

Good evening.
HARRIET RYLEY
NICK CLARK
STONEBENCH/Gloucestershire
JONATHON PROBYN/Husband
DCI RALPH GOODRICH/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
Tania Probyn's white Renault car was discovered in the murky waters of the river Severn after two days of an intensive search by the police.
Inside was the body of a woman.
The car was slowly winched out of the water so that forensic experts could begin their work with the minimum of disturbance.
Mrs Probyn went missing after having a blazing row with her estranged husband Jonathan, at his house at Elmore, not far from the stretch of river where the car was found.
Earlier today Mr Probyn made an emotional plea for his wife to get in touch:
The police have questioned Mr Probyne and say he's been very helpful, but they haven't ruled out any line of inquiry:
The cause of death will now be established by a home office pathologist: Friends of the dead woman say she doted on her two young children and wasn't the sort of person to have contemplated suicide — the pathologist's report will show whether or not that turns out to be true.
The man who listened into an alleged conversation between the Princess of Wales and a male friend says only parts of his tape have been made public, and that far more damaging sections may soon be revealed.
Cyril Reenan sold the tape to a newspaper for six thousand pounds, but he says he regrets ever recording it and is going to give the money to charity.
Gareth Furby reports.
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
CYRIL REENAN
Voice over
Today for the first time Cyril Reenan allowed the cameras into his Abingdon home to see the sophisticated radio scanner that started it all
He says it was flicking through the frequencies when it locked onto a call and he recognised the voice as Diana.
He says normally he would have lost the cost but this time it stayed there.
He says he only recorded the conversation on this tape recorder, so he could play it his wife.
But two and a half years later he was front page news.
Mr Reenan says he was pursuaded to hand the tape over to a Sun reporter.
He says he was initially paid a thousand pounds and at one point offered a further fifty.
But two weeks ago he signed this contract with the Sun and was paid five thousand pounds.
He says he doesn't want the money.
It will go to charity.
With the so-called’ Dianagate’story provoking speculation that the Royal couple were about to separate the press besiged Cyril Reenan's house.
He was also branded a nosy parker by some of his Abingdon neighbours.
Today he apologised.
He says he's sorry.
He wishes he'd never made the recording.
But Mr Reenan is now worried that the Sun is about to publish further extracts from his tape.
He claims much of the transripts already published are from another tape recorded by a woman in Oxford.
And he says potentially far more damaging excerpts from his tape haven't yet been used.
He says he knows a lot more about the tape than the public know.
He's glad it hasn't been published.
But he can't discuss what the extracts reveal.
Today the Sun confirmed there were further extracts but it added:
Cyril Reenan, who's now packed his scanner away, hopes the paper will keep to its word.
A magistrate who granted bail to a man who then committed murder has resigned.
Andrew Hagans had been charged with rape when he appeared before magistrate Ray Morgan.
He was remanded to an open bail hostel, but while he was there he raped and murdered office worker Anna McGurk.
Richard Barnett reports.
KAY POTTS/Anna's Mother
Voice over
Ray Morgan was chairman of Cheltenham magistrates on the day that 26 year old, Andrew Hagans appeared before him in July last year, charged with raping a woman in the town.
Despite pleas by senior police officers and the Crown Prosecution Service to remand Hagans in custody, the bench granted him bail, ordering him to stay at the Ryecroft Bail Hostel in Gloucester.
Hagans was allowed to come and go as he pleased and only days later, he raped and murdered council worker, Anna McGurk, as she walked home from her office.
Anna's family and friends launched a campaign calling for tighter restrictions on bail laws and Cheltenham MP, Nigel Jones gave it his backing in a march through Gloucester.
Retired university lecturer Ray Morgan was not at home when we called to see him, but it's understood that he decided to quit after several meetings with the Gloucestershire Magistrates Association.
He has denied the decision to quit is linked to the Hagans case.
Today Anna's mother said his resignation was an admission that the magistrates were in the wrong.
Although Anna's family have welcomed the resignation, they're determined to see a change in the bail laws.
They say, only then will further tragedies like the death of their daughter, be avoided in future.
Disabled children at a residential home in Gloucestershire are being cared for in appalling conditions, according to social services officials.
A new report describes the county council run home as’ totally inadequate’.
Sheila Brocklebank reports.
GLOUCESTER
LYN BURNS/Gloucestershire Social Services
Oxford United will be announcing their new manager in the morning — we'll be revealing his name for the first time, tonight on Central News.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
ROBIN POWELL/Cirencester
Sgt DAVID WASLEY/Gloucestershire Police
DAVID COBB/Gloucestershire Ambulance Service
BROADWAY/Worcestershire
Voice over
The woman who died was driving this pick-up truck when it hit an ambulance travelling in the opposite direction along the A417, half a mile out of Cirencester.
She's expected to be identified tomorrow.
Ambulance Service paramedic Brian Moss is said to be in a comfortable condition in hospital; the ambulance driver, Glyn Day, has already been discharged.
The ambulance was on its way to another accident about a mile away, where a woman driver's thought to have skidded off the road in heavy rain.
She escaped with cuts and grazes.
The police want to hear from anyone who saw either the truck or the ambulance shortly before the collision.
Gloucestershire Ambulance Service has begun its own investigation, but points out that its drivers are trained to the highest standards and are very rarely involved in accidents.
The collision occurred at about 9.15 this morning, when there was torrential rain across much of the Cotswolds.
There were 6 accidents in Gloucestershire in just one hour.
A 3-month-old boy died after a head-on collision near Burford.
His twin brother, who was airlifted to hospital with him, is in a critical condition.
And 3 people were taken to hospital after a crash on the A44 at Fish Hill near Broadway.
One of them's suffering from serious head injuries.
More heavy showers are forecast for tonight and for the rest of the week.
After the warm weather, police say the rain's making the roads greasy, and motorists are advised to take extra care.
GPs are to be warned of the side effects of prescribing steroids to children after a nine year old girl died after taking the drugs.
Lexie McConnell died six weeks after starting steroid treatment for an eye infection.
JESSICA FOWLE/Abingdon
ARTHUR McCONNELL/Lexie's Father
Dr HILARY ALLINSON/GP
VICTORIA McCONNELL/Lexie's Mother
Voice over
Arthur and Victoria McConnell's daughter Lexie died nine months ago.
They watched their happy and healthy daughter detiorate before their eyes as the drug Prednisilone attacked her immune system.
It left her vulnerable to a number of infections which eventually killed her.
No-one told them about the drug's side effects.
Male speaker
The most important complaint is that we were given no information.
I asked about side effects and was told all drugs have side effects, even paracetemol.
Voice over
Now the body that controls all prescribed medicines in the UK has written to the McConnell's telling them it's conducting a detailed investigation into the effects of this type of steroid on the immune system.
And in the light of Lexie's death GPs are to be told to take extra caution when prescribing the drug to children.
Male speaker
I think it was a primary factor.
We've succeeded on this one and we're very pleased it's taking place.
In the past I've prescribed steroids freely without thinking of their immunosupressant effects.
This has made us all sit up and think.
Female speaker
I think it's going to make us much more aware of the dangers of prescribing steroids.
I've prescribed steroids freely in the past without thinking about the immunosuppressant effect.
It's made us all sit up and think about what whe're doing.
Voice over
The Oxfordshire Health Authority says the reasoning behind the warning is that many doctors’ may not come across this very rare event in the course of their professional lifetime.’
The McConnells say their fight isn't over yet.
They still want an independent inquiry conducted by doctors from outside the Oxfordshire Health Authority.
And now they're considering legal action.
Female speaker
We've tried all the other channels but they've closed all the doors to us.
So we've been left with no other avenue but to go to law.
Voice over
Lexie's parents are pleased that their efforts may prevent other children dying from the side effects of steroid treatment.
But nothing can make up for the fact that any improvements in prescribing practice are too late to save Lexie.
A nursery which sells bonsai trees claims that a local council is trying to close it down.
Staff at the nursery say that the business is harming no-one.
But the council says it's breaking planning regulations.
KEN GOODWIN/Cheltenham
KEVIN EUSTACE/Bonsai World
KEN SPELMAN/Planning Consultant
ALAN MARTIN/Tewkesbury Borough Council
JOHN CLEGG/Bonsai World
Voice over
Bonsai world grows and sell miniature trees.
They exhibit at shows all over the country, and the nursery at Woodmancote has become famous for it's collection.
But their success has caught the eye of Tewkesbury Borough Council, which says that the land is for agricultural use only, and should not be used as a retail outlet for bonsai trees.
The council is going to issue Bonsai World with a notice prohibiting some of it's activities.
But the firms owners say that they're doing nothing wrong.
He says we're doing a lot of good for the village…we're determined to win.
Bonsai World has hired a planning consultant to help fight the council.
He says that the firm is bieng unfairly harassed.
There's nothing wrong with the operation.
Tewkesbury Borough Council says it has a duty to uphold planning regulations.
But Bonsai World staff say they won't give up without a fight.
He says that there's an old song…keep up the fight…we won't give in.
The Council says that Bonsai World might like to consider moving to a more suitable site.
But staff at the miniature tree nursery say this is one business which won't be uprooted.
One of the country's largest flower shows has opened with the awarding of the prizes for the best blooms.
Today and tomorrow five thousand people will relish the roses and delight in the dahlias 
SIMON GARRETT Cheltenham
MAURICE WOODFIELD Judge
PETER GODWIN Acting Chairman
Cllr MAY DENT President
Voice over
The world of flower shows is cruel but fair.
At Cheltenham Town Hall…on show the results of years of selective breeding and careful nurturing.
For some there's the big prize…but others fell on stoney ground
Male speaker
You curse when they fail and when you bring what you feel is the perfect bloom against others you still fail
Voice over
Flower growers believe in good clean competition.
Winning of course…does have its place
Male speaker
If you can improve your flowers you do.
Not by cheating…but if it meant trimming the petals with a pair of scisasors ten minutes before walking out the hall and the judge won't notice it…
You might call that cheating I call it improving one's exhibit
Male speaker
There's the old trick of sticking a knitting needle up the stem to make the flower stand up…things like that
Voice over
Judging takes years of experience and a keen impartial eye.
But even the scrutineers are aware of occasional psycological warfare
Male speaker
An exhibitor's put an exhibit up and everyone thinks they can beat it but when they've gone and left their the exhibitors gone back and put a new lot up…things like that happen.
But they're all good pals together really and help one another 
Voice over
Vegetables are not to be outdone.
At Cheltenham there are leeks to marvel at…and onions which would make any eye water.
Things went a bit flat among the cakes for some…but that's as nothing to the one recurrent nightmare for the organiser
Male speaker
To find that you've left a large space for a larege number of flowers none of which turn up.
That's the trouble with flowers they have a will of their own
Voice over
Thus perished class 44 of the dahlias…smitten by frost.
But not to worry…there's plenty survived the worst of the weather…and there's much to admire for the committed gardener and the casual observer
Are you an exhibitor?
Female speaker
No, I came to get a ticket for the literature festival but it was pouring down so I came to get out of the rain.
I really shouldn't be here at all 
Female speaker
The public like to come and see what they can't do.
Can you get blooms like that?
Voice over
No…can you?
Female speaker
No…because I haven't got a greenhouse
Voice over
So the truth is finally out…
Green fingers are not enough 
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Smear tests recalled
FTSE down 3
The hundred shares index closed down three point two at three thousand and thirty five point four 
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty three and up at two marks, forty nine.
In April nineteen fifty-eight a British nuclear bomb was detonated on Christmas Island in the Pacific Ocean.
Thirty five years later servicemen who were forced to witness the test say they are still suffering physical and mental side-effects.So far the government has consistently denied a positive link between the two.
The veterans say they'll continue to fight for the truth to be revealed about what they say was a’ crime against humanity’.
HARRIET RYLEY/Frilford Heath
PAT HURLEY/Nuclear Test Veteran
BRIAN STROUD/Nuclear Test Veteran
KEN GOWER/Nuclear Test Veteran
DAVE THOMAS/Nuclear Test Veteran
CHILTON/Oxfordshire
WINSTON CHURCHILL MP/Con Davyhulme
Voice over
Britain's first hydrogen bomb test at Christmas Island on April 28th 1958.
35 years later four former servicemen share memories of their time spent working in the forces during the early nuclear bomb tests.
They're all members of the British Nuclear Test Veteran Association which has campaigned for the last ten years to get recognition for its members, who feel they were used as human guinea pigs.
He says most of the lads that were out there were in their late teens, early 20's and for them it was an adventure to go out to the tropics — then when you realise what it was about — well it's marked us for life there's no two ways about it.
Pat Hurley from Milton Keynes, himself just 20 when he witnessed Britain's first thermonuclear bomb test on Christmas Island in the Pacific in April 1958.
Also stationed there with the RAF was Brian Stroud from Drayton in Oxfordshire.
He was 19.
Like the others Brian remembers minimal preparation and no protection for them during the tests.
He says apart from drill in the sense of head-counts, turn your back to the blast area and sitting on the ground covering your eyes and so on— none whatsoever.
That bomb was 400 times the size of the one dropped on Hiroshima.
The men on Christmas Island were about 12 miles away from where it was detonated.
The veterans have become increasingly alarmed at the incidence of illness — especially cancers amongst the 20,000 who were present at the tests.
They believe that's directly linked to their exposure to ionising radioation.
Ken Gower from Pitstone in Buckinghamshire witnessed Britain's first atomic bomb test off the island of Montebello also in the Pacific in 1952.
He says being a little forgiving I could praps forgive them a little for us on the 1952 test, the first, but I can't forgive them for what they did to these other lads on the later tests, they must have known something from Nagasaki, Hiroshima and Bikini atoll tests.
Of these four men, none has developed any cancer, but all live in dread of it.
Pat Hurley suffered terrible nightmares and considered suicide.
Dave Thomas from Abingdon who was a cook with the RAF on Christmas Island has suffered illness all his life since that time.
He feels that miscarriages of deformed foetuses by his wife are linked to the tests.
He says we were told one of them was very badly deformed — but we were never told why — I wondered if that was put down to the tests.
In 1988 the National Radiological Protection Board produced its first report commissioned by the government into whether there was any link.
It concluded that:
’ participation in the nuclear weapons test programme had not had a detectable effect on the participants' expectation of life, nor on their total risk of developing cancer’
It did admit a possible link with cases of leukemia and cancer of the bones and agreed war pensions should go to those cases.
But members of the all-party group of MPs who support the veterans want more cases regognised.
He says we are pressing for compensation for more of these men.
Of course it suits beaurocracy, the treasury to drag their feet, but it's not good enough.
They can't wait until they're all dead.
Of these four men — Ken is fit and still working part-time, Brian was given a war pension because of his deafness, Pat is well, but Dave suffers dangerously low blood-pressure which his doctor can't explain.
He and the others say they'll fight on against what they call a crime against humanity:
He says time may be running out — it has run out for alot…this may go on for several more years — we haven't go several more years.
I don't think many of us will make old bones.
(wes ad lib)(anne) Still to come on Central News, the new man at the manor 
Welcome back.
Tomorrow Oxford United will officially reveal who they've chosen to be their new manager.
(WES NEXT)
But to end the speculation now, let's go over to the Manor Ground and join Tim Russon.
Voice over
Rugby — and Gloucester's former captain Mike Hamlin joins former team mate Mike Teague for his first game this week with his new club Moseley.
It means they'll be working together six days a week.
TIM HURST/Gloucester
MIKE TEAGUE/Moseley Captain
MIKE HAMLIN/Moseley
Voice over
The two Mikes, Mike Teague and Mike Hamlin, already work together Monday to Friday for Teague's building company based in Gloucester.
After year's playing together for Gloucester, first Teague left to join the Birmingham club Moseley.
This Saturday he'll be joined by former Gloucester captain Mike Hamlin, who's playing his first First team match for his new club.
Last season Moseley only avoided relegation by beating Newcastle Gosforth in their last match.
Hamlin has no doubts about his new club's target this season.
It's a long climb, but both men predict that Saturday's match against Saracens will be a win for their new club.
A factory worker has been describing how he tried in vain to save a colleague who'd been overcome by toxic fumes.
An inquest into the death of 40 year old Alan Dimmer was told he died from shock and severe burns after collapsing in a vat of chemicals.
RICHARD BARNETT/Northampton
Voice over
Alan Dimmer died this March after removing oil and grease from components at the KAB car seating factory in Northampton, using a vat full of toxic chemical.
The process involved lowering metal seat parts into the vat.
Coroner Michael Colcutt told the inquest jury at Northampton General Hospital that Mr Dimmer climbed into the vat to retrieve some components that were stuck.
He suffered 50 percent burns, and died the next day in hospital.
Fellow worker Robert Howes said he was with Alan Dimmer when the components became jammed.
Alan climbed down into the vat and began handing the parts to him.
Mr Howes said a short time later, Alan began to sway.
Then he collapsed and fell to the bottom of the tank.
He was slumped in the chemical.
It was a nightmare.
At one stage Mr Howes said he had hold of Alan's arm…but his colleague was a dead weight, and he had to let go.
Alan Dimmer died the next day in Northampton General Hospital.
Mr Howes said he and Mr Dimmer were never issued with protective clothing or warned how dangerous the chemical was.
The inquest was adjourned for a month, when Health and Safety officials will give evidence.
Forty nine people have been arrested and a hundred thousand pounds worth of stolen property seized in an operation involving police forces from seven counties.
Operation Gauntlet was the culmination of months of work — now detectives hope they'll soon be able to return the property, which includes everything from caravans to jewellery, to its rightful owners.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Gloucester
Det Supt PETER SHAYLE/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
Officers in Gloucester have spent the day logging the hundreds of thousands of pounds worth of property seized in raids late last night and early this morning.
The Operation, codenamed Gauntlet, targetted alleged burglars and safe houses in Gloucestershire, West Mercia, and surrounding counties.
The goods which include caravans, trailers, antiques and jewellery are all being kept at a secret location.
Meanwhile six of the forty nine people arrested have been charged with offences including theft and receiving stolen goods.
The funeral of one of two firemen killed in the fire which destroyed a meat processing factory will be held this Friday.
Monday/HEREFORD
Leading Fire Fighter John Davis died when part of the Sun Valley Poultry factory in Hereford collapsed on him and a colleague.
Mr Davis's funeral will be a private family service in Leominster.
Then on Monday, the funeral of Fire Fighter David Morris from Hereford will take place with full fire service honours.
Both men were married with two children 
Six and a half thousand homes had their power supplies cut off when a fire broke out at an electricity sub-station.
BODENHAM/Herefordshire
The sixty-six thousand volt transformer at Bodenham near Hereford was severly damaged.
No-one was hurt and most supplies were reconnected within two hours.
Midlands Electricity has started an investigation into how the fire started.
A plant that may only flower once in a hundred years but grows at up to seven inches a day is catching on with gardeners.
Bamboo enjoyed its first surge of popularity in the last century…and now it's coming back into fashion once again.Richard Barnett reports:
KINGSLAND Herefordshire
MICHAEL BRISBANE Jungle Giants
WIGMORE Herefordshire
Voice over
Watching intrepid explorer Michael Brisbane force his way through a dense thicket of bamboo, you could be forgiven for thinking we're in Nepal.
But this isn't the foothills of the Himalayas.
It's the border between Herefordshire and Wales.
And it's the home of jungle giants; a show garden featuring one of the largest collections of bamboo plants in Britain.
Michael Brisbane started propagating bamboo 6 years ago and now his nursery stocks over 140 varieties from all over China, South America, South Africa and the Indian sub continent.
Even though they may only flower once a century, these plants are proving increasingly popular with gardeners and landscapers throughout Europe.
Male speaker
Bamboo is a fast growing and elegant species.
He travels great distances to see new varieties.
Voice over
Bamboo grows at an amazing pace.
This plant has shot up 21ins in 3 days.
And some of the taller varieties will reach a height of 25ft within 4 years.
The canes boast a wide range of colours.
This black variety was first imported into Britain in the 1830s.
Then there are the variegated bamboos like this green and yellow variety.
And perhaps the most striking of all; a pink caned plant which unfortunately isn't hardy enough to survive outdoors.
The canes are far more striking than the flowers.
This bamboo is flowering at the moment.
It last bloomed in 1896.
Male speaker
The flowers are insignificant, but the plants don't die after blooming.
Voice over
The Jungle Giants nursery is at Wigmore a few miles from the show garden.
Here gardeners can pay anything from £10 for some of the popular varieties to five hundred pounds for a rare prize specimen.
And bamboo is such a vigorous grower, a visit here can bring a whole new meaning to picking up a pot plant.
Prince and Princess of Wales carry out public engagement
FTSE down 10
The hundred shares index closed down ten point two at two three two seven point five 
The pound is down at one dollar, ninety seven and down at two marks, seventy eight.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
A mother and daughter in the Forest of Dean are writing to more than fifty prisoners in America…including convicted killers on death row.
The correspondence has even led to romance — the daughter hopes to marry a man who is serving life for shooting his wife.Richard Barnett reports:
PARKEND/Gloucestershire
MAUREEN TIMMINS/Mother
AMANDA TIMMINS/Daughter
Voice over
Every day of the week, Maureen Timmins and her daughter Amanda sit down to write to their friends in America.
Their pen pals include Ernest’ The Wizard’Downs, aged 41, convicted of the contract killing of a banker.
He faces death by the electric chair in Florida state prison.
Bobby Downs, Ernest's 28 year old brother, who shot his wife in front of his two young children; serving life in the same jail.
Terry Roach, 41, convicted of killing a police officer by running him over in a truck, serving life in the Phillips Correctional Institution, Georgia and Michael Hamilton, aged 40, convicted of the contract killing of his wife, sentenced to death in the gas chamber at San Quentin.
The 2 women began writing to inmates of American jails after reading a newspaper article about the US justice system a year ago.
Female speaker
Some of the prisoners are sad, others are sinister.
Even though they have committeds crimes, they are entitled to forgiveness and friendship.
Voice over
One of the prisoners she wrote to has died by the electric chair.
Romance has blossomed between Amanda and convicted killer, Bobby Downs, even though they've never met.
Female speaker
At the moment, she just loves him as a friend.
He feels sad for what he has done.
He deserves forgiveness.
Voice over
Each day, there's another batch of envelopes to open, as Maureen and Amanda maintain their lifeline for the lifers.
A stunt pilot and a photographer are hoping to make a blockbuster film to rival Indiana Jones.
The pilot has already spent twenty five years in the movie business and built up a collection of classic planes.
But the recession has meant the studios are cutting back, so instead of keeping his planes on the ground, he's making his own flying thriller.
Gargy Patel reports.
AMATEUR VIDEO
JON DAVISON/Photographer
WYCOMBE/Buckinghamshire
TONY BIANCHI/Film Stunt Pilot
PETER WRIGHT/Local Historian
PHIL MILLINGTON-HAWES/Researcher
AMATEUR VIDEO
Voice over
Oxford in the 1920s…a Sopwith Camel flies in to land at Port Meadow aerodrome.
In the cockpit…flying ace Luke Jackson…returning home from a treacherous journey to find lost treasure.
A classic storyline set in the twenties being filmed in the nineties.
But this time it's the plane's owners and pilots who've turned film makers.
The world war one aircraft have starred in dozens of films like Indiana Jones and Aces High.
But the recession has hit the film industry.
So instead of renting out the planes from the Blue Max museum, the team came up with a plan to use them in their own production.
They're looking to entrepreneurs like David Puttnam and Richard Branson for the vital backing to develop the project.
Called Into the Blue it's a tale involving spying, nostalgic aircraft, and the romance of Oxford just after the Great War.
They're confident of staying within a five million pound budget…a fairly conservative figure compared with other flying thrillers.
In fact most of the story is written, the action scenes carefully planned…right down to the last detail
Fiction based on fact…
Port Meadow was turned into an aerodrome during the first world war years, a training base for those early monoplanes and biplanes.
There was always the risk of death from the flimsy machines…two pilots lost their lives in a crash just yards from the airfield…now they're immortalised on the stone bridge overlooking the meadow.
All that remains from those days is the outline of the road which led to the hangers.
The production team hopes to recreate the Port Meadow Aerodrome.
An ambitious task…but they're convinced the combination of suspense and high flying drama will bring in the cinema audiences.
Tony Bianchi has spent twenty five years as a stunt pilot in the movies.
Like Indiana Jones he's now reaching high, Into the Blue, for his own adventure.
He'll always be a flier, but with skill and imagination, he hopes to bring this dream safely home.
A memorial service is to be held in Swindon for five youngsters who died when a car ploughed into them.
SEPTEMBER 1991/SWINDON/Wiltshire
Two boys and three girls aged between seven and nineteen died when a car ran off the road in Akers Way in September last year.
A service is being held at the accident spot this evening and a memorial service is to take place at St Mary's Church in Moredon on Sunday.
Two men have been charged in connection with the accident and are due to stand trial at Gloucester Crown Court.
One man was killed and another two people injured when a car overturned and smashed in to the front wall of a house.
OXFORD
The accident happened when the car went out of control on the Iffley Road in Oxford late last night.
It hit a postbox before ploughing into the wall.
The dead man has been named as John McCallum, who was twenty seven and from Oxford.
A female passenger is said to be in a serious condition in hospital.
The car's driver escaped with minor injuries.
No-one in the house was hurt.
Thieves have broken into an electrical shop and stolen several sophisticated radio scanners.
It's feared the equipment could be used by criminals to tune in to police broadcasts.
Russell Trott reports.
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
JOHN SHEPPARD/Shop Owner
Up to sixty jobs are to go at an engineering firm in Swindon.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
The workforce at Linton and Hirst's is to be cut by one third despite a two million pound investment programme carried out at the company in July.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
Meanwhile it's been announced that Smith Industries, the areospace contractors based in Gloucestershire, are to share in a two hundred and thirty five million pound contract from Romania.
The Romanian national airline has ordered seven Boeing 737-300 aircraft for which Smiths will supply the cockpit equipment.
Some residents on a housing estate that's undergone a six million pound refurbishment say they were better off in their old flats.
They were speaking as a government minister was touring the estate, once described as the worst in Europe.
Simon Garrett reports 
CHURCHDOWN/Gloucestershire
TERESA TOWERS/Resident
TONY BALDRY MP/Environment Minister
Voice over
4 months after the first tenants moved in, the builders are already back in this council house on the infamous Innsworth Grove estate.
A deal between Government, developer and local authority raised £6 million to rebuild the estate; half private, half council.
Some of Tewkesbury Borough's tenants are unimpressed.
Male speaker
I would have been happy with refurbishment of my old flat.
So would a lot of people to be truthful
Male speaker
I've got four children and three adults in a three bedroom house and they tell me I can't be moved
Voice over
Environment Minister, Tony Baldry was here to see the nearly finished project.
He says if residents don't like it, they must complain.
Male speaker
No longer is it like the fifties when councils dictated to tenants how things would be.
Nowadays all good authorities listen to residents and tenants and try to work in partnership with them
Voice over
The new private owners of Innsworth seem unconcerned about the estate's history.
Male speaker
It's quite quiet, it's great
Female speaker
It's nice and quiet not like London where we've come from
Male speaker
It's especially good for kids
Voice over
But no new facilites have been built for children and some fear boredom will once more spawn the vandalism which blighted the original buildings.
Female speaker
I'll give it three years before it starts going downhill again
Voice over
Planners admit they've squeezed the council properties to make room for the private homes.
Male speaker
We've designed to modern standards which means there's less space but the properties are as good if not better than similar properties in the private sector
Voice over
The last of the old flats will be emptied and demolished in the autumn and it's planned the whole Grove facelift will be finished by November.
Council officials say that's just the start though.
They say imaginative management and co-operation with tenants will make for a model estate.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
STONEBENCH/Gloucestershire
Insp MIKE PENNINGTON/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
Mrs Probyn's body was found 6 days after she disappeared.
It was in her Renault car, submerged under 20ft of water in the River Severn.
The mother of two had gone missing after a blazing row with her estranged husband, Jonathan, at his home in Longney, just a mile from where she was found dead.
Today the police said that after a post mortem examination, they're still awaiting the results of more tests.
He says that scientists have certain tests they need to carry out, they can't really be sure how she died until shis has been done.
So the inquiry is by no means cut and dried and they're now trying to piece together the last hours of the dead woman's life.
She was last seen alive at 10.30 p.m. on Wednesday 2nd September, when she left her husband's house after they had argued.
Police hope someone may have seen her driving her distinctive renault car.
He says the area where she was found — Stonebench — is popular with courting couples and people who just want to view the river.
Someone may have seen her.
Mrs Probyn was a runner up in the Miss Gloucester beauty competition in 1984 and was described by her husband, Jonathan as level headed and sensible — not the sort to contemplate suicide.
Only the results of further tests by pathologists will prove that one way or another.
Until then, police are keeping all their options open.
Eight prisoners serving sentences for offences ranging from drug trafficking to armed robbery are taking part in a conference on violence in society.
They've joined delegates from across the world for the three-day seminar.
Nick Clark reports.
JOHN MORTIMER QC/Howard League for Penal Reform
DENIS SIDEBOTTOM/Prisoner
FRANCES CROOK/Howard League for Penal Reform
MICHAEL JACK MP/Home Office Minister
Voice over
3 years ago, a security video recorded a gang beating up 2 brothers outside a Swindon nightclub.
It's this sort of violence that's most commonplace in Britain; teenagers versus teenagers.
This man spent weeks in hospital with broken vertebrae, after a similar incident in the early hours.
Scenes a long way from the serenity of New College, Oxford, where the Howard League for Penal Reform is hosting a conference examining the nature, causes and treatment of violence.
The event's chaired by the new president of the Howard League, John Mortimer QC; delegates including probation officers, police chiefs and psychologists.
Male speaker
This conference is very important to stop the rising tide of violence.
Voice over
Among the delegates are 8 prisoners on special release including Denis Sidebottom.
He's served 6 years of a 10 year stretch for armed robbery.
Male speaker
I can give my experience of life inside.
Voice over
As at any conference there's disagreement over possible solutions.
Home office Minister, Michael Jack told the delegates of the tougher sentencing available to the courts from October.
But for the director of the Howard league, that is not the way forward.
Female speaker
It will just mean making the problems worse by introducing more prisoners to the system.
Male speaker
It will just mean those who really deserve tougher sentences will get them.
Voice over
Tomorrow the agenda focuses specifically on violence in prisons, something that's been a problem at Long Lartin jail in Worcestershire where prison officers have been the subject of attacks by prisoners in recent months.
A fourteen year old boy who was in council care has died after sniffing butane gas.
Stephen Smith was on a weekend break away from the home when he sniffed the gas.
He's the second teenager living at the home to have died as a result of solvent abuse.
Clare Lafferty reports.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
TERRY BURNS/Gloucestershire County Council
OCTOBER 1991
Voice over
Stephen Smith had been staying at the Hallerton House Children's Home in Cheltenham since July.
But he was on a weekend break visiting relatives in the town when he sniffed the gas.
Stephen was taken to the Cheltenham General Hospital on Saturday evening, after being found collapsed in a car.
He died the same night.
Officials at the Social Services department of Gloucestershire County Council were saddened by Stephen's death, but say as he was away from the home there was nothing they could do.
Stephen was the second resident at Hallerton House to die after experimenting with solvents.
Last year 15 year old Joanna Hughes died from burns, after fumes from the solvent she was sniffing caught fire.
Social services say they're do all they can to make their charges aware of the dangers of solvent abuse.
An inquest into Stephens death was today adjourned to a date to be fixed.
The number of babies delivered by Caesarean section has trebled in the last twenty years, according to a book just published.
Its authors claim that some operations are carried out unnecessarily because doctors are frightened of being sued.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
Dr COLIN FRANCOME/Co-Author
ANDREW BOND/Obstetrician
ANNA O'NEILL/Caesarean Patient
Dr ROD HOUSEMAN/GP
Voice over
One-day-old Nicole Garratt — one of the latest babies to be delivered by Caesarean section at the Princess Margaret Hospital in Swindon.
According to a book published today, the percentage of Caesarean births at the PMH last year was 3 per cent higher than the national average.
Swindon author Dr Colin Francome, who co-wrote the book, explained at today's launch that research shows that one reason for the increase in Caesarean operations is that consultants are afraid of a law suit if the baby's born naturally and isn't healthy.
On average, around 13 per cent of babies are delivered by Caesarean section.
The Gloucestershire Royal Hospital's average is 12.4 per cent, Oxford's John Radciffe 13.3 per cent , and Hereford County Hospital 14.2.
Northampton General and the Princess Margaret lead the way with 16 per cent.
Andrew Bond, an obstetrician at the PMH, admits the threat of litigation's always at the back of his mind, but the main reason why Swindon's Caesarian rate is so high is its good reputation for dealing with difficult cases.
Statistically, a Caesarean is slightly more dangerous for the mother than a natural birth.
Anna O'Neill underwent her second Caesarean last week.
She says women shouldn't be worried about the operation itself, though it can take some time to recover.
GP Rod Houseman, a gynaecology specialist, says some Caesareans are essential, but if women want to avoid one if they can they should make their wishes known at the start of their pregnancy.
There's little evidence to suggest that being delivered by Caesarean section is any more harmful to the baby than a natural birth.
And as Mrs O'Neill's found out, they cry just as loudly.
Rare ducks worth thousands of pounds have been stolen from the Wildlife and Wetlands Trust at Slimbridge.
Staff believe the birds may have been stolen to order for a private collector 
SIMON GARRETT/Slimbridge
TONY RICHARDSON/Aviculture Director
Voice over
Thieves scaled fences into the trust's breeding pens.
Among their haul South American Black Headed ducks…
Ruddy ducks…reared at Slimbridge.
Peruvian Ruddies — It's not likely they were stolen just for someone's dinner table
Male speaker
They are however potentially of interest to collectors of waterfowl and have some considerable value.
We value them as part of out conservation and education work.
They may well have been stolen to order.
Voice over
Some of the birds will be spotted straight away as unusual by anyone with knowledge of wildfowl.
The birds will have tell-tale leg rings with Slimbridge stamped into them…or a pale mark on the leg if the ring's been removed.
Staff are angry at the thought the duck's may've been mistreated
Security's being tightened up around the breeding pens…but staff are committed to maintaining the same easy access to the birds for visitors to the trust.
(WES AD LIB)(ANNE)
Still to come on Central News, the Smith and Crosby show 
Welcome back.
Oxford United's new manager Denis Smith and his assistant Malcolm Crosby took over at the Manor Ground today (WES NEXT)
Top priority is to give the fans what they want…a winning team which plays good football.
Tim Russon reports 
DENIS SMITH/ United Manager
MALCOLM CROSBY/United Coach
Voice over
There was no red carpet for the new Lords of the Manor…but then again Denis Smith and his right hand man Malcolm Crosby are not ones for airs and graces…
They're two of football's straightest talkers with a record of championships…cup finals and promotion…
Denis Smith says…he likes winning and he's a football man
As a player Denis Smith was a concrete block of a centre half with Stoke City…and most of his career was spent in the big time…
As a player-manager he brought instant success to little York City
At Sunderland he made Roker Park roar…
And in ten months at Ashton Gate saved Bristol City from certain relegation
Denis Smith says they have a good pedigree and have proved they can do it
And what of Malcolm Crosby…he teamed up with Smith at York…followed him to Roker and then took over and led Sunderland to Wembley…
Malcolm Crosby says he likes to see teams playing good football but they've got to work hard as well That's the new team…so what are their plans…what do they believe in…what can they do for Oxford United…
Denis Smith says it's not going to be an easy job because they're in a poor league position…he may change players by wheeling and dealing but is under no pressure to sell
Malcolm Crosby says Oxford was always a hard place to come and get a result and he wants to make that so again
Smith was the unanimous choice of the Oxford board…he has the experience…the grit and determination to survive and hopefully succeed…and he has a message for the Oxford fans
Denis Smith says come along and enjoy what they're putting on and they can guarantee they will be working hard
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
RICHARD BARNETT/Burford
PC SIMON HARBOUR/Thames Valley Police
JAMES ROBERTS/Consumers Association
CROWTHORNE/Berkshire
RICHARD LOWNE/Transport Research Laboratory
Voice over
The two children, Christopher and Mathew Keys were in the back of their parents' Metro saloon when it went out of control on the A424 near Burford.
The car slewed sideways into a Pontiac travelling towards it.
And the Pontiac hit the side of the Metro right next to where the children were sitting.
Both twins were in child safety seats.
Christopher Keys, who was closest to the impact, was thrown out of the seat into the back of the Metro.
He died a short time later.
His brother Mathew died this morning at the John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford.
The first policeman on the scene of the crash says both children had been properly strapped into the safety seats before the accident:
Male speaker
The children were in the correct seats and they were strapped in properly.
Voice over
Childrens safety seats undergo extensive testing, and they have to meet British Safety standards.
But a researcher who recently carried out wide ranging crash tests for the Consumers Association says the seats cope poorly with side impacts:
Male speaker
Side impacts are the most dangerous.
More research is needed in how to make safety seats more effective in such crashes.
Voice over
Research into child safety seats is carried out at the Transport Research Laboratory in Berkshire.
It says a case of a child being hurled out of one of the seats is extremely rare:
He says in 20 years he's not known a similar accident.
Anything learned from crashes will be fed through to improve the design of safety seats.
Despite the death of the twins, safety experts stress that child seats play a vital role in saving lives.
Out of 9,000 children killed or injured in car accidents every year, only 8 die in safety seats.
An inquest's heard how a student took a drugs overdose because he was worried about his exams.
Lee Don Lau called his parents in Singapore to say he was sorry for what he had done.
A friend later found him collapsed in his room.
GRAEME BOWD/Oxford
LIZ FRAZER/Dean of New College
Voice over
Lee Don Lau was in his final year at Magdalen College Oxford.
A brilliant history student he was a devout Christian and the son of a Singapore MP.
At today's inquest a student counsellor Mary Marzillian said he was extremely anxious about his exams.
The 21 year old had been treated for depression and had been prescribed tablets by his doctor on 15 occasions.
Last May just days before his finals he telephoned his mother in Singapore to say he'd taken 200 pills.
He said he was sorry and asked her not to contact the emergency services.
Instead she called his friend Heng Yu Wong who found him collapsed in his rom.
Nearby were 3 empty tablet containers.
Attempts to revive him failed and he died later in hospital.
Mr Wong said his friend was a bright student and a caring person.
But he'd become depressed about his exams and couldn't concentrate on his work.
Lee Don Lau is the fourth Oxford student to commit suicide in the last year.
Welfare officers say exams are not the only pressure.
Next month New College is extending its induction course for undergraduates.
Female speaker
Students coming to Oxford and Cambridge find it very stressful.
They find they're no longer top of the school.
The competition is fiercer.
We realise that chucking them in at the deep end is not satisfactory.
We have to help them find their feet.
Voice over
The coroner Nicholas Gardner said he was satisfied that Lee Don Lau had intended to take his life.
But he said the young man's fears that he would fail his exams were almost certainly unfounded.
The head of a childrens home has been arrested and charged on two counts of rape.
The fifty year old has been suspended from his job at the council run home, and police are joining together with social services to investigate his conduct.
Citizen Newspaper Photograph
CLARE LAFFERTY/Whitminster
GLOUCESTER
NORWICH
DERYK MEAD/Gloucestershire Social Services
Voice over
Fifty year old Douglas Hewitt took up his job as Principal of the Parklands Childrens Home in Whitminster ten years ago.
The charges of rape relate to a time two years before that, when he held a similar position at a childrens home in Norfolk, run by Norfolk County Council.
Mr Hewitt was arrested at the offices of Gloucestershire Social Services by officers from the Child Protection Unit of the Norfolk police force.
He appeared at Norwich Magistrates Court yesterday and was released on conditional bail.
Now officials in Gloucestershire have set up an inquiry.
Mr Hewitt has been suspended from his job at Parklands.
Meanwhile Social Services plan to set up a 24 hour helpline.
A forest ranger who uses a chainsaw to fell trees is now using it to sculpt the wood.
Neil Sollis can turn logs that would have been pulped, into anything from a piece of doll's furniture to a chess piece.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Forest of Dean
NEIL SOLLIS/Forest Ranger
Voice over
Neil Sollis can normally be seen using his chainsaw to fell trees in the Forest of Dean.
But on this occasion he's donning his visor to give an art demonstration.
Neil has been a Forest Ranger for 15 years and a sculptor for 5.
If you're interested in buying any of Neil's pieces, he gives the to charity shops to sell.
A forty year old airliner that seats just fourteen passengers has taken off for a new lease of life in Australia.
It's a journey that will take ten days and involve eighteen stop-overs.
TIM HURST Staverton
JOHN IVES Heron Airlines
BILL KENNEDY Gloster Aviation Services
Voice over
The airliner is a d'Havilland Heron, with a range of just 700 miles.
It's been renovated over the last three months at Gloucestershire airport at Staverton near Gloucester, bound for a new life in Australia ferrying tourists on a two week tour of the outback.
148 Herons were built from the early 1950's, but only 18 are still flying.
They've been used in Australia since 1952, working for an airline founded by the father of the new owner.
The aircraft was in service with the Royal Navy until 1986, and after last minute engine and radio checks, the plane took off from Staverton an hour ago, with two pilots and an engineer on board.
The journey to Sydney will be made in 18 stages, with stops in France, Italy, Crete, and the Middle East, before the long haul across India and then to Bangkok, Singapore, Jakarta and Bali.
It'll take 8 days to reach Western Australia and another two days from there to Sydney.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Israel-PLO recognition
As two hundred Palestinian deportees were allowed to return to Israel, a Palestine Liberation Organisation spokesman said the PLO and Israel have agreed to recognise each other.
PM considers tax rise
The Prime Minister has confirmed that the Cabinet will consider tax increases in the autumn Budget.
More South Africa deaths
The day after twenty-five people died in massacres in South Africa, two more were killed in a gun attack which injured two others.
Suicide verdict on Fame's wife
A Coroner has recorded a verdict of suicide on Nicolette Fame, the wife of the singer Georgie Fame, who was suffering from depression when she jumped from the Clifton suspension bridge in Bristol.
FTSE down 4
The hundred shares index closed down four point two at thirty, thirty-one point two.
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty-five and down at two marks, forty-eight.
Its got more than eight thousand different types of plants, and attracts scientific experts from around the world.
A unique collection for research, and a place people can wander through for peace and tranquility.
In the last of our summer gardens series, Gargy Patel reports on one of the most historic gardens in the world.
OXFORD
TIMOTHY WALKER Superintendent
Voice over
It's one of the finest and most varied collection of plants on earth.
Oxford's Botanic Garden is the third oldest in the world.
For 371 years, it's been the University's teaching garden, providing plants for students to research.
Almost half a million visitors a year come to wander round the grounds or float past in punts on the River Cherwell.
Over the centuries, the Superintendents who've been responsible for looking after the garden, have each played a major part in it's growth and development.
For them, it's the job of a lifetime.
The various stages of plant evolution can be seen here, from relatives of ferns found in fossils to hybrids created within the last few years.
The vast range of species attracts experts from around the world.
Here, an international study group has travelled from Kew Gardens in London to explore Oxford's own tropical greenhouse.
But it's not just the scientists who find it fascinating here.
The greenhouse is popular with children, even if they do get lost in what could be an Amazonian rainforest.
But for many, the biggest attraction is the colour and beauty and like all good gardens, the peace and quiet.
He says it's good fun to wander through, feed the ducks and watch people make fools of themselves in the punts.
She says they keep the grounds so pleasant.
It's nice to be able to walk by the river and walk through the buildings and greenhouses.
It's wonderful.
From the beginning, the Oxford garden has inspired hundreds of others.
Like most of the colleges, it still maintains an air of tradition and history.
By the 18th century, the botanic gardeners had started an international seed exchange, to help distribute plants around the globe.
And the layout of the walled garden; long narrow beds, with plants grouped according to their botanic family, has been copied worldwide.
Running a modern garden though means less digging and more paperwork for those in charge.
But there's still time to remember tall stories from previous superintendents.
Since the early days when the entire collection was catalogued in one small book, the role of the Botanic Garden has come full circle.
People are again looking at plants for new drugs to fight illness and disease.
And botanists fear a quarter of the world's flora could vanish in the next century, so it's vital the garden continues to help the plant kingdom grow and flourish.
Pilots shot down in Gulf launch book
FTSE up 13
The hundred shares index closed up thirteen point one at two three four zero point six 
The pound is up at one dollar, ninety seven and up at two marks, seventy eight.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
The British tourism trade is going through tough times according to industry leaders.
Overseas visitors are still coming here but they're staying for shorter periods and spending less money.
Mark Kiff reports.
OXFORD
DOUGLAS BAMBER/General Manager/Randolph Hotel
WILLIAM DAVIS/Chairman/British Tourist Authority
HEATHER ARMITAGE/Oxford Tourist Information Authority
TONY LEONARD/The Oxford Story
Voice over
A couple of years ago, it seemed, Britain was being overrun by tourists.
Americans, Japanese, fellow Europeans flooded cities like Oxford.
But in the past year, the wheels have started to come off the tourism trade.
First the Gulf War and now the recession.
The Randolph Hotel is synomous with all the best Oxford has to offer; history, character and service.
But even the Randolph, which caters for the top end of the market, has felt the chill wind of economic depression.
He says the economic situation in American and Europe is not helping.
People are either not coming or they're not spending as much.
The picture painted by the Randolph is a view shared across the tourism industry.
It's certainly the message from the British Tourist Authority in its annual report, published today.
William Davis, Chairman of the British Tourist Authority, says overseas visitors are still coming but they're trading down and looking for bargains.
Happy certainly doesn't appear to describe the situation in Oxford.
The city is one of the most popular destinations on the visitors' map…but accomodation bookings have fallen roughly a quarter over the past two years.
She says the bed bookings fall appears to indicate people are coming to Oxford for the day or perhaps staying with friends or relatives.
But the picture isn't all one of doom and gloom.
Some tourist attractions say they're still drawing in the crowds, although the immediate future is far from rosey.
Tony Leonard, of the Oxford Story, says there are no signs of an increase in leisure spending.
And there's no doubt Britain still has much to offer the traveller.
She says we went on a bus tour and learnt about the architecture and colleges.
He says they're having a good time.
Some of Britain's museums could fall into disrepair or even close because of a shortage of funds, according to a new report.
The Museums and Galleries Commission says a national lottery should be set up to provided the money that's needed.
Sheila Brocklebank reports.
OXFORD
HELEN LA RUE/Curator/Pitt Rivers Museum
GRAHAM GREENE/Museums and Galleries Commission
Voice over
The Pitt Rivers Museum in Oxford has been called an Aladdin's Cave of treasures.
Crammed under one roof is one of the world's greatest collections of artefacts, from human cultures through the ages.
It was founded in 1884 when General Pitt Rivers, an amateur anthropologist, donated his collection to the university.
But since then, it's expanded massively and now contains subjects as diverse as the Cook collection, relics from Captain Cook's voyage to the South Pacific in 1772, to totem poles donated by a North American Indian tribe.
But the museum is desperately short of cash, having had it's budget cut since 1985.
The plight of the Pitt Rivers is typical of the majority of Britain's small museums, according to a report by the Museums and Galleries Commission.
At a conference in London, its chairman, Graham Greene, urged the Government to use the proceeds from any national lottery to protect small museums from closure.
The Museums Commission said it was confident the newly-formed Department of Heritage would support the needs of smaller galleries and ensure that collections of national importance, like that at the Pitt Rivers Museum, are preserved for the public.
A sixteen year old schoolboy has invented a system which enables the deaf to use a phone.It uses the ordinary keypad on the telephone to generate messages on a screen.The invention has gained Richard Mead a place in the finals of a national competition.Richard Barnett reports:
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
RICHARD MEAD/Inventor
CAROLYNE ATKINSON/Diocesan Association for the Deaf
IAN McNAUGHT-DAVIS/Judge
RAY ISLES
Voice over
For 5 years, deafness has prevented Ray Isles from using a telephone.
But today he's holding his first phone conversation since 1987.
It's all thanks to the 16 year old on the other end of the line; Richard Mead.
As part of his GCSE studies at Cheltenham College, Richard has invented Textcall to help the deaf to communicate.
He keys in a series of numbers on a phone which generate letters on a screen which Ray can read.
Ray can then reply down the phone.
The benefit of the system is it only requires the deaf person to have the special electronics and screen.
Anyone can ring the deaf person via an ordinary touch tone telephone.
Male speaker
The idea came from a friend of his sister who was deaf.His sister said it was difficult not being able to phone her.
The system is simple so anyone can use it.
Voice over
The invention has impressed organisations helping the deaf.
Although Carolyn Atkinson can't use Textcall because she communicates by sign language, she says it will help many others.She knows all too well how frustrating not being able to use a phone is:
Female speaker
It's like BT cutting off all the phones.It makes you feel more disabled not having access.
Voice over
The invention has so impressed the judges of the Toshiba Year of Invention Competition, that Richard has reached the final 20, out of more than 4,000 entrants.
Male speaker
Richard has a very fertile mind.
He is good at finding problems and overcoming them.
Voice over
So is Textcall a winner.The final word must go to Ray.
We asked him, by phone of course, what he thought of Richard's invention.
Male speaker
It's marvellous to hold a first telephone conversation for many years.He would like one himself.
Voice over
One of the first centres in the country designed specifically to help child abuse victims is about to open.
Organisers say they hope to teach youngsters and their families how to survive the abuse and carry on with their lives.
Gargy Patel reports.
GLASGOW
VICTIM'S MOTHER
RECONSTRUCTION
ANGELA MARSHALL/Project Director
IAN WHITE/Social Services Director
Voice over
Therapy based in the playroom.
These trained workers are preparing the Ark centre, near Oxford for the arrival of youngsters, who've been victims of sexual abuse.
Using a mixture of conventional and special toys, they'll encourage children to express their anger and emotion; hopefully learning how to heal the scars and carry on with their lives.
The project is based on a successful pilot scheme in Glasgow, which has already counselled 80 families.
The idea started with the national Childrens Home charity.
With funding from local authorities, another eleven centres are starting up.
The Oxfordshire scheme aims to provide a 6-month intensive programme.
Therapy will extend to families of victims who often suffer their own trauma because of the abuse.
The Ark is the only project of it's kind in the region.
Gloucestershire's social workers do work with abused children, but there are no funds for specialist units.
And in Hereford and Worcester, facilities for abused children are run by a children's charity and paid for by the authority.
For Oxfordshire's social services, the expertise here is invaluable.
National Childrens Home is already planning another 5 treatment centres.
Like the Ark, they hope they'll succeed in providing a safe temporary refuge for abuse victims.
Three men and a woman are being questioned by police in connection with the murder of a car dealer whose remains were found in a lake.
The torso of Stephen Davison was found in the lake at Reigate in Surrey in June.
It had several gun-shot wounds.
Mr Davison, who had four children and lived at Dulverton Avenue in Swindon, had been reported missing two weeks earlier by his girlfriend.
The last time he'd been seen was in a fight outside a pub in Carshalton, just ten miles from where the body was found.
JUNE 1992/REIGATE/Surrey
Britain's biggest bankrupt Kevin Maxwell has begun his search for work.
RECENT PICTURES/HAILEY/Oxfordshire
A mission to bring Bosnian children back to England has ended in failure.
The rescuers had hoped to bring forty children back to the region to be fostered by families here.
But they say red tape has meant they've had to come home alone.
Clare Lafferty reports.
BERKELEY/Gloucestershire
JOHN NIX/Organiser
LAST SATURDAY
CHRIS CHAPPELL/Volunteer
EDDIE BOULTON/Coach Driver
Voice over
This was meant to be the happy day when a group of volunteers from Berkeley, brought 40 children from the war in Bosnia, to the safety of Gloucestershire.
But it wasn't to be.
When they arrived back this morning, they were alone and almost too upset to talk.
Only 5 days ago, the rescuers were full of hope for the mission.
Carrying a coach load of supplies, they'd planned to collect the children from a camp in Zagreb.
But they were diverted instead to refugee camps in Hungary, where there were no children.
The trip was organised by BritPol, a charity which advises on bringing women and children from Eastern Europe to Britain.
A spokeswoman for the organisation blamed the volunteers for the failure.
She said they hadn't organised themselves properly and didn't listen to advise and instructions.
For a week now the volunteers have been sleeping among the undistributed relief supplies on the coach.
And for the last 3 days, they've been living on the food they'd planned to give to the children.
But despite everything they all want to repeat the trip.
The volunteers are now doing all they can to rearrange their mission.
They hope next time, it'll have a happier ending.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
PURTON/Wiltshire
FRED FOWLER/Tenant Farmer
Picture Courtesy/ SWINDON EVENING ADVERTISER
DOUG FOWLER/Tenant Farmer
JEREMY MOODY/Tenant Farmers Association
Voice over
The Fowlers have been tenants at Battlelake Farm for 58 years.
But now they face eviction and the prospect of unemployment.
He says he doesn't know how a another man who bring himself to do this to them.
London-based businessman, Christopher Mackarness bought the property 3 years ago.
Although Mr MacKarness won't confirm it, the Fowlers claim the price was just £70,000 because it came with sitting tenants.
But a clause in the tenancy agreement allows the landlord to evict, if he's given the go ahead to convert the farm to a non-agricultural use.
The Fowlers claim just 3 weeks after he bought the property, Mr Mackarness had applied for planning permission.
North Wiltshire Council turned it down, but Mr MacKarness went to the Department of the Environment, who approved.
The Fowlers then appealed to the High Court but lost and earlier this week the council approved a further plan involving the farmhouse as well as the farm.
He says if he wanted an equestrian centre, why didn't he buy one instead of ruining people's lives.
He says it's been the worst 3 years of his life.
Mr Mackarness runs a property company from this office over a shop in South London.
At first he agreed to be interviewed but then changed his mind.
But today in a faxed letter, he confirmed he bought the property because it had a clause allowing eviction and added:
The Tenant Farmers Association says it's a legal loophole which must be closed.
He says it means if a planning permission is granted, tenants farmers can loose all or part of their land or buildings.
Mr Mackarness insists his bank offered the Fowlers a guaranteed £100,000 in compensation.
But the Fowlers claim the money was never guaranteed.
They now expects to be served with a final doucments, giving them 3 months notice of eviction, with the legal minimum compensation of just £10,000.
A trainer and breeder of horses has been found guilty on cruelty charges.
Roger Pike, who trains point-to-point racehorses, was fined three hundred pounds for permitting unneccessary suffering to a horse from his stables.
His groom was also convicted.
Nick Clarke reports.
Insp TERRY WINSTONE/RSPCA
Voice over
Police investigating the death of a woman, whose body was discovered in a car pulled from the River Severn, have been searching the riverbank for clues.
They're still trying to piece together her last movements.
Russell Trott reports.
Insp MIKE PENNINGTON/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
Detectives spent the day searching the banks of the River Severn, near Hardwicke, close to the spot where Tania Probyns body was found.
The twenty eight year-old mother of two had been missing for six days when police frogmen pulled her submerged Renault car out of the river.
Officers investigating her death say they're keeping their options open…and they say crime hasn't yet been ruled out.
They're now desperatly trying to piece together the last few hours of her life.
Her car will now be taken to Forensic Laboratories in Chepstow, Gwent, where yet more tests are to be carried out.
Meanwhile further tests are being carried out on Tania Probyn's body…to solve the mystery of exactly how she died.
Beatrix Potter's classic children's story’ The Tailor of Gloucester’has been made into a video.
It will go on sale at Christmas, and it's hoped to use the release to boost tourism in the city.
THE TAILOR OF GLOUCESTER Courtesy
SIMON GARRETT Reporting
PHILIP MOSS City Tour Guide
SALLY FLOYER Publisher
TONY WORKMAN Sheriff of Gloucester
Male speaker
’ In the time of swords and periwigs and full-skirted coats with flowered lappets — when gentlemen wore ruffles, and gold-laced waistcoats of paduasoy and taffeta — there lived a tailor in Gloucester.’
Voice over
Beatrix Potter was holidaying in Gloucester when she learned of a local legend about a tailor called John Pritchard…who returned to work on a Monday morning to find an unfinished coat mysteriously completed over the weekend.
In later years the truth came out how two of the tailors apprentices had spent their wages on the Saturday night
Male speaker
It turned out they got rather drunk that night and were unable to get home.
Unbeknown to the tailor they had a key to the shop and let themselves in to sleep off their excesses.
They woke on Sunday morning and people wre going to church…they daren't be seen in their working clothes.
So to while away the time while they waited for dark again they sat in a back room and fiished the waistcoat.
When darkness fell they went home.
The Tailor arrived on Monday morning and there was the waistcoat — completed
Voice over
Peter Rabbit was in town to promote’ The Tailor.’
Potter's most successful creation seemed to be feeling his hundred years old.
But he's still irresistible for children…well some of them anyway.
But it wasn't the naughty rabbit but the tailor who most pleased Potter herself
Female speaker
She liked it the best of all her books.
She always used to say this is my favourite.
It was less popular than Peter Rabbit because itat Christmas
Voice over
Children from Kingsholme Primary School were among the audience for the premier
Female speaker
All the houses looked like Gloucester in the olden days andf it was snowing in the streets.
Male speaker
I liked everything
Male speaker
I liked the bit where the mice made the cloak
Voice over
Beatrix Potter's own sketches of the city were used by her in her books.
The place where she put the tailor's shop is now a Beatrix Potter shop and museum.
The Tailor's house…the Tailor's house pub.
In the video they've used a combination of modern animation techniques and her classic drawings.
Male speaker
This'll go out worldwide and there is a great lot of interest in Potter not only in Gloucester but across the country and the whole world in general 
Voice over
It's the hope of council and traders alike that people who've read the book and seen the film will also want to come and see the Tailor's city 
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Unions warn of industrial unrest
FTSE up 5
The hundred shares index closed up five point eight at three thousand and thirty seven 
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty four and down at two marks, forty seven.
Welcome back…later on…the Beatrix Potter story that put Gloucester on the literary map…
But first with all the sport…here's Tim
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
DENIS SMITH/United Manager
Voice over
The welcome's over…the introductions have been made…today it's been down to work for Oxford United's new manager Denis Smith and his assistant Malcolm Crosby…their plan for the first game
Denis Smith says hopefully to get three points and play good football…there's not much they can do in two days but his team talk will be tell the players to go out enjoy it and pass the ball…by a strange twist of fate Smith's first match at the Manor is against the team that gave him the sack last season Bristol City
Denis Smith says there's nothing he likes better in life than winning football matches and victory tomorrow will delight him
Just about all the first team squad on call for tomorrow…two problems facing the new manager Les Robinson is doubtful with a back injury…and skipper Jim Magilton is fighting for fitness after taking a knock in the Ireland game
The team haven't won since the opening day against Portsmouth…as for Bristol City both have their wins have been at home
In the premier league it's West Ham against Swindon at Upton Park…last season of course they faced each other in the first division…in London Town came out on top and it was this win that sparked their promotion run…so let's hope it's lucky for them again
The team is likely to be unchanged by there's a chance Terry Fenwick may appear as one of the subs…the other is likely to be Steve White…he's fit again
No Swindon fan likes looking at the league table just now but the Hammers have lost their last two and let in seven goals
In Division Three Hereford United will be hoping to make it two wins in two…they've a new star rising in the west Chris Pike's his name…three goals in two games
There'll be a change in defence tomorrow Kevan Smith is in for his first game
United need to nail the cobblers who are bottom of the league with just one point
goal of the week goes to Hereford skipper Derek Hall…he's hot three this season…this one against Scunthorpe was the best so far
we'll be going back to the Manor Ground a little later on to find out the winner in our manager competition.
But now in our action round-up we're off to Kingsholm, where Gloucester are kicking-off their new season tomorrow 
BARRIE CORLESS/Director of Rugby
Voice over
There's only one fresh face at Kingsholm for the new season…but that's the all important one…
Barry Corless is the club's first full-time director of rugby…
Barry Corless
It promises to be the toughest league year yet for rugby union…the first division has been changed so that teams play each other at home and away…which means more games
Barry Corless
There are no new names in the team…for the opening game…leading the pack is John Hawker who's career was almost killed off by a serious neck injury
What chance Gloucester this season…well they looked sharp enough on the re-season tour of Italy so bona fortuna for the Cherry and Whites
if Central South had been running twenty five years ago our sport would have been dominated by the name of one man…jockey Terry Biddlecombe one of Gloucestershire's most famous and favourite of sporting sons…
After a spell in Australia Biddles is back and celebrating a great victory…its a great story for our Friday Feature 
TERRY BIDDLECOMBE
Voice over
In his day…in the sixties and early seventies Terry Biddlecombe was the best…three times champion jockey…a Gold Cup winner at Cheltenham…the first man to ride a century of winners two years running…in big races the nation's punters back Biddles…
In retirement he still worked with horses at his home near Tewkesbury…signed on as Central's racing tipster…and no national hunt gathering was complete without Terry Biddlecombe…
But away from the glamour…away from the headlines was the sad story of two broken marriages…a new future falling flat in Australia…and worse of all a disease that haunts many a sportsman, many a famous face…alcoholism…
Biddlecombe hit the bottle…the booze took him over
Terry B says he didn't think he was hitting the bottle but there's one side of you that takes over and he started to slide down hill…he became and realised it was time to get real with himself and he hasn't had a drink since march
This is the new Biddlecombe…a couple of stones lighter…free of alocohol
A man fighting to get back on top…he's a new life and a new job with a firm of auctioneers in Hereford…
Terry B says he had some treatment and lots of help from friends…he goes to meetings every week and he's enjoying life and taking one day at a time…he's had one innings and is now enjoying his second
Biddlecombe's new beat is around the horse sales…his year's of racing expertise is being harnessed at last…and the best news of all is that he may soon be back in the saddle
Terry B says it's great to be back and he's heard there's a race for the over fifties which he may have a go at…he's getting itchy feet and will soon be back riding for trainers…he's also got his old job back as a steward at Worcester races and his public still love him
finally it's back to the Manor Ground to pick the winners in our competition to pick the new Oxford manager…who better to make the draw than the new man himself 
Voice over
thank you Denis…two season tickets to the manor for you Mr. Mullins…we're also giving away a United shirt apiece to six runners up…and they're Lee Lowe…
L.Buck…
Darren Hooson…
Rose Green…
Terry Sullivan and Jon Middleton
Villagers are angry over a proposed deal which would give owners of a gravel pit the right to build thirty houses.
A council has been asked to give permission for the development in return for money for recreational facilities.
Opponents of the plan say the gravel pit is in a conservation area, and the houses would be too expensive for local people.
HARRIET RYLEY/Environment reporter
BODENHAM/Herefordshire
STEPHEN MORRIS/Bodenham Lake Action Group
DEREK PRITCHARD
ROGER WHITE/Redlands
Voice over
Bodenham Lake was worked as a gravel pit until nineteen eighty-seven.
Since then it's been used by Hereford and Worcester County Council to teach children sailing.
The lake is just west of the village of Bodenham.
Now its owners, Redlands, wants to build thirty houses between the lake and the village.
As sweetners to gain planning permission they've also proposed part funding for a sailing centre and to pay forimprovements to the area around the lake.
People in Bodenham object because it's in a conservation area and they say the proposed houses would be too expensive for local people.
They also feel there's one rule for them and another for Redlands as far as planning is concerned.
He says over the last few years there've been a number of applications by local people who live and work in the area and want to stay here and they've been refused permission to build on their own land for single dwellings and we think it would be terribly unfair if Redlands could come in and build a whole new estate, doubling the size of the village.
Derek Pritchard who lives in the village wants to build a house on his own land next-door to his parents for himself and his fiancee, but was refused planning permission in April this year.
He says I grew up here, I went to school and I want to stay in this area.
I can't afford the kind of houses which go on sale around here.
Redlands has sold around fifty disused sites around the country for similar schemes in the last decade and insists they would take local people's needs into account in deciding what kind of houses would be built.
He says we've actually made it clear on our planning application that we're prepared to look very carefully at the mix and size and type of housing to ensure it fits what local people need in the area.
Leominster District Council refused to comment on the Redlands application, beyond saying consultations are still going on.
A decision is expected by the end of the year.
The man who first described the Gloucestershire Regiment as’ The Glorious Glosters’has died at the age of eighty nine (89).
Major General Tom Brodie commanded the regiment in it's most famous action.
His heroic stand in the Korean war saved UN troops from being overrun by the Communists.
GRAEME BOWD/Reporting
General Sir ANTHONY FARRAR-HOCKLEY/Korean War Veteran
Major CLAUD REBBECK/Gloucestershire Regiment
Voice over
The Gloucester's stand was the turning point of the Korean war.
Under the command of Major General Tom Brodie, on the right, the 29th Brigade held a vital front along the Imjin River.
Though outnumbered by 20 to one their heroic resistance gave American forces time to regroup.
There were two VCs, Brodie was among just 50 survivors.
General Sir Anthony Farrar-Hockley, who later commanded allied forces in Europe, fought with Tom Brodie in Korea.
He remembers him as one Britain's great military commanders and a master of the under statement.
Male speaker
He got on very well with all the nationalities there.
But he sometimes surprised the Americans.
He was once asked by an American general how things were going.
He replied’ a bit sticky, Sir.’
Voice over
It was Brodie who first called the regiment the Glorious Gloucesters.
The term stuck.
Although he led them in Korea he was actually from the Cheshire Regiment.
But the Gloucesters still regarded him as one of theirs.
Male speaker
The old soldiers used to sing a song about him called 'get up to the front Tom Brodie.'
When a soldier sings about his officer he's a splendid fellow.
Voice over
On retirement from the army he went on to have a succesful career in business.
He remained president of the Korean Veteran's Association.
His funeral will take place at Sandhurst next week.
(WES ADLIB)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, Biddlecombe's back
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
RICHARD BARNETT/Sandford
APRIL 1993
BLACKBIRD LEYS/Oxford
ANDREW SMITH MP/Lab
Cllr JOHN COCHRANE/Oxfordshire County Council
Voice over
Orchard House old peoples home in Sandford won a major safety award five months ago for the way staff looked after the residents.
Now it's one of five homes Oxfordshire County Council is being recommended to shut down to save money…along with Longlands at Blackbird Leys in Oxford and three other homes in Oxford, Woodstock and Banbury.
Up to two hundred old people will have to move if the council accepts a recommendation from its Social Services Director that the homes should close.
The County's Social Services department refused to let Central News into the threatened homes to talk to the residents.
But at Orchard House, the old people were determined to make their views known…so they came out to us:
They say: It's a very good home and they couldn't cope with moving.
Orchard House is in the Oxford East constituency of MP Andrew Smith.
He's fighting the closures:
Male speaker
It will cause great problems for the old people.
And if they move, it will be harder for their relatives to visit them.
Voice over
But one of the councillors who has been revierwing the county's homes has defended the move:
Male speaker
He's seen old people who've moved out of homes before and they've enjoyed it.
Voice over
The council will decide the fate of the homes at the end of the month.
Meanwhile the residents at Orchard House will continue their fight to stay put.
An elderly couple who survived an arson attack on their flat say a council failed to repair a defective smoke alarm.
The pair say they could both have been killed if neighbours hadn't woken them up.
KEN GOODWIN/Gloucester
BEATRICE TUCKER/Pensioner
IVOR GRIFFITHS/Pensioner
ALICE DOWD/Neighbour
Voice over
Ivor Griffiths and Beatrice Tucker say they're both lucky to be alive.
They were alerted by neighbours who saw smoke and flames coming from their outhouse.
It seems someone had stuffed burning paper through a gap in the brickwork.
The gas meter and pipes were only inches away.
She says that if they hadn't been woken they would both be dead.
He says that if the fire had melted the gas meter, there would have been an explosion.
Neighbours helped wake the two pensioners.
She says that they banged on the doors, and got them out.
The couple say that their smoke alarm, provided by the council, wasn't working.
They disconnected it because it was faulty.
They had asked the council to fix it — that was eighteen months ago.
He says that he replaced the batteries, but the alarm kept going off all the time.
So he disconnected it and told the council it didn't work.
Nothing has happened since then.
Gloucester City Council says that it usually responds straight away to requests to repair smoke alarms in it's properties, but an investigation has now been launched to see if there's been a break down in communications.
Meanwhile the pair say that they've had trouble in the past with vandalism and youths prowling around the back of the council owned flats.
But this latest attack is the worst, and could so easily have resulted in a loss of life.
People who survive road accidents can go on to develop severe psychiatric problems, according to a report out today.
Experts say some motorists can't even face getting back into a car.
Hundreds of thousands of people may be at risk, and doctors say they need proper treatment.
GARETH FURBY/Oxford
AMBULANCE SERVICE VIDEO
RICHARD EATON/Accident Victim
CAROLYN BLANSHARD/Accident Victim
DR RICHARD MAYOU/Consultant
JAMES WILSON-MACDONALD/Trauma Surgeon
Voice over
Nine months after surving a road accident…
Richard Eaton's physical wounds have healed.
The crutches he had to rely on have gone.
But the mental scars left by that head on crash are still with him, especially when he drives.
He says approaching bends he's worried because he has flashbacks of someone losing control and crashing into him.
Student nurse Carolyn Blanshard was in car when it was hit from behind.
She says she gets nervous whenever there's a car behind her, and she's scared of speed.
According to Dr Richard Mayou hundred of thousands of people may now be living with similar fears.
A survey of accident victims treated at Oxford's John Radcliffe Hospital found up to one fifth later suffered from mood changes, nightmares, and horrific flashbacks.
The results are published in today's edition of the British Medical Journal.
He says someone people can go through the experience of the crash all over again and it's very frightening.
The researchers say in some cases the after effects can compare with those suffered by survivors of major tragedies like the Zebrugree disaster.
Now they want doctors who deal wioth the physical side to think of the mental scars as well.
He says patients could talk to each other about what happened and that may help.
Psychological counselling may help accident victims like Richard Eaton cope better with the flashbacks.
But he says his fears of speeding traffic will stay with him forever.
He knows better than most how dangerous it can be.
(1)
Two men from Surrey have been charged with murder after the body of a car dealer was found in a lake.
Two others who were being questioned have been released on police bail.
The torso of Stephen Davison was found in a lake at Reigate in Surrey in June.
It had several gun-shot wounds.
Mr Davison, who had four children and lived at Dulverton Avenue in Swindon, had been reported missing by his girlfriend.
The last time he'd been seen was in a fight outside a pub in Carshalton, ten miles from where the body was found.
JUNE 1992/REIGATE/Surrey
FTSE up 30
The hundred shares index closed up thirty point three at two three seven zero point nine 
The pound is down at one dollar, ninety three and down at two marks, seventy eight.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight and have a good weekend.
A rave party has been banned because of fears that the loud music and lights would harm a herd of pigs in the next field.
Organisers said the party would be tightly controlled.
But after magistrates heard from the pig centre and from the RSPCA, they turned down the application.
Gargy Patel reports.
WOODCOTE/Oxfordshire
LIBRARY PICTURES
ALISTAIR MEWS/RSPCA
JUNE 1992
Voice over
For the Cotswold Gold pig, life on the farm is fairly peaceful.
Nothing like the rave parties which have become a controversial feature in the countryside.
Organisers had planned to attract ten thousand youngsters to the airstrip 300 yards away from the pigs.
The noise they said, wouldn't reach the sow's ears, but South Oxfordshire District Council turned the idea down.
The party group appealed, but the court in Henley agreed it would be a serious threat to the 150 sows, 300 piglets and 12 boars, which are the subject of a major research project.
It's the first time a licence has been refused because of animal welfare.
The rave organisers, Nemesis, weren't available to comment.
Their most recent party was near Northampton, where police made a number of arrests for drugs charges.
The RSPCA, which partly funds the pig project in Oxfordshire, says it doesn't want to be a spoilsport.
Most animals, it says, actually find music soothing, but that doesn't include rave music.
Animal experts say the pigs can cope with the sound of microlight craft using the airstrip, but a rave would cause a catastrophe.
As for the pigs themselves, some played up to all the publicity, others were content to wallow in their victory; settling for a quiet life.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
GREG DOWNS/Player-Coach
Voice over
and don't forget first news of the football…on goals extra tomorrow teatime…our next sport takes us to Kingsholm in Gloucester and its curtain up for this week's rugby review 
Voice over
will he or won't he…can they or can't they…this weekend Nigel Mansell and the Williams team are due to make up their minds at the Italian Grand Prix…that's where Mark Kiff starts his action roundup 
Voice over
Nigel Mansell has promised he'll make a statement tomorrow about his future with the Oxfordshire-based Williams team.
The world champion was fastest this afternoon in qualifying for Sunday's Italian Grand Prix.
Mansell is looking for that elusive record-breaking ninth win of the season.
Colin McRae clinched his second successive British rally title today with vicotry in the Manx rally.
His Banbury-based Prodrive outfit dominated the race from start to finish.
Britain's judo team, especially the men, may not have fared as well as expected in the Olypmics.
But the sport is still very much alive and kicking in this country.
To prove it, the Blackbird Leys Leisure Centre in Oxford is hosting the All-England Championships this Sunday.
More than two hundred and fifty competitors are lined up to compete.
National Coach for the Martial Arts Judo Council Mike Ilott says there should be plenty of explosive action.
Oxfordshire snooker star Tessa Davidson from Bodicote near Banbury has made the ideal start to the new season.
This weekend the newly crowned UK Ladies Champion plays in the qualifying rounds for the German Championships.
Wheelchair athlete Ian Hayden from Sutton Courtenay near Abingdon overcame an arm injury to pick up a second silver medal at the Paralympic Games in Barcelona.
He finished runnerup in the javelin to add to his second place in the shot put.
And finally, while Oxford United's men take on Sunderland at the Manor tomorrow the club's newly formed Ladies team makes its debut at the Witney Town Ground on Sunday afternoon…formerly known as the Oxford and County Ladies, United kick off their campaign against the Hassocks from Sussex.
good luck to them…and to Witney Town who've got their super new ground going at last…
Now we always try to find you winners on Central South and tonight we bring you Leon Taylor of Cheltenham…his future is our Friday Feature 
LEON TAYLOR
IAN BARR/Coach
Voice over
Now to a less energetic pursuit.
If you're a beer drinker, there's only one place to be this weekend.
A festival of real ale is being held where you can taste the best of the beer made by the country's small independent brewers.
Kevin Ashford reports.
WORCESTER
ELIZABETH LEE/Festival Organiser
MIKE HALL/Ash Vine Brewery
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
DINTON/Buckinghamdshire
HUGH COATES/Springhill Centre
Voice over
A family who are believed to have raided five jewellers' shops in the space of a few weeks are being hunted by police.
The young couple and their two small children were captured on a security video during their latest raid.
Jessica Fowle reports.
SECURITY VIDEO
BLETCHLEY/Milton Keynes
CAROL REAVELL/Shop Manageress
Det Sgt TONY EVERITT/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
This is the moment that the group, believed to be a family, helped themselves to jewellery worth more than £3,000 at the Hatton House Jewellers in Bletchley.
While the shop assistant helped another customer and the children played, the 2 adults filled their pockets with rings and other valuables.
This is believed to be their 5th raid — with reports of incidents in Aylesbury and Thame.
Just an hour before the thieves struck in Bletchley, there was a similar theft from a shop in Buckingham.
The couple, who are both in their 30s, are described as being heavily built with Irish accents.
The young boy is about 4 years old and his sister is about 3.
Meanwhile, a woman shop assistant was bound and gagged and forced to lie face down while thieves raided a jewellery shop.
WALLINGFORD/Oxfordshire
The attack happened in broad daylight at M-G-J jewellers in Wallingford.
A police helicopter was used in the search for the two men who were both white and wearing overalls.
Police are hunting a sex attacker who cut a nurse's hair and clothes with a pair of scissors before indecently assaulting her.
AYLESBURY/Buckinghamshire
The twenty-year-old was walking outside Stoke Mandeville Hospital near Aylesbury when she was dragged into a field and attacked.
Police are looking for a man who's five feet eleven inches tall and of medium build.
He has short, black hair and was wearing a short zipped jacket and black trousers.
A man who was alleged to have killed barman Brian Hawkins has had the charge against him dropped.
Mr Hawkins, who was twenty-six, was found dead at his home in Stroud last May.
Michael Talbot, who's twenty-three, was charged with his manslaughter.
But the Crown Prosecution Service has dropped the case after four post mortems failed to establish a cause of death.
STROUD/Gloucestershire
Aircraft from all over Europe and America are taking part in one of the biggest mid-air refuelling exercises ever staged.
Central to the operation are tankers flown by The United States part-time airforce.
Simon Garrett reports 
Sgt SONNY REYNOLDS/Boom Operator
Major JOHN D'ERRICO/Pilot
First Lt DEBBIE PARK/Navigator
Voice over
An F-16 from the Royal Dutch airforce connects to the boom of a KC135 Stratotanker out of Upper Heyford.
In a war situation, these are vulnerable moments.
But with up to 6,000 pounds of fuel a minute gushing down the 4-inch pipe, the danger is kept to a minimum.
It's a US airforce tanker, but the crew are from the Air National Guard.
Some full-time some part-time like the territorials.
The Dutch and American jets wait patiently for their turn.
There are 80 jets and 11 tankers of various nationalities in a very small area.
The flight crew's first priority is not to get too close to other aircraft.
The Stratotanker is a converted Boeing 707.
It works on what could be described as tried and tested technology.
The part-time officers come from all walks of life.
Some national guardsmen are ex-servicemen.
Some would like to make the job full time.
Tanker 1471's navigator is unemployed at the moment and would like to make a career of the air guard.
With tanker and jet having to exactly match their speed at refuelling.
Precision is everything.
Too far away and the boom won't connect.
Too close could be disasterous.
Tankers are slow and defenceless on the battlefield.
They're a highly prized military asset.
But with fighter pilots depending on them for the fuel to get home with, the tanker crews say they have a feeling their friends will look after them.
A farmer is claiming twenty thousand pounds in compensation from an electricity company after a quarter of his cattle herd was electrocuted.
It happened while workmen were trying to mend faulty overhead cabling in the field where the stock were grazing.
Midlands Electricity has begun an investigation.
Viewer's Video/JESSICA FOWLE/Bromyard
RAY BOUSTON/Farmer
DAVID THOMPSON/MEB
Voice over
This is what farmer Ray Bouston found when MEB workmen told him that twenty-two of his charolais beef cattle were dead.
The engineers had been investigating a fault with overhead cables in the field at Bromyard in Herefordshire.
It's still not clear exactly what happened but somehow the electricity surged into the ground around the pole.
A quarter of Ray's stock was killed but it could have been a human life lost.
Male speaker
The greatest relief was that I hadn't called in on my way down or I would have been with them.
I would have gone straight over to them.
Male speaker
MEB has very stringent safety rules for its staff and customers will be concerned that it doesn't happen again.
Voice over
Most of Ray's cows were grazing in another field when it happened but those he lost were his most valuable.
They were to be sent to market next month and Ray was depending on the money.
He's claiming almost one thousand pounds per cow from Midlands Electricity.
Male speaker
We're hoping to be compensated straight away.
When they go to market you get the cheque in two or three days.
We're relying on it to replace them.
Voice over
Ray's now waiting for the outcome of his compensation claim.
In the meantime MEB has set up an inquiry into what happened.
A farmer who's admitted almost thirty cases of cruelty to animals has been warned he could be sent to prison.
One cow was so ill it was being attacked by rats while still alive.
The RSPCA says it's one of the worst cases of it's kind.
RSPCA Video/TIM HURST/Cheltenham
Insp ALVAR POWELL/RSPCA
Voice over
RSPCA inspectors found emaciated cattle and sheep, some dead, others dying, when they raided two farms in Gloucestershire earlier this year.
They videod and photographed more than 200 animals before accusing the farmer of cruelty.
Today, Reginald Oliffe, who lives at Witcombe in Gloucestershire, appeared at Cheltenham Magistrates Court and pleaded guilty to 29 charges of cruelty and neglect.
An RSPCA inspector, police and vets, had raided Crickley Hill Farm, near Gloucester, and Cornerways Farm at Staverton near Cheltenham earlier this year.
Most of the animals seized have been transferred to other farms in Gloucestershire where many have fully recovered.
Oliffe has already admitted keeping 300 sheep in pens surrounded by broken bottles and barbed wire in Gloucester.
Police have praised the bravery of a teenage soldier who dragged himself from the wreckage of his car after being speared with a wooden stake.
He was spotted by a passing motorist and is now in a stable condition in hospital.
JESSICA FOWLE/Stoke Orchard
Insp PETER TOCKNELL/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
A Chief Constable has asked for an inquiry into the running of the world's biggest military airshow.
Parking problems and traffic congestion have prompted one local councillor to describe the International Air Tattoo as a shambles.
July 1993/ROBIN POWELL/RAF Fairford
BRUCE ARKELL/Farmer
TONY BUTLER/Chief Constable
DAVE GAYLER/County Councillor
Voice over
July's International Air Tattoo at RAF Fairford was marred by a mid-air collision between 2 Mig aircraft in front of more than 150 000 spectators.
One of them landed in a field next to Bruce Arkell's house, and he's still finding pieces of wreckage.
It's been suggested that the crowd was too large for the organisers to handle, and at today's police authority meeeting Gloucestershire's Chief Constable announced a review into how the event was run.
The review's been welcomed by the county councillor who represents the Fairford area.
The Air Tattoo told us: There are a number of areas which will benefit from a fresh approach, particularly the traffic and admission arrangements.
It's vital that we get things right in future.
Meanwhile, it's hoped the organisers can at least be persuaded to divert flight paths away from local villages in time for the next tattoo.
An RAF squadron which is to be disbanded next month has staged a special display to mark the end of an era.
The airmen and women's families turned out in force to watch, and top billing at the biggest farewell bash in town went to those masters of precision flying, The Red Arrows.
MARIA COYLE RAF Benson
Sqdn Ldr STEVE NEWTON 115 Squadron
Wing Cdr DOUGIE BARR 115 Squadron
SANDIE McLEOD Squadron Leader's Wife
BECKLEY Oxfordshire
Voice over
Every child's dream is to be a pilot.
That dream came true for Adam and David, the sons of a squadron leader based at RAF Benson in Oxfordshire.
For this is Family Day when dads and husbands are given the chance to show what they do.
Male speaker
It's useful for them to know what dads does when he leaves the house to go to work.
They like the planes although the noisier ones do give Adam some problems.
He should grow out of that.
They like the planes though, especially the Andovers.
Voice over
It's the last Family Day for Number 115 Squadron which will be disbanded next month.
The squadron's Andover planes will go to East Midlands airport where a private firm is to take over the squadron's duty checking the accuracy of radar and landing systems on all military aircraft.
Male speaker
In the RAF you get used to moving around from appointment to appointment.
I've been at RAF Benson for four years, and some of the men have been here longer, so it will be sad to leave.
Voice over
Squadron sixty will stay at RAF Benson home of the Queens flight and the WEssex helicopters.
Seventy people out of over a thousand RAF personnel here will be posted elsewhere.
But everyone enjoyed the opportunity to relax, socialise and soak up the sun.
Female speaker
Everyone's pulled together.
The wives might not have quite as glamorous a job as their husbands flying the planes.
But we like to be there to give our support.
Voice over
Interviewer asks: What does your daddy do?
Female speaker
My daddy does the washing-up for mummy.
Voice over
Music ending on sound effects.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
Israel-PLO deal signed
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organisation have signed an historic deal in Washington granting Palestinians on the West Bank and Gaza Strip self-rule.
Yitzhak Rabin and Yasser Arafat shook hands.
Girl of 14 found dead
A man has been arrested after a fourteen-year-old girl was found dead at a house in Hull.
Inquries into demolition death
Three separate inquiries are underway into why a woman spectator died attending the demoliton of a block of flats in Glasgow, early reports suggest she WAS at a safe distance from the site of the blast.
Death of Raymond Burr
The actor, Raymond Burr, star of TV's Perry Mason and Ironside series, has died at the age of seventy-six.
FTSE down 12
The hundred shares index closed down twelve point two at thirty, twenty-four point eight.
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty-four and up at two marks, forty-nine.
We know from your calls that some of you are suffering from poor picture quality on all channels at the moment.
The problem is caused by engineering work on the Oxford transmitter: its aerials are now 25 years old and need replacing.
The work started last week and until its finished the transmitter is operating on reduced power, which for some viewers means a poor picture on all ITV and BBC.
The company that owns the transmitters, NTL, tells us the work will be finished by October 10 
(That's it for tonight, our late news is at 10.30pm.
Goodnight.)
RUNS=0:10
The new rugby union season got underway on Saturday.
Gloucester's first match was home to the Wasps.It finished as it started, all square.
a draw nine points apiece 
Voice over
It was a game of kicks…
Rob Andrew gave Wasps the lead with a first half penalty…3-0
3-3 when Gloucester's Tim Smith landed his 400th penalty for the club and 6-3 when he kicked another minutes later…
The Cherry and Whites were on top then and were looking good for an opening win when Damien Cummins dropped a goal to make it 9-3…
But Wasps hit back with two more penalties from Rob Andrew the last with just seconds to go make it 9 all…
That's the bones…coach Keith Richardson has the meat of the match
Keith Richardson says it the game showed a lot of encouragement for the cherry and whites…if anything Gloucester had the edge…and with a little more luck it could have gone their way…confidence is not quite there and Gloucester have to turn their pressure into points…
things were looking good some of the players were a little disappointed but if they win next week that's three points from four which isn't a bad start
A treasure hunter using a metal detector has unearthed one of the biggest ever hoards of Iron Age coins.
They'll be valued soon, but it's thought they could be worth around ten thousand pounds.
GARETH FURBY/Worcester
RICHARD BINCH/Coroner's Officer
HILARY WHITE/Archaelogist
PHILIP DE JERSEY/Coin Expert
Voice over
It may look like a handful of chocolate buttons.
But close up, to the expert, its the most important finds of iron age coins this century, a mix of bronze, silver and gold.
It was dug up in a ploughed field in South Worcestershire…the precise location is being kept secret.
And the treasure hunter doesn't want to be identified.
The hoard's now being kept at Worcester police station.
He says a coin was found on the surface, and the rest were about sixteen inches down.
It's beleived the money was buried by an ancient Briton trying to protect his fortune.
She says for some reason he didn't come back for it.
It doesn't compare to the recent find by Suffolk farmer Eric Laws, which is estimated to be worth millions.
But experts say the Worcester treasure hunter may still be in for a pleasant suprise.
He says it may be worth up to nine thousand pounds, and it's also valuable to historians who want to know about Iron Age society.
The coins will be valued by the British Museum this week.
An if an inquest decides they are legally classified as treasure trove…then the finder will be paid the full market value.
Dozens of sudents who can't get into medical colleges in this country are trying for places in Czechoslovakia.
Professors from universities over there are on a recruiting drive over here.
But students who qualify as doctors abroad won't automatically be allowed to practise in Britain.
KATE GARRAWAY/Malvern
Prof JIRI KRAML/Charles University
ROBIN BELLERBY/Abbey College Principal
While many contemporaries are still digesting their A level results, these students queued up to sit yet more exams.
The Abbey College in Malvern was the venue.
The prize for successful candidates, a chance to study medicine in the former Czechoslovakia.
Universities there have started teaching the subject in English in an attempt to attract students from all over the world and so far they appear to be succeeding.
Female speaker
Even though I have a degree in Bio-chemistry I still couldn't get a place at medical school in Britain.
So doing the foundation course here gives me the chance to get a place at a Czech University.
Female speaker
How do you feel about going to Czechoslovakia in a few days.
Female speaker
Very excited, very nervous also but I am relly looking forward to it.
Voice over
Professors flew in especially from Prague to supervise the entrance examinations and emphasise the benefits of studying in their country.
Male speaker
The university has a high standard and a very good reputation.
It also requires only a fraction of the fees of other European Universities.
Voice over
But are the qualifications the students will get in Czechoslovakia up to standard.
Male speaker
The degrees will be recognised by the General Medical Council in Britain but on a limited registration basis.
Voice over
That means doctors who qualify from Czech Univeristies will only be allowed by the General Medical Council to work in this country under the supervision of a fully registered colleague.
But with further tuition in the UK they can move on to full doctor status and for many students the chance to experience life in another country more than makes up for the extra years of study.
Just days after announcing the closure of five old people's homes, a county council is to spend an extra seventeen million pounds on care for the elderly and disabled.
It says the extra money underlines its commitment to quality care and choice, but admits that the closures were a difficult decision.
MARIA COYLE/Oxfordshire
IAN WHITE/Director of Social Services
Voice over
Last week's leaked report revealing that five old people's homes could close resulted in a wave of protests like this one in Woodstock yesterday.But the Director of Social Services has said that was just one piece of the jigsaw.
He's announced that an extra seventeen million pounds is to be pumped into care over the next six years.
It'll provide 400 new beds.They'll do that by buying beds in private old people's homes, refurbishing council-run homes, and five new sheltered housing complexes are being built.
The bad news is, despite protests, 200 beds could be lost.
Five old people's homes are due to close.
They're Spencer Court in Woodstock, Orchard Lodge in Banbury and three homes in Oxford, Longlands, Orchard House and Cutteslowe Court.
The county council says it can't afford to upgrade them.
Male speaker
The rules attached to the money the government is giving us tells use we have to spend on voluntary organisations and private care.
They are trying to provide a mixed economy of welfare so frustratingly, paradoxically, we can't spend on our own services.
The emotional response shows how upsetting it must be for some, but private nursing homes provide good quality care, better than we can provide and cheaper than we can provide.
Voice over
An extra four and a half million pounds is to be spent on home care schemes.
That means more home helps, more meals on wheels and more money available for home improvement grants for the disabled.The future of the threatened homes will be discussed by the social services committee when it meets in two weeks.
The county council says it hopes to give residents a choice on where they'll be moved to and doesn't expect compulsory redundancies among care staff.
(WES ADLIB)(ANNE) Still to come on Central News, a winning start for Denis Smith
Plus, coining it in…the treasure hunter who's unearthed a fortune.
Welcome back: In a few minutes, the Roman coins that could turn out to be one of the most precious finds in history.
But first, with the sport, here's Tim.
TIM RUSSON
Hello there…
Six goals…two penalties…a sending off…a carrying off…a touchline bust-up…the Manor Ground was like a fireworks factory on saturday as Denis Smith kicked off his reign as manager of Oxford United 
DENIS SMITH/United Manager
Voice over
Nice to see you…to see you nice…there was a rousing welcome at the Manor for Denis Smith…and his assistant Malcolm Crosby…everyone of course wished him well…everyone was pleased to see him except Bristol City…
they sacked him as manager last season and there was pride as well as points riding on this match…
Denis and his new gang had the first and the last laugh…only 11 minutes had gone when Cusack set Chrissy Allen up for a prize goal…
Allen was man of the match…him and Cusack looked sharp up front and what's more important they found the back of the net…
It was Allen who all but put United two-up when he went flying through again only to be bodychecked…he was too quick for Bristol and penalty taker Jim Magilton was too accurate…
Just before half-time City came back with a goal from Ian Baird it was well made and well taken…food for thought for the United defence and of course Smith who started off in the directors box but was down on the touchline after this incident in which David Penney charged into Junior Bent…
The Bristol player suffered a broken cheekbone and his club are considering legal action against Penney…but the United bench were angry too
It was that sort of game though…too much referee's whistle…too many niggling fouls…it worked in United's favour…when they won another penalty…
Allen's speed doing the damage…
and because it was classed as a professional foul Aizelwood was sent off…
Jim Magilton who's never missed a penalty for United was on target again and there was more to come…that man Allen on the left won the ball…fought his way through and Alex Dyer claimed his first goal for the club
this killed Bristol off for goods…bad defence by them…but smart piece of work from Allen and Dyer…
the last goal went Bristol's way…an absolute screamer it was…unstoppable shot from Ian baird…
4-2 the final score…a game to remember…one to treasure for the new manager and the fans
Denis Smith says it was an interesting game and his team played well…it was a hard game…but after four defeats it was just the result they wanted and will help build them up for the rest of the season
in the premier league Swindon Town won their second point of the season at West Ham and in the third division there was a one-all draw for Hereford against Northampton at Edgar Street 
Voice over
Hereford are still searching for the winning touch…goal man Chris Pike was out of luck on saturday…out of sorts too he went off still feeling the affects of flu…
United's goal came in the first half…top marks for winger Max Nicholson…he kept control…kept his head and then smashed it home…low and hard…
Sadly Hereford couldn't hold on…
Northampton equalised 10 minutes into the second half…
Ian Gilzean who's dad used to knock them in for Spurs showed that goals run in the family…
A ten million pound research centre which represents one of the largest investments in Europe by a Japanese company has been officially opened by the President of the Board of Trade Michael Heseltine.
Scientists at the centre will be leading the way in computer and television technology.
Nick Clark reports.
OXFORD
MICHAEL HESELTINE MP/President/Board of Trade
Dr CHARLES BRADLEY/Sharp Laboratories
SHOEI KATAOKA/Sharp Group
Voice over
We may be in Oxford, but the mood's very much Japanese and to the taste of the President of the Board of Trade.
Male speaker
It's very nice.
Voice over
Traditional formalities apart Mr Heseltine's visit here marks a significant endorsement of British scientists by one of the most technologically advanced companies in the world.
The pedigree of Sharp the corporation is second to none.
The company dates back to the so-called Ever-sharp pencil invented in 1915, through to a 1960s desktop computer and now a liquid crystal television display.
Male speaker
It's very good long term news.
Voice over
The Japanese move is a welcome boost for Britain's so-called brain-drain.
Nine British scientists who had moved abroad, are now working here in Oxford.
Male speaker
This is very good news indeed.
Male speaker
We are quite satisified with the quality of our staff.
Voice over
Work here will concentrate in areas like information technology, and further liquid crystal research which will eventually make 3-dimensional and high definition television widely available.
These phones are already on the market…you don't need to dial manually, you can just say the number and the phone will dial it automatically.
In part two: Taking a back seat…
Mansell's retirement sends motor racing world in a spin.
And making a comeback…the taxi service that's a hit with horse lovers.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
well Nigel Mansell might not be our only formula one champion this year…there was another Italian Grand Prix yesterday this one was on water in Milan for the powerboaters…
Voice over
our next race is for football's league championships…on Saturday in the first division Swindon slipped back and Oxford struggled…yesterday in the third division Hereford grabbed a point 
Voice over
Tomorrow its Oxford against Cambridge and York v Hereford on Wednesday Swindon play Brentford…
The ice hockey season is underway again…
They're playing the Autmn Trophy at the moment…so lets go skating with the Oxford City Stars and our man Mark Kiff 
PAUL DONOHUE/Captain
GARY REID/Coach
JOHN GRAVELLE/Centre
Voice over
The ice hockey season traditionally gets underway with its cup competitions…for the Oxford City Stars that means the Autumn Trophy…and a match against the New Boys in the First Division…the Stevanage Sharks.
The Stars are basing their future success on home grown talent.
Captain Paul Donohue says they've got a lot of young players coming up through the ranks of the Oxford City Ice Hockey Club.
Coach Gary Reid is confident they can make an impact.
He says we play basically a bump and grind game.
But if we pass well no one will be able to stop us.
They got off to a blinder against the Sharks…catching them napping repeatedly in the first period to put six past them.
Like all teams Oxford has its share of overseas imports…is British ice hockey catching up with the North Americans?
John Gravelle says the standard here of individual players is surprisingly high.
The Sharks put some bite into their performance in the second and third periods but not enough to deny the Stars a sparkling victory 17-11 and a place nearer the final of the Autumn Trophy.
another local team off to a flying start are Gloucester Rugby club…they've won four out of four now…
On Saturday they beat Sale seventeen — eleven.
Voice over
our final fling tonight takes to the sport of judo…this weekend Oxford staged the all England Championships.
Mark Kiff reporting again 
MIKE ILOTT/National Judo Coach/Martial Arts Council
Voice over
Judo is a sport in which Britain has had more than its fair share of world champions.
But recently the medals, especially for the men, have dried up.
Many blame Britain's decline on too much red tape.
There are 4 major ruling bodies running judo.
So, in an effort to bring the sport together under one roof, the Blackbird Leys Leisure Centre played host to the first All-England Championships.
National Judo Coach, Mike Ilott, says they've had an excellent response.
The championships are designed to bring the judo world together.
Whole families came to Blackbird Leys.
More than 400 competitors in all, from the age of 5 upwards, gave their backing to the championships.
They both say the championships are a good idea.
With the success of these first Championships, the organisers are hoping Blackbird Leys will become an annual event.
Five and a half years…second sentence for inmate who kidnapped a prison officer.
Stretched to the limit…police chief says petty crime is going unchecked.
And fox hunt demo…animal rights protestors clash with huntsmen.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
Erika Barnes reports from the Old Bailey.
Det Insp RICHARD QUINN/Flying Squad
Voice over
A police chief has warned that faced with soaring crime rates, his officers have little chance of catching petty offenders.
So great is the police workload that some crime is simply logged but not investigated.
Tim Hurst reports.
RECONSTRUCTION
Chief Con ALBERT PACEY/Gloucestershire Police
ALAN KNIGHT/Sales Manager
Voice over
Crime such as theft from cars and cars themslves, has rocketed in Gloucestershire by almost a third; up so much that detectives can't cope.
They're working on more serious crime like armed robbery, robbery with violence and serious burglary.
Crime overall in Gloucestershire is at record levels, burglaries up by 34%, theft from cars up 30%, robbery with violence up 17%.
The county's chief constable, who heads a national committee on crime, says he hasn't the resources to cope.
One victim, who's had his car broken into 3 times, says Gloucestershire is not unique.
Beating crime means more than more police, according to the Gloucestershire force.
So they're organising a seminar to ask for ideas from the public.
Meanwhile, figures out today show that the Thames Valley Police force has the second worst record in the country for solving crimes.
The force, which covers Oxfordshire, Buckinghamshire and Berkshire solved just twenty one point seven percent of reported crimes last year.
That compares with a national average of thirty point three percent.
The figures also reveal that the Thames Valley Police is one of the most severely understaffed forces in the country.
As the Autumn fox hunting season gets underway, animal rights protestors have been holding one of the biggest demonstrations seen in the region.
They were protesting against what they call cub hunting, where cubs are chased and killed by hounds.
Liz Hannam reports.
STRATTON AUDLEY/Oxfordshire
PAUL DAVIS/Oxfordshire Anti Death Sports
IAN McKIE/Master of Hounds
Voice over
Hounds run wild, bewildered by the noise.
It's part of a protest by saboteurs against the Bicester Hunt with Whaddon Chase.
Their aim is to distract the hounds, at any cost.
Occasionally hounds, which have been confused by the differing horn calls have been led onto the road, knocked over and killed.
But for the saboteurs, it's an acceptable price to pay to wipe out what they call the evil of fox hunting.
It's one of the first meets of the season.
The huntsmen call it the Autumn Hunt.
The saboteurs, cub hunting.
It's the time young hounds are trained to pick up the scent of a fox.
The aim is to disperse the cubs.
They're all under nine months old and those that don't get away are destroyed.
The huntsmen believe they're doing a necessary job, culling vermin quickly and efficiently.
They've been hunting here for 150 years.
The Antis — as the huntsmen call the Saboteurs — have been active for 10 years.
There's usually a mutual tolerance, but sometimes strong feelings spill over.
For the rest of the hunting season, the saboteurs will play a cat and mouse game with the huntsmen.
This one ended with both sides claiming victory.
Later in the day, the saboteurs organised a march from Bicester Town Centre to the stables, where they held a service dedicated to the lack of civilisation in Western Society.
Two thousand jobs are to be created in the next three years with the construction of a new Channel Tunnel rail depot in the region.
It will cost a hundred and forty million pounds and be built on a green-field site.
Brian Jones reports.
M1/Northamptonshire
JEFF JONES/Developer
Open fields alongside the M1 in Northamptonshire have been earmarked for the project.
It's expected work will start next year, with the first trains going through in another 2 years.
The site's near the main roads to most of the East Midlands industrial centres and will be the country's biggest Channel Tunnel terminal.
Lorries will take containers to and from the terminal and trains will make the journey between Northamptonshire and the continent.
Jeff Jones, the developer says it's the best site in the region.
It's expected as many as 150,000 lorries will use the terminal every year.
In addition there will be warehouses, an agricultural centre and a hotel nearby.
He says there should not be any problem raising the money in the private sector.
The Channel Tunnel construction is moving rapidly from the plan to the site and the new terminal represents the first definite move to link the region with the continent.
A taxi service with a difference is being launched which looks certain to become a runaway success with tourists.
Clair Dalton is reviving the traditional horse drawn carriage.
And on a recent trial run it proved popular with both passengers and onlookers.
Ken Goodwin has this report.
CHELTENHAM Gloucestershire
CLAIR DALTON Carriage Driver
Voice over
Once it must have been a familiar sight in Cheltenham; now the horse drawn carriage looks a little out of place among the busy traffic, snaking it's way around the towns one-way system.
Soon, though, Horsewoman Clair Dalton will be establishing a regular service around the town and for a couple of pounds, you'll be able to step back in time and view the famous architecture in the same way that the Spa Towns Regency Founders did.
She says it's been a lifelong ambition to work with horses.
The Council have given Clair permission to operate the service.
Now she's sorting out which routes she'll take.
But after a trial run, what do her passengers think of the ride?
They both say it's a great idea and it attracts a lot of attention!
The last horse drawn carriage service in cheltenham ended years ago, but people living in the town think reviving the tradition is a good idea.
She says that it's a nice way to view Cheltenham.
She says that the by-products are handy too: good for the roses!
In a town with a name so closely associated with horses, Clair hopes her idea will turn out to be a winner.
TV companies to axe 100 jobs
FTSE up 51
The hundred shares index closed up fifty-one point two at twenty-four, twenty-two point one.
The pound is down at one dollar, eighty-nine and up at two marks, eighty.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
A group of travellers has begun a fight to stay on their farmland campsite.
They're being backed by the landowner, but villagers say the area has been ruined, and they want the travellers thrown off.
RICHARD BARNETT/Upper Hill
ROBERT GRAYBURN/Farmer
STEPHANIE HODGSON/Traveller
ERIC LAW/Parish Council Chairman
DOUGLAS SMITH/Villager
Voice over
Travellers have been camping at Yoke Farm, Upper Hill near Leominster ever since a landowner sympathetic to their cause bought the farm in 1969.
But when farmer Robert Grayburn applied for planning permission to make the site official, Leominster Council turned it down.
It said there was no need for the site.
And it claimed as the travellers weren't proper gipsies, the council had no legal duty to provide a place for them to stay.
Today the farmer and five travellers began their appeal at a public inquiry in Leominster, calling for the site to be approved:
Male speaker
They have to stay somewhere.
Female speaker
It's her home, and she has nowhere else to live.
Voice over
Villagers are adamant they want the travellers thrown out.
They say Upper Hill has been ruined by the influx of caravan dwellers:
Male speaker
They're dirty and encourage rats.
They should accept that planning permission has been refused and move on.
Male speaker
They have no toilet facilities and at one time were cavorting in the nude.
Voice over
The inquiry is expected to last all week.
But it will be several months before a decision is made on whether the Yoke Farm travellers can stay.
A police sergeant accused of assaulting a prisoner is said to have told a colleague that the man was treated like an animal, because he'd been behaving like one.
The sergeant has denied assault, in a trial that's expected to last five days.
TIM HURST/Bristol Crown Court
CHELTENHAM
Voice over
Police Sergeant Richard Williams from Cheltenham in Gloucestershire is being tried at Bristol, accused of assaulting a prisoner in a police van at Cheltenham two years ago.
The alleged assault happened in Cheltenham High Street when a group of men were arrested near the entrance to the Regent's Arcade.
Simon Maggs, from Cheltenham, who admits he has a criminal record, says Sgt Williams stamped on his leg, after he'd been put in the police van.
Mr Maggs said he saw a friend of his being ill-treated in the back of the van, The police were using too much force.
He heard somebody say’…and Maggsy’ and he was grabbed from behind and dragged into the van.
When in the van, say the prosecution, Sgt Williams stamped on his leg, saying’ Here's something to complain about.
The van with five prisoners inside was driven from Cheltenham High Street to Gloucester police station, where say the prosecution
Sgt Williams told a custody officer’ They behaved like animals, they were treated like animals.
The trial is expected to last until the end of the week.
Two joyriders leapt out of a moving car causing it to smash into a house.
It narrowly missed one of the occupants who was sitting in the front room.
The stolen Vauxhall Cavalier was being followed by police at the time of the crash.
MARIA COYLE/Banbury
CYNTHIA BROUGH/Occupant of the house
CEDRIC BROUGH/Occupant of the house
Insp DAVID WHITTAKER/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
The stolen car rammed into the front of the house in Cheviot Way in Banbury.
It came to rest just beneath the window of the front room, inches away from where one of its occupants was sitting.
Female speaker
I thought the front of the house had fallen down.
I was very shaken I was only sitting on the other side of the wall.
Voice over
The damage will run into thousands of pounds but the couple who live here say it could have been a lot worse.
At least they escaped unscathed.
Male speaker
If our house had had a glass front like the neighbours the car would have gone straight through.
At least the porch was able to bear the brunt of it.
Voice over
This is the car which caused the damage.
The stolen Vauxhall Cavalier had been spotted by police on the Hardwick Estate only moments before the crash.
The police gave chase.
both cars were doing around thirty miles an hour when they entered the cul de sac.
The car thieves jumped out and escaped on foot as the stolen vehicle ran into the house.
The men wanted to escape.
They did so without any regard for the serious injury they could cause or for the damage they could inflict.
These training shoes could provide a clue to the identity of the joyriders.
It's believed they were left on nearby Sussex Drive by one of the car thieves as he made his escape.
The joy riders were both white and in their teens or early twenties.
Police are appealing for anyone with information to come forward.
In Central News tonight
On trial: Did a policeman treat a prisoner like an animal?.
Good evening.
WESLEY SMITH
HARRIET RYLEY
KEN GOODWIN/Reporting
RUTH STRINGER/Greenpeace
STEPHEN BOWMAN/Environmental Health Officer
Voice over
Ruth Stringer is a scientist working for Greenpeace at Exeter University.
She's looked at the results of samples taken by the National Rivers Authority from a mineshaft and other sites on land owned by Watkins engineering, of Sling, near Coleford.
Watkins have, for more than thirty years, been using the shaft to dump effluent from tanks.
Beneath the shaft, there's evidence of pollutants coming into contact underground streams, and cavers have now been forbidden from potholing near the area.
Test results show that some very toxic chemicals have in the past been put into the shaft.
Among them oil based poisons known as PCB's.
She says that PCB's can inhibit mamalian development, and the development of babies in the womb.
But PCB's are only part of the cocktail.
She says that there are other nasty solvent type chemicals which are dangerous.
Since Central news first showed these pictures last february, Watkins Engineering has been issued with a legal notice telling the firm that it is responsible for clearing out the shaft.
He says that an enforcement notice has been issued, if the firm fails to carry out the work the County Council will do it and then bill them.
Conservationists, meanwhile say the work should be carried out without further delay.
She says that it is vital that the work is carried out as soon as possible — there's a danger to groundwater and the environment.
No-one was available for interview from Watkins engineering, but in a statement a spokeman said that dumping in the shaft no longer goes on, and the firm has co-operated fully with environmental health officers and will continue to do so.
But one question remains.
The Forest of Dean is riddled with underground streams and springs.
If some have been contaminated by pollution, where does the water end up?
Experts are all agreed that it must emerge somewhere — the National Rivers Authority is monitoring likely places but so far it's a question which remains unanswered.
A murder inquiry's underway after the death of a young footballer.
He died as a result of injuries received in a street brawl.
The trouble started after friends tried to stop him driving because he'd been drinking.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Newent
ALAN BASSETT/Newent Town Chairman
Det Chief Insp TERRY MOORE/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
Nick Pollard was a well liked sportsman, who finished up dead after a street fight in Newent.
The twenty three year old footballer had been drinking and became involved in a brawl in Church Street after friends tried to stop him driving because he'd drunk too much.
His family and friends are devastated.
Male speaker
He was well liked by everyone at the club
Voice over
The incident happened on Saturday after Mr Pollard had been playing for Newent Town.
He was transferred from the Gloucestershire Royal Hospital to Bristol where he died last night.
A post mortem has been carried out and it's understood he died from head injuries.
Police have launched an investigation and they're appealing for witnesses.
Male speaker
a young man has died and we are trying to establish why at the moment
Voice over
Police say someone has been helping with inquiries and an inquest will be opened into the young man's death tomorrow.
A man is still being questioned tonight after the body of an elderly widower was found with shotgun wounds.
The arrest was made eighty miles away, and three hours after the body was discovered.
CHRIS MOORE/Hampton
The body of sixty eight year old Alwyn Baker was discovered just after midnight at his bungalow in the Hampton area of Evesham.
He had shotgun wounds.
Mr Baker, who was a widower, lived alone.
Neighbours describe him as a reserved man who didn't mix much.
She says I've seen him at the shop but he didn't speak.
She says it's very shocking.
Two hours after Mr baker's body was discovered, officers from Avon and Somerset Police arrested a man near Frome.
He was taken to Yeovil Police station but has now been taken to Redditch in Worcestershire for questioning by West Mercia detectives.
Israel
Israel and Jordan have laid out plans for a peace agreement.
Briton shot dead in USA
A British holidaymaker has been shot dead whilst on holiday in Florida.
His wife was also shot and is recovering in hospital.
Clarke's warning over pay
The Chancellor, Kenneth Clarke, has said any public sector pay rises should be offset by improvements in productivity.
TUC emergency pay meeting
In response, John Monks, the General Secretary of the Trades Union Congress, says there'll be an emergency meeting of public sector unions to discuss the clampdown on pay rises.
Barclays cuts 500 jobs
Barclays Bank is to cut five hundred jobs.
Bus driver jailed for murder
A bus driver has been jailed for life for murdering a twenty-year-old woman who was the only passenger on his bus travelling from Liverpool to Wigan.
FTSE up 3
The hundred shares index closed up three point two at thirty, twenty-eight exactly.
The pound is unchanged at one dollar, fifty-four and down at two marks, forty-eight.
War veterans who were held in Japanese labour camps may be a step nearer to receiving compensation.
John Major has said he'll take up their case when he visits Tokyo next week.
The move appears to mark a significant shift in Government policy.
Survivors have always been told the terms of the peace treaty with Japan meant nothing more could be done for them.
GRAEME BOWD/Reporting
ARTHUR TITHERINGTON/Former Prisoner of War
SID TAVENDER/Labour Camp Survivors' Association
NIGEL JONES MP/Lib Dem
Voice over
Arthur Titherington spent almost half the war as a prisoner of the Japanese.
A former major of Witney he now runs a successful phoitographic business.
And he's still fighting for compensation from his former captors.
He recently published a book on the labour camp where his weight fell from 13 stone to just five.
Forty eight years after the war, he still believes the Japanese have a debt to pay.
Voice over
Arthur Titherington spent almost half the war as a prisoner of the Japanese.
A former major of Witney he now runs a successful photographic business.
He recently published a book on the labour camp where his weight fell from 13 stone to just five.
Forty eight years after the war, he still believes the Japanese have a debt to pay.
Male speaker
I worked in a copper mine for nearly three years, 18 hours a day, seven days a week.
I think that is worth paying for.
Voice over
Some fifty thousand British soldiers and airmen died in Japanese labour camps.
Most suffered indescribable hardship.
Many were tortured.
But until now the Government has been reluctant to take up their case.
Five years ago Mr Titherington's MP Douglas Hurd outlined its case in a letter.
The peace treaty he said precludes raising the question with the Japanese Government in any way.
But today that view appears to have changed.
War Veterans like Sid Tavernor learned that Mr Major will broach the subject with Japan's new prime minister.
Mr Tavernor has been fighting their case for more than forty years.
He sees Mr Major's move as a change of heart.
Male speaker
They had no alternative.
Otherwise we'd have taken the British Government to the court of human rights.
It is a major breakthrough.
Voice over
His case is backed by his local MP.
Male speaker
There is a window of opportunity becasuse Japan has a new prime minister.
But it is a sensitive subject.
Voice over
Britains 12000 survivors are seeking compensation of £10,000 each, a small price for what they suffered.
It remains to be seen if Japan can be persuaded that's its a price worth paying.
An artist is using rubbish from her dustbin to make re-cycled sculptures.
Veronica Goslings also peruses the local jumble sales for suitable material, and her garden at home is adorned with the results.
KATE GARRAWAY/Newent
VERONICA GOSLINGS/Artist
Voice over
Most artists would be horrified if critics said their work was a load of rubbish, but Veronica Goslings would think it a compliment.
Because rubbish is exactly what her art is.
Ever since her children started school she's been filling her time making sculptures from scrap.
Now old buckets, boots, broken chairs and even prams are a source of information.
She says I have just bought this pram from a jumble sale and I am thinking I may use it as a flower pot and maybe make some model babies out of flowers.
It is certainly inventive but is it art?
Collectors say yes.
They're drawn to her eccentric style and now her work is exhibited all over the country.
After all in an age where everyone is becoming more environmentally aware, perhaps it is only fitting that even artists are getting into recycling.
Now for a new definition of fast food — Indian curries travelling at one hundred and twenty five miles an hour.
They're being served up by British Rail on an Inter City service, and if they prove popular they could become part of the regular travelling menu.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Reporting
PAT CHAPMAN/Curry Club
SIMON COUCHMAN/Waiter
ABDUL AHAD/Jaipur Restaurant
Voice over
All aboard the curry express: A piping hot Indian restaurant meal served at a hundred and twenty five miles an hour.
British Rail enlisted the services of the Jaipur restaurant in Milton Keynes to prepare and serve a one-off Indian menu on the 5:15 Euston to Wolverhampton Express.
Male speaker
it's excellent.
I'd eat at his restaurant.
Female speaker
They'd need to keep up this standard if it's to be permanent
Voice over
The meal was cooked in the kitchens at the restaurant which is in the rail station precinct at Milton Keynes.
It was driven to Euston even though the train stops at the station.
Once on board it was reheated and served to unsuspecting passengers.
Most liked it, some were indifferent.
Male speaker
some of it's nice.
I'm more of a steak and chips man
Voice over
Passengers were given a choice of menu: Chicken tikka Massala or vegetable curry.
Samosas and barjees to start, and indian desserts.
Male speaker
it's the ideal food for a train.
British Airways does a similar thing.
I think they shoulds be available on all British Rail trains
Voice over
Those on short journeys had to be quick about it.
The train stopped at Milton Keynes, Coventry, Birmingham International and New Street, and Wolverhampton.
The waiters wasted no time.
Male speaker
it's been quite busy but we've managed
Voice over
Normal inter city menus offer fish and chips, steak and chips, and sometimes steak and kidney pie…then there's the buffet car…
The curry is a completely new step.
Male speaker
The idea is to offer our products to a wider public
Voice over
It'll be a while before Inter City make a decision on offering the menu.
But the Jaipur is hoping that eventually passengers will be eating their food the length and breadth of the country.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
A hundred and thirty staff at a factory destroyed by fire have volunteered to work at the company's plant in France.
They travel out next week, with their employers picking up all the hotel bills.
The company says it's the only way to get its operation back on its feet.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Hereford
MURDOCH URGUHART/Sun Valley Poultry
VALERIE YEOMANS/Employee
JIM GREENAWAY/Employee
Voice over
It'll be many months before work resumes at the Corbett plant of the Sun Valley Company in Hereford.
The whole block was completely destroyed just over a week ago in a fire that claimed the lives of two firemen.
Many of the five hundred people who worked here have been redeployed on other sites in Herefordshire and Wales.
Now the company is sending a hundred and thirty workers to a new factory in France.
All a hundred and thirty employees are volunteers.
They'll work in France for a few weeks at a time staying in hotels.
It's estimated that the workers will be travelling back and forth from France until Christmas.
By then Sun Valley hopes to have made arrangements to have new production lines up and running in Herefordshire.
(HARRIET AD LIB)(WES) Still to come on Central News, kill your speed not a child 
Welcome back.
Each year more than forty four thousand children are killed or injured in accidents on our roads.
(WES NEXT)
Now there's a new campaign to cut the death toll.
It features a disturbing TV commercial urging drivers to slow down.
Government Commercial
JESSICA FOWLE/Reporting
Insp GARTH MANN/West Midlands Police
KEITH PORTER/Trauma Consultant
JOHN ASKEW/TEARS Centre
ADAM HEATH/Accident Victim
Voice over
For a child crossing the road, the difference of ten miles an hour can be the difference between life and death.
Today the government launched its latest weapons in a campaign against speeding including this hard hitting television advertisement.
It's a difficult message to get across.
Male speaker
With a modern car it is very easy to exceed speed limits and once you're in the vehicle you become totally oblivious to the speed.
Male speaker
Many of the accidents occur because of inadequate education.
Families through schools should imporve road safety awareness.
Voice over
Education about dangers on the roads is top of the agenda at the new TEARS Traffic Education and Road Safety centre in Malvern.
At a time when even Tufty wears trainers and a shell suit, road safety has been brought bang up to date.
With the help of computer games and a mobile information centre the staff here are well equippped to change attitudes.
Male speaker
Our main purpose in life is to make people aware of the problem, to make them think of their own vulnerability and responsibility and make them act in a safe and sensible way.
Voice over
Adam Heath was knocked off his bike by a car.
He says it's taught him important lessons.
Male speaker
It's useful because it makes you more careful.
It's not good though.
It's very frightening.
Voice over
At the TEARS centre the children put the day's lessons into practice.
And they've a few tips for drivers.
Female speaker
They shouldn't drive so fast because their car isn't worth as much as a child's life.
Male speaker
They shouldn't drink and if they do they should ask someone else to drive.
Female speaker
If they drive fast they might hit someone.
Voice over
It's hoped that eventually motorists will take heed of these messages and learn to kill their speed not a child.
In Central News tonight
On trial: Did a policeman treat a prisoner like an animal?.
Good evening.
WESLEY SMITH
HARRIET RYLEY
KEN GOODWIN/Reporting
RUTH STRINGER/Greenpeace
STEPHEN BOWMAN/Environmental Health Officer
Voice over
Ruth Stringer is a scientist working for Greenpeace at Exeter University.
She's looked at the results of samples taken by the National Rivers Authority from a mineshaft and other sites on land owned by Watkins engineering, of Sling, near Coleford.
Watkins have, for more than thirty years, been using the shaft to dump effluent from tanks.
Beneath the shaft, there's evidence of pollutants coming into contact underground streams, and cavers have now been forbidden from potholing near the area.
Test results show that some very toxic chemicals have in the past been put into the shaft.
Among them oil based poisons known as PCB's.
She says that PCB's can inhibit mamalian development, and the development of babies in the womb.
But PCB's are only part of the cocktail.
She says that there are other nasty solvent type chemicals which are dangerous.
Since Central news first showed these pictures last february, Watkins Engineering has been issued with a legal notice telling the firm that it is responsible for clearing out the shaft.
He says that an enforcement notice has been issued, if the firm fails to carry out the work the County Council will do it and then bill them.
Conservationists, meanwhile say the work should be carried out without further delay.
She says that it is vital that the work is carried out as soon as possible — there's a danger to groundwater and the environment.
No-one was available for interview from Watkins engineering, but in a statement a spokeman said that dumping in the shaft no longer goes on, and the firm has co-operated fully with environmental health officers and will continue to do so.
But one question remains.
The Forest of Dean is riddled with underground streams and springs.
If some have been contaminated by pollution, where does the water end up?
Experts are all agreed that it must emerge somewhere — the National Rivers Authority is monitoring likely places but so far it's a question which remains unanswered.
A murder inquiry's underway after the death of a young footballer.
He died as a result of injuries received in a street brawl.
The trouble started after friends tried to stop him driving because he'd been drinking.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Newent
ALAN BASSETT/Newent Town Chairman
Det Chief Insp TERRY MOORE/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
Nick Pollard was a well liked sportsman, who finished up dead after a street fight in Newent.
The twenty three year old footballer had been drinking and became involved in a brawl in Church Street after friends tried to stop him driving because he'd drunk too much.
His family and friends are devastated.
Male speaker
He was well liked by everyone at the club
Voice over
The incident happened on Saturday after Mr Pollard had been playing for Newent Town.
He was transferred from the Gloucestershire Royal Hospital to Bristol where he died last night.
A post mortem has been carried out and it's understood he died from head injuries.
Police have launched an investigation and they're appealing for witnesses.
Male speaker
a young man has died and we are trying to establish why at the moment
Voice over
Police say someone has been helping with inquiries and an inquest will be opened into the young man's death tomorrow.
A man is still being questioned tonight after the body of an elderly widower was found with shotgun wounds.
The arrest was made eighty miles away, and three hours after the body was discovered.
CHRIS MOORE/Hampton
The body of sixty eight year old Alwyn Baker was discovered just after midnight at his bungalow in the Hampton area of Evesham.
He had shotgun wounds.
Mr Baker, who was a widower, lived alone.
Neighbours describe him as a reserved man who didn't mix much.
She says I've seen him at the shop but he didn't speak.
She says it's very shocking.
Two hours after Mr baker's body was discovered, officers from Avon and Somerset Police arrested a man near Frome.
He was taken to Yeovil Police station but has now been taken to Redditch in Worcestershire for questioning by West Mercia detectives.
In Central News tonight
On trial: Did a policeman treat a prisoner like an animal?.
Good evening.
WESLEY SMITH
HARRIET RYLEY
KEN GOODWIN/Reporting
RUTH STRINGER/Greenpeace
STEPHEN BOWMAN/Environmental Health Officer
Voice over
Ruth Stringer is a scientist working for Greenpeace at Exeter University.
She's looked at the results of samples taken by the National Rivers Authority from a mineshaft and other sites on land owned by Watkins engineering, of Sling, near Coleford.
Watkins have, for more than thirty years, been using the shaft to dump effluent from tanks.
Beneath the shaft, there's evidence of pollutants coming into contact underground streams, and cavers have now been forbidden from potholing near the area.
Test results show that some very toxic chemicals have in the past been put into the shaft.
Among them oil based poisons known as PCB's.
She says that PCB's can inhibit mamalian development, and the development of babies in the womb.
But PCB's are only part of the cocktail.
She says that there are other nasty solvent type chemicals which are dangerous.
Since Central news first showed these pictures last february, Watkins Engineering has been issued with a legal notice telling the firm that it is responsible for clearing out the shaft.
He says that an enforcement notice has been issued, if the firm fails to carry out the work the County Council will do it and then bill them.
Conservationists, meanwhile say the work should be carried out without further delay.
She says that it is vital that the work is carried out as soon as possible — there's a danger to groundwater and the environment.
No-one was available for interview from Watkins engineering, but in a statement a spokeman said that dumping in the shaft no longer goes on, and the firm has co-operated fully with environmental health officers and will continue to do so.
But one question remains.
The Forest of Dean is riddled with underground streams and springs.
If some have been contaminated by pollution, where does the water end up?
Experts are all agreed that it must emerge somewhere — the National Rivers Authority is monitoring likely places but so far it's a question which remains unanswered.
A murder inquiry's underway after the death of a young footballer.
He died as a result of injuries received in a street brawl.
The trouble started after friends tried to stop him driving because he'd been drinking.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Newent
ALAN BASSETT/Newent Town Chairman
Det Chief Insp TERRY MOORE/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
Nick Pollard was a well liked sportsman, who finished up dead after a street fight in Newent.
The twenty three year old footballer had been drinking and became involved in a brawl in Church Street after friends tried to stop him driving because he'd drunk too much.
His family and friends are devastated.
Male speaker
He was well liked by everyone at the club
Voice over
The incident happened on Saturday after Mr Pollard had been playing for Newent Town.
He was transferred from the Gloucestershire Royal Hospital to Bristol where he died last night.
A post mortem has been carried out and it's understood he died from head injuries.
Police have launched an investigation and they're appealing for witnesses.
Male speaker
a young man has died and we are trying to establish why at the moment
Voice over
Police say someone has been helping with inquiries and an inquest will be opened into the young man's death tomorrow.
A man is still being questioned tonight after the body of an elderly widower was found with shotgun wounds.
The arrest was made eighty miles away, and three hours after the body was discovered.
CHRIS MOORE/Hampton
The body of sixty eight year old Alwyn Baker was discovered just after midnight at his bungalow in the Hampton area of Evesham.
He had shotgun wounds.
Mr Baker, who was a widower, lived alone.
Neighbours describe him as a reserved man who didn't mix much.
She says I've seen him at the shop but he didn't speak.
She says it's very shocking.
Two hours after Mr baker's body was discovered, officers from Avon and Somerset Police arrested a man near Frome.
He was taken to Yeovil Police station but has now been taken to Redditch in Worcestershire for questioning by West Mercia detectives.
In Central News tonight
On trial: Did a policeman treat a prisoner like an animal?.
Good evening.
WESLEY SMITH
HARRIET RYLEY
KEN GOODWIN/Reporting
RUTH STRINGER/Greenpeace
STEPHEN BOWMAN/Environmental Health Officer
Voice over
Ruth Stringer is a scientist working for Greenpeace at Exeter University.
She's looked at the results of samples taken by the National Rivers Authority from a mineshaft and other sites on land owned by Watkins engineering, of Sling, near Coleford.
Watkins have, for more than thirty years, been using the shaft to dump effluent from tanks.
Beneath the shaft, there's evidence of pollutants coming into contact underground streams, and cavers have now been forbidden from potholing near the area.
Test results show that some very toxic chemicals have in the past been put into the shaft.
Among them oil based poisons known as PCB's.
She says that PCB's can inhibit mamalian development, and the development of babies in the womb.
But PCB's are only part of the cocktail.
She says that there are other nasty solvent type chemicals which are dangerous.
Since Central news first showed these pictures last february, Watkins Engineering has been issued with a legal notice telling the firm that it is responsible for clearing out the shaft.
He says that an enforcement notice has been issued, if the firm fails to carry out the work the County Council will do it and then bill them.
Conservationists, meanwhile say the work should be carried out without further delay.
She says that it is vital that the work is carried out as soon as possible — there's a danger to groundwater and the environment.
No-one was available for interview from Watkins engineering, but in a statement a spokeman said that dumping in the shaft no longer goes on, and the firm has co-operated fully with environmental health officers and will continue to do so.
But one question remains.
The Forest of Dean is riddled with underground streams and springs.
If some have been contaminated by pollution, where does the water end up?
Experts are all agreed that it must emerge somewhere — the National Rivers Authority is monitoring likely places but so far it's a question which remains unanswered.
A murder inquiry's underway after the death of a young footballer.
He died as a result of injuries received in a street brawl.
The trouble started after friends tried to stop him driving because he'd been drinking.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Newent
ALAN BASSETT/Newent Town Chairman
Det Chief Insp TERRY MOORE/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
Nick Pollard was a well liked sportsman, who finished up dead after a street fight in Newent.
The twenty three year old footballer had been drinking and became involved in a brawl in Church Street after friends tried to stop him driving because he'd drunk too much.
His family and friends are devastated.
Male speaker
He was well liked by everyone at the club
Voice over
The incident happened on Saturday after Mr Pollard had been playing for Newent Town.
He was transferred from the Gloucestershire Royal Hospital to Bristol where he died last night.
A post mortem has been carried out and it's understood he died from head injuries.
Police have launched an investigation and they're appealing for witnesses.
Male speaker
a young man has died and we are trying to establish why at the moment
Voice over
Police say someone has been helping with inquiries and an inquest will be opened into the young man's death tomorrow.
A man is still being questioned tonight after the body of an elderly widower was found with shotgun wounds.
The arrest was made eighty miles away, and three hours after the body was discovered.
CHRIS MOORE/Hampton
The body of sixty eight year old Alwyn Baker was discovered just after midnight at his bungalow in the Hampton area of Evesham.
He had shotgun wounds.
Mr Baker, who was a widower, lived alone.
Neighbours describe him as a reserved man who didn't mix much.
She says I've seen him at the shop but he didn't speak.
She says it's very shocking.
Two hours after Mr baker's body was discovered, officers from Avon and Somerset Police arrested a man near Frome.
He was taken to Yeovil Police station but has now been taken to Redditch in Worcestershire for questioning by West Mercia detectives.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Unscrupulous dog breeders are selling too many working farm dogs as family pets, according to a couple who run an animal rescue centre.
They say they're having to deal with more and more dogs owned by families who haven't been able to give them the exercise they need.
Elizabeth O'Reilly reports.
BOURTON-on-the-WATER/Gloucestershire
ALAN SLOUGH/Border Collie Rescue
One of the most successful stage acts is making a controversial comeback after a fifteen year break.
The Black and White Minstrels are performing without their traditional makeup after complaints that it is racist.
Simon Garrett reports 
VERONICA BRUNO/Minstrel
LES WANT/Original Minstrel
JOHN REDGRAVE/Minstrels Manager
Voice over
The Minstrels 1992 style.
A generation of sell-out shows and peak-time television audiences witnessed the Black and White shows.
But at Oxford's Appollo Theatre there'll be no makeup.
When the revival was announced a storm of protest followed.
The Commission for Racial Equality among others said the black makeup was demeaning to black people.
The new cast was shocked.
Female speaker
I think it's been blown up out of all proportion.
I personally don't find it offensive and being black I'm the one who's meant to.
You have to see the show to see there isn't anything offensive.
A lot of people who haven't seen the show jump to the wrong conclusion about it
Voice over
At some theatres, the Minstrels are asking the audience to vote at the half-time interval on whether they want the makeup added.
So far they've always said yes.
That won't be happening in Oxford.
The Apollo Theatre chain has requested no black paint.
The cast's sole survivor from the great Minstrel days says that's a shame.
Male speaker
Two of our greatest fans were the 1968 West Indian Cricket team and the Duke Ellington Orchestra they gave us a standsing ovation.
So I'd like to know what's happened from then to now if it isn't political — And I think it's political
Voice over
The show's critics have said apart from the racist slur, the Minstrel idea has been and gone.
They claim it has no appeal today.
But the Minstrel's manager says today is precisely the right time for them.
Male speaker
In these days when practically every news item brings a worry of some sort isn't it nice to go to the theatre listen to music see something visually attractive and not have to think too hard, just to enjoy the thing and come out humming the tune of these songs, get in the isle and enjoy it if there's room
Voice over
So far the audiences haven't be sell outs, but the Minstrels are confidant as the word spreads, like the saints they'll come marching in
Cricket scores now and 
More than a hundred and fifty schoolgirls have been getting to grips with the subtle skills of scrummaging and line outs.
It was all part of an afternoon's coaching in the art of rugby.
Mark Kiff went to see how they fared.
OXFORD
LYNN EVANS Director of Coaching Oxford University
CATHERINE BAKER Lord Williams's School Thame
CLAIRE HUMPHRIES Lord Williams's School Thame
BRENDAN NASSER Oxford Univ and Australia
FANIE du TOIT Oxford Univ and Stellenbosch
Voice over
If there's one thing that rugby players are fond of saying it's that’ rugby is a MAN's game.’
Well, if ever there was an argument to the contrary…this is it.
A hundred and seventy or so girls from all over Oxfordshire gathered at Iffley Road this afternoon to learn about scrummaging…rucking and what exactly constitutes a forward pass.
It's all the brainchild of Oxford University rugby coach Lynn Evans.
Lynn Evans says we need to make rugby more attractive as a game and get away from its beer swillinmg image.
The game has to involve both sexes.
The national curriculum demads that boys and girls play similar games.
It's not just the girls who were there to learn about the game.
There were valuable lessons for their teachers too.
Catherine Baker says they've
The emphasis is on skills…the contact element is reduced to just touch tackling although the odd bruise can't be avoided.
The event is part of the Rugby Football Union's attempts to promote the game.
The coaching has come from the Union itself and University students.
UK gives extra
FTSE down 52
The hundred shares index closed down fifty-two point one at twenty-three, seventy exactly.
The pound is down at one dollar, eighty-eight and down at two marks, seventy-eight.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
WESTON on the GREEN/Oxfordshire
LESLIE GODWIN/Taxi Driver
Voice over
Leslie Godwin was on a routine drive, taking a prisoner and 3 officers back to jail near Bicester, after a routine court appearance.
But the back seat passenger was Michael Johnson, an armed robber with a history of prison escapes.
He pulled out a knife and ordered Mr Godwin to stop.
After a scuffle, Johnson made off in the taxi with one of the prison officers.
It was a terrifying ordeal.
Male speaker
When I do prison trips, I always have on my mind what happened.
I can't concentrate on what I'm doing.
I don't want it to happen again.
Voice over
Now Mr Godwin hopes for compensation.
He says the Home Office haven't considered the trauma and financial problems he went through.
Male speaker
I'm self employed.
I had a week off when it happened.
I have got a mortgage and can't afford time off.
If I don't get work, I don't get any money.
Voice over
Mr Godwin also wants Bullingdon Prison to tighten security after a body and metal detector search failed to detect Johnson's knife.
I think they should double check and treble check to make sure someone doesn't escape.
Even to handcuff both hands if necessary.
After Johnson was jailed for 5 and a half years for armed robbery and the escape attempt, the Home Office said that a full inquiry had been carried out and they were satisfied there was no negligence by staff at Bullingdon Prison.
Two brands of vaccine used to protect babies against measles, mumps and rubella are being withdrawn because of possible links with a mild form of meningitis.
The decision was taken after a two-year long study by the Department of Health.
Sheila Brocklebank reports.
Dr AIDAN MACFARLENE/Paediatrician/Radcliffe Infirmary
ROSEMARY FOX/Parents of Vaccine/Damaged Children
Voice over
An environmental campaigner is demanding that Severn Trent Water should refund seven million pounds in charges because he claims it's not doing its job properly.Julian Jones says the authority is failing to control pollution…and the local community could spend the money more wisely.And now he's going to court to claim the water charges back.
Richard Barnett reports:
COALEY/Gloucestershire
OSMAN GORING/Mill owner
JULIAN JONES/Campaigner
NEWNHAM/Gloucestershire
Voice over
The 13th century Coaley Millpond used to be full of crystal clear water.
Now it's choking with thick green algae.
The growth isn't only unsightly, it also clogs up the intake to a water turbine that provides electricity for the mill.
The owner says the problem is caused by a Severn trent sewage treatment plant half a mile upstream.
Male speaker
Every day he has to clear the algae.
He's certain it's caused by sewage pollution.
Voice over
It's problems like this that have convinced environmental campaigner, Julian Jones that Severn Trent Water is failing to meet its duty to control pollution.
He lives in the Stroud District and he'd demanding that local people should be refunded the £7 million they've paid in water charges.
Male speaker
He's claiming the money on behalf of the community because Severn Trent is't doing its job.
It's a free market, and the money should go to someone else who will control pollution.
Voice over
The case will be heard at Stroud County Court in 2 weeks time.
Julian Jones will argue that schemes like this natural reed bed sewage treatment system should be inbtroduced.
Here at this private works in Newnham, the reed plants filter out all the impurities in the waste.
Julian says the conventional sewage treatment plants being installed by Severn Trent are less efficient and cost 10 times as much to build.Severn Trent says it can't comment on the seven million pound claim until the court hearing.
A man who killed his friend with a single blow after an argument outside a pub has been found not guilty of manslaughter.
MARCH 1992/DIDCOT/Oxfordshire
Alfred Thornhill died from a severed artery in his neck after being hit by Vincent Cannonoutside The Sprat public house in Didcot in March.
Oxford Crown Court was told that Cannon, who's from Bristol, struck the first blow because he thought he was about to be attacked.
A former policeman is to head an independent inquiry into allegations of sexual abuse at a school in Worcestershire.
MALVERN/Worcestershire
Fourteen boys at Rhydd Court School near Malvern have been cautioned by police after younger pupils were allegedly abused by older ones.
Barry Florentine, the former Assistant Chief Constable of West Mercia Police, will chair the inquiry committee.
A businessman is claiming that a blunder by British Telecom has cost his firm seventy thousand pounds in lost orders.
Now he says he's taking court action for compensation.
Ken Goodwin reports.
WOTTON UNDER EDGE/Gloucestershire
PETER LIHOU/Mainstream Computers
Voice over
Peter Lihou's firm, Mainstream computers is in the doldrums.
But, claims Mr Lihou, it has nothing to do with the recession.
He says that BT were asked to disconnect his firm's fax machine when he moved his premises to Wotton under Edge.
But instead of reconnecting it afterwards, BT gave the fax number to to a rival firm which had been set up by Mr Lihou's former partners.
And, says Mr Lihou, as his firms brochures all have that fax number printed in them — he's losing thousands of pounds worth of orders.
He says that every brochure made it clear that the best way to order goods, was to fax.
BT say that it's offered Mr Lihou a one off payment of £5,000, but doesn't admit any liability for what happened.
Worktwice, the rival firm which now has the fax number, say it merely applied for the fax number because it was told it had become available and are confident British Telecom acted in a right and proper manner.
It's a dispute which Mr Lihou says can only now be settled in court.
A woman who caused a row when she applied for a teaching job under a false identity has now joined the debate over children's reading.
She says modern methods do more harm than good, and has written a book designed to teach youngsters the traditional way.
Gargy Patel reports.
APPLETON/Oxfordshire
THORPE MANDEVILLE/Northamptonshire
ANNIS GARFIELD/Reading Tutor
DECEMBER 1990
TRICIA PRITCHARD/Head Teacher
Voice over
Knowing how to read is the foundation of a child's future.
A basic skill that gives them the greatest start in life.
For years, the traditional method has been to use phonetics; learning how each letter sounds and building up a word.
In the 1960's, the American’ Look and Say’method was introduced, where a child is taught to recognise the whole word.
But with recent fears that reading standards have fallen, a parent who's long promoted the old-fashioned way is pushing for a return to basics.
Annis Garfield, caused a major row 2 years ago when she applied for a teaching post under a false name and was offered an interview, despite her application being littered with spelling mistakes.
Despite her failure to enter the teaching profession, she's now published a book promoting phonetic teaching.
But teachers in the classroom argue that both methods have to be used side by side.
Look and Say does have a part to play.
Annis Garfield is convinced the look and say method has failed too many youngsters.
The wrong approach to reading, she says, is to blame for dyslexia and word blindness.
The current education debate also seems to be pushing for a return to traditional teaching methods.
When Education Secretary John Patten visits Appleton Primary school in 2 weeks, he'll see for himself how children in the classroom master the skill of reading.
A new one and a half million pound incinerator for burning hospital waste has been switched on.
It replaces an old incinerator which caused problems when half burnt hospital notes rained out of its chimney onto nearby gardens.
Ken Goodwin reports.
GLOUCESTER
PAUL BOWTELL/Torpy Energy
Rt Hon TOM SACKVILLE/Jnr Health Minister
GRAHAM MARSH/Gloucester Health Authority
Voice over
This is the glowing heart of Gloucestershire royal hospitals new furnace.
It cost one and a half million pounds — but the hospital says it's money well spent.
It's previous incinerator was old and inefficient, not only belching out smoke but also the half burnt remains of used surgical dressings, and even patients confidential notes, which rained down on nearby gardens.
But the new furnace will change all that.
He says that there will be no pollution, nothing will smell, no smoke will be seen.
The official opening ceremony was performed by junior health minister Tom Sackville, during a visit to the hospital.
He says that the incinerator conforms to strict new guiidlines about air pollution set down by the Government.
The new furnace means that waste comes into minimum contact with staff.
Once it's been put into containers, they need never touch it again.
As well as being cleaner the new furnace will also save energy:
He says that warmth generated by the furnace will be used to heat the hospital, saving fifty thousand pounds a year.
Other hospitals will also bring their rubbish to be burnt in Gloucester — the hospital says that it hopes that as far as local people are concerned waste won't now be a dirty word.
Last night we carried a report on fox hunting which may have given the impression that Mr Paul Davis held the view that the death of a hound was an acceptable price to pay in the campaign against hunting.
This is in fact not the case and we are happy to make clear that Mr Davis in fact believes strongly in the rights of all animals.
The police are joining forces with businessmen to try to beat crime.
A new group called the Thames Valley Parternship wants to channel private funds into schemes designed to tackle crime at its source.
GARETH FURBY/Abingdon
GLEN ROBINS/Computer Operator
NICK WALL/Thames Valley Partnership
CHARLES POLLARD/Chief Constable
Voice over
A few years ago Glen Robins was unemployed and living from hand to mouth.
Now he's a computer operator with a firm of designers.
It's a success story which a new group called the Thames Valley Partnership hopes will soon be commonplace.
The partnership wants more firms to take on people like Glen to tackle crime at its source.
He says unemployment is to blame.
Give someone a job and they won't be tempted to steal cars.
As well as involving businessmen, the Thames Valley Partnership wants ideas from probation officers, court officials, in fact anyone whgo deals with crime and all its repercussion.
It could lead to more schemes like the Trax project in Oxford, where young offenders get the chance to work on cars, as an alternative to stealing them.
He says he wants to end the waste of young talent.
The latest crime statistics for the Thames Valley area will be released on Friday, and the police will be closely involved with the partenrship, welcoming anything that helps to reduce crime.
He says it will involve everyone
The Partnership will be officially launched tomorrow.
Eventually it could give thousands of jobless youngsters, who may otherwise have turned to crime, the chance of a well-paid job or a better future.
A new university opened today — for car workers.
It's being run by the car parts company Unipart, to give specialist training for its four thousand employees.
Without it, the company says it couldn't compete with businesses overseas.
ERIKA BARNES/Cowley
Prof DAVID NICHOLAS/Principal
JOHN NEILL/Chief Executive
JOHN PATTEN MP/Education Secretary
MISHA VADER/Peers School
ALEX CLANFIELD/Peers School
HELEN FRISBY/Peers School
Voice over
Classes at Unipart don't look much like lectures at the other established Universities in Oxford.
Here they're playing a Japanese style game, which will help the staff-cum-students learn more about manufacturing and selling.
Here managers become teachers and the University’ freshers’are reeping the benefits.
Male speaker
I think it's quite extraordinary to find a course like this in UK.
I could imagine it happening in Japan but this is ground breaking stuff in UK
Voice over
The Unipart U as it's known, cost two and a half million pounds to set up.
An investment for the future they say, something they couldn't afford NOT to do.
Male speaker
We can see by investing in our people, we'll improve our competitiveness.
It's good business to upgrade our people's skills.
Voice over
Education Secretary John Patten gave his seal of approval to the University which not only teaches it's own staff, but caters for it's future workforce.
Male speaker
I'd like businesses, rather than coming to me saying they can't get what they want from schools, to be like Unipart and go out an find what they want.
Voice over
And in turn, the new University is also listening to the fears of it's future workforce.
Male speaker
I don't think I'd like to work in a factory.
Male speaker
It's dull and uninteresting.
Voice over
Since trying out the University's business game their outlook completely changed.
Female speaker
I didn't know anything about it before.
But we tried things that we'd done in theory.
It was fun.
Male speaker
There's much more to it than I imagined.
Voice over
There are no degrees on offer at this University, no league tables to compare the results.
But the Unipart graduates will be probably qualify as Bachelors of Parts!
(harriet adlib)(wes) Still to come on Central News, Jack's Back.
Welcome back.
The man regarded by many as the best wicket keeper in the world has won back his place in the England cricket team.
(HARRIET NEXT)
Jack Russell, who plays for Gloucestershire, has been selected for the winter tour of the West Indies.
ABI DONALD/London
MIKE ATHERTON/England Captain
JACK RUSSELL/England Wicket Keeper
Male speaker
Jack Russell…
Mike Atherton the England captain announcing what everyone hoped that Jack Russell is back in the England squad — and back in the team.
It's been over a year since Russell kept wicket for his country, and even the England selectors now agree it was a mistake to drop him in the first place.
In spite of his skill the Gloucestershire player was replaced by the all rounder Alec Stewart, for what turned out to be a disastrous tour of India and this summer's Ashes series against Australia.
Now it seems thay've had a change of heart and have decided that there's room in the side for a specialist wicket keeper.
Male speaker
We traditionally take two wicket keepers on tour, Alec Stewart is one of them, but he'll be opening the bat and we need the best wicket keeper and someone to bat at 7 or 8 and Jack Russell is the man.
I'm glad to see him back.
Voice over
At the age of thirty, with 31 tests behind him Russell will be one of the oldest and most experienced players in the England side, but he thinks the selectors have chosen well.
Male speaker
There are quite a few experienced players and there's enough dedication to win us some matches.
Voice over
If Russell is to keep his place in the team he'll have to prove himself as a batsman, to avoid being replaced by Stewart.
It's something he's managed in the past and if he can pull off shots like this he'll be sure of his place.
And we've just heard that Jack Russell has agreed a new four-year contract with Gloucestershire.
He'll serve as vice-captain under Courtney Walsh.
Russell's original contract had a year to run.
In Central News tonight
Forced to kill…
The aid worker caught in a civil war.
A tragic waste of talent…coroner's tribute to singers who died.
And Britain's newest University…we talk to the Bachelors of Parts.
Good evening.
WESLEY SMITH
HARRIET RYLEY
KATE GARRAWAY/Swindon
ANDREW WILSON/Nurse
Voice over
When Andrew Wilson joined up with a medical team working in former Yugoslavia his intention was to help lives.
He never guessed that he would end up being forced to take them.
Now back in his hometown of Swindon he has time to reflect on the months tending wounded and dying Croatians at the frontline of battle in North Bosnia.
Andrew assisted in amputations, removing bullets and shrapnell and even helped deliver two babies.
But because his work was right in the heart of the the battle zone there were times when he was forced to kill Serbian soldiers, to save his own life and those of his patients.
I walked along saw the guy in front of mne there were bulltes all around me so it was either him or me.
Andrew was forced to return to Britian because the medical unit he was working with was burnt to the ground.
He is now hoping to raise enough money to return to Bosnia to continue his work, and while the thought he had to kill still haunts him he says in the same situation he would not fail to kill again.
It is survival of the fittest out there and if I had to do it again I believe I would.
Andrew says if people find it unbelievable that a nurse could ever kill then they should relise that the situation in Bosnia is unbleievable.
For the fouir lives he was forced to take he knows there are many more he has saved, and he says’ sometimes you have to do some bad to do some good’.
An inquest's heard how two singers died in a car crash just days before what could have been their biggest break.
They had already recorded a performance for a television talent show, but died a few days before it was broadcast.
ROBIN POWELL/Reporting
SWINDON
July 1993/ELLEN MILLER/Dee's Mother
Voice over
Dubbed Britain's answer to the Supremes, the Divas were tipped for the top.
But just days before this edition of Central's Pot of Gold was broadcast, 2 members of the band — 28-year-old Dee Miller and 30-year-old Rose Patterson — were killed in an accident of the M4 motorway near Swindon.
They were returning, through the night, to Luton, after performing at Butlins in Minehead when they hit a lorry at the back of Territorial Army convoy.
Driver Nicola Jenkins and passenger Mark Bachelor told the Coroner they felt a jerking movement and pulled into the hard shoulder.
When they got out they saw a Vauxhall Astra, its front badly damaged, directly behind in the inside lane.
The car was on fire, but they'd almost put it out when their fire extinguisher ran out.
The fire caught hold again and a second lorry driver and then the police tried in vain to open the doors, which were jammed because of the impact.
Eventually the Fire Service put the fire out, but by then both women had died from smoke inhalation.
The officer who investigated the accident said he found no tyre marks, suggesting that Rose Patterson, who was driving, hadn't even braked or swerved to avoid the back of the lorry.
It was possible, he said, that she'd misjudged its speed, or momentarily fallen asleep, though their manager said in a statement that when they left Minehead they were in fine spirits and showed no signs of tiredness.
Dee Miller's mother applauded ITV's decision to show the programme as a tribute to the 2 who died.
She'd been sure her daughter would go far.
Recording verdicts of accidental death, the Coroner extended his sympathies to the victim's familes.
They'd lost, he said, 2 very talented young ladies.
A sixty year old man has appeared in court charged with murder and kidnap.
He was remanded in custody for a week.
It follows the death of a man from gunshot wounds.
RICHARD BARNETT/Evesham
Voice over
A second Gloucestershire social worker has been sacked for smoking cannabis while in charge of a group of youngsters on holiday in Devon.
GLOUCESTER
Timothy Murphy, a residential care worker with Gloucestershire County
Council, allegedly used the drug during the holiday at a caravan in Torquay.
Earlier this month a male colleague, also on the holiday, was dismissed.
Both are expected to appeal.
A couple have won more than a million pounds on the pools — and are putting the jackpot down to the lucky pixie mascot they used to pick the numbers.
But despite their big win, the couple say they'll both be back at work tomorrow.
RICHARD BARNETT Bristol
SHIRLEY WHEELER Pools Winner
LES WHEELER Pools Winner
CINDERFORD Gloucestershire
Voice over
Les Wheeler, his wife Shirley and twin daughters Ceri and Amey from Pillowell in the Forest of Dean had to endure the full razzmatazz of the pools publicity machine before they found out exactly how much they'd won.
But as the numbers spun round on the electronic scoreboard, it was clear this was a big one.
Then came the exact figure…one million, five hundred and seventy five thousand, three hundred and twenty pounds.
Shirley was not surprisingly almost lost for words:
Neighbours had travelled down from Gloucestershire to join in the celebration:
Meanwhile, back at Pillowell, everyone was talking about the big win:
Shirley Wheeler teaches children with special needs.
And Les works as a care assistant at the Royal Forest of Dean Centre for those with learning difficulties.
It was there that he filled in the winning coupon, using a lucky pixie:
Everyone at the centre is delighted…one man had even penned a special poem:
The Wheelers live in a modest terraced house on the edge of the village…no one ever guessed it would become millionaires row.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Inflation rises to 1
The inflation rate has risen to one point seven per cent.
Broadmoor escape alert
A inmate has escaped from the Broadmoor psychiatric hospital in Berkshire.
It's the second escape in three months.
Florida employs extra officers
The state of Florida has brought in an extra eight hundred officers to protect tourists following yesterday's killing of a holidaymaker from Yorkshire.
Sacked RAF woman gets
A woman sacked by the RAF because she became pregnant has been awarded twenty-two thousand pounds compensation.
The Ministry of Defence has accepted the sacking was unlawful.
FTSE down 38
The hundred shares index closed down thirty-eight point six at twenty-nine, eighty-nine point four.
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty-five and down at two marks, forty-seven.
Football now…
Oxford United's hopes of playing football in Italy this winter have disappeared.
They were knocked out of the Anglo-Italian Cup by Portsmouth, who beat them two-nil at the Manor.
MARK KIFF/Oxford
Voice over
Oxford had a lot to do if they were to stand any chance of taking on Italian opposition.
They needed at least a two goal win to reach the international stages of the competition.
But it was Portsmouth who looked like taking the lead.
With the rain teeming down at the Manor, Italy seemed a long way off — too far for United.
Sure enough, Portsmouth opened the scoring.
There looked to be a communications breakdown in the Oxford defence.
But full back Mike Ford clutched a damaged hamstring to let in former United striker John Durnin.
He took full advantage.
Oxford were struggling to get forward — Les Robinson provided the first shot on target.
Portsmouth, needing only a draw, made certain of going through with a second just before the interval.
Durnin was again in the thick of it — setting up Paul Hall for the killer goal.
After the break, United looked much more positive — but just couldn't find their range.
Portsmouth were restricted to just the odd chance — Lee Chapman almost sneaking a third.
United tried every means of scoring without any joy.
On another day, they might have scored a handful but this wasn't the night.
Dave Collins came closest to scoring but not close enough.
Sadly, the only Italian football United will enjoy this season is watching it on the telly.
And there was more bad news for United today — Bristol City are complaining to the Football Association about a foul which has put one of their players out of the game for two months.
BRISTOL
Oxford's David Penney charged into City winger Junior Bent during the match last Saturday.
Bent's jaw was broken in four places, and Penney was shown the yellow card.
City say unless the Football Association take appropriate action, they will pursue the case through the courts.
A sixth-form languages student has been chosen to travel with the Prime Minister on his forthcoming trip to Japan.
Katharine Over has only been studying Japanese for a year, but she's already considered good enough to act as an ambassador for Britain.
JESSICA FOWLE/Hereford
KATHARINE OVER/Student
Dr DAVID HUDSON/Principal
Voice over
In case you're not fluent in Japanese, Katharine Over is telling her friend Lucy that she's about to join the Prime Minister on a diplomatic mission.
It's not something the average student would expect to come up on the sylabus and Katharine's still recovering from the shock.
Female speaker
I couldn't believe it at first.
My dad thought I was joking.
But gradually it's sunk in but when I'm there it will probably seem like a dream.
Voice over
John Major's taking a break from the hard grind of political life here to sell Britain to the Japanese.
Hereford Sixth Form College feel that Katharine will be the perfect ambassador.
Male speaker
She would typify what I'd hope all students would be.
That's polite confident and capable of communicating.
That's what selling's all about.
Voice over
Katharine won't actually be making any speeches on his behalf but she does have some tips for the Prime Minister.
Female speaker
Just be very polite because they're very up on etiquette and things like that.
Voice over
During their week in Tokyo, which is being funded by a private charity, the students will stay with a Japanese family, visit schools and join John and Norma at official functions.
David Hudson and Katharine's father are both hoping that she'll get the opportunity for a quiet word in the Prime Ministerial ear.
Female speaker
My dad wants me to ask him about VAT on electricity bills.
Male speaker
I'm the father of a two year old and I'd like him in school by the age of four to learn Japanese.
Voice over
Katharine will be expected to make two speeches during her visit, but for now she's practicing the most important phrase: thank-you for having me.
The Flying Scotsman, one of the world's best known steam engines, is on track for six weeks of railway nostalgia.
Although the engine holds a world speed record, its arrival in the Cotswolds was a little more sedate.
TIM HURST/M5
DAVID MEE/GWR
STEVE HEWINS/Fireman
Voice over
The Flying Scotsman, on a run from London to Scotland in the 1930's, became the first steam engine ever to reach 100 miles an hour.
This morning, heading into Gloucestershire on the M5, it was doing a more sedate 35 miles an hour on the back of a low loader.
The next train to arrive at Junction 9 and all road hazards to Toddington near Cheltenham, will be the 100 ton Flying Scotsman, bound for six weeks of steamy nostalgia at the Gloucestershire Warwickshire Railway, the GWR.
Nothing changes much on the railway, the Scotsman arrived at Toddington late, two weeks late because of delays at the point of departure in Devon.
But for the true enthusiasts that simply heightened the sense of anticipation.
The engine will also be offering lessons on the footplate to all those who really did want to be engine drivers when they grew up, with the help of an experienced fireman.
It'll be a few days before the 70 year old grand dame of the railways moves under her own steam, first there are boiler inspections and checks to prove she can clear every bridge on the Toddington track.
But even standing still the Flying Scotsman is impressive, especially to those who've never known a steam train.
The Flying Scotsman may never again set any records for speed, but loved and cared-for, no doubt she'll go on holding a place in the hearts of steam enthusiasts for another 70 years, a reminder of the days when trains were smoky, dirty, smelly, and beautiful.
Police arrest the husband of woman found dead in river.
Two drivers stand trial over deaths of five young people.
And school governor is fined for importing pornographic material.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
He's being questioned by detectives in connection with the death of Tania Probyn.
Her body was found in the car six days after she went missing.
Richard Barnett reports:
LONGNEY/Gloucestershire
STONEBENCH/Gloucestershire
8 SEPTEMBER 1992/JONATHAN PROBYN/Estranged Husband
Voice over
Police arrived at Grove End Cottage in Longney in Gloucestershire at 7.30 a.m. this morning.
2 detectives knocked on the door, and arrested Jonathan Probyn in connection with the death of his estranged wife Tania.
He was driven to Gloucester's main police station.
Detectives have spent all day questioning him about Tania Probyn's disappearance and subsequent death.
Her body was found in her car in the River Severn 8 days ago; 6 days after she was reported missing.
Police have declined to give details of precisely where the body was found in the vehicle, or if there were any signs of injury.
Meanwhile, forensic experts have been carrying out a thorough examination of the lonely cottage where Jonathan and Tania had met shortly before she disappeared.
28 year old Tania was first reported missing two weeks ago.
Later Jonathan Probyn made an emotional appeal for his estranged wife to contact him or her family.
Only hours later, police frogmen found Tania Probyn's Renault car under 12ft of water in the River Severn at Stonebench.
The car was hauled out of the river and Tania's body was discovered inside.
Post mortem tests are still going on to confirm whether she was already injured before she drowned.
Meanwhile police are trying to find out who was driving the car when it travelled down the country lane to Stonebench.
And they want to know how it plunged into the river.
They hope extensive forensic checks on the car will come up with some of the answers.
As the inquiries continue, relatives and friends have placed flowers at the riverside where Tania's car was found.
The trial has begun of two men charged with causing the deaths of five young people by reckless driving.
The Prosecution claim the two men were racing their cars just before the accident happened.
Shaun Gooch and Anthony Gallagher both deny the charges.
As Clare Lafferty reports.
GLOUCESTER
Voice over
24 year old Shaun Gooch and 22 year old Anthony Gallagher, both from Swindon arrived at Gloucester Crown Court this morning for the first day of their trial.
Both men are charged with causing the deaths of 2 children and 3 teenagers by driving recklessly in two seperate cars.
The charges follow an accident on the night of September 13th last year.
A car driven by Shaun Gooch crashed into a group of young people, who'd gathered by a bench on the side of Akers Way in Swindon.
The 5 who died were 7 year old Ian Lilley, Sheree Lear who was 8, Paula Barnes aged 16, Paul Carr, 17 and Belinda Brown who was celebrating her 19th birthday on the day of the crash.
One of the witnesses called today was Peter Simpson, a taxi driver who was waiting in a layby in Akers Way when he said he heard the sound of screeching tyres and looked to see two cars driving at speed, nose to tail along the road.
Another prosecution witness, David Moss, was walking along Akers Way, when, he said, he saw 2 cars speeding down the road.
He said one went to overtake, clipped the curb and lost control, richochetting over the road on two wheels.
Gooch and Gallagher have pleaded not guilty to the charges.
The trial will continue tomorrow.
A former vice chairman of governors at a school for disturbed children has been fined nine hundred pounds for importing pornographic material.
The court heard that he possessed indecent photographs of young boys.
Ken Goodwin reports.
EVESHAM/Worcestershire
Voice over
Paul Righton, also known as Peter Righton, a leading authority on the treatment of disturbed children, pleaded guilty to three charges.
Two of importing indecent material and one of possessing indecent photographs of children.
The prosecution told the court how last April customs officers had intercepted two packages from the Continent addressed to Mr Righton at his home in Evesham.
The packages contained a magazine and a book called Boy Foto which contained male nudes, some under 16.
A warrant had then been obtained to search Mr Righton's house.
There, police and customs officers found more indecent material including 3 specialist paedophile magazines called Ben and another magazine called Stud Boys.
In an interview with customs officers, Righton said he knew that children were vulnerable, but didn't agree they needed the protection of the law against being photographed in the nude.
His Defence Counsel said he'd suffered a great deal since his arrest and said the real punishment had already happened away from court.
But the chairman of the magistrates saiod they viewed the offences very seriously and found Mr Righton a total of £900 plus £75 costs.
Mr Righton would not comment as he left court.
New Barnes School is the subject of a separate investigation by the police and social services into child abuse and has remained closed since it shut down early for the Summer break.
Mr Righton resigned as Vice Chairman of the school's Govenors, shortly after his arrest.
The school's Principle, David Alston was suspended from his job.
It's not known if he'll return to the school.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Government proposals to stop travellers camping illegally will destroy gipsies' way of life, according to Liberal Democrat MP Nigel Jones.
At his party's conference in Harrogate he attacked the plans as’ attempted ethnic cleansing’.
Sheila Brocklebank reports.
MAY 1992/CASTLEMORTON COMMON/Worcestershire
NIGEL JONES MP/Lib Dem Cheltenham
JOHN DAVIES/Land Owner
KITTY CLEAR
ANTHONY WATKINS
Voice over
It was because of events like that at Castlemorton Common near Malvern in May, when around 20,000 travellers set up camp for an illegal Bank Holiday festival, that the Government announced tough new measures to deal with illegal encampments.
The proposals, if adopted, would mean it'll be a criminal offence to camp anywhere without the land owner's permission…and would give local councils the right to tow away and seize any illegally parked vehicles.
Delegates at the Liberal Democrat Conference today attacked the Government's plans.
The party's local Government spokesman and Cheltenham MP, Nigel Jones, said they represented a deliberate attempt to eliminate the gipsy way of life.
Distinction between traditional gypsies and travellers.
Gypsies who've camped on land in Hereford for generations years with the farmer's permission.
The proposals are to be discussed in November when local authorities and the police will make their views known.
The most advanced bomb disposal centre in the world has been officially opened by the Duke of Kent.
It has its own village, complete with a post office, a railway station and a pub and the Army says it's a great step forward in the fight against terrorism.
Adrian Britton reports.
KINETON/Warwickshire
It's a training exercise…but for the bomb squad this scenario is disturbingly real.
A bomb has been left in the doorway of a post office.
The army are called in to detonate it.
The remote controlled vehicle is armed with a camera and water.
Water is fired into the device because it's non combustible.
The exercise is taking place on a purpose built village on the Central Ammunitions Depot at Kineton.
The new four million pound training facility has houses, shops, a hotel, a pub…even a train station with railway line and train.
The station's first official passenger was the Duke of Kent…who in army uniform today officially opened the described as the most advanced anywhere in the world.
It's very realistic.
It's taken some time to construct.
From the memories of those who've worked in areas such as Northern Ireland it is very realistic.
The houses are solid.
The windows are solid.
In a couple of places we've installed central heating.
In this exercise…the Spanish Ambassador and his wife are taken hostage by terrorists.
The house is quickly surrounded by Ministry of Defence police marksmen.
It's believed the terrorists have a bomb.
In SAS style officers from the Royal Ulster Constabulary bomb disposal squad are flown in by helicopter.
The house is stormed.
The bodies of the shot terrorists are dragged out.
The hostages are free.
Among the VIP guests watching the exercises…the head of Scotland Yard's anti-terrorist squad commander George Churchill-Coleman.
The army believes the new traning centre will help them step up their fight against terrorism.
We have had other facilities in the past.
This is the first time since 1969 that we've had them on site.
To be able to inject this realism it's extremely good and a big step forward
As well as training soldiers and police officers who serve in Northern Ireland the centre will be used to train security forces from fifty countries worldwide.
Teachers and pupils have condemned builders who've felled a line of trees next to their school grounds.
They say it shows little respect for the environment and have managed to pursuade council officials to consider putting preservation orders on the remaining trees.
Ian Maclaren reports.
FARINGDON/Oxfordshire
REX NORMAN/Head Teacher
SARAH HAYTON/Sixth Former
MATTHEW GERRING/Sixth Former
Voice over
It was the last straw for teachers at Faringdon School this morning, when contractors began lopping branches from a row of beech trees.
Already, two mature horse chestnuts had been felled.
In desperation they turned to Central South…furious that apparently nothing can be done…
Pupils, who are increasingly aware of environment issues, are angry too.
Building work continued this afternoon.
A spokesman for the Coxwell Hall private nursing home sayy the trees are on clay foundations and had to go because they were a potential danger to residents and school pupils.
Tonight officials from Vale of White Horse District Council are urgently considering a preservation order on the remaining trees.
They say it would have been nice to have had discussions with the contractors before any action was taken.An officer will be on the site, first thing tomorrow.
The nursing home say they did consult the council…and have promised to carry out sensitive landscaping…along the gap.
In part two: Take that…
Oxford give Cambridge a lesson in football.
And taking Pride in their work…behind the scenes of a top drama.
Welcome back.
It's a big football night in Europe tonight that's why we've kicked off early…
On the Central South soccer front…
Oxford United are back on the winning trail but Hereford are still chasing success…they both played last night…
Here's Tim Russon.
Voice over
Meanwhile, the Chairman of Hereford United has announced that he's to resign.
The developers of a golf course are facing criminal prosecution for blocking footpaths with a club house and an ornamental lake.
Meanwhile, ramblers are planning a mass protest at the site.
This report from Simon Garrett.
LOBBERSDOWN HILL/Oxfordshire
CHRIS HALL/Rambler's Association
Voice over
Mark Twain described golf as’ a walk spoiled.’
The Ramblers say this exclusive course in the making called’ The Oxfordshire Golf Club,’has spoiled several paths, including one which runs right through the middle of the clubhouse.
Now walkers along the ancient Oxfordshire Way near Tetsworth, have to wear hardhats through the basement.
The plans call for that and other paths to be diverted.
The Rambler's National President is so angry, he'll be leading a mass protest here in two week's time.
Male speaker
They've come and put down the fairways and greens without regard for existing rights of way.
They knew what they were doing and thought’ Sod them’and just gone ahead anyway.
Voice over
Oxfordshire County Council's taking the developers to court on the criminal charge of Obstructing the Public Highway.
A public Inquiry held in July still hasn't reported its findings.
Developers Nitto-Albion declined an interview, but director Alex McMillan said:
’ We are promoting an Anglo-Japanese ideal.
We have good contacts with the local community.
We have co-operated with the local authorities and we have done everything we can to enhance the quality of the environment, including the footpaths.’
The Ramblers are clear about what they want done.
When it opens next May, The Oxfordshire Golf Club will have 600 or 700 members.
Each will have paid £25,000 to join, plus an annual fee of another £1,000.
A third will be Japanese businessmen.
It's hoped to attract a top professional and a very big money tournament.
All that remains to be decided is whether the Oxfordshire Way runs round the front of the club house, or through the car park at the back.
Now for the final part of our series behind the scenes at Central,’ Inside the Globe’.
This week it's our drama series, Family Pride, the country's first Asian soap opera, which goes out at teatime on Thursdays and will soon be shown three nights a week on Channel Four.
Wesley Smith reports.
FAMILY PRIDE/A Central Production
ANJUU MISRA/Arifa
SHAHEEN KHAN/Shoba
JACQUI ROGERS/Continuity PA
MIKE RICHARDSON/Producer
SUDHA BHUCHAR/Kiran
ZIA MOHYEDDIN/BB
Voice over
Whether you call it a serial, a drama or a soap, Family Pride is an ambitious project.
The plot highlights many aspects of Asian culture in today's Britain.
It uses the successful cocktail of romance, family crises and big business.
The cast take a break from the gruelling schedule.
They work 6 days on, 2 days off, often from very early in the morning.
Anjuu Misra, actress, explains that the schedule can make it difficult to learn lines.
Lunch is soon over and the crew set to work again.
It takes about half an hour to set up for 2 shots, which will take up about 5 seconds each on screen.
There's an enormous amount to do.
This warehouse is being converted into a Radio station reception, just for the day.
The script calls for graffiti to be sprayed on the windows, a special easy-to-clean paint is used.
Just time to rehearse.
A track is laid to allow the camera to move smoothly, then they go for a take.
The show wouldn't work without the back-up crew.
There's make-up, wardrobe and continuity.
Jacqui Rogers, Continuity PA, explains how she has to observe every scene and check everything matches up from one to the next.
Onto the next location, BB's warehouse.
The crew here have also helped to build the sets.
Wesley Smith visits one of the sets in studio and Producer, Mike Richardson talks about how the shooting is split between studio and location and that he prefers to think of’ Family Pride’as more of a drama than a soap.
All good drama has its fair share of controversial characters; one of those is Kiran.
Actress, Suda Bhuchar, explains that she likes the positive role she plays and that her character has become more rounded in this, the second series.
Actor and Executive Producer, Zia Moyheddin, says there is still much the programme wants to cover.
The programme has broken new ground for Asian actors, the crew was inundated with requests from young Asian actors for parts.
Actors explain that although’ Family Pride’sets a good precedent, there is still a long way to go before they get more mainstream parts.
The entertainment comes from making drama out of everyday crises.
Whether or not this second series will be something the crew can be proud of, will be up to the viewers to decide.
Pakistan Government warn of widespread epidemics
FTSE up 8
The hundred shares index closed up eight point three at two three seven eight point three 
The pound is down one dollar, eighty four and down at two marks, seventy seven eighty four.
Good evening.
WESLEY SMITH
HARRIET RYLEY
GARETH FURBY/Aylesbury
Chf Insp LAURIE FRAY/Aylesbury Police
GARY STREETER MP/Conservative
CHLOE WILLETTS/Aylesbury Town Mayor
EDWARD SAVAGE/Clerk to the Justices
Voice over
For one offender just four hours in a police cell was enough to wipe out fines totalling nearly one thousand two hundred pounds.
Another man saw nine hundred pounds wiped off his slate, with just three hours behind bars.
And to help time fly during their brief stay, there was a radio to listen to even magazines to read.
The police have to work closely with Ayslebury magistrates, and so are qualified in their criticism.
He says there are obviously going to be officers who query the reason for it, but they don't have all the facts as they magistrates do.
But others are more outspoken.
He says it makes a mockery of the justice system.
In theory at least ifa one thousand pound fine can be cleared in three hours.
Then ten thousand pounds could go in just over a day.
And one hundred thousand in under a forthnight.
Aylesbury's town mayor has joined the chorus of disapproval.
She says people will get the idea they can get off lightly.
But this afternoon Aylesbury's magistrates clerk said the magistrates had done nothing wrong.
They'd always had the power to exhange fines for prison, and it was the police who simply didn't understand the law.
He says he'll be complaining to the chief constable.
Despite their stay in the cells, both offenders still have to pay off the remainder of their fines, around five hundred and six hundred pounds each.
But the police are worried if it happens again and again, they'll simply become jailers to offenders who think they're getting off lightly.
An inquest's been hearing how a fifteen year old public schoolboy died in an accident after taking his brother's car.
Richard Montague-Smith was one and half times over the legal drink-drive limit when the accident happened.
The court heard that in the months before his death he'd experimented with drugs, and had suffered from depression 
TIM HURST/Birdlip
Voice over
Richard Montague-Smith, who was 15, took his brother's Escort car without consent and died when it left the road at more than 70 miles an hour on the Birdlip bypass near Gloucester earlier this year.
His parents, who lives at Cowley near Gloucester, were the only relatives or friends to attend his inquest at Tewkesbury.
A statement read to the coroner from Richard's family doctor said he'd been expelled from Millfield for throwing a brick through a teacher's window.
Then he transferred to Cheltenham College, in Cheltenham, from where he was expelled for obtaining alcohol.
He hadn't been able to mix with other pupils and suffered from depression.
He then attended the Crypt School in Gloucester, but left early on the day he died, cancelling a tennis lesson.
Richard took his brother's car that night, and a witness who saw the accident on the Birdlip bypass said it happened in the dark, the car left the road without attempting to follow the curve of the road.
It was travelling at more than 70 miles an hour.
The coroner was told that blood alcohol tests after the accident showed Richard had been one and a half times over the legal drink drive limit.
The coroner recorded a verdict of accidental death.
A man who was being questioned by police following the death of a footballer, has now been released on bail.
Nick Pollard died after a fight in his home town of Newent in Gloucestershire.
NEWENT/Gloucestershire
The trouble broke out in Church Street when his friends tried to stop him driving home because he'd drunk too much.
A file is being sent to the Crown Prosecution Service who'll decide how to proceed 
Demolition work has begun on a factory which was damaged by fire.
HEREFORD
Part of the Sun Valley Poultry factory at Hereford is being pulled down so that replacement buildings can be put up.
Two fire fighters were killed ten days ago in the fire which gutted most of the factory.
The company is also hoping for permission to develop on a nearby abbatoir site.
Welcome back.
A British grandmother arrived home this evening after meeting murderers on death row in an American jail.
(HARRIET NEXT)
The visit was part of her campaign to outlaw the death penalty in every American state.
TIM HURST/Park End
MAUREEN TIMMINS/Campaigner
Voice over
On death row in San Quentin, California, Maureen Timmins for the first time met the convicted murderer she's convinced is innocent.
Every day at her home at Park End in the Forest of Dean, Gloucestershire, letters pour in from the 80 condemned men she's corresponding with, as part of her world-wide campaign against the death penalty.
She's back home tonight after a 12 day visit to San Quentin.
10 times with her son Peter she visited death row, principley to talk to Michael Horton, convicted of killing his pregnant wife.
Maureen Timmins plans to sell some of Hamilton's paintings to raise money for his retrial and to pay for another trip to America.
Eighteen Russian students are starting school in England after their parents answered an advertisement placed in a Moscow newspaper.
It promised a traditional British education, saying it could be the key to an international career.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Cirencester
SASHA BADEEV/Pupil
MARINA SHCHUKINA/Pupil
LARISSA RYAZANOVA/Parent
JOHN RAWLINSON/Headmaster
WILLIAM WITCHELL/Pupil
Voice over
A carriage driver and his horses are on their way to America to take on the World's best in the sport.
The competition will be tough enough, but the flight there will be even more gruelling.
They'll be flown over in one of the biggest movements of horses ever.
ERIKA BARNES Stow on the Wold
BOB JOHNSTON Horse Carriage Driver
Voice over
This is the beauty of teamwork.
Driver and horses pulling together.
Bob Johnston rides around the lanes of Stow on the Wold with loyal companions Idris and Nuggett.
There's plenty of time to enjoy the ride and time to show off some skill and control.
They're preparing to represent Great Britain in the World Horse Carriage Championships in America.
A gruelling test of endurance not only at the competition…but also a test of endurance to get there.
Male speaker
They'll be loaded onto Jumbo jets.
It'll be the biggest movement of horses ever.
There'll be nine horses from each country.
We're training seven days a week.
We do something different every day to keep them interested.
Voice over
There are three elements to carriage driving.
The dressage, all discipline and control.
A slalom course to highlight the team's maneoverability.
And the twelve mile cross country, complete with spectacular hazard sections.
Male speaker
’ Come on Idris’
Voice over
It's a team effort.
Each member complementing the others.
Idris is the honest hardworking horse.
Nuggett is the hot headed one.
Bob is in control, with brakes at his feet.
His groom on the back does the final balancing act.
The real test is in America at the end of this month.
A test of strength, stamina and skill for them all — for the man, his machine and his two loyal companions.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Bosnian peace summit called
The warring groups in the Bosnian crisis are to meet for peace talks in Sarajevo next week.
Major dismisses Lamont attack
The Prime Minister has dismissed Norman Lamont's attack on his leadership as,’ sad and disingenuous’.
Unemployment up by 5
The number of people unemployed rose again last month by nearly six thousand.
Multiple transplant for Laura
Laura Davies, the five-year-old girl from Manchester, is undergoing a twenty hour multiple transplant operation in the United States after complications followed her earlier surgery.
Surfer's legal action
A surfer is taking legal action against Southern Water claiming he contracted Hepatitis A from polluted sea water.
Probation for soccer star
The Rangers footballer, Duncan Ferguson has been put on probation after being found guilty of assault.
FTSE up 14
The hundred shares index closed up fourteen point five at thirty, o-three point nine.
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty-three and down at two marks, forty-six.
Thousands of farm workers are in danger of being exploited if their minimum wage is scrapped.
That's the view of campaigners trying to stop the abolition of the Agricultural Wages Board.
The government's already got rid of a minimum wage in industry, but farmworkers say they must be treated as a special case.
MARIA COYLE/Latton
NIGEL LANGSTAFF/Head Herdsman
EILEEN RAPER/Part-time Farmworker
TOM BEWLEY/National Farmers' Union
Dr GAVIN STRANG MP/Shadow Agriculture Minister
BARRY LEATHWOOD/TGWU
Voice over
Farmworkers are in danger of being milked by their employers if the Agricultural Wages Board is scrapped.
That was the message at a the launch of a campaign headed by the Shadow Agricultural Minister who met workers at a farm in Latton in Wiltshire.
The current Farm-workers' minimum wage is a hundred and thirty eight pounds thirty pence for a thirty nine hour week.As part of the deal half of the agricultural workers have a cottage either free of charge or with a nominal rent of one pound fifty pence a week.
Farmworkers fear for their future if the Board now under government review is scrapped.
Male speaker
He thinks that employers will go for the cheapest labour they can.
Female speaker
She thinks the Board has done a good job and what would it be replaced with?
Voice over
According to the National Farmers union, employers too want to keep the independent bargaining body.
Male speaker
Individual farmers prefer to have a framework to operate within when it comes to pay negotiations.
Voice over
Politicians are divided on the issue.
The Labour party and trade unions say farmworkers need to be protected and need to be treated as a special case.
Male speaker
it's a monstrous social injustice if the Board is abolished.It will mean a reduction in wages, putting farmworkers on the poverty line.
Male speaker
Farmworkers are especially vulnerable because they're isolated and if they're working alone they don't have any support, working in ones and twos on a remote hillside.Some don't even feel they can dare to approach a union.
Voice over
But Paul Marland Conservative MP for West Gloucestershire himself a farmer believes flexibility within the farming industry is essential.
He says in some cases workers will have to accept lower wages to avoid redundancies.
The period of public consultation ends in November.
Many in the farming industry say the current system has survived well for seventy years and they see little reason for changing it.
Scientists have been holding a one-day strike in an attempt to get the same pay as their European colleagues.
CULHAM/Oxfordshire
More than a hundred people working on the JET nuclear fusion project in Oxfordshire are fighting for pay parity with other European scientists.
It's been more than a year since a report was published on their position.
They say they now want their employers to take immediate action.
Church leaders in Gloucester have named the date for the ordination of the first women priests in the diocese.
GLOUCESTER
The Bishops have set aside two days in May for the services at Gloucester Cathedral.
The controversial legislation has not yet been officially approved by Parliament.
But the Bishop of Tewkesbury, the Right Reverend Jeremy Walsh, says the district is anxious for the ordinations to go ahead.
Five puppies are fighting for survival after being left to die in a rubbish sack.
The puppies, which are about eight days old, were discovered by a busy road side.
One had already suffocated.
KEN GOODWIN/Whitminster
JACKIE SADLER/Whitminster Animal Shelter
JILL SPENCER/Holly's Owner
Voice over
Left to die — five tiny puppies separated from their mother and dumped by a busy roadside.
This is how they were found, bundled up in a rubbish sack similar to this one, and abandoned on a verge in Stroud.
Origionally there were six puppies.
But one had already suffocated in the plastic bag by the time they were found by a passer by.
Now the eight day old puppies are in the hands of the Whitminster Animal Shelter.
She says that they need to be fed every two hours or so.
They're very hungry.
Workers at the shelter say they're disgusted that anyone would abandon the pupies in such a cruel way.
She says that the owner could have contacted the shelter if he didn't want the puppies — it was cruel to part them from their mother at such an early age.
At the moment, staff at the shelter are playing mum to the pups.
But help may be at hand in the form of Holly, a dalmatian which is the middle of a phantom pregnancy.
She has all the symptoms, but no pups of her own to feed.
Holly's owners are hoping she'll adopt the orphans.
She says that they're going to leave Holly in a kennel to see if she'll accept the puppies as her own — she's very broody.
Some of the kennels young residents are lucky — they're being looked after their real mother…
Now it's hoped that these hungry youngsters will soon have a mother of their own too.
Still to come on Central News, journey to death row.
(2)
Auctioneers have blamed the recession for the flop of a sale of twenty pubs.
Many of the pubs were being auctioned because their previous owners had run into financial difficulties.
But in the end, only three were sold.
Richard Barnett reports:
HEREFORD
JOHN WILLIAMS/Auctioneer
MARYSE WHEELER/Landlady
Voice over
There was a packed auction room at Hereford Racecourse this afternoon as 20 pubs; 8 of them in Herefordshire and Worcestershire came under the hammer.
But few were buying and 17 pubs failed to reach their reserve price and were withdrawn.
They included the Royal Oak at Ledbury, the Lemster Ore at Leominster, the Talbot at Kington and the Royal Oak at Hardwicke near Hay on Wye.
Auctioneer John Williams blamed the recession for the slump in the pub trade affecting buyers and sellers.
Male speaker
The slump is likely to go on for another two years.
It's putting off prospective buyers.
Voice over
As dozens of pubs go out of business, others are riding out the recession.
At the Oxford Arms in Hereford, Landlady, Maryse Wheeler says running a real local with regular customers is the answer.
Female speaker
Pubs that chase trade with things like karaoke lose out when another craze comnes in.
Voice over
Meanwhile judging from the way today's auction went, the breweries and banks could have a long wait before they get their money back from pubs that close.
Demonstrators calling for World Motor Racing Champion, Nigel Mansell, to be kept on by Williams gathered outside the team's Didcot headquarters.
A national newspaper had called for an army of Mansell fans to turn out, but fewer than two hundred actually did.
Simon Garrett reports 
DIDCOT/Oxfordshire
ROB KELLAWAY/The Sun
DAVE WILLIAMS/Williams Grand Prix RAYMOND/Hot Dog Salesman
Voice over
Mansell's few were well armed with placards and banners demanding their hero stay with Williams.
They're angry the motor racing team hasn't been able to improve on the reportedly £7million offer to tempt him back.
They came from all over the country to show their displeasure.
A father and son even hitch hiked from Manchester.
2 Senna fans staged a counter-demonstration.
A free coach was laid on by the Sun bringing fans from London.
But despite the attraction of Page 3 girls handing out t-shirts, only 9 fans joined in to swell the numbers.
Newspaper staff put on a brave face.
Williams team management said they were on the protestors' side.
Whether their actions were misplaced or not the final word on numbers belonged to the traders who'd made their way from London to supply the crowds.
The one thing missing was an appearance by the man himself, but he was probably out job hunting.
Swindon Town's hopes of playing in Europe this season suffered a setback last night when they were beaten by Brentford in the preliminary stages of the Anglo Italian Cup…
Tim Russon reports from the County Ground 
Voice over
A huge balloon will be floating over the countryside for the next five weeks.
Carried beneath it will be sophisticated instruments gathering information on a subject that absorbs us all — the weather.
Ian Maclaren watched the take off.
CHARNEY BASSETT/Oxfordshire
PHIL HOPWOOD/Research Scientist
DAVE BAMBER/Research Unit
Voice over
It takes 24,000 cubic ft of helium to fill the Met Office research balloon.
For the next 5 weeks, it'll be floating over the Vale of White Horse.
The plan is to gather some 300 million measurements to improve the way scientists forecast the weather.
The balloon was launched today with a host of instruments and probes clamped to its cable.
They'll gather information on how the wind behaves closer to ground level.
They'll also send back details of heat and moisture; vital when you're predicting cloud formation.
The Met Office says it should give them much more accurate information.
The weather balloon is developed from the war time barrage balloons and warnings have been posted to all military and civil aircraft to keep well clear during the field experiment.
On the ground, another array of instruments to take yet more readings.
All the information will be stored in the Met Office computers installed on the site.
But the big question is, will it mean more reliable weather forecasts?
The Met Office say they already get their predections 80 — 85% correct and they're still trying to improve.
But as with most things scientific, it'll be at least 5 years before the information gathered from the Oxfordshire countryside will be put to good use by the forecasters.
Britain's top Olympic and paralympic athletes gathered today to celebrate the outstanding achievements in their sports.
It was a rare occasion when the best able bodied and disabled athletes applauded each others talents.
Mark Kiff reports 
LONDON
IAN HAYDEN Double Silver Medallist
STEVE REDGRAVE Triple Gold Medallist
BOB MATTHEWS Triple Medallist
LINFORD CHRISTIE Olympic 100 Metre Champion
DAVID COLEMAN Compere
Italy follows Britain out of ERM
FTSE up 105
Voice over
The hundred shares index closed up a hundred and five point six at twenty-four, eighty-three point nine.
The pound is down at one dollar, seventy-seven and down at two marks, sixty-three.
Now the latest news on the crash of the American fighter plane at the United States airforce base at Upper Heyford.
An airforce spokesman has tonight confirmed that both the pilot and navigator of the F One-Eleven are feared dead.
An investigation into the crash, close to the nearby village, has already been launched.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
UPPER HEYFORD/Oxfordshire
JACKIE WILLIAMSON/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
IAN MACLAREN/Reporting
Voice over
It's the second time this year a plane from Upper Heyford has crashed.
On July the 31st an EF111, radar jamming plane, spiralled out of control after its tail caught fire.
The aircraft crashed just 30 yards from buildings where 40 people were working at an agricultural firm in Buckinghamshire.
Both crew members ejected safely…but people on the ground had to dive for cover as the plane crashed in a ball of fire.
A report from the US Air Force subsequently cleared the crew and the equipment from blame.
It's known the fire in the tail caused the accident…but not what caused the fire.
The USAF said details of the safety report had to be kept confidential.And F111s have continued to fly missions.
Until now the the F111 has had a good safety record.July's crash was the first in peace time.
But with up to 92 flights a day over Upper Heyford, members of the local action committee are likely to be even more concerned tonight.
With me is Patrick Fitzgiven of the Defend Steeple Aston Action Group.
PATRICK FITZ-GIBBON/Defend Steeple Aston Action Group
RUNS=1:15 
A witness in the Akers Way trial has told how he saw a car flip over and land upside down in a hedge in the crash in which five young people were killed.
He was one of a number of witnesses who described their view of events leading up to the crash in Swindon last year.
Erika Barnes reports.
GLOUCESTER
Voice over
Shaun Gooch arrived at Gloucester Crown Court to hear more evidence about the crash which claimed 5 lives.
He and codefendent Anthony Gallagher saw a video of the route along Akers Way in Swindon.
It showed tyre marks on the road close to where the crash happened.
The court heard evidence from David Moss who'd walked passed and chatted with the victims sitting on the roadside bench.
He told how he saw 2 cars going up the road and had a strong feeling there would be an accident.
Later he described how a car, driven by Mr Gooch had struck a kerb, swerved across the road, before being catapulted back again and out of site.
Another witness, taxi driver David Harvey described how he'd seen two cars flashing by, about three feet apart, in the opposite direction.
He'd heard loads of acceleration and loads of noise.
Workshop manager Gordon McLean had been testing a car on Akers Way, when he saw another car pass in front on his, travelling at around 65 to 70 mph.
It went into a skid.
His passenger, Gary Hanlon saw the car flip over, turn upside down and land in a hedge.
7 year old Ian Lilly died in the crash, along with 8 year old Sheree Lear 15 year old Paula Barnes, 16 year old Paul Carr and 19 year old Belinda Brown.
The court heard how the speed limit has been reduced in Akers Way, but at the time there was a temptation for drivers to speed.
It was described as a couple of seconds crammed with incident.
The trial continues.
Detectives investigating the death of Tanya Probyn must decide in the next hour whether to continue to question her husband, or release him.
Jonathan Probyn has been in custody since his arrest yesterday morning.
Tim Hurst reports.
HARDWICKE/Gloucestershire
Voice over
Jonathan Probyn, from Hardwicke in Gloucestershire, has been held by police since his arrest at his home early yesterday.
Teams of detectives have spent the last two days searching the house.
Mr Probyn is being questioned about the death of his wife, Tanya, who was 28, and who'd been missing for six days before her body was found in her car in the River Severn.
She had drowned.
Mr Probyn can be held at Gloucester police station for only another hour without either being taken to court or released.
If he is taken to court, detectives can apply for permission to question him for a further 24 hours.
Tanya Probyn's car had been driven along a lane at Stonebench in Gloucestershire before reaching the River Severn.
At the spot where her car was found in ten feet of water last week, flowers have been left by family and friends.
Bereaved parents have joined with health experts to produce a training video for hospitals on how to deal with the death of a new born baby.
They say parents are often left without support to cope with the death, and doctors, nurses and midwives need to understand how to help them.
The video is based on a pioneering scheme in the Oxford region.
Gargy Patel reports.
OXFORD
MATT TODD/Father
TRAINING VIDEO
JENNI THOMAS/Bereavement Counsellor
JAMIE BECKETT-HESTER/Midwife
JANE POOLTON/Mother
LUCY TODD/Mother
Voice over
Trading standards officers say they're losing the battle against computer game pirates who cost the industry twenty million pounds a year.
The remarks followed a court case in which a couple admitted selling counterfeit software at car boot sales.
GRAEME BOWD/Swindon
GEOFF SNOWBALL/Wiltshire Trading Standards
Voice over
Popular computer games on sale for just £2 each.
They cost up to than £30 in the shops.
But these just some of the thousands of pirate discs which find their way into homes all over Britain.
At Swindon Magistrates Court Andrew Broadway and Sandra Green admitted selling the discs illegally at car boot sales.
It was the first prosecution of its kind in Wiltshire.
Trading standards officers investigated the couple after complaints from a computer engineer who bought their products at a sale in Lyneham.
They discovered that the pair were also trading at a stall in Abingdon and by mail order.
More than five hundred discs were found at their homes, all of them illegal copies.
But the couple's solicitor Con Fernandez said the pair were just skittles waiting to be bowled over by the long arm of the law.
They knew little about computers and had bought the discs from another counterfeiter who's yet to be caught.
Broadway and Green were each sentenced to 80 hours community service.
Trading standards officer say the recent growth in car boot sales has provided a perfect outlet for the computer pirates.
But to secure a conviction they must show prove the culprits are professional dealers.
Even finding out who they are is often difficult.
Male speaker
The people whop sell it are often itinerant.
We have followed the trail of these people only to find that they have moved house and we cannot trace them.
Voice over
Most genuine discs are now programmed to prevent copying, but the pirates are on the ball, often finding ways to beat the system.
Copywrite fraud is now thought to be costing software companies £20m pounds a year.
And the industry seems powerless to stop it.