

Detectives are trying to trace a charity worker who was due back in Britain today to face questioning about missing funds.
The woman has phoned friends saying she's in London, but the police have no record of her flying home from Turkey she's already been questioned by fraud squad detectives.
Tim Hurst reports.
LIBRARY PICTURES
Voice over
Ruth Hilali, who founded a Kurdish refugee charity in Worcester, should have flown into Heathrow from Turkey at midday to face questioning about the withdrawal of £130,000 from a Worcester charity for Kurdish refugees.
She wasn't on the plane and West Mercia fraud squad have asked Interpol to investigate.
However she phone a Worcester radio station this afternoon to say she had arrived by plane and she was in London consulting legal advisors.
Last month she'd phoned England from Turkey to say she was buying supplies for Kurdish refugees in the north of the country.
Supplies collected for the charity in Worcester remained in a warehouse in the city, and West Mercia Fraud Squad were asked to investigate the withdrawal of funds from the Worcester branch of the Royal Bank of Scotland.
Last week 2 detectives flew to Turkey to talk to her and she volunteered to return to Britain.
She was booked onto a flight arriving in London at midday but failed to board the plane.
Police say they have no record of her entering the country.
Children with Cerebral Palsy could soon lose the training centre that helps them to overcome their handicap.
They are taught to walk and talk using the Hungarian system of Conductive Education, and for most its their only chance to achieve an independant life.
But unless the children's parents raise twenty thousand pounds within the next few days it will close.
This report from Mike Rowbottom.
DINTON/Buckinghamshire
LISA THOMPSON/Parent
JANET LLOYD/Parent
HEATHER LAST/PACE Director
Voice over
Children with cerebral palsy can't control, their muscles, or voices, but there is a way of helping them develop.
Conductive education, combines forced manipulation of their limbs with music and teaching to help them overcome their problem.
The PACE Day Centre near Aylesbury has been using the technique for the last 3 years, but it could all be over in the next couple of days.
They need to raise £20,000 or they'll have to close and that will be a huge blow for the parents.
Female speaker
Dexter has a lot of problems but he has improved a lot since being here.
Before he wouldn't even let anyone touch him.
Female speaker
I took my child out of the school system because I didn't think the physio she had was right for her needs.
Male speaker
I'm learning to walk.
Male speaker
I can't walk on my own, not yet.
Female speaker
I learn to walk and breathe and do the programme.
Voice over
They're funded entirely voluntarily from money raised by the parents.
But the recession and competition with other charities has reduced contributions.
Female speaker
It's not an easy time to develop any project.
We have a high level of expertise to give these children the education they need.
Voice over
PACE has taken a charity stall on nearby Aylesbury Market, but it needs all the help it can get.
It costs up to £18,000 a year to educate one child, although the results are there for all to see.
They have until Wednesday to get the money in.
It's to pay for the centre until the end of January.
The children often struggle to stand on their own 2 feet.
Now it seems the centre is having the same problem.
In part two: Four of a kind…
Durnin plays the winning hand as United come up trumps against Luton.
A bishop's blessing…holy start to Britain's first Sunday jump meeting.
And the next Ritz?…plans to turn Colditz into a hotel with a history
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
Brian Horton's yellow and blue army are on the march.
They're unbeaten now in 8 league battles.
Leading the charge against Luton on Saturday was one of the young braves, Joey Beauchamp.
He was on top form.
The big clubs were watching from the stands at the Manor and Joey could well become a top transfer target if he turns it on like this.
He made the first goal with a delightful, a dazzling run.
It was a deadly finish too from John Durnin.
And it was his day.
He's been in good form this season.
He's a soldier that gives everything; throws himself at the enemy and for once every ball, he touched finished in the back of the net.
In the second half Oxford eased off just for a bit, but when Luton opened fire United hit back with all guns blazing.
Number 3 was made by Allen and taken superbly by Durnin.
3 minutes later came number 4.
Goal of the week; it'll be in the running for goal of the season.
4-0.
The hero deserved a medal.
How about the DFC; Durnin First Class.
Across at the County Ground, the Swindon commander, Glenn Hoddle led his team from the front by making the first goal against Southend.
Superb skill and Craig Maskell was there as always to score.
That was after 10 minutes.
This was 12 minutes Mitchell to Maskell.
Crash; bang; wallop.
It was 2-0.
After 24 minutes, it was 3-0.
Maskell this time, the maker; Martin Ling, the taker.
Easy; easy shouted the crowd.
We want 4.
Well another goal came before half-time.
It was at the wrong end, though, as Ian Benjamin got one back for Southend.
And things were tight near the end, when John Cornwell made Swindon sweat with a second for Southend.
Town 3-2 on top at the end.
That keeps them in second place.
Still to come on Central News.
Into Afghanistan.
Where the cold front of winter can be a killer.
And a walk across the sky: Record breaking two miles up.
Welcome back.
Thousands of refugees in Afghanistan who've fled conflict and civil war are now preparing for a further challenge…the bitter winter ahead.
Many are still facing the uncertainty of life in refugee camps a year after leaving their homes.
Oxfam is working with the refugees helping them rebuild their lives.
Following the successful Cold Front appeal it's flying in warm clothing and our reporter Kim Barnes joined the airlift.
Voice over
Flying into Afghanistan…on board 23 tonnes of clothes and blankets…the achievement of Oxfam's Cold front appeal.
They're destined for thousands of people whose lives have been torn apart by conflict…who're now facing a cruel winter.
The long war with Russia has ended…now the Russian airline aeroflot is bringing aid from Britain…
Afghans recruited that morning at the market unload the bales…then it's off into the night.
The clothes will be given to people who face temperatures as low as minus 20.
These people are already preparing for that.
24,000 regugees from neighbouring Tajikistan live here.
They fled the civil war there a year ago.
This was the scene when they arrived…
Since then they've built their own homes out of the earth…and Oxfam has put in a desperately needed water supply.
The translator says there was no food for us, we had to cross the border and come to Afghanistan.
Now we're happy with the Afghan people.
The UN is helping us, we have no problems.
Our only problem is that we're away from our country and our relatives.
Mud houses, they say, are better than the devastation at home…now with winter around the corner they're digging deeper for warmth…
This young woman crossed the border with a three month old baby and her second child was born here.
Belkhuban's father died while they waited at the border to get here…her brother's been left behind…she has nothing, but she shared bread and tea with us.
All she wants, she says, is to see her brother again.
No one knows how long they'll be here…like most refugees they would love to go home.
But that may not happen soon…so the Tajiks…with extraordinary commitment are building a school for their children…with their bare hands.
Just a few miles away at the Camas camp 1100 refugees with a different story to tell are also preparing for winter.
These people are afghans…a few of the one million who fled the rockets raining down on the capital city, Kabul.
Translator says our house in Kabul has been destroyed.
Now we're here, we're happy.
There are no rockets and no firing.
He says there was shooting and rockets and the houses burnt down.
So we had to leave our homes and come here.
This man has fourteen children…he's preparing his home as best he can.
Here again Oxfam made fresh water available…helping to keep disease at bay.
But the continuing conflict is never far away.
As we filmed, the tanks rolled by and the Migs flew over head…
In their shadow people who've lost everything try to do their best for their children.
A further three million people fled the trouble in Afghanistan for Iran.
Now they're coming back…in most cases to nothing.
This extended family of forty share five rooms…they get no help from any agency…but at least they're home.
He says it's very difficult living like this but there's no other way.
We have to get on with it.
Afghanistan is one of the poorest countries in the world…factional fighting continues to devastate it…
Oxfam is doing what it can…but this will be a bitter and uncertain winter.
The UK's biggest recycling plant has opened for business.
Waste materials are carefully separated out to make them more valuable when they're resold.
It's cost nearly six million pounds to build, but will turn hundreds of thousands of tons of rubbish into a small fortune.
GARETH FURBY/Milton Keynes
KEITH ELY/Milton Keynes Borough Council
ROD DARTON/Operations Director
Voice over
There's nothing else to match it in Britain.
A giant plant than can recycle up to one hundred thousand tonnes of rubbish every year.
Onto one conveyor belt go cans and plastic bottles.
A machine using magnets separates metal from aluminuim.
The plastic is then divided by hand into different grades.
And its the sorting which makes all money.
Mixed plastic, for example, sells for about £25 a ton.
But separated it can command up to £400 a ton.
He says it will make enough to break even in the first year.
The market for recycled material has recently hit a bad patch with falling prices.
But Milton Keynes council insists the plant won't require a subsidy from council tax payers, in fact they can help make it a success.
He says people should make sure they hand in their rubbish.
He says there needs to be a similar plant in every town.
It means jobs for twenty five people.
Eventually even the plastics will be sorted by machine.
But if the plant is to be popular with council tax payer its operators will have to prove that recycling on this scale really can pay for itself.
Plans to build the country's second biggest reservoir have been shelved for at least five years.
Thames Water says demand for supplies isn't growing as fast as expected.
People living on the proposed site say their future is now more uncertain than ever.
HARRIET RYLEY/Environment Reporter
JOHN SEXTON/Thames Water
EAST HANNEY/Oxfordshire
RAY REYNOLDS/Farmer
CLIVE FEWINS/GARD
Cllr TERRY COX/Vale of White Horse DC
Voice over
This is the reservoir Thames Water want to build south-west of Abingdon in Oxfordshire.
It would cover four square miles and be the second biggest in the country.
This morning in a surprise announcement Thames Water said they were deferring their application for planning by at least five years
He says we're saving water by reducing leakage.
That means we can delay putting plans in for the reservoir.
There was also an admission that the demand for water is not growing at the rate Thames Water had earlier predicted.
But the company insists there will still be a need to build the reservoir and that they would do all they can to minimise the impact it makes on the surrounding countryside when that happens.
Farmer Ray Reynolds was unimpressed with the news.
He's spent a lifetime building up his two hundred acre farm on the site of the proposed reservoir:
He says it's another shock, to extend it five years — it's more devastating than it was to begin with — yet more uncertainty.
The protest group — GARD — Group Against Reservoir Development — reacted cautiously to the delay:
He says we don't see this as a victory.
It's just common sense and proves what we've always said that there isn't a need for this reservoir.
The local district council, Vale of the White Horse, has always been against the reservoir:
He says I'm very concerned for local people who will have a further period of uncertainty.
But on the other hand I'm pleased the reasons they've given for the delay are the points we've been raising with them over the last two years.
Thames Water has already bought five houses on the proposed site and says it will still buy those affected at the going market rate.
But news of the delay means many prefer to wait until the reservoir's future becomes more certain.
A disabled rider who's accusing a horse trader of cheating her out of twelve hundred pounds says more than a hundred and fifty people may have suffered a similar fate.
Both the police and trading standards officers say they're aware of what's going on, but they're powerless to intervene.
ROBIN POWELL/Wootton Bassett
ALISON CLIFFORD/Horse Rider
MARTYN CLIFFORD/Alison's Husband
BAYFORD/Somerset
ROBERT TAYLOUR/Trading Standards Officer
Voice over
Alison Clifford is back in the saddle, but only on a borrowed horse.
Her pony Strawberry was put down after breaking a leg, and its replacement Jamie proved unsuitable for Alison, who has rheumatoid arthritis.
So she gave Jamie to a horse dealer called Liz Burt and asked for another in return.
Jamie was sold, but 2 months later Mrs Burt hasn't kept her side of the bargain.
Now Trading Standards have told Mrs Clifford she can't expect her money back.
But Mrs Burt appears to be doing just that.
She's placed another advertisement in this week's local newspaper, under an assumed name — one of around 20 she's thought to use.
Alison's husband is furious.
Mrs Burt works out of these stables near Wincanton.
This woman who'd come to complain about an allegedly dangerous horse she'd sold her was threatened by stable-hands, and Central News was told that Mrs Burt was at a funeral and unavailable for comment.
A former employee admitted she was hard to get hold of.
Avon and Somerset Police told us they've been monitoring the situation closely, but so far they've been unable to press criminal charges.
A spokesman said the complaints made so far have tended to be of a civil nature, but added: If we receive a complaint which can be substantiated then we will investigate it.
Trading Standards in Yeovil have just submitted a report on Mrs Burt to the Office of Fair Trading and their counterparts in Swindon are warning potential customers to be wary.
Meanwhile, anyone with information is asked to contact the police.
Landowners are warning that a plague of squirrels is threatening our forests.
They say a pest control campaign is needed to stop a squirrel population explosion.
Already the animals are destroying millions of pounds worth of trees every year.
RICHARD BARNETT/Garnons
HARRY COTTERELL/Country Landowners Association
Reconstruction/PARKEND/Gloucestershire
ERIC PRITCHARD/Wildlife Ranger
Voice over
Many towndwellers see the grey squirrel as an amusing furry creature that comes into their gardens.
But to the Country Landowners Association they're vermin…wreaking havoc in woodland across Herefordshire, Worcestershire and Gloucestershire.
Squirrel damage costs foresters millions of pounds every year.
The animals eat the bark off the trunk of the tree, preventing the sap rising.
Eventually the tree dies.
The Garnons estate in Herefordshire includes 700 acres of woodland.
Here the squirrel is the Number One enemy:
Meanwhile in the Forest of Dean in Gloucestershire, staff wage an unceasing battle against the grey squirrel.
They use special poison bait holders called hoppers.
Poisoned wheat is put inside the holder which is designed to let in grey squirrels and exclude other small mammals.
In the Foest of Dean alone, an estimated 5,000 squirrels are poisoned each summer and another 800 are shot.
When the grey squirrel was first introduced from the United States a century ago, it was viewed as a welcome newcomer.
But as far as the Foresters are concerned, its time is up.
In Central News tonight:
Driving lessons on the state: Social services paid for single mother's classes.
Banned: Another council outlaws fox-hunting on its land.
Living on the edge: A dare-devil walk into the record books.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
Social workers have been criticised for paying for driving lessons for a seventeen year old single mother.
An independent review body has described the lessons as overly generous.
An MP says social workers shouldn't be able to spend public money in such a way.
WESLEY SMITH
But a support group for one parent families says spending the money is justified.
The social workers say they have a duty to prepare the seventeen year old for independent life as an adult.
Reconstruction/TIM HURST/Reporting
MARJORIE LAMBERT/Former Foster Mother
FRED DAVIES/Gloucestershire Social Services
DOUGLAS FRENCH MP/Con Gloucester
SHEILA MAXAM/Gingerbread
Voice over
A 17 year old single mother, who lives in the Forest of Dean in Gloucestershire, is having her driving lessons paid for by the county's social services department.
Her former foster mother complained about what she called the extravagence to an independent review panel, who've criticised the payments as overly generous.
Mrs Lambert, who's fostered 27 children and teenagers, no longer works with Gloucestershire County Council.
She made 2 complaints to the review panel.
But the use of social services budgets to pay for driving lessons has been criticised by one of Gloucestershire's MPs.
Gingerbread, a support group for single parent families, says such reaction underlines the Government's attitude towards single mothers.
The 17-year-old has already completed one course of 10 lessons.
Social workers will continue to pay to prepare her for her driving test.
Books on hunting may be banned from public libraries by a county council which has voted to outlaw fox hunting on its land.
The ban on hunting has been welcomed by anti blood sports campaigners.
But hunt supporters say it won't affect them.
GRAEME BOWD/Thame
OXFORD
Cllr JACK STEER/Labour
Cllr KEITH MITCHELL/Conservative
Cllr JOHN WALTON/Conservative
ALASTAIR JACKSON/British Field Sports Society
Voice over
Huntsmen out in East Oxfordshire today say the ban will make little difference.
It only applies to five thousand acres of council owned land.
Elsewhere hunt is usually welcome.
But the debate at county hall aroused strong feelings on both sides.
As hunt supporters made their case, their opponents delivered a 16,000 name petition.
It was the third time in five years the council had considered a motion to ban hunting.
This time it was passed by 34 votes to 24 amid wild applause from the public gallery.
Councillors admit the decision won't stop hunting but say it's a way of bringing public opinion to the notice of the Government.
He says the council has added its voice to the lobby against hunting.
It's telling the Government that the barbaric practice of hunting should be stopped.
Councillors were given a free vote, but for the most part opinion followed party lines, with Labour and the Liberal Democrats against the sport, the Tories for it.
He says’ Charlie Fox.’
Attractive but vicious, cruel and calculating.
A killer.
And from some councillors there were claims of censorship.
The vote also stops public buildings being used to promote field sports, so could this mean that books on hunting will vanish from the libraries.
He asks if the motion will stop newspapers with hunting articles going into libraries?
Censorship at its worst.
But anti hunt lobby say they won't go that far.
The hunt supporters believe the ban in unlawful and plan to challenge it in the courts.
He says they've already been allowed a judicial review over the ban on deer hunting by Somerset Council and we've requested one in the case of Hampshire.
He says they will now do the same for Oxfordshire.
And there's some doubt as to whether the council can make its tenant farmers enforce the ban.
To do so could break the terms of their lease.
More than 30 councils have now made moves to kerb hunting.
But only Parliament ban it from private land.
So for now at least the fox has no reason to sleep more easily.
A world record has been set for tight rope walking between two hot air balloons.
Ian Ashpole walked across a steel rope just one and a half inches wide almost two miles above the earth.
But he's no stranger to dare devil stunts, he's already made a bungee jump from more than ten thousand feet.
KAREN THOMPSON/Ross on Wye
IAN ASHPOLE/Tightrope Walker
CHRIS DUNKLEY/Balloon Pilot
LOUISE ASHPOLE/Ian's Wife
July 1992/ROSS ON WYE/Herefordshire
Voice over
a crazy pie in the sky idea dreamt up over a few beers finally became a reality today and a new world record.
The task for balloonist and skydiver Ian Ashpole from Ross On Wye was this, to walk between two hot air balloons along a fifteen foot stainless steel rope, just one and a half inches wide at ten thousand five hundred feet.
There'd been months of preparation and delays because of the weather.
The early frost today was a worry.
He says the bar keeps icing up because of the frost and if it's like that in the sky I could fall off.
The steel rope had to be used because a normal tight rope wouldn't keep taut between two unpredictable hot air balloons.
The skills of the balloon pilots would be vital.
He says safety is paramount you have to make sure the balloons are at the same temperatures and that they keep at the same height.
Ian's wife Louise is used to his love of stunts, but her nerves were jangling…
She says they're knotted as the time is almost here for the stunt.
Today there was a quick practice after all the equipment had been checked.
Then the balloons were off rising above Herefordshire to eleven and a half thousand feet instead of the planned ten and a half thousand.
And so the moment of truth.
He says this is scariest thing I've ever done in my life.
He's asked how he feels.
He says terrified.
Exhilarated Ian wanted to try walking back without the balancing pole.
And he's never happier than when he's falling flying, floating through the air.
He says when I fell off I was relieved just to get off it.
Last year Ian made this bungy jump out of a balloon at more than ten thousand feet.
Then he didn't make it into the record books.
Today's stunt guarantees him a mention and proves that ideas inspired by a chat over a pint aren't just a load of hot air.
PAUL COPPERWHEAT
New evidence in Bridgewater case
FTSE up 10
The hundred shares index closed up ten point six at thirty one oh one point nine 
The pound is down at one dollar, forty eight and up at two marks, fifty two.
Schwarzenegger wins libel award
FTSE down 0
The hundred shares index closed down nought point four at twenty-six, seventy-nine point two.
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty-one and up at two marks, forty-two.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
The RAF Falcons parachute display team have been in practice for their next season by jumping from one of the largest aircraft in the world.
The Galaxy C-5 is so big it can transport half a dozen helicopters in one go.
And as Nick Clark reports it provided the perfect platform for the Falcons from RAF Brize Norton.
Flt Lt ALEX JONES/Team Leader
Sgt TONY ISHERWOOD/New member
Flt Lt STEVE DARLING
Flt Sgt REX PRITCHARD/Coach
Voice over
It's the start of the Falcons' year; training for next season's displays and a unique chance to jump from the second biggest plane in the world, courtesy of the US Airforce.
Of course as a plane that could happily take half a dozen buses on board, it's going to be something of a new experience.
Male speaker
It's a different sort of a jump.
There's the slipstream to take into account.
And the plane's going slightly faster than the Hercules or Andover.
Voice over
These training exercises are geared towards getting the new members of the Falcons team used to the routine.
Male speaker
I don't really know what will happen, we'll have to wait and see.
Voice over
2 miles below the drop zone is ready as the Galaxy hoves into view.
Up above, the Falcons know the plan; jump; freefall and link up to make a circle.
Which is pretty much what happens, although one of the new jumpers doesn't quite get it right and ends up doing an unscheduled, but spectacular stunt.
Male speaker
I just didn't quite judge it right, so I decided to go for the hole rather than ipe the team out!
Male speaker
It's his first mistake — he'll learn.
Voice over
Well you can't win 'em all and there's plenty of time to get it right.
Not least when the team go on detachment to southern California next week.
Highlight of that trip is a jump into the Jack Murphy stadium in San Diego.
Central South will be following the team's progress over in the States and through next year's display season in the UK.
Meanwhile, it's over to the USA too for the Galaxy C-5, mission complete, thanks for the memory.
A rare breed of pig is making a comeback…on the dinner table.
Supporters of the Gloucestershire Old Spot say the best way to protect the pig is to eat it.
Richard Barnett reports:
SOUTH CERNEY/Gloucestershire
RICHARD LUTWYCHE/Cotswold Gourmet
SOUTH WOODCHESTER/Gloucestershire
MARK TYLER/Meat Processor
SOUTHROP/Gloucestershire
Voice over
For over a century, the Gloucestershire Old Spot pig was queen of the sty across the West Country.
Known as the orchard pig because of its liking for windfall apples, it was cheap to keep and delicious to eat.
But by the 1930s the Gloucestershire Old Spot was being squeezed out by faster growing modern hybrids.
And in the 1960s, the breed was on the verge of extinction.
But now the Old Spot is stageing a comeback.
What started as a hobby for rare breeds enthusiasts, is now making sound commercial sense, as demand is growing for meat from rare breeds.
Richard Lutwyche, who's Secretary of the Gloucestershire Old Spot breeders Club, has launched a firm to market rare breed products.
Male speaker
The best way to save the breed is to market it commercially.
Demand for the rare breed products is growing.
Voice over
The Old Spot meat is turned into bacon and sausages by a traditional meat processors near Stroud.
Male speaker
The meat has an excellent taste and texture.
Voice over
Meanwhile at the Swan in Southrop, Old Spot Pork is going down a treat.
There are now around 500 Gloucestershire Old Spot sows in herds throughout Britain.
And as demand for their meat grows, the breed looks as if it's been saved by its bacon.
A sixty-one-year old disabled man has established a new record at the Silverstone Grand Prix circuit…for the slowest ever lap.
He used an electrically driven three wheeled scooter.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
SILVERSTONE/Northamptonshire
JOHN POWELL/Disabled Rider
TONY REYNOLDS/Wheelchair Competitor
Voice over
Pole position on the Silverstone starting grid is a tense place for anyone.
It doesn't matter if it's Formula One, or in this case, an electrically driven disabled scooter and manually powered wheelchair.
It's still a demanding ordeal.
John Powell, at 61, is probably the oldest driver to have taken on the new Grand Prix Circuit.
He's suffered 3 strokes in the last year and chose one of the wettest days of autumn to have a go.
He can make 4mph downhill.
Male speaker
I am going fior a new record.
No one has done it before and no idiot is going to try it again.
Voice over
His preparations took place in the world famous Silverstone Pits, with some fine tuning to the sensitive power unit at his fingertips.
Tony Reynolds runs British Motorsports for the Disabled and was planning to keep him company on the journey.
He fancied his chances.
Male speaker
My main concern is aqua-planing.
I am known as Sideways Reynolds and I might have to cut back on the speed on the corners.
Voice over
Just for the record, Nigel Mansell did the fastest ever Grand Prix lap at Silverstone this year in 1 minute and 22 seconds and 141mph.
Our doughty competitors realised that was out of their reach, but the glamour still didn't fade.
Asked how he handled Beckett's Corner, he says: Very well thank you very much.
Male speaker
You've got me on the touhgest part of the course and I'm quite out of breath.
Voice over
In the end technology triumphed over brute strength and John Powell stormed over the finish line to take the chequered flag in a record 44 minutes.
30 times slower than Mansell.
Male speaker
I'm pleased with the time whatever it is.
Voice over
In the process, he raised over £500 for a disabled peoples' charity.
It was too cold and wet for champagne, so they settled for a cup of tea.
Volunteers are being asked to visit residential homes and befriend the people who stay there.
The council initiating the scheme says it's important for residents to have someone who isn't official to talk to.
Clare Lafferty reports.
WHITMINSTER/Gloucestershire
JACK NEWELL/Volunteer Visitor
JUDY BAVIN/Gloucestershire County Council
Voice over
For these young people at the Parklands Children's Home in Whitminster, it's often hard to find someone to talk to.
The staff here are very friendly and helpful, but in some situations the children need someone independent to confide in.
That's where Jack comes in.
He's been visiting the home for three years now.
He tries to persuade the children to talk to him about the things they feel they can't discuss with the staff.
Gloucestershire County Council wants more peopl like Jack to visit all their homes…be they for children, the elderly or disabled people.
They see it as important part of improving the service they give.
Residents at Parklands think the visitors are a great idea.
Female speaker
It's a good idea because you can tell visitors things in confidence and you know they'll keep it to themselves.
Voice over
The council would like anyone who feels they can make a regular committment to visit their homes to get in touch with its social services department.
An eleven year old boy who's committed a string of motoring offences has been sent to a children's centre two hundred miles from his home, because he keeps absconding.
The boy is too young to be locked up, but has persistantly run away when granted bail.
Mark Kiff reports.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
Britain's biggest motorway service station opened its doors this afternoon.
The forty-six acre site has more petrol pumps than any other forecourt in Europe and can seat a whole coachload in the ladies.
Simon Garrett reports 
STRENSHAM SERVICES/M-5/Worcestershire
NICK TURNER/General Manager
Voice over
When they built the new Strensham northbound services they thought big.
800 parking spaces, 112 petrol pump nozzles, as last minute preparations went on even the extra large soap dispensers were filled to the brim.
Male speaker
Toilets, we've the largest ladies there is. 56 in all.
We can seat a coachload the driver the courier and two others all at once so we shouldn't have too much queuing
Voice over
The bunting was strewn, the green shoots already recovering the banks, nerves were at full stretch preparing for the balloon to go up.
Male speaker
We're at fever pitch at the moment with staff running about
Voice over
What'll it be like when the public come through the door?
Female speaker
Havoc It'll be a nightmare
Female speaker
Terrible hectic awful
Voice over
As the inevitable plaque was unveiled the final polish was applied.
Motorway bollards were due to be removed at one thirty for the first customers to stream in.
Somehow, bollards still in place, they got in 20 minutes earlier.
Male speaker
We were just out for a ride, We came here by accident.
We don't know how we got in either
Voice over
Within minutes, the machines were beeping and the tills humming.
But how would the public react?
Male speaker
We've just been overcharged for this sandwich.
We're complaining to the manageress.
Voice over
Oh dear, three miunutes after opening
Bad luck
Give us a verdict?
Female speaker
Let's try a chip…not bad
Male speaker
I thought the the restaurant was quite expensive so I've bought a sandwich in the shop instead.
That's a normal sort of price I'd have said
Voice over
The old Strensham northbound is closed and empty for good.
The service station is dead, long live the service station.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
GLOUCESTER
SHEILA HILL/Sharon's Mother
Voice over
These were the last photographs taken of Sharon Hill.
The undeveloped film was found in her handbag after she'd been shot in an ambush by Islamic fundamentalists, while on holiday in Egypt a month ago.
The terrorists had made it known that tourists would be a target, but the Foreign Office decided not to issue a general warning to British travellers.
If they had, says Sharon's mother, her daughter would still be alive.
She says that warnings should have been given as soon as the terrorists made their threats.
Mrs Hill says she's trying to arrange a meeting with the foreign office, she says the least they could do is apologise.
She says she's written to the Prime minister and Douglas Hurd and will wait to see what happens.
The Foreign Office has now issued a warning to tourists about terrorist activity in Egypt, and says the reason it wasn't given out sooner is because British tourists weren't thought to be at risk.
That's been proved tragically wrong and Mrs Hill thinks the Foreign Office must take some of the blame.
She says they failed Sharon, by not passing on warnings.
The family have pictures and a video of Sharon to keep her memory alive.
They know that protests to the foreign office won't bring their daughter back, but they hope it may help prevent a similar tragedy occuring again.
A joyrider who crashed his car and killed a partially sighted pensioner has been sentenced to three years custody for causing death by dangerous driving.
Stephen Reynolds, who was disqualified from driving at the time of the crash, is one of the first people to be convicted under the new charge.
But an MP says the sentence was quite inadequate.
Erika Barnes reports.
ERIKA BARNES/Oxford
2 JULY 1992
PETER BUTLER MP/Con Milton Keynes NE
Voice over
20 year old, Stephen Reynolds had more than 30 motoring offences to his name.
At the time of the crash in July, he'd been disqualified from driving.
Oxford Crown Court heard how Reynolds collided with another car and mounted the kerb at St Mary's Road in Oxford, after driving at speeds of around 45 to 50 mph.
He hit 83 year old partially sighted pensioner, Ivor James and trapped him against a wall.
Mr James, a former University Scout, died a few days later.
Reynolds was sentenced to 3 years in a young offenders institution and disqualified from driving for 2 years.
He's believed to be the first person convicted of the new charge of causing death by dangerous driving, which was introduced to crackdown on joyriding.
But one MP, who's taken a special interest in the problem says the sentence isn't tough enough.
Male speaker
Effectively, taking control of a lethal weapon and driving down St Mary's Road in Oxford, which is an ordinary residential street and kill someone and be sentenced to three years: I don't think the public will think it's enough.
Voice over
In sentencing Reynolds, The Judge Mr Justice Rougier said:’ You had chosen to make war on society.
You will find it an unequal contest.
Society is better armed than you.’
’ Your driving was appalling and totally callous.’
Reynolds will also serve another 2 years in custody for an unrelated street robbery he'd carried out 2 days before the crash.
An inquest has been hearing how a six-month old baby girl died from a fractured skull after being dropped on her head at playschool.
The court's been told it was probably done by a three year old boy.
The baby's mother said she only left her alone so the child could have a nap.
Kim Barnes reports.
BUCKINGHAM
Voice over
Noth Bucks Coroner Rodney Corner told the jury at today's inquest that six month old Hannah Davies had been found on the floor beside her buggy at a local playgroup.
PTC
He said the only explanation of this was given by the boy to his five year old brother.
later a transcript will be read to the inquest.
PTC
Paediatrician Dr Pravin Lakhani said the baby had extensive skull fractures, consistent with bing dropped on the floor.
He also said Hannah who was born 8 weeks early was an extremely small, scrawny baby.
A home Office pathologist said he noted seventeen injuries to Hannah; s head.
At first he thought an adult must have caused them but now he thought she could have been dropped by a child.
The inuest continues tomorrow.
Fire has badly damaged an office block in Gloucester.
GLOUCESTER
Fire crews were called to the Grosvenor House building next door to the bus station early this morning.
The offices of the charity Age Concern are among the worst affected.
Police say the cause of the fire, which started in an empty top floor office suite, is not thought to be suspicious.
More than a hundred demonstrators have won a partial victory over proposed cuts in Gloucestershire social services.
The protestors gathered outside Shire Hall in Gloucester in response to the possible closure of Whaddon Family Centre and the Elmfield Family Centre in Cheltenham.
Councillors voted to turn down plans for any cuts but still face the prospect of having to make reductions if the government chargecaps the council.
Hundreds of ancient bones have been unearthed on a building site.
They're thought to be from an old church, and are helping archeologists to piece together a picture of life in medieval times.
RICHARD BARNETT/Gloucester
MALCOLM WATKINS/Archaeologist
DES PIKE/Site Manager
Voice over
These bones are more than six hundred years old.
They were found as workmen dug foundations for a new county court being built in Gloucester docks.
It used to be the site of an old church, and has already been previously excavated.
That dig yielded five hundred skeletons.
It's taught archeologists a lot about ancient Gloucester.
He says that they hoped to find the old church, but didn't, because they think it was destroyed when the docks were built.
Workmen on the site have been helping archaeologists to find the remaining skeletons.
He says that it's been very delicate work, but they think that they have found all the bones.
The docks site is not the only one to reveal a rich fund of archeological finds.
Just a few hundred yards away, at the site of the former Blackfriars friary, hundreds of skeletons were found under a car park which was being dug up.
The bones most recently found in the docks will be reburied.
Other skeletons taken from the site are still being examined by experts.
They're involved in long term research into the health of Medieval Britain.
A penguin keeper whose own family has flown the nest has taken on the role of mother to one of her birds.
The baby King Penguin has been hand reared and follows his adopted mum everywhere.
She says she thinks of him as one of her own children.
KEN GOODWIN/Bourton on the Water
MAUREEN HEWITT/Penguin Keeper
Voice over
Harry the penguin thinks he's a person.
So nothing could be more natural than going for a walk and holding hands with mum.
Harry is a King penguin — he'll look like this when he's an adult.
He was hatched and hand reared at Birdland in Bourton on the Water, by penguin keeper Maureen Hewitt, who says that the Harry still feels a bit insecure about being with adult penguins and loves a reassuring hug.
She says that he thinks of her as Mum.
No, she doesn't look like a Penguin, but she certainly smells like one!
Of course, Harry is not the only Penguin to follow Maureen around.
Rosie the Rock Hopper often skips out of her enclosure in search of a snack.
She knows that this is where Maureen keeps the fish.
Harry, meanwhile was raised on a diet of liquidized fish — now he's old enough to take solids, and loves nothing more than a few pounds of sprats — all in one go.
As for Maureen, how does she feel about being a surrogate Mum to a Penguin?
She says it's marvelous, all her own children have lest home — these are her kids now.
But she needs a good bath when she gets home — because of the smell!
Penguins at Birdland are used to being the centre of attraction, some even starred in the last Batman movie.
Harry may only have a walk-on part at Birdland, but he's still the star of the show.
And now some news about ourselves.
One of our cameramen, Steve Ryder, has been named as the TV News Cameraman of the Year in the British Telecom/Birmingham Press Club awards.
Judges say they were stunned by Steve's work which included coverage of the RAF Falcons trip to the USA.
To get the best shots of the Falcon's descent into an American football stadium Steve set up cameras inside the Hercules plane and attached to the freefallers themselves before positioning himself on the ground.
Steve was presented with a Press Club tankard at the awards in Birmingham.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Mandela and De Klerk reach agreement
FTSE up 10
The hundred shares index closed up ten point six at thirty one oh three point nine 
The pound is down at one dollar, forty eight and up at two marks, fifty two.
Environmentalists say there's a high risk of pollution from a new landfill site — because it's on a layer of chalk.
They say that because the chalk's porous, dangerous chemicals could seep into groundwater below.
But the National Rivers Authority, which has investigated the site, says there's nothing to fear.
HARRIET RYLEY/Environment Reporter
PAUL MOBBS/Friends of the Earth
Dr JOHN HAINES/NRA
Voice over
Just a fraction of the household and commercial waste that comes in to the landfill site at Oakley Wood in Oxfordshire every day.
It's owned and run by Oxfordshire County Council, which is building another much bigger landfill alongside it intended to take twelve year's worth of south Oxfordshire's waste.
What environmentalists are concerned about is the fear that in spite of a clay lining — dangerous waste from the site will eventually leak through the porous chalk below and into the groundwater — though that may not be for another fifty years.
This is a cross section of the landfill at Oakley — with a one metre thick clay lining at the bottom, covered by a layer of gravel.
Gas from the site would be either released by a gas vent or collected and sold.
A pipe would siphon out the leachates — or dangerous organic waste which gradually forms in a landfill.
Friends of the Earth fear that once the site is full, there's a risk the expensive process of pumping out leachate might not be continued and that it could then leak through the clay lining and contaminate groundwater.
Friends of the Earth have commissioned a report into the safety of Oakley Wood, but say they've had no reply on this from the council.
The site is expected to begin receiving waste during the next few weeks.
Still to come on Central News.
Out on the streets.
The hostel forced to turn the homeless away.
And walking tall: Why Harry the penguin loves his new mum.
Welcome back.
Four out of five homeless people seeking shelter at a city centre night hostel are being turned away because of overcrowding.
Staff say many vulnerable people have no option but to sleep on the streets.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Gloucester
MAURICE/Resident
BILL/Resident
JEAN CRESSWELL/Mariners' Hall
MALCOLM JACKSON/Church Army
PAUL SMITH/Gloucester City Council
Voice over
It's far from luxurious…but to Maurice, the Mariner's Hall hostel in Gloucester is a five star hotel.
He's been homeless for more than twenty years.
And he's often had to sleep rough.
For Bill too the Mariners Hall is a welcome altrenative to a night on the street.
The Mariners Hall has beds for just seventeen homeless people.
For everyone they take, staff say they turn another four away.
They say the city desperately needs another hostel.
Malcolm Jackson has the job of trying to care for the overflow.
He spends his nights wandering around the streets of Gloucester offering them blankets and hot soup.
Organisations that look after the homeless have pinpointed various disused buildings around the city which they think would make ideal hostels.
But they can't afford to convert them.
And Gloucester City Council can't help out.
So homeless organisations may have to rely on charity to provide the extra night shelter.
In the meantime, Jean is keeping the blanket cupboard well stocked for the winter.
A gunsmith is taking Michael Heseltine, the President of the Board of Trade, to court over a bureaucratic blunder which left a company close to bankruptcy.
He claims Mr Heseltine's department blocked an export order because officials couldn't understand German.
GRAEME BOWD/Hereford
JOHN SLOUGH/Gunsmith
This gun won the women's world pistol championship for Britain.
But the company which makes it has been close to bankruptcy.
It's boss John Slough says he was almost put out of business by Government red tape.
He's claiming £300,000 from the President of the Board of Trade Michael Heseltine and today in London he sought leave to take his claim to the High Court.
JSL of Hereford has been making pistols since 1975, mostly for export.
Earlier this year an order from Germany was blocked.
Mr Slough said trade officials were slow to adopt new export procedures which came into force in January.
And although he produced the right paperwork, they couldn't understand it.
He says they refused to accept the import licence because it was written in German.
It pull them in dire financial straits.
Their sales contract was invalid and they've only made 84 of the 400 guns ordered.
The Department of Trade opposed his application to sue for damages.
But District Judge Lichfield said there was a case to answer.
It'll now go to the High Court.
JSL employs just 7 people but it's pistols have been used in many top shooting competitions.
Germany is the company's biggest market.
More than seventy percent of children at one school have played truant in the past year, according to the Government's school league tables published today.
The Education Secretary John Patten says the school's record is a blot on the local educational landscape.
Teachers say the figures are meaningless.
SIMON GARRETT/Oxford
JOHN PATTEN MP/Education Secretary
COLIN HALL/Deputy Head Cheney School
SERENA GILBERT/Pupil
TANYA POST/Pupil
JOHN BARKER/Henry Box School
ROD HUMPHREY/Oxfordshire County Council
Voice over
According to the government Cheney School in Oxford is seventeenth worst in the country for truancy.
71% of pupils were absent without authorisation at least once.
Pupils and teachers at Cheney say they're victims of their own rigourous adherence to guidelines for working out the figures.
Some schools accept parents phone calls as explanation for absence.
Cheney doesn't.
Attendance at Cheney school today.
The figure for unauthorised absence may fall again if a satisfactory explanation's forthcoming.
GCSE students here have been studying the truancy problem.
They've concluded it's overemphasised…and that broad statistics don't help.
Fifteen miles away in Witney Henry Box School reported just three per cent truancy.
But staff here agree the assessment has been of little value.
The head says the figures explain more about where a school is than how well it educates
Oxfordshire County council's already making use of a government grant of a hundred and fifty thousand pounds to combat truancy.
Their emphasis is also on the individual
There seems to be general agreement in Oxfordshire's educational establishment that parents wishing to assess a school shouldn't pay too much attention to broad brush statistics like those released today.
Beauracrats, teachers and pupils say the only way parents can judge a school is to go and take a look at it
The latest flu epidemic could be followed by an upsurge in the number of cases of meningitis.
The National Meningitis Trust says people who've had flu are more susceptible to contracting the brain disease, and that spotting the symptoms at an early stage could save someone's life.
ROBIN POWELL/Cheltenham
FRAN WILLIAMS/National Meningitis Trust
Dr KEITH CARTWRIGHT/Meningitis Expert
Voice over
Matthew Jores was left blind and deaf when he contracted meningitis 5 years ago.
It was diagnosed too late to be treated.
Now the Stroud-based National Meningitis Trust has warned the public to be on the lookout for symptoms of the disease, because the outbreak of 'flu that's affecting large parts of the country is making everyone — young and old alike — more likely to catch it.
The warning's based on research carried out at the Public Health Laboratory in Gloucester after the 'flu epidemic of 1989.
No fewer than 9 people in Gloucestershire contracted meningitis in the weeks that followed that outbreak, and the man who led the investigation says there's no reason why the same thing shouldn't happen again.
Meningitis attacks the brain.
Some adults have a natural immunity, but 'flu suppresses the body's immune system, and it's important to be able to spot the warning signs.
There's still much about meningitis which remains a mystery — why, for instance, cases of the disease come not in isolation but in localised clusters.
But Dr Cartwright and his colleagues are currently developing the world's first vaccine for meningitis, which should be available in January.
Until then, the best advice is to make sure you're well informed — and consult a GP if in any doubt.
In Central News tonight:
End of the road: two hundred and ninety jobs go as leather works closes.
Crushed to death: boy's parents say they may sue for damages.
And gunning for the government: the pistol firm ruined by red tape.
Good Evening 
ANNE DAWSON
Two hundred and ninety people are to lose their jobs with the closure of one of the country's leading leather manufacturers.
The company blames the world recession for a fall in demand for leather clothing.
WESLEY SMITH
The factory's been producing leather goods for more than seventy years at the same site.
News of its closure comes after one hundred and fifty jobs were lost in the same town when a carpet works closed down.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Abingdon
RAY HIGHSMITH/Leather Worker
WENDY WELLS/Leather Worker
JOHN PITTARD/Group Managing Director
JOHN PATTEN MP/Con Oxford West and Abingdon
Voice over
The Pavlova leather works in Abingdon has been working solidly since 1917.
This morning the workforce learned it would all come to an end in three months time.
They're still coming to terms with it.
Ray Highsmith has two children, and his wife works there as well.
Male speaker
It's a disaster, It's two incomes.
I shall have to keep my eyes open for whatever's about
Voice over
Other couples are in a similar predicament.
Female speaker
I was gutted.
I haven't had a chance to talk to my husband because we're on different shifts
Voice over
The factory used to make leather for the neighbouring MG works.
It was taken over by the Pittard Group in 1987 but made serious losses in the last three years.
They make leather for the clothing industry and the international recession has taken its toll.
Their output will be absorbed at other factories in the group, which spreads through Somerset, Wiltshire, and Northampton.
Male speaker
There's a lot of capacity in the world market and we've had trouble competing against that
Voice over
The news came only a weeks after another major Abingdon employer, Abingdon Carpets, announced a hundred and fifty jobs would go with the transfer of its distribution centre from the town to Bradford.
But the local MP John Patten says he’ s certain they'll find jobs
Male speaker
This had happened in Abingdon befoire but the local economy is so buoyant it will cope.
It has done before
Voice over
The Pavlova Works will carry on for the next three months and some jobs will be made available at the group's other centres.
But they say it's unlikely the factory will reopen even if there's an upturn in demand.
The family of a schoolboy who died when a derelict building fell on him are considering sueing for compensation.
The building was a popular place for children to play despite signs warning that it was dangerous.
It collapsed when the boy hit its walls with a metal pole even though friends told him to stop.
TIM HURST/Warndon
BRIAN O'CONNELL/Family Solicitor
Voice over
Parts of Lyppard Grange at Warndon in Worcester were known to be derelict, semi-ruinous and dangerous 2 years ago.
In September, it collapsed, killing 14 year old Lewis Hall, from Warndon, whose family attended his inquest at Worcester this afternoon.
They heard evidence from 2 brothers, Wayne and Paul Stallard, aged 14 and 12, who, with Lewis, had ignored warning signs and climbed a 10 foot fence into the building.
The brothers said Lewis had begun hitting the walls with a metal pole, they told him to stop, but he continued.
Bricks had fallen and then the roof caved in, pinning Lewis under a concrete lintel.
He died from multiple injuries.
A police officer told the coroner he'd found youths on the site at least six times since the fence had been erected earlier this year.
The site is owned by two offshore companies based in the Isle of Man, although Worcester City Council had fenced the site.
Lewis's family lawyer says they are considering suing for compensation.
And the parents of two children who drowned in a water tank at an army barracks say they may sue the Ministry of Defence for compensation.
A jury has returned a verdict of accidental death on the children who died at the barracks where their father was stationed.
KAREN THOMPSON/Northampton
Voice over
Samuel Marshall, who was four and his younger sister Taylor, who was two, climbed into a twenty-five thousand gallon water tank while playing at Simpson Barracks in Northampton.
The inquest heard that the children had got into the site through a hole in a wire fence which had been made by the fire brigade to drain and the tank.
The hole had been sown-up with nylon thread, but was later untied probably by the children.
Their mother Audrey, who lived with her husband Corpral William Marshall at the barracks, said she was alerted by a kitten crying.
When she went to the tank she saw the body of her son floating on top.
The coroner Michael Colcutt said that the only verdict the jury could return was accidental death.
A court's been hearing how an off-duty nurse saved a security guard's life after he'd been shot in the chest during an armed robbery.
Two guards were wounded when a robber grabbed forty five thousand pounds from an armoured van and escaped on a moped.
Tim Hurst reports.
JANUARY 1991
APRIL 1991
Voice over
One guard shot during the raid on a security van in Cheltenham last year, was brought back to life by a passing nurse, according to the prosecution.
Thomas Cotterill had stopped breathing and his heart had stopped.
He was rescucitated by the nurse, before being taken to hospital.
Another guard, Wilfred Lane, said he had decided to have a go at the robber, by grabbing him round the neck and catching hold of his gun hand.
He'd been shot in the head, left partially deaf and paralysed.
During questioning in court, which had to be shouted because of his deafness, Mr Lane broke down as he was asked to recall his memory of the robbery.
2 men, Paul Bryant, aged 29, and who'd lived in Cheltenham before the robbery, and Mark Cunnliffe, also 29, from Derby, are accused of robbery, attempted murder, and possessing a firearm.
They've denied the charges.
Bryant is also accused of attempting to rob a post office at Brockworth near Gloucester in April last year, in which a postman was shot.
He's denied it, but Cunnliffe has admitted being the driver, say the prosecution.
The number of the getaway car had been noted by witnesses and car itself was found abandoned nearby.
Fingerprints found in the car, say the prosecution, led to Bryant and Cunliffe being arrested in Derby, where officers found evidence linking them to both robberies.
The robber at Bath Road had grabbed £45,000 after shooting the two guards and made his initial getaway on a moped, found, say the prosecution, at the point at which he'd switched to a getaway car driven by the second man.
A third guard in the van, Anthony Edwards, told the court he'd been petrified he might be shot.
He said he's still got the shakes almost 2 years later.
The prosecution say the robber was disguised by a crash helmet, it had been Bryant or Cunnliffe and the other had driven the getaway car.
The trial continues.
League tables of exam results published today are being roundly condemned — even by some of those schools which came out on top.
Education secretary John Patten says the tables will help parents choose the best schools.
But some heads say that's rubbish.
Across the region, Buckinghamshire is twelfth in the national table, with forty two point one per cent of pupils getting at least five GCSEs.
Oxfordshire scores forty one point two per cent.
Gloucestershire and Wiltshire both achieved forty per cent.
And Hereford and Worcester got thirty seven point eight per cent.
The national average is thirty eight point one per cent, but even the best schools say the figures are misleading, as Ken Goodwin reports.
OXFORD
JOAN TOWNSEND/Headmistress
GLOUCESTER
JOHN SMITH/Headmaster
MORRIS LITTLEWOOD/NASUWT President
Voice over
Oxford Independent high school for girls has scored top marks in the Governments new league table of exam results.
It's a school of high achievers.
Of the children this year who took GCSE's, a 100% got grade A to C passes.
Judging by the league table results alone, this school is a success.
Yet the headmistress believes it's a poor way to judge quality.
She says many things other than exam results make a good school.
Saintbridge School in Gloucester hasn't done so well.
Only 5% of this year's GCSE entries achieved grade A-C.
Parents armed with this information, might well think Saintbridge is not a good choice for their children.
Yet the school has just sent 2 pupils to Cambridge University; a third has won an engineering scolarship to an American University.
It has also won several technology awards.
Because of the schools emphasis on vocational courses such as computing and engineering, school leavers have a good success rate in getting jobs.
The school's headmaster says this sort of information is more important to parents.
He says it's mad trying to judge the quality of a school by exam results, parents should come and see for themselves.
The exam league tables have also been given a black mark by teaching unions.
He says that it doesn't take account the differing backgrounds of pupils.
The exam league table is supposed to help parents make well informed choices for their children.
The view from many of the schools which took part, is that it tells only a fraction of the story.
An inquest jury has returned an open verdict on the death of a baby girl killed at a playgroup.
Hannah Davies was found lying beside her push chair with extensive injuries at the playgroup in Milton Keynes in July last year.
The jury heard a three year old boy had admitted to his brother that he dropped the baby on the floor.
But the coroner said the evidence should be treated with caution.
Gareth Furby reports.
BUCKINGHAM
Det Supt JOHN BOUND/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
WEEDON/Northamptonshire
Insp JOHN CHURCH/Northants Police Federation
A year ago this month mourners packed this church in Kettering at the funeral service of year-old policeman Simon Lilley.
He'd been directing traffic at a census point in Weedon, Northamptonshire.
Twenty eight year old Andrew Hayton approached at around sixty miles an hour on his Yamaha motorbike but did not slow down.
Simon Lilley was hurled more than seventy feet by the impact and later died in hospital.
At Northampton Crown court Hayton admitted causing death by reckless driving.
The court heard Hayton had drunk five pints of lager only hours before the accident.
He had three previous convictions for drink driving and three for careless driving.
Judge Julian Hall sentenced Hayton to three months imprisonment and banned him from driving for four years.
Chairman of the Northamptonshire Police Federation says he's appalled at how lenient the sentence is.
He says he's bewildered and surprised at the sentence.
They could have applied up to five years.
It makes a mockery of the system.
Tonight the Crown Prosecution Service issued a statement saying:
The question of any appeal over the undue leniency of this sentence is under consideration.
That decision rests with the Attorney General.
Well, the sentence imposed on Andrew Hayton has also provoked anger in parliament.
Michael Shersby, the MP who represents the police federation's interests in the Commons, told our reporter Simon Mares that he found the sentence hard to understand.
MICHAEL SHERSBY MP/Con Uxbridge
Voice over
Thames Valley Police have defended their decision to pursue a stolen car at high speed through a city centre.
The car was eventually stopped after driving the wrong way down a dual carriageway.
A senior officer said someone could have died if the car hadn't been stopped.
Erika Barnes reports.
Chief Supt DAVID LINDLEY/Thames Valley Police
DENNIS BOSHER/Stolen Car Owner
Voice over
The rammed remains of a stolen metro car.
Stopped by police after a high speed chase through Oxford.
It all began in the early hours when it's alleged the car failed to stop at a police check and sped off through the city centre and out along the Botley Road.
The car made a U-turn and headed back at high speeds.
It was followed to Marston where it turned onto the wrong carriageway of the Northern bypass.
It was then the police decided the car had to be stopped.
A Fox FM radio reporter who was inside one of the pursuit cars, recorded the final moments of the chase.
Three police cars were damaged as they effectively rammed the metro and brought it to a stop.
In the light of day, it clear to see the potential dangers of the drive.
Male speaker
Death and injury were almost certain.
With that in mind, the officers rightly in my opinion made the decision to bring this incident to a halt in this way.
Voice over
It was shocking news for the owners of the car.
Male speaker
Real horro, that someone has taken something that you've bought: because it was my daughter's first car, it was even worse.
Nothing can replace it.
Voice over
Police have warned that despite last nights events, car thieves will not be allowed a free ride in the Oxford area.
Male speaker
We've got to recognise, if there was no following policy, any thief or drunk driver only has to put their toe down and drive away at speed, comfortable that police won't follow them and that is far more dangerous in the long run for the public.
Voice over
The incident caused damage and upset to the police and the public.
The stolen car is a write off.
Two youths have been charged with aggrevated vehicle taking.
A third youth has been released from hospital on police bail.
Oxford University is helping young mothers scale the academic heights by opening its first nursery.
Without it, looking after a child during the day would mean some of them having to give up their studies.
Robin Powell reports 
SUMMERTOWN Oxford
FIONA SEGROVE Nursery Manager
ELAINE MORTEN Student
Voice over
Oxford University isn't renowned for moving with the times, but it's taking this equal opportunities business really rather seriously.
It's just opened Mansion House, its first ever nursery, allowing student mums to concentrate on more profound subjects, than feeding bottles and dirty nappies.
This young man has a long way to go if he's to earn a PhD in Biology like his mum.
She's one of several who'd be unable to study if it weren't for the nursery.
Mansion House has only 24, but it's seen as the first step to putting the University at the forefront of childcare provision.
So are these the Oxford graduates of tomorrow?
Young Robert's certainly not taking his University place for granted.
Right now, he's still having problems learning his farmyard noises.
High Street shop sales edge higher
FTSE up 24
The hundred shares index closed up twwenty-four point eight at twenty-seven-oh-four exactly.
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty-two and down at two marks, forty-two.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
A baby girl rescued from the Bosnian war zone is reported to be responding well to treatment for a serious heart condition.
The eight-month- old girl was so ill that she only just survived the flight to England.
Now her mother is thanking the doctors who saved her life.
Robin Powell reports.
OXFORD
12 NOVEMBER 1992/HEATHROW AIRPORT
Dr NICK ARCHER/Paediatrician
Voice over
Odessa Blagayatch is happy again.
After a week at the John Radcliffe Hospital her heart condition is showing all the signs of clearing up.
Even with the help of an interpreter, her mother can't say how grateful she is The interpreter says:
When Odessa arrived in England she was desperately ill.
Now the doctor who's cared for her says she's well on the way to recovery.
Male speaker
I'm optimistic that in the long run her heart will not be a problem to her.
Voice over
But the whole episode has brought home to doctor Archer the pointlessness of the war in what was once Yugoslavia.
Male speaker
The most upsetting thing for me has been to see her medical notes and realise that she could have got the right treatment at home…that is if her country wasn't being torn apart by war
Voice over
So what's the plan for mother and child now?
The interpreter says:She's planning to stay with me, and carry on coming here until the baby gets well.
Odessa has a visa allowing her to stay in England for several months.
Nobody knows when — if ever — she'll return to her homeland.
Voice over
A hospital's emergency and maternity units are still threatened with closure after a report failed to ruled out the possibility.
A demonstration was held outside the hospital after it was first suggested the units might close, but now the protestors must wait until next year to see what happens.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
BANBURY/Oxfordshire
Dr CHRIS DAVIES/Senior House Officer
Dr LOUISE WALLACE/General Manager
DAVID PERRY/Oxfordshire Health Authority
OCTOBER 1992
Voice over
When an ambulance brings an emergency to Horton General Hospital in Banbury every second counts.
This time it's a rescuscitation case.
If it had been left any longer he could have been in serious trouble.
Medical staff are worried that if Horton no longer has an Accident and Emergency unit the patient might not be so lucky.
Male speaker
He was treated in the ambulance but if she had to go to Oxford he might not have made it
Voice over
The unit's been threatened with closure together with the hospital's other acute service including Intensive care, coronary care, and specialist baby care.
Instead the emergencies and serious cases would go to the John Radcliffe Hospital twenty six miles away in Oxford.
A report from Health Care analysts today has done nothing to change that.
They offer three options for Horton: to Roughly stay as they are when they become a health Service Trust; TO’ Examine’the Accident and other acute services; or to move the acute services away to major hospitals.
Female speaker
Our main concern is that if they take away one of our acute services it will have a domino effect on the rest
Male speaker
There is a future for Horton as an acute Hospital, I have no doubt about that.
The best way to look at it is as a examining the size of bricks and how they would be affected if that happened
Voice over
The local people of Banbury are furious at the prospect, not only because of the extra risk, but also because they raised eight hundred and fifty thousand pounds to build the Accident Unit.
Male speaker
It's ridiculous.
If I had to Oxford my finger might have come off bythe time I got there
Voice over
Nothing's been decided yet.
The review now goes for consultation.
Two hundred and forty cyclists were killed in Britain last year.
Many of them died because drivers simply didn't see them in the dark or poor visibility.
In an attempt to reduce the death toll, one police force has launched a campaign to get a simple message across to cyclists — that being seen could save them from being killed.
Nick Clark reports.
CONRAD GRANT Victim
PC GEOFF CHAMBERS Thames Valley Police
Voice over
May 12th this year; a cyclist has been knocked down and is feared to have died.
Police photographers take pictures for the prosecution of the driver.
In the event, the cyclist defied the odds and survived.
He's now recovered from his injuries which included a punctured lung and many broken bones.
Male speaker
I don't really remember what happened, because I lost my memory for 2 months afterwards.
But from what I'm told, a woman driver, who wasn't paying attention, drove into me from behind, throwing me into the road.
Voice over
Like many cyclists, Conrad Grant wasn't wearing any high-visibility clothing.
And that, say police, is the reason why so many cyclists are hit on the roads.
Male speaker
The right sort of clothing could just save your life.
Voice over
The police say a small investment in clothing like this could save your life.
It's effectiveness is clear in the glare of lights, when compared to no high-visibility clothing at all.
As part of the campaign the police will be giving advice to cyclists, telling them the importance of being seen.
Male speaker
I can see the benfits.
Female speaker
I will wear at least a strap now.
Male speaker
It would just give the driver that extra split-second to react to a potentially dangerous situation.
Voice over
The police campaign will continue for the next fortnight.
And with Christmas coming, they're asking anyone who's thinking of giving a bike for a present, to think of giving the right clothing as well.
Unemployment down 49
FTSE up 5
The hundred shares index closed up five point five at thirty one twenty five point five 
The pound is up at one dollar, forty seven and up at two marks, fifty two.
Welcome back:
Swindon Town have gone on a spending spree, in the hope of changing their fortunes in the premier league.
They've spent three hundred thousand pounds on a third division player who started his working life in a bank!
ERIKA BARNES/Swindon
KEITH SCOTT/New Signing
JOHN GORMAN/Swindon Manager
Voice over
This is the man who likes to say yes!
Keith Scott, agreed to move from third division Wycombe Wanderers to join the rescue effort at Swindon Town.
Just a few years ago, he used to work in a bank.
Now he's hoping he gives his new club a good return on their three hundred thousand pound investment.
Male speaker
I know I've got to score.
Whatever club I go to, I'll have to do it.
Voice over
There's still a lot of games to go.
Hopefully we won't be the poor relations anymore.
Swindon Town have spent big money this season for little return.
Goals are few and far between.
The biggest buy has been Norweigan international Fjortoft.
He's yet to score for Swindon and its rumoured his future with the club looks shaky.
New boy and new hope Keith Scott brings the spending total to around 1.7 million.
But town have netted only around half that in sales.
Despite the big money transfer of Colin Caulderwood.
So Swindon are having to scout around the lower divisions for new talent, although they're optimistic it'll bring dividends for the club.
Male speaker
Ian Wright and Les Ferdinand, they were from lower leagues.
We can't afford to buy the likes of Ian Wright now.
Voice over
But the club have done their sums.
They've seen Scott score goals like these all season.
They hope he gets the chance to prove on Saturday, that he's value for money.
And…well doesn't the new striker remind you of another Swindon Saviour?
Glenn Hoddle got them to the Premier league…maybe Keith Scott can keep them there!
A nineteenth century health spa is up for sale.
It was built in the early nineteenth century to provide cures for numerous illnesses.
But it fell into disrepair earlier this century when the water dried up.
Now its back on stream, and looking for a buyer.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Lower Swells
STEVE WICKHAM/House Renovator
JIM SPRINGER/House Renovator
Voice over
You can sell a house by saying it's near to the station, or the shops: or you can be really eccentric and say it's a life giving spa centre with its own magic water source.
That's what Jim Springer and Steve Wickham did to a derelict old building in Lower Swells.
Male speaker
The water has a high iron content.
It was originally a sparkling water and used to combine with herbs grown here to treat variousn illnesses
Voice over
The Pineapple Spa was built in eighteen o seven to cash in on the craze for spring water and its healing properties.
It was designed by Samuel Pepys Cockerell, the man who built the Brighton Pavilion.
It's much smaller than its competitors in Bath or Cheltenham, and it's far less reliable than them.
But what it lacks in size it compensates for in quality.
Male speaker
This is the only spa of its kind in the Cotswolds.
It tastes very good, certainly nothing like the Cheltenham Spa water which made me feel ill
Voice over
The water source is a constant trickle in a well dug beneath what is now the living room but which used to be the Pump room.
But it is liable to dry up in times of drought.
That's one reason why the whole enterprise was abandoned in 1926.
The building was rescued from dereliction earlier this year.
Before that it was in a similar condition to the cottage next door which has the original entrance to the spa.
Now it' a renovated house with all the trimmings.
Male speaker
It is very distinctive in its own way
Voice over
For £125,000 the house could become someone's very own liquid asset.
It may seem expensive for a drink of water, but with the cost of the mains supply these days it could be a bargain.
In one of Britain's most important woodlands the winter clearing is underway.
The ancient craft of coppicing will help rare wildplants to grow, and bring a spectacular display of bluebells in the spring.
RICHARD BARNETT/Wintours Leap
COLIN STUDHOLME/Gloucestershire Wildlife Trust
Voice over
Workers from the Gloucestershire Wildlife Trust are busy coppicing in the shadow of the 250 foot limestone cliffs towering above the River Wye at Wintours Leap.
The team are cutting back hazel bushes to ground level across two acres of woodland.
Coppicing is a technique dating back thousands of years to encourage healthy regrowth on the forest floor.
It's the first time the hazels in the Lancaut Nature reserve have been cut back:
Male speaker
It's an important reserve for wild plants.
Cutting back the undergrowth encourages the seedlings to grow.
Voice over
The brushwood isn't wasted…it's stacked to form an impenetrable fence to keep out deer which would otherwise nibble down all the new growth.
Meanwhile in another part of the wood the trust team are felling sycamore trees.
It seems an odd way to conserve the wood:
Male speaker
It is conservation to fell the sycamores as they're dead.
Voice over
It will take around a fortnight for all the dead sycamores to be felled and the coppicing to be completed.
But the hard work now should pay off in the spring with a fine show of bluebells.
Lancaut lies within one of the most important woodland areas of Britain.
It's home to a number of rare trees and wildflowers.
And with help from the conservationists this spectacular reserve will continue to thrive.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
A man charged with murdering three members of his own family has been sent for trial at the Crown Court.
Ronald Godfrey is accused of killing his wife, daughter and mother-in-law.
They died from wounds apparently inflicted by a hammer.
MIKE ROWBOTTOM/Oxford
August 1993
Voice over
The battered bodies of Margaret Godfrey, aged 54, Susan Godfrey, aged 22, and Florence Jeffrey, aged 78, were found in two different houses in Oxford in August this year.
Today 59 year old Ronald Godfrey was committed for trial at the Crown Court.
He is charged with the murder of all three women, his wife, daughter and mother-in-law sometime between the 14th and 20th of August.
Mr Godfrey's wife and daughter were found at their family home in Westrup Close, Marsdon.
His mother-in-law was found at her home in Nelson Street, Jericho.
Post Mortem examinations revealed they had been probably been battered with a hammer.
Mr Godfrey, a cleaning contractor and former fireman spoke only twice during the nine minute hearing.
He was remanded in custody.
Addiction to the drug crack cocaine is spreading into the shire counties.
Police in Gloucestershire have made their first seizure of the potentially lethal drug.
Drugs counsellors say they're alarmed by the growing addiction rates.
KAREN THOMPSON/Reporting
Ch Insp COLIN HANDY/Gloucestershire Police
Dr DICK ROPNER/General Psychiatrist
Voice over
Crack cocaine is highly addictive and often associated with violent crime, even murder.
It's usually hardened drugs users who take and supply crack.
They'll go to any lengths to obtain money to buy this dangerous narcotic.
It's expensive, the habit can cost a thousand pounds a week.
Police have tracked down the main suppliers to the North West of England.
In recent weeks, drugs squad officers have seized quantities of crack cocaine in Gloucester and Stroud.
He says we're very concerned.
It's a small amount.
We're very pleased and need to catch the pushers and users of crack.
Despite the seizures police in Gloucestershire are playing down fears that crack is taking a hold in the county.
But experts at the Coney Hill Psychiatric Hospital are alarmed.
He says education services for young people need to be improved.
But in Gloucestershire we're lucky we have a drugs project which provides a helpline.
Information gathered by the national criminal intelligence service reveals a growing use of crack cocaine in the Shire counties.
A man was arrested and released on police bail in the first raids of their kind in Gloucestershire.
The message to the users and suppliers of crack cocaine…
Stay out of the county.
A congested city has been selected for a detailed three month inquiry into its traffic problems.
It follows years of wrangling over a controversial by-pass.
KEN GOODWIN/Hereford
MIKE COTTELL/Conference Chairman
GUY WOODFORD/Anti Bypass Group
KAREN MIDDLETON/Pro Bypass Group
PAUL BAINBRIDGE/Hereford City Council
Voice over
The centre of Hereford simply can't cope with heavy traffic.
Plans for a by-pass which would have crossed Lugg meadows were scuppered by a public inquiry.
So it was back to square one.
But now there's a new idea being tried out.
For the first time in Britain, a special committee will hear residents and experts ideas about how to deal with the city's traffic.
These views will then be passed on to the department of transport.
He says that he hopes that there will be a meeting of minds on how to deal with traffic problems.
The by pass row created various factions for and against.
Brought together again for the conference, which starts in december, most are agreed it's a good idea.
He says that although they succeeded in preventing a by-pass, it was a negative victory becasue it didn't solve Hereford's traffic problems.
She says that she hopes that in the end another by-pass scheme will result from the conference.
The council says that ultimately something must be done about Herefords traffic.
He says that Hereford needs some sort of scheme which will be sympathetic to the area's enviromnent, but succeed in reducing traffic.
The conference is expected to last at least three months — but by the end of it the Department of Transport may have a publically acceptable solution to Hereford's traffic jams.
Still to come on Central News.
Swindon Town are splashing out.
Three hundred thousand pounds for their new striker.
And a winter spring clean…making way for next year's bluebells.
In Central News tonight:
Minibus deaths bring calls for M-Forty rest areas.
A bogus policeman attempts to abduct two children.
And addiction to crack spreads to the shires.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
The M-Forty has been open for nearly three years, yet its first service area will not open until nineteen ninety four.
Police and motoring organisations say the lack of anywhere for drivers to rest greatly increases the risk of an accident.
CHRIS MOORE/Reporting
January 1992/Insp JOHN WHEELER/Thames Valley Police
DAVID ROGERS/RoSPA
SIMON WOODINGS/AA
ROGER WILLIAMS/Oxfordshire County Council
Dr BILL CLOUGH/Transport Research Laboratories
Voice over
Eight girls, two boys and their teacher, all dead in the wreckage of a minibus, burned out after crashing into the back of a motorway maintenace lorry on the M-Forty.
As an inquiry into the cause begins, one prime theory will be driver fatigue.
The M-Forty is the longest stretch of road in Britain with no services.
Since the final stretch through Oxfordshire opened nearly three years ago motoring organisations and the police have been campaigning for service areas to be built so that drivers can take a break.
Male speaker
Tiredness does kill, and having looked at statements of accidents it's a contributing factor.
Voice over
It's not certain that driver fatigue did contribute to this latest accident.
What is known is that seven deaths on this motorway HAVE been attributed to it.
Male speaker
It's called Press On-itis.
It's almost a macho thing to go just that little bit further.It's sometimes neccessary for sales reps to meet their deadlines, but it can't be dangerous.
Voice over
Service areas are being built, but this one near junction ten at Ardley won; t open until spring.
The AA says it's long overdue, and still not enough
Male speaker
One is certainly not enough, when you consider the number of cars and drivers who use this stretch of motorway each day.It's unwise for people tol have to drive for more than an hour and a half without taking a break.
Voice over
Oxfordshire County Council wants service areas included in motorways right from the planning stage.
Male speaker
We have always said that the proper way to do it is to have the service areas there and ready to open on the day the motorway itself is opened to traffic.
Voice over
A technological solution to avoiding accidents like today's may soon exist.
The Transport Reserch Laboratories at Crowthorne in Berkshire are developing electronic driver aids.
This could lead to a device that detects stationary objects ahead, and wanrs the driver, even stopping the vehicle if necessary.
Male speaker
It could be a flashing light or audible warning that there is an obstruction ahead.
Eventually, control of the car could be taken out of the driver's hands, and the brakes applied if a stationary vehicle is detected in the road ahead.
Voice over
Such technology might reduce the succession of accidents on the motorway caused by driver fatigue.
In the meantime, police have been doing what they can, including setting up their own temporrary service areas with toilets and refreshments.
The exact cause of this latest M-Forty tragedy may never be known.
But nobody who regularly uses the motorway can say they haven't been warned about the dangers of driver fatigue.
A bogus policeman has tried to abduct two children and to extort an on-the-spot fine from a driver.
The man used a car with a blue light on top and was dressed in police uniform.
TIM HURST/Hereford
JOHN COOPER/Neighbour
LOUISE WILLIAMSON/Aged 13
Reconstruction
Insp STEVE BROOKER/West Mercia Police
Voice over
A 13 year old girl and her younger brother, from Bartestree near Hereford, were stopped by a man in a white car and wearing what they describe as police uniform, who offered them a lift home.
He drove off quickly when a family friend drove up behind.
A short time later, on the other side of Hereford, a motorist was stopped by a white car with a blue light on top.
The driver, wearing a flourescent jacket with the word police, demanded a £20 on the spot fine.
The motorist was allowed to go with a caution when he said he had no money.
Police believe it was the same man.
Every police force emphasises that all officers carry warrent cards and should produce them when asked.
And no genuine police officers will demand cash on the spot for speeding offences.
A man's been charged after a fight at a pub between rival groups of football fans.
6 November 1993/NORTHAMPTON
More than fifty people were involved in the fight which happened earlier this month at the King Billy public house in Northampton.
Northampton Town had just been beaten at home by Shrewsbury Town.
The man's been charged with criminal damage and violent disorder.
Another county council has voted to ban fox hunting on publicly-owned land.
Northamptonshire County Council is bringing in the ban on nearly four thousand acres of farmland where fox hunting could take place.
Gloucestershire, Oxfordshire, Wiltshire and Hereford and Worcester have already brought in their own bans.
An MP has called for judicial thrashing and the return of the stocks to combat juvenile crime.
Tony Marlow says Britain has become too civilised and doesn't punish offenders properly.
It's time, he says, for a modified form of corporal punishment.
Chris Moore reports.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
TONY MARLOW MP/Con Northampton North
MICHAEL JACK MP/Junior Home Office Minister
OXFORD
Voice over
Another statistic in the joyriding craze; a stolen Astra driven up the M5 at 100 mph, then crashed into this oncoming car.
Enough is enough says Tony Marlow.
Male speaker
Given that most juvenile crime is carried out by psuedo-macho little gits, will the government introduce judicial thrashing?
Voice over
The Minister says: The gentleman has made his point in his usual colourful style.His views will be taken into consideration by the Home Secretaryw when he looks at the problem
Undeterred, the straight talking Mr Marlow went one step further outside the Commons Chamber.
Male speaker
Courts have no effect.We need to bring back the stocks.
Not the old fashioned type where you throw rotten cabbages at people, but a new system.
It would keep the offenders sitting there day after day, wearing clothes which had written on them what crimes they had committed.
Voice over
Mr Marlowe would probably have to fight the European Convention on Human Rights to get his wish.
Meanwhile, a man's been charged with aggravated vehicle taking, after the Gloucestershire incident.
Meanwhile, a teenager has appeared in court after yesterday's high speed chase through the centre of Oxford that left this stolen Metro wrecked, along with 3 police cars.
A solicitor has claimed that three men found not guilty of the manslaughter of twin girls should never have been put on trial.
Rebecca and Emma Harper died in a barn fire last year — the men accused of their manslaughter were all acquitted after a crown court trial.
In a letter to a newspaper, their solicitor Tim Robinson says that his clients should never have been prosecuted at all.
The dead girls parents say they're disgusted by his comments.
Ken Goodwin reports.
TIM ROBINSON/Solicitor
Voice over
An insurance company has announced two hundred job losses.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
Eagle Star, which has its headquarters in Cheltenham, employs three thousand staff in the town.
Last year a thousand Eagle Star employees lost their jobs.
The latest cuts will hit the life assurance section.
One of the four companies charged after two men fell to their death from the Severn Bridge has been cleared by a judge at Bristol Crown Court.
SEPTEMBER 1990
Painters Robin Phelps, from Brockweir, in Gloucestershire, and Eric Sullivan, from Tintern, in Gwent, were killed when the gantry they were working on collapsed in September nineteen ninety.
John Laing Services were accused of failing to maintain the gantry and insure its safety.
Today the jury were ordered to enter a formal not guilty verdict.
The three remaining companies deny breaching the Health and Safety at Work Act.
RAF medical crews are on standby to fly out to the war zone in what used to be Yugoslavia.
They'll be used to provide emergency treatment for British troops if they're injured while on convoy protection duty in Bosnia.
This report from Mark Kiff.
RAF LYNEHAM/Wiltshire
Wing Cdr TIM WOODS/AeroMedical Evacuation Sqdn
Corporal BOB PEARSON/AeroMedical Evacuation Sqdn
Voice over
For the 2,000 British troops providing protection to the UN relief convoys in Bosnia, life is proving dangerous.
Already they've been the target of attacks from warring factions.
It's for these troops that the men and women of RAF Lyneham's AeroMedical Evacuation Squadron are preparing to fly out and offer essential support.
Wing Commander Tim Woods says they will help transport casualties and give immediate treatment if needed to any injured troops.
The squadron has been preparing for action for the past 2 weeks.
This high tech tent is the latest in mobile medical hardware, which could help save lives.
Used in the Gulf War by the Americans, it can be put up within an hour to create a sealed surgical unit, with environmental climate control.
If the Squadron gets the call, it's personnel will be flying out to Bosnia within hours.
A handful of Lyneham's aeromedical squadron are already in the region.
One of the team has just returned.
Corporal Bob Pearson says the weather in Bosnia is not very good and is likely to get worse.
Morale among the British troops is good and everyone is waiting to see what will happen.
The AeroMedical teams are now waiting for a Whitehall decision on when they'll be needed.
In the meantime, the Hercules of RAF Lyneham have already stepped up their workload to the war zone.
In addition to the daily relief service between Zagreb and Sarajevo, 2 more flights are now leaving Lyneham each week with supplies.
If needed, they'll also offer emergency evacuation for any casualties.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
MIDDLEYARD/Gloucestershire
JOYCE ALLIS/Widow
ROBERT ALLIS/Brother
Voice over
Tony Allis, from Middleyard near Stroud in Gloucestershire, was moving a disputed fence in woodland behind his home when he was shot by a neighbour.
Terence Maul, who'd erected the fence, and his son Graig, were cleared of murder last year, but today the Allis family went to court to prove Tony Allis had indeed owned the land.
The judge ruled Mr Maul must pay £550 damages for trespass and damage to trees, and the costs of the case.
Shortly after the hearing the Allis family laid flowers at the spot where Mr Allis died.
His widow is determined to pursue further court action.
Before today's hearing, Mr Allis's brother discovered the disputed fence had been torn down, and replaced on the correct boundary.
The family's legal advisers have told them, if they're seeking damages for the death of Tony Allis, they must start proceedings before next July, the third anniversary of his death.
Two families have spoken about how they're coming to terms with a playgroup accident that changed their lives.
It's thought that six-month-old Hannah Davies was dropped on her head by a three-year-old boy, though the inquest jury returned an open verdict because of conflicting evidence.
Both familes say they're satisfied with the outcome of the case.
Robin Powell reports.
MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
DAVID DAVIES/Hannah's Grandfather
Det Chief Insp STAN HORLOCK/Thames Valley Police
DISGUISED VOICE
Voice over
David Davies expects he'll never find out what caused the death of his 6-month-old grand-daughter, Hannah.
She died in Milton Keynes General Hospital in July.
She'd been found on the floor beside her pushchair in the office of a local playgroup.
An inquest jury at Buckingham was told that a 3 year old boy may have dropped the baby on the floor, but yesterday it returned an open verdict after the Coroner Rodney Corner warned that the evidence was contradictory.
It's a tragedy that's devastated 2 families — now Mr Davies is holding out a hand of friendship to the boy's parents.
It's an attitude that's earned the Davies's the admiration of the officer in charge of the case.
We've been ordered to protect the identity of the boy involved, though his mother has faced the press to talk about the episode for the first time.
His mother describes the 3 year old as a quiet, shy little boy, who loves babies.
She has no reason to believe that it was anything other than an accident.
The police have closed the book on the Hannah Davies case.
Meanwhile they've expressed hope that all concerned will be left alone to put Hannah's death behind them.
A haul of stolen cars has been seized by police officers in a two day operation in which eighteen people were arrested.
Detectives say more than a hundred thousand pounds worth of vehicles and parts have been recovered.
Nick Clark reports.
MILTON KEYNES
Det Con STEVE REDDING/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
These vehicles were seized after more than 50 police officers swooped on a farm buildings in a village north of Milton Keynes.
The operation followed a tip off that stolen cars were being processed or 'rung' there.
Male speaker
We acted on information.
Voice over
Inside many of the vehicles there's evidence of the original theft, here a broken steering wheel lock.
And on this car the chassis number has been removed.
Amongst the haul including parts and mechanics' tool kits, there are paint spray cans and compressed air cylinders.
Male speaker
There are also parts here belonging to about thirty other vehicles, the lot totalling around a £100,000.
Voice over
So far three people have been charged with conspiring to steal.
detectives hope this find may lead to further discoveries.
Male speaker
We're following up much of the documentation that we found and hope it could lead to other things which I can not reveal.
Voice over
Police are hoping to trace original owners but admit it's an uphill task.
This may look like a thirteen hundred cc Fiesta, but a glimpse in the bonnet reveals an 1800 cc diesel engine and the car's number plate was from a stolen police car.
Well if one of those flats is for you, here's just the thing to set off the view from the window.
A stately home is selling off a herd of deer, and there has already been a stream of inquiries.
Ken Goodwin reports.
BATSFORD Gloucestershire
MICHAEL HUGHES-HALLET Estate Manager
Voice over
Red deer and the country house — they go together well, yet the two are soon to be parted.
The herd are part of the Batsford Park estate, near Moreton in Marsh and now the magnificent animals are up for sale, following the death of the former Lord Dulverton.
He says that Lord Dulverton loved the deer on his Scottish estate so much he established a herd in the Cotswolds.
This magnificent stag rules the herd, he's been busy keeping at bay the 8 other stags which stick together in their own batchelor group on the fringes of the herd.
The Deer can be worth anything from £200 for a hind, to £500 for a mature stag.
And they thrive particularly well in the Cotswolds.
He says in Scotland they live in freezing conditions, the Cotswolds are luxury.
Estate staff will be particularly sad to see the deer go and they're hoping the whole herd can be sold together, hopefully to grace the grounds of another country estate.
Bank to cut 3
FTSE up 2
The hundred shares index closed up two point two at twenty-seven-oh-six point two.
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty-three and down at two marks, forty-one.
That's all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
The RSPCA has dismissed fears that an animal shelter could close.
Committee members meet tonight to confirm the sanctuary's future.
Simon Garrett reports 
WHITMINSTER/Gloucestershire
BETTY MERRETT/RSPCA
Voice over
There are 120 cats and dogs being looked after at the RSPCA's animal shelter in Whitminster near Stroud.
Rumour and the recent closure of a similar sanctuary in Hereford a week ago has given rise to closure fears.
But committee members insist the centre's here to stay.
Whitminster costs £2,000 a week to keep open, but it is in the black.
Changes in the way it's run are to be discussed at a meeting tonight, but details aren't being revealed until then.
What is being said is that it's intended to keep what's regarded as a highly successful regime going on existing lines.
Committee members are concerned that rumours about plans to close Whitminster could put off potential cash donors.
With that in mind, a public statement's expected soon after the end of their meeting tonight.
A taxi firm run by women for women says it plans to carry on operating despite a ruling that such services discriminate against men.
The firm says it's providing peace of mind for a growing number of women — opponents say it's unfair to male taxi drivers.
Gargy Patel reports.
OXFORD
GLOUCESTER
YVONNE BREMER/Driver
Viscount GOSCHEN/Employment Minister
JOAN CAMPBELL/Women-only Driver1
Voice over
A taxi driver calls to pick up a fare, the two female passengers are guaranteed that the driver is a woman.
Paradise Cars in Oxford is one of the few taxi firms run by women for women.
They don't refuse male customers, they simply sub contract them to another firm.
Because of the Sex Discrimination Act they're not allowed to advertise a women only service or recruit only women drivers.
Despite the law, the company has grown over the last year.
But fifty miles away in Gloucester the same laws have stopped Yvonne Bremer from setting up a female taxi business altogether.
The demand is there, she says, but without being able to advertise or recruit just women her plans have been scrapped.
Drivers like Yvonne have campaigned to change the law.
In the House of Lords yesterday there were calls to make female cab services an exception to the Employment Act.
And they talked about growing fear of attack and rape amongst women.
But the Government insisted there's no case to answer.
Male cab drivers in Gloucester said running a female only business would give an unfair impression of men.
Despite the latest ruling, Oxford's women only firm is determined to carry on.
Through word of mouth and demand from customers, they've built up a sizable business with five drivers.
The Equal Opportunities Commission says the Sex Discrimination Act is clear that restricting taxi cab jobs to one sex is potentially unlawful.
And it says it would be better to lobby MPs and Parliament to provide funding for better and safer transport to include ALL vulnerable groups.
A property developer is hoping to defy the recession by putting flats in a converted Mill on the market at up to a quarter of a million pounds a time.
What's more he's certain they'll sell quickly.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
CHIPPING NORTON/Oxfordshire
ANDREW DAVIS/Developer
DAVID BENNETT/Architect
PHILIP BLANCHARD/Estate Agent
Voice over
Recession!
What recession?
As far as the developers of Bliss Mill at Chipping Norton are concerned, they have buyers lining up to take their new luxury flats.
No matter about the slump in the property market, nor that there doesn't seem to be any money about: they'll come running for these.
Male speaker
It will appeal to people who would like to live in a large country house but who can't at the moment, and also to foreign customers who don't have a base in this country
Voice over
The Mill has been renovated after 12 years of doing nothing.
It was Chipping Norton's pride being rebuilt after a fire in 1872.
The name of William Bliss was known throughout the world for his quality tweeds and it continued long after his death.
But the mill closed in 1980.
Much of the renovation work was already done before a previous developer had to abandon the project.
Now, after over £5 million and a lot of work, it's ready.
They're hoping retired people, or those looking for a second home in the country will stump up the cash.
The top price for one of the 35 units is just under a quarter of a million, but they do get the unique chimney thrown in.
Male speaker
The chimney is its best feature.
It's a listed building and a lot of work has gone into making sure of its stability and construction
Voice over
The complex includes most of the luxuries expected by a 1980's yuppy; swimming pool, sauna, jacuzzi, Squash Court and Gymnasium.
The tennis courts act as helicopter landing pads.
Nice if you can afford it, but who on earth can?
Male speaker
I presume there are people with second homes who actually have money which they've put aside for the right property.
The international customer will be looking for as bolthole for the times he or she is here
Voice over
Whoever buiys them will be taking over a vastly different building from the hard working tweed factory…but that's progress.
Good evening.
The main stories now from the Central newsroom…
ANNE DAWSON
The widow of a man shot and killed in a boundary dispute has won civil damages from a neighbour cleared of her husband's murder.
A judge has agreed that she, and not the neighbour, owns the land for which her husband died.
TIM HURST/Middleyard/Gloucestershire
JOYCE ALLIS/Widow
Voice over
Tony Allis, from Middleyard near Stroud in Gloucestershire, was moving a disputed fence in woodland behind his home when he was shot by a neighbour.
Terence Maul, who'd erected the fence, and his son Graig, were cleared of murder last year, but today the Allis family went to court to prove Tony Allis had indeed owned the land.
The judge ruled Mr Maul must pay £550 damages for trespass and damage to trees, and the costs of the case.
Shortly after the hearing the Allis family laid flowers at the spot where Mr Allis died.
His widow is determined to pursue further court action.
Before today's hearing, Mr Allis's brother discovered the disputed fence had been torn down, and replaced on the correct boundary.
The family's legal advisers have told them, if they're seeking damages for the death of Tony Allis, they must start proceedings before next July, the third anniversary of his death.
A solicitor has claimed that three men found not guilty of the manslaughter of twin girls should never have been put on trial.
Rebecca and Emma Harper died in a barn fire last year — the men accused of their manslaughter were all acquitted after a crown court trial.
KEN GOODWIN/Reporting
TIM ROBINSON/Solicitor
Voice over
The mother of a three year old boy believed to have dropped a baby girl who was found dead at a playgroup has expressed symapathy for the child's family.
Six month old Hannah Davies was dropped on her head.
The inquest jury returned an open verdict because of conflicting evidence.
ROBIN POWELL/Milton Keynes/Buckinghamshire
DISGUISED VOICE
Voice over
David Davies expects he'll never find out what caused the death of his 6-month-old grand-daughter, Hannah.
She died in Milton Keynes General Hospital in July.
She'd been found on the floor beside her pushchair in the office of a local playgroup.
An inquest jury at Buckingham was told that a 3 year old boy may have dropped the baby on the floor, but yesterday it returned an open verdict after the Coroner Rodney Corner warned that the evidence was contradictory.
It's a tragedy that's devastated 2 families — now Mr Davies is holding out a hand of friendship to the boy's parents.
It's an attitude that's earned the Davies's the admiration of the officer in charge of the case.
We've been ordered to protect the identity of the boy involved, though his mother has faced the press to talk about the episode for the first time.
His mother describes the 3 year old as a quiet, shy little boy, who loves babies.
She has no reason to believe that it was anything other than an accident.
The police have closed the book on the Hannah Davies case.
They accept that they'll probably never know exactly how she died.
Meanwhile they've expressed hope that all concerned will be left alone to put Hannah's death behind them.
An insurance company has announced two hundred job losses.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
Eagle Star, which has its headquarters in Cheltenham, employs three thousand staff in the town.
Last year a thousand Eagle Star employees lost their jobs.
The latest cuts will hit the life assurance section.
A haul of stolen cars has been seized by police officers in a two day operation in which eighteen people were arrested.
Detectives say more than a hundred thousand pounds worth of vehicles and parts have been recovered.
NICK CLARKE/Milton Keynes/Buckinghamshire
Det Con STEVE REDDING/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
These vehicles were seized after more than 50 police officers swooped on a farm buildings in a village north of Milton Keynes.
The operation followed a tip off that stolen cars were being processed or 'rung' there.
Male speaker
We acted on information.
Voice over
Inside many of the vehicles there's evidence of the original theft, here a broken steering wheel lock.
And on this car the chassis number has been removed.
Amongst the haul including parts and mechanics' tool kits, there are paint spray cans and compressed air cylinders.
Male speaker
There are also parts here belonging to about 30 other vehicles, the lot totalling around a £100,000.
Voice over
So far, 3 people have been charged with conspiring to steal.
detectives hope this find may lead to further discoveries.
Male speaker
We're following up much of the documentation that we found and hope it could lead to other things which I can not reveal.
Voice over
Police are hoping to trace original owners, but admit it's an uphill task.
This may look like a 1300 cc Fiesta, but a glimpse in the bonnet reveals an 1800 cc diesel engine and the car's number plate was from a stolen police car.
A convicted robber has come out of prison on parole…and walked straight into a job as a professional actor.
David Walker's playing Lucius in the English Shakespeare Company's production of Julius Caesar.
He was chosen after being spotted in a prison production by a theatrical agent.
UALITY David Walker is just four years through an eight year jail sentence for robbery.
But he has swopped life behind bars for the Bard.
He came out of Maidstone prison on parole straight into the English Shakespeare Company's touring production of Julius Caesar.
His big break came when an agent spotted him in a prison production of the Tempest and signed him up.
Now Dave is coming to terms with life on the outside:
RICHARD BARNETT/Malvern
DAVID WALKER/Actor
CAROLINE HARRIS/Actress
SALLY HOMER/English Shakespeare Company
Male speaker
You don't know what freedom is till you lose it.
It's good to be working hard at something and enjoy the appreciation.
Voice over
David's role is Lucius, a servant to Portia, who's played by Caroline Harris.
Female speaker
He's a very good actor.
There's a rawness to his perfromance and a warmth the audience enjoys.
Voice over
The English Shakespeare Company is Britains largest international touring theatre.
And it expects high standards from its performers:
Female speaker
He didn't get the role because he was a prisoner, but because he is a good actor.
Voice over
Julius Caesar ends it's week long run at the Malvern festival theatre tomorrow night before moving on to London.
The task of bringing up children is tough for any parent but for one man it's particularly difficult.
Ron Deacon is adoptive father to five love bird chicks, who need constant care and attention.
He even has to take them with him to work.
KATE GARRAWAY Witney
RON DEACON Lovebird Breeder
ROSEMARIE DEACON Lovebird Breeder
Voice over
Just like any new parent Ron Deacon's getting little sleep these days.
He has five youngsters who all need feeding.
But there's a difference.
His brood are five love bird chicks He took them on when their real parents died of exhaustion.
Living up to their name the love bird pair couldn't stop reproducing.
Male speaker
They had three broods.
The first one was six, then they had seven.
I think it was all too much for them.
They just couldn't hack it as they say.
Voice over
So now Ron's taken on the role, with help…of sorts from grandaughter Yasmine.
He's had other Lovebirds in his avery.
But none have needed this much attention, never leaving his side even at work, much to the delight of colleagues.
Male speaker
They were very interested.
I think when I wasn't there they used to come in and feed them and the girls all used to come round and bill and coo over them.
Voice over
But Ron's keen that the chicks aren't the only lovebirds in his house.
Despite the attention they need he's determined his wife's feathers won't be ruffled.
Female speaker
The girls at work keep saying are you getting as much attention as the chicks.
I just say yes I am.
Voice over
It'll be another six weeks before the chicks can stand on their own two feet.
Until then Ron will have to put up with sleepless nights.
But then they do say the course of true love…even if it is of the feathered variety, never did run smooth.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Sunday Trading options published
FTSE down 17
The hundred shares index closed down seventeen point five at thirty one oh eight 
The pound is down at one dollar, forty seven and down at two marks, fifty two.
…welcome back…later on we'll meet the ex con who's doing time treading the boards…but first…sport and we're off to the sunshine of Australia…to the heart of the outback to join Tim Russon 
TIM RUSSON
PHIL FARRAND/Solar Flair
JIM PIKE/Solar Flair
DEAN PATTERSON/Solar Expert
ALISON BOCKMAN/Adelaide College
ALAN HEATH/Science Teacher
CHRIS POOLE/Team Manager
JOHN FAGAN/Oklahoma University
STEVE BRADBURY/Solar Flair
Voice over
Hello there…welcome to Australia for a Central South sporting special…where we've come for a race of the future…the Solar Challenge…sun powered cars racing through the wild outback…that's our Friday Feature…first it's back to Britain…for our football parade
Swindon against Ipswich…that's the match in the premiership…
When the two towns faced each other in the first division…it was no contest…
Swindon won hands down…4-1…it was one of their best wins of the season…
Those were the days…what the County Ground fans would give for something like this tomorrow…
Ipswich are on a downer…it could be Town's big chance…
John Gorman hasn't finalised his team yet but new signing Keith Scott will be leading the attack…
Fjortoft will be on the bench…
Sooner or later Swindon have to win…
Ipswich are struggling for confidence after a flying start to the season…
Confidence is coming back to Oxford United…three games without defeat doesn't make a season but it does build the foundations for the future…tomorrow it's Leicester City away…no changes to a winning team…the only fresh face is Paul Wanless he takes over from Dave Penney on the bench…form favours Leicester but they were beaten by Stoke last week…and Oxford are on a high…
Hereford need a win at Torquay tomorrow…they've done it once this season in the coca cola cup…the only side to have won at Plainmoor this season…
Leroy May got the first goal…that set the fans dancing…and United went thro on penalties…it was one of their best nights of the year…
One change to the united team…
Gerry Harrison has been signed on loan from Bristol City and he plays in midfield…
Torquay are unbeaten at home in the league…but United fancy their chances…goal of the week…no problem…
Jimmy Magilton's free kick against Derby…a real flyer…it's night time its winter back with you here it's summer and the early morning in the Australian outback…this is the stage for the solar challenge…and behind us is the longest racetrack in the world for cars…cars that run on sun power alone…driving for britain driving for a world first are a team of adventurers from Central South…this is their solar challenge…
The solar challenge is the race to the future…fifty machines looking more like spaceships than cars are on the grid in darwin…ready to roll for 2000 miles…ready to soak up the sun…
The only fuel on board is solar energy…the race the challenge is open to all…the professional car makers have a grand prix size set up…
Honda have spent five million pounds on their Dream Machine…and then they're are the adventurers…their cars are built for pennies from old bike parts…from wood and cardboard…and then they're are the brits…the Central South car…the Solar Flair…built in a barn in Wallingford…its been designed and driven by Phil Farrand…he's served his racing apprenticeship with the Williams Grand Prix Team as a research engineer…
Phil Farrand says that he's spent the last two years building the car and has put hours of work into it…his machine runs on the same amount of power that drives a toaster or a hair dryer so much for ceremony…with the sun blazing down its time to race south…the track is the main Stewart Highway…
Australia's M6 which runs the 2000 miles from Darwin to Adelaide…the rules are simple they drive from eight in the morning until five at night…the sun racers will make it in four to five days topping speeds of seventy miles an hour…the adventurers…thast includes Solar Flair have given themselves two weeks
Jim Pike of the solar flair team says it's very hot and bumpy in the car but it manages to keep on the road even with the road trains flying past solar cars are simple machines…the cells on top soak up the sun and the energy drives an electric motor…
Dean Patterson says the use of solar energy is important to all people around the world…and he says we will say electric cars on the road within five years but even with the sun shining…they're are breakdowns…punctures and problems…a driver says they've had a stone fly up and brake the chain but they'll get going again
For some the solar challenge is a flat out race…for others it's a a journey of discovery…take the team of schoolgirls from Adelaide…they've built their car in class and have just passed their driving tests one of the girls says…she's learnt lots and lots about the car and she didn't realise it was such a big event
Alan Heath science teacher says the girls learn more about life than anything else they've grown up three years in one day purring along behind the girls are one of 20 teams from Japan…this one is the cat's whiskers…
Chris Poole says there not here to win the race but get in touch with kids and help promote solar power the American's are here in force too…in the states solar technology is big business
John Fagan says it's a sport that shows people the future…we'll be out of oil soon and we have to find something else
The solar challenge is not just a test of speed…of brain…it's also a trial of stamina and survival…you see come five o clock…the cars have to stop…wherever they are and that means a night camping in the bush…good fun for the Brits…
Jim Pike says he's a bit worried about the snakes and spiders
the Japanese may be light years ahead on race technology but can they put up a tent…
the japanese say they are looking for the instructions they can work a solar car but can't put up a tent for eats…its what you fancy…at night its noodles…come daybreak its what's left…
the americans say they are eating doughnuts…peanut butter and jelly for breakfast
there's no stopping the leaders…
Honda's dream machine is way out in front…500 miles a day…
but they leave nothing to chance they've even brought their own satellite to plot the weather…
the rest are way behind…and the forecast is bad news…in Alice Springs a storm is blowing up…and when the sun doesn't shine…the solar cars don't run…
and guess where the brits have run out of power…at Barrow Creek…the only piub for five hundred miles and two days…
Steve Bradbury says it's a great place to be stuck…they've just had a fried breakfast and now they are having free drinks
with the sun shining the wheels are rolling again…down in Adelaide Honda pass the finishing post…they've made it in just over four days…a world record
back down the road…and further Solar Flair is still going…they've cracked it at last…and are up to forty five miles an hour…next stop is Adelaide the city that closes its streets to grand prix cars…today…the roads are open and the crowds out to welcome them in…
after nine and half days on the road the Central South team have made it…the first british car ever to complete the Solar Challenge
Phil Farrand says it is brilliant…it has been a long slog and has meant a lot of hard work
what next he reckons he'll have an allotment…and take it easy
and that's it from Australia…on Friday we'll be forgetting all about the sunshine…all about the solar cells…we'll be back burning fuel…driving through the rain and mud of winter in the RAC Rally
Ramblers who fear they could be denied access to Forestry Commission land if it's privatised have won the support of the Labour Party.
The Shadow Agriculture Minister says privatisation would be a scandal and could threaten jobs in the timber industry.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Coleford
Dr GAVIN STRANG MP/Labour Agriculture Spokesman
BART VENNER/Forestry Commission
Voice over
This is what those opposed to plans to privatise the forestry commission fear they will lose.
The chance to wander freely through some of Britian's most beautiful forests.
Hundreds of ramblers from the Forest of Dean are campaigning against the governments proposals.
Today they got the support of the Labour Party.
Doctor Strang also introduced fears that privatisation will effect the future of jobs in the timber industry.
The results of the Governments reveiw into forestry privatisation are due out in February.
In the meantime ramblers say they'll continue to campaign what they say is the right to enjoy their forest.
As the temperatures fall, council workers are preparing for another winter gritting the roads.
They've set aside thousands of tonnes of salt which they'll dump on icy road surfaces to make driving safer.
ERIKA BARNES/Witney
DEREK GAMAGE/Driver
Library Pictures
COLIN CARRITT/County Road Engineer
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
FRANK FORD/Weather-Watcher
BECKFORD/Worcestershire
Voice over
One sure sign that winter is taking a grip — the gritting lorries are out.
Another sure sign, is that council worker Derek Gamage is out with them.
Male speaker
I first started in 1962.
It was the old shovels then.
Now we have new machines.
I once had a thank you for rescuing a woman who had a baby in Woodstock.
She was trapped in.
Voice over
Oxfordshire County council have stock piled 24,000 tonnes of salt, ready to scatter on major roads when the ice comes.
They're also ready for the snow if and when it arrives.
Three years ago they worked round the clock to clear several inches of the stuff.
They have an early warning system.
Roadside sensors at weather stations around the county are linked up to a computer system.
When temperatures fall to freezing, they're ready to go.
Male speaker
We used to use grit and salt.
But that damaged the roads.
Now we only use salt.
Neat salt, put on at a light rate of spread is just enough to de-ice the road surface.
Voice over
But the warning is that not every road is treated with salt — and even if it is, not every road is safe in icy conditions: and sometimes it's even hard going for the experts.
Male speaker
Sometimes you go out and you don't know if you're ever going to get back.
Voice over
Over in Cheltenham, Frank Ford has been watching out for the first signs of winter.
He's sticking his neck out, with a prediction that the snow ploughs and gritting lorries won't be needed too often over the next few months.
Male speaker
If we get a cold spell between Boxing Day and the 21st of January, then it will be very cold.
Christmas Day?
It's too early to say yet.
Voice over
Another faithful sign that winter is truly upon us, is when wildlife comes in from the cold.
At Beckford in Worcestershire fifty hedgehogs have been brought in by worried animal lovers.
These weren't prepared for the winter hibernation.
And so they'll spend the coldest months, snuggled up in wooden boxes.
Still to come on Central News.
Driving down under:
Britain's solar powered car takes its place in the sun.
And the love chicks: the passion that left a whole family orphaned.
Thames Valley police officers have been telling the Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke they need more people and resources to do the job.
They made a direct appeal to Mr Clarke as he was paying his first visit to a police station since taking over at the Home Office.
Gargy Patel reports.
MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
KENNETH CLARKE/Home Secretary
WPC GILL DODD/Milton Keynes Police
PC PAUL WOODHAM/Milton Keynes Police
CHARLES POLLARD/Chief Constable
Voice over
Parallel policing…working with groups in the community…one of the schemes which has earned Thames Valley police a reputation as one of the most progressive forces in the country.
And one of the main reasons why Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke chose Milton Keynes as the first police station to visit since he took up post in April.
Thames Valley has campaigned year on year for more officers and resources to meet increasing demand.
Today Mr Clarke saw how the police operate at the sharp end.
He insisted more resources have been poured in.
But out on the beat officers say more support is desperately needed.
The Chief Constable said Mr. Clarke was willing to listen.
By seeing their work at first hand, they're hoping he'll be convinced of the need for more officers.
For the Home Secretary this was a fact finding visit.
Thames Valley Police says Mr. Clarke has seen a professional and efficient service.
But it's being stretched to the limit.
A student theatre has had to close for four months because of the risk of fire.
The theatre has cancelled a string of performances and workshops while it finds the money to carry out vital repair work.
Erika Barnes reports.
OXFORD
ANTHONY LILLEY/Student Drama Officer
WAYNE DOWDESWELL/RSC Chief Electrician/Swan Theatre
Voice over
The famous faces are taken off the walls of the Burton Taylor Theatre in Oxford.
It's closing down…declared a fire safety risk…only a few years after it was reopened.
It's a blow to University students who've had to cancel performances they've worked hard to produce.
Male speaker
They'll be affected as this is their first port of call in their early experience in the theatre.
Voice over
The theatrical smoke is fake…but the fire dangers are too real.
This lighting workshop is the last to be held here because the building could be unsafe.
Theatre professionals are concerned by the implications of the closure.
Male speaker
If these places aren't available to learn, we won't have trained people for the future.
Voice over
It's hoped the University authorities will pay for the repairs.
Without the money…it could cast a shadow over the future of student theatre in Oxford.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Voice over
Lord of the Manor…that's John Durnin…he's banged in seven goals in the last three matches…four of those came against Luton Town last weekend…tomorrow United's new goal machine takes his talents to the big city…to the bright lights of Upton Park…
Can Oxford extend their unbeaten run to nine games against West Ham…
STING
They're at full-strength…
Jim Magilton reported back fit from World Cup duty so the team is unchanged…
The man with golden goal touch at the County Ground is still Craig Maskell…the two hundred and fifty thousand pounds that Swindon gave Reading for him is beginning to look chicken feed…15 goals this season…the last two came last week against Southend…tomorrow he's off to Ashton gate to shoot Bristol City down…
STING
This should be the team…
Micky Hazard who stretched his stomach muscles last week is fighting for fitness.and young Lee Middleton who's on loan from
Coventry might come into the reckoning
Hereford's top scorer is Owen Pickard…he's hit seven this season…the best possibly his first on the opening day…tomorrow he's off to Gigg Lane to have a crack at Bury…
STING
United have everyone fit…centre half Kevan Smith who missed the cup game last week may get a recall…
goal of the week…he scored four last saturday but the crowd still sing…there's only one John Durnin…
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
GLOUCESTER
JAN CHRISTIE/Patient
FRED CHRISTIE/Husband
DAVID COOK/Community Health Council
TIM TOMLINSON/Surgery General Manager
Voice over
Campaigners against poverty are demanding a radical shake-up of the social security system.
They say it's failing millions of people living in severe hardship.
Their call came fifty years to the day after an Oxford academic produced a report that became the corner-stone of the welfare state.
Robin Powell reports.
BANBURY/Oxfordshire
LINDA FEELEY/Mother of Three
PAUL ARCHER/CPAG
ANDREW SMITH MP/Lab Oxford East
ANDREW DILNOT/Social Security Expert
Voice over
Don't talk to Linda Feeley about a welfare state.
A single mother of three, she relies on income support, child benefit and a small disability allowance for her daughter Davina, who has chronic asthma.
And it's nowhere near enough.
The Feeleys are just the sort of family William Beveridge was trying to proivide for when, exactly fifty years ago, he presented the Governemnt with a report that laid the foundations of the welfare state.
The report was written in Oxford — Beveridge was the Master of University Coillege, and he retired to a house in St John's Street in the fifties.
Fitting then that the local branch Child Poverty Action Group should mark the anniversary with a press conference in the Town Hall, to highlight what it calls the inadequacy of today's social security system.
Most are agreed on the need to reform the welfare state, but that's unlikely to happen in the forseeable future.
Andrew Dilnot is a social security expert living in Oxford.
Meanwhile Linda Feeley doesn't view the future — least of all Christmas — with any relish.
Oxford University will commemorate the Beveridge Report with an anniversary event next week.
There are no plans for celebration in the Feeley household.
A 93 year old woman has been tricked out of her life savings and pension book.
Police say the case highlights the need for elderly people to be on their guard when strangers come to their homes.
Simon Garrett 
HEREFORD
MOLLIE PRITCHARD/Victim
Det Sgt DAVID GWYNNE/West Mercia Police
Voice over
Mollie Pritchard's just discovered there's no age limit for victims of crime.
A man came into her house asking after a neighbour and then for a glass of water.
He took her pension book and four hundred pounds from her handbag.
Female speaker
I don't know what to say.
He's a young fellow, and there's no work for them so they're going to get money somehow.
He was so well groomed though
Voice over
With Christmas coming West Mercia police fear a spate of so-called distraction burglaries.
They say elderly people must be on their guard
Male speaker
They must make sure they know who they're letting in.
Ask them for identification.
If they're unhappy don't let them in.
A lot of old folk are getting caught and we must stamp it out
Voice over
Mollie says she won't be fooled the next time a conman comes to call
Female speaker
I wouldn't open the door.
I'd stick to the window
Voice over
The burglar's described as white and about twenty, slim and pale.
He has light brown hair and was tidy and well spoken in a dark anorak and jeans
If you're a Gloucester rugby fan there'll be no sleep for you tonight will there…tomorrow's game against Saracens could be the most vital this season…it could be the most important for years 
Voice over
The Cherry and Whites first division future is on the line tomorrow…having lost four of their opening five matches defeat against the saracens could prove fatal…
This was Gloucester's one and only win against Rugby at Kingsholm…but they've won their last three club matches so lets hope they keep on rolling tomorrow
STING
Here's the team…
Martin Roberts keeps his place at full-back even though Tim Smith is fit…
Pete Miles plays at number eight…he could be a key man tomorrow…
Last Friday the same fifteen ran in thirty one points against Transvaal…in all there are seven changes to the side that lost to West hartlepool in the last league game…tomorrow they can't afford to break…it's got to be win or bust.
So keep your fingers crossed…action round up now…and we've two new champions to toast 
Voice over
Steve Thompson from Gloucester is the new world karate champion…in the finals in Italy he won his class…he won the champion of champions fight and then went on to help Britain win the team title…
STEVE THOMPSON
Another champion fighter is Simon Bellettee from swindon…he's kickboxing's new british super welterweight king…
Milton Keynes mountain biker Jamie Carr has finished the Great Australian Bike Race…he's ridden from coast to coast…one of only nine men to make it…
And the ice men from Milton keynes are through to the final of the Autumn trophy they beat Swindon in the semi-final
The RAC Rally starts in Chester on Sunday…its reckoned that well over a million people will be on route to watch it…sadly its not driving through Central South land this year but we have got cars and crews competing…some good ones to…here they are in our Friday Feature 
DAVE RICHARDS/Prodrive
COLIN McRAE/British Champion
PENNY MALLORY
RICHARD ROBERTS/PAUL HUNTER
ADE JEFFERIES
STEVE BENNETT
Voice over
The world's biggest motor rally takes in 160 cars…1500 miles…four days…and 34 special stages…
The professionals will be driving for the world championship…a jackpot of a £100,000…the amateurs the so called privateers are on the road for pride and pennies…
That's the beauty of this motoring beast…its there for all to enjoy…
The prodrive team from banbury who lead the British challenge pack thousands…millions of pounds into their preparation…
while enthusiasts like Richard Roberts of cheltenham and his co driver Paul Hunter are packing their tent to sleep in at night…
then there's Steve Bennett and his dad from Ross on Wye who've built their own car…
in Gloucester navigator Ade Jeffries has been on a crash course to lose the fat and get fit…
and there's good old lady luck…with Penny Mallory and her all womens team from Banbury…
The RAC rally is the biggest…is the best
Dave Richards chat
Dave Richards Prodrive Subaru team is the best British bet…
Driver Colin McRae is champion for the second year running…he's won all six rounds of the home championship…and if he becomes the first Brit since 76 to win the rally he'll land the bonus prize of a hundred thousand pounds…
Colin McRae
While Colin McRae goes all out to win…
Penny Mallory is assured of being the top woman driver…because she's the only British lady behind the wheel this year…and what's more her co-driver and mechanics are all women too
Penny Mallory
Sponsorship has been kind to Penny and her team but for many the RAC Rally is run on savings…take Richard Roberts…his budget is around four thousand pounds…to save money he and co driver Paul camp out on route…
Richard and Paul
these two are also hoping to come back with more money than they went…you see along the route they're raising funds hopefully as much as ten thousand pounds for the haemophilia society…
one man who's been losing pounds to go on the rally is Ade Jeffries from Gloucester…for the past two months he's been in the local gym geting fit…he's lost nearly two stone…
Ade Jeffries
FX of Ade in car…
Ade will be navigating…co-driving for Andy Sharam of Ledbury…and across Herefordshire county in the back garden garage of the Bennett family…
Steve and his dad Bob have been working overtime on their car…they've built it themselves…
Steve is the driver…one of the most promising in his class…in the country while his dad is chief mechanic…van driver…tea maker you name it…
Steve and Bob
Trout are being helped to breed more successfully using a high powered water jet.
The jet's being used to scour the river beds where native brown troutspawn.
Mark Kiff reports.
STANTON HARCOURT/Oxfordshire
VAUGHAN LEWIS/National Rivers Authority
A pub that's been painted pink is making villagers see red.
Landlord John Gardner painted the front of the listed building without getting planning permission first.
Now some of his neighbours are purple with rage.
Ken Goodwin reports.
NEWHNAM-ON-SEVERN Gloucestershire
JOHN GARDNER Landlord
Voice over
You can't miss the ship Inn at newhnam on severn — it's new bright colour has tickled some villagers pink — but left others seeing red.
When landlord John Gardner bought the pub he decided it needed a new colour scheme.
So he plastered on pink paint — but forgot to get planning permission first.
He says that it never occured to him to apply for planning permission.
But regulars are right behind the pink pub.
He says that it was a bit of a shock at first, now he's got used to it.
She says that she likes pink — because it makes the ladies drink.
There are other bright coloured buildings to be seen in Newhnam, but for some neighbours, the pink pub is like a red rag to a bull.
He says that the pub should have remained black and white.
John's appealing to planners to change their minds and let his pub's new colour stay.
If they do, John's planning a toast — with a pink drink, of course.
Customs officers seize
FTSE up 26
The hundred shares index closed up twenty six point two at two seven three two point four 
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty two and up at two marks, forty two.
A pub that's been painted pink is making villagers see red.
Landlord John Gardner painted the front of the listed building without getting planning permission first.
Now some of his neighbours are purple with rage.
Ken Goodwin reports.
NEWHNAM-ON-SEVERN Gloucestershire
JOHN GARDNER Landlord
Voice over
You can't miss the ship Inn at newhnam on severn — it's new bright colour has tickled some villagers pink — but left others seeing red.
When landlord John Gardner bought the pub he decided it needed a new colour scheme.
So he plastered on pink paint — but forgot to get planning permission first.
He says that it never occured to him to apply for planning permission.
But regulars are right behind the pink pub.
He says that it was a bit of a shock at first, now he's got used to it.
She says that she likes pink — because it makes the ladies drink.
There are other bright coloured buildings to be seen in Newhnam, but for some neighbours, the pink pub is like a red rag to a bull.
He says that the pub should have remained black and white.
John's appealing to planners to change their minds and let his pub's new colour stay.
If they do, John's planning a toast — with a pink drink, of course.
Customs officers seize
FTSE up 26
The hundred shares index closed up twenty six point two at two seven three two point four 
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty two and up at two marks, forty two.
Welcome back: In a few minutes, a night of tributes from the stars to one of the great men of British cinema.
But first, with the sport, here's Tim.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
Pictures BBC SPORT
Voice over
By rights Swindon Town should have been celebrating their first win of the season on Saturday…what they have to do to win heaven knows…
After John Wark gave Ipswich the lead Town fired back…and thoroughly deserved their equaliser…it came from new striker Keith Scott…and on this showing he could be the bargain of the season…
Town should have been two or three up…but Ipswich went back in front thanks to a John Wark penalty justice was done near the end when Town won themselves a penalty…and what do you reckon was going through Paul Bodin's mind…the man who missed the penalty that could have given wales a world cup place was on the spot again…
no mistake this time…
Swindon 2 Ipswich 2…
the best result…the best performance of the weekend came from Oxford United at Leicester…
Not many teams beat the City on their own ground…and early on you wouldn't have given much of a price on United…
and you'd have probably written them off when Leicester won a penalty…it looked more like a slip than a push but Thompson's kick made it one-nil at half-time…
second half was something else…
United on song…
Leicester on the run…and when Nick Cusack got the equaliser the game was really on…
there was no stopping Oxford then…they went for the kill…and looked to have got it when Anton Rogan blasted them into the lead…
could United hold on…was this going to be their first away win of the season…
it was touch and go for a time and when Leicester hit back with an equaliser from Whitlow a draw seemed the best they could hope for…
this is a new United though…they've a bit more go…bit more steel in their boots…and with just three minutes to go Alex Dyer gave them victory…what a win 3-2 three cheers for Oxford…
down in Devon…
Hereford must have thought they'd cracked it as well when they went and took the lead against Torquay United…
Chris Pike who else was the marksman…
but with four minutes to go United went and blew it all…the defence tied themselves in knots and Paul Trollope banged in an equaliser…1-1 hard luck Hereford
Success too on the rugby field…
Gloucester are back on the winning trail…against all the odds…they beat Northampton on Saturday…19-14 was the score…here's the action 
KEITH RICHARDSON/ Gloucester Coach
Voice over
Gloucester don't believe in doing things the easy way…funny thing is they play better when they're up against it…so this game was ideal…they were losing and down to fourteen men when Pete Jones was sent off mid way through the first half for stamping…
6-3 down at half-time…they were in even bigger trouble at the start of the second half when Nick Beal raced through to score for Northampton…
any other team would have packed their bags and be finished by now…not Gloucester…they were just starting…
the Kingsholm crowd began to roar…and the cherry and whites prepared for the charge…
Dave Sims opened Northampton up and prop Andy Deacon bulldozed through to score what could well turn out to be on of the most important tries of the season…
Gloucester won it with two penalty kicks from Tim Smith…their first league win of the season…
Keith Richardson says that the team responded magnificently to win…and it was a very welcome victory…
Keith Richardson's next task is to beat the all blacks…he's in charge of the young England team to face New Zealand at Gloucester tomorrow night…
England were training at Stonehouse this morning…how on earth are they going to cope…
Keith Richardson says…they will go into the game with a positive mind and take the game to New Zealand
The search is on for a Conservative candidate to succeed the black barrister involved in a race row at the last general election.
The row over John Taylor helped lose the seat to the Liberal Democrats, but this time the Tories say their candidate will be chosen on’ electability’.
April 1992/ERIKA BARNES/Cheltenham
Cllr KEN BUCKLAND/Cheltenham Conservative Assn
NIGEL JONES MP/Lib Dem Cheltenham
Voice over
Accusations of racism dogged the conservative General Election campaign in Cheltenham from start to finish.
From the moment black barrister John Taylor was selected as Tory candidate.
Until long after the election was lost.
Local Conservative Association Member Bill Galbraith's racist comments about Taylor split the party.
He died before he went to trial over the matter.
When finally the tories were displaced, some still blamed the race row for their downfall.
Last month John Taylor decided he wouldn't stand in Cheltenham again, but not because of the racist taunts.
Male speaker
They were misguided.
They haven't put me off.
They've made me more determined to stand again.
Voice over
Now the Conservatives have to find a new candidate.
They say they have a democractic selection procedure.
And each applicant will be considered on their’ electability’.
Male speaker
The factors will come down to ones that will determine whether the person, male-female, tall-short, black-white, local or external is electable.
And that's the judgement that'll be made on that day.
Voice over
The Cheltenham MP, Liberal Democrat Nigel Jones, says he won the seat at the General Election on a pro lib-dem, anti-tory vote…not because of a racist vote.
And he's convinced he'll win the seat again whoever the candidate is.
Male speaker
Pick someone young.
Pick someone who wants to fight a seat to get experience.
Because they won't win the seat.
The Liberal Democrats will win Cheltenham next time.
Voice over
And in Cheltenham, the voters have some advise for those with the task of finding a new parliamentary candidate.
Male speaker
Cheltenham conservatives must get it right this time, or they won't win again, there's so much in fighting.
Male speaker
There's a lot of coloured people.
But in Cheltenham it did go against them unfortunately.
Female speaker
It's the personal qualities that matter, not the colour of their skin.
Voice over
The Cheltenham Conservatives have learned many lessons from the experience of their last candidate.
And they know they'll have to unite behind the new one if they're to be a force at the next General Election.
A hotel that's been flying the Union flag for more than sixty years has been told to get planning permission, or take it down.
The local council says the flag is an advertisement, and must be approved.
The hotel owner says that's nonsense, and the flag will stay put.
RICHARD BARNETT/Tewkesbury
PETER HANDS/Hotel Owner
ALAN MARTIN/Tewkesbury Borough Council
Voice over
Ever since the 1920s, the Bell Inn on Church Road in Tewkesbury has done its patriotic duty.
In peace and war, the Union Flag has fluttered above the main entrance.
But now Tewkesbury Borough Council has decreed the flag is an advertisement.
And as it's not flying on a vertical pole, it needs planning permission.
The hotel has been ordered to apply for approval to fly the flag, or take it down.
Male speaker
He can't understand what the flag is meant to be advertizing, unless it is being proud of one's country.
He can't believe it.
Voice over
Regulars at the hotel share the owners indignation…they say they fought for the flag in the last war:
They say: It's ridiculous for the council to want the flag down.
But Tewkesbury Borough Council's Assistant Planning Officer is unrepentant:
Male speaker
Under the regulations the national flag must be on a vertical pole.
Otherwise it needs planning permission.
Voice over
Whatever the planners say, the patriots at the Bell are adamant the flag will stay put.
And it would be a brave council official who tries to take it down.
In part two: Guess who's coming to tea!
Ali proves he's still The Greatest.
And, happy birthday Mr Boulting.
A salute to a screen giant.
Stars of the film world have been marking the eightieth birthday of one of the giants of British cinema.
Roy Boulting, with his identical twin brother John, made more than fifty films, and on the way discovered some of the country's most famous actors, such as Peter Sellers and Richard Attenborough.
I'M ALL RIGHT JACK/Lumiere
SIMON GARRETT/Reporting
DON HENDERSON/Actor
ROY BOULTING/Film Producer
MELVYN HAYES/Entertainer
NICHOLAS PARSONS/Entertainer
Voice over
Terry Thomas: What precisely is the trouble
Peter Sellers: The members feel the agreement negotiated with respect to time and motion study is being contravened
Terry Thomas: That's impossible you know I wouldn't do anything behind the backs of the unions
Many thought the Boulting brothers mad when they cast Peter Sellers in his first big film role as Fred Kite the bolshie shop steward.
There's a girl in my soup, Carlton Brown of the FO, the Magic Box.
Fifty films in as many years…all made in Britain.
Time and again unknowns became stars.
John is now dead, but Roy, now living in Oxfordshire, spent his eightieth birthday taking part in a the Russ Conway Cancer benefit at Oxford's Apollo theatre.
Little did he know when he was called out on stage he was to be the subject of glowing tributes from around the world
Male speaker
I hold you in the greatest esteem for the peerless courage you displayed in all you undertook.
Many happy returns and fondest love — Shiela and Dickie Attenborough
Female speaker
Have a wonderful evening Rula Lenska
Male speaker
Lots and lots of kisses — Goldie Hawn
Male speaker
They don't make them like him anymore.
They don't make films like his anymore — more's the pity.
He's a wondrful man and I wish people would make films like the ones he used to make
Male speaker
Have a great night, very affectionately Ian Carmichael and Kate
Male speaker
Congratulations on your birthday, sincerely, Anthony Newley
Voice over
The Boulting obsession with the silver screen began on a wet day in 1921 when the eight year old twins went with nanny for their first trip to the cinema
Male speaker
From that moment we were dedicated to film.
We stopped taking the Magnet and the Gem and the Boy's Own Paper.
We started taking Boy's Cinema and Girl's Cinema, and later Film Weekly, we were very sophisticated.
But all our games in the nursery from that moment were around film.
That is the beginning of the Boulting Brothers' rather squalid career
Male speaker
Oh they're the governers, the two masters.
When the name Roy Boulting was mentioned on stage tonight you could hear the warmth that came over and I felt very proud and privileged to be a part of it.
I meant it when I said’ Roy can I be in your next?’
Male speaker
The very first film I made with Roy he took me to one side and he said’ you've been working a lot in the theatre and you're playing to the back row of the the dress circle which is right for the theatre.’
And he gave me a little master glass in cinema acting which I've never forgotten
Male speaker
Roy, this comes from Shepperton studios
Male speaker
And it's signed with the warmest personal regards of the film director, Mr David Puttnam
Male speaker
Film making is highly technical but for it's inspiration it depends on one's capacity intuitively and creatively, and it means bloody hard work
Voice over
Their are no more Boulting films to be shot.
But the one more big number already in production is eagerly awaited.
His autobiography 
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Two shot in car showroom
Two men have died after a shooting at a car showroom at Stockport in Greater Manchester.
Cold weather payments called for
FTSE down 37
The hundred shares index closed down thirty seven point four at thirty seventy point six 
The pound is up at one dollar, forty seven and down at two marks, fifty one.
In Central News tonight: Pay as you pray.
Vicar wants to charge to go to church.
Fighting back: Shop assistant tackles an armed robber.
And take it down: Hotel is told it can't fly the flag.
Good Evening: up to twelve pounds a week to worship.
Not even the unemployed would be exempt.
ANNE DAWSON
Wesley Smith
WESLEY SMITH
Reverend Sawyer says at the moment worshippers simply aren't giving enough.
His church urgently needs repair, and compulsory membership fees would help keep it out of debt.
But some church-goers aren't impressed.
GARETH FURBY/Gloucester
Rev DEREK SAWYER/Vicar of St Aldates
Rev JOHN PENNY/Gloucester Diocese
Voice over
If Reverend Derek Sawyer has his way regular worshippers at his church will soon be paying membership fees…similar to a private club or gym.
He says a gym his instructors asnd facilities, and a church has its vicar and its buildings.
The membership for a family would be twelve pounds a week, more than six hundred pounds a year.
For a single person it's seven pounds a week, more than three hundred and fifty pounds a year.
And even the unemployed will have to find five pounds a week, that's two hundred and sixty pounds a year.
Tonight some church goers in Gloucester weren't impressed.
She says she wouldn't pay it.
He says it's wrong to pay.
But Reverend Sawyer says his collections and fees simply aren't raising enough money…to even pay for urgent repairs, the sixty regulars in his congretation will have to pay.
He's asked if he'll turn people away.
He says no, but if they don't pay there won't be a church or a vicar.
Reverend Sawyers already asked his congregation to provide the communal wine to help save money, he claim that scheme's working quite well.
His latest idea hasn't been welcomed by the church authorities.
He says he's never heard of a church charging.
But the Reverend Sawyer says in though times any worshipper one who give less that three pounds a week is simply a burden of everyone else.
If people want to be regulars at his church they'll have to pay for the privilege.
Police have praised the courage of a shop asssitant who tackled a man threatening her with a knife.
She banged his head on the till and slammed the drawer on his hand, before he ran off almost empty-handed.
But police say it's not a way of dealing with criminals they can recommend.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
PARVEEN AKHTER/Shop Assistant
SELEENA MOHMOOD/Colleague
Det Con MICHAEL INSKIP/Wiltshire Police
Voice over
The Park Off-Licence in Faringdon Road in Swindon has been raided several times in the past few months.
But when a man came in last night and threatened her with a knife, shop assistant Parveen Akhter decided enough was enough.
She banged his head on the till, slamming his hand in the drawer, and he ran off with only half a 20 pound note.
Parveen's colleagues say they wouldn't have dared to retaliate, although they can understand what drove her to do so.
The police have praised Parveen for her courage, but they're not recommending that women who find themselves in similar situations react in the same way.
The incident happened at 6 o'clock last night.
The police want to hear from anyone who may have seen the offender — a white male, wearing a black balaclava, a brown jacket and blue jeans.
A man accused of murder has been remanded in custody for a month by magistrates.
OXFORD
The body of thirty year old Ian Barrett was found at the weekend in his flat at Cowley in Oxford.
He died from head injuries.
Colin Griffiths from London appeared in court charged with the killing.
Another man is still being questioned.
Fire has damaged one of the oldest buildings at Winchcombe in Gloucestershire.
WINCHCOMBE/Gloucestershire
The alarm was raised at the former Kenulph Art Gallery when a passer-by spotted flames coming from the roof.
The gallery has been empty for several years.
It's thought the fire was started by someone trying to light a fire in a disused chimney.
Young England against New Zealand is at Kingsholm tomorrow night…
Now in sporting legend the All Blacks take some beating…but when it comes to the greatest in any sport…there's just one name…that's Muhammed Ali…he's over here at the moment and has made a surprise call on an Oxfordshire man reckoned to be his number one fan.
KIM BARNES/Oxford
HOWARD BINGHAM/Photographer
PADDY MONAGHAN/Ali Fan
Voice over
They'd waited hours to get a glimpse of a legend…
Muhammed Ali three times world heavyweight champion is still the Greatest.
In Oxford to promote a new book of photographs he proved that charisma never fades.
But fans were saddened to see the great man so affected by Parkinson's disease.
Friend and photographer Howard Bingham has travelled with him for thirty years.
He says Ali's mind is one hundred per cent, his motor functions like they should be.
But Ali's happy with himself, he doesn't want anyone to feel sorry for him.
And the fans are happy with him too…even those who weren't around in his heyday.
He says I've always wanted to meet him.
I've seen him on TV, I've always liked him.
Ali's still up his tricks and for those who do remember the magic in the ring — it's still there.
He says I've always followed his career, from the 1960 Olympics.
I've even used some of his training methods.
He's a brilliant guy.
And a brilliant friend as he showed on a surprise visit to Abingdon.
Paddy Monaghan and Ali have been pals since 1963…when Paddy, furious that Ali had been stripped of his title for refusing to fight in Vietnam, gathered 22 thousand signatures.
Recently Paddy's had heart problems…the Champ was determined to call round…
He says it means a lot to me, ity's a great honour to have him in a little town like this.
I've known him for thirty years, nothing surprises me with him.
He's something else.
And Paddy's neighbours would agree to that.
They were treated to a rare return to sparring in the middle of the street.
He may longer sting like a bee but Ali's still as light on his feet as a butterfly…and the memories are going strong.
Fed up with turkey at Christmas?
Looking for something new?
Well how about a wild boar, or even a few snails?
They were just a few suggestions on display at a Christmas food festival, and traders are proud to say that they're all produced locally.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Malvern
ALAN GARDENER/Snail Dealer
BARRY CLARK/Hereford Duck Company
JUDY GOODMAN/Goodmans Geese
KATHERINE KEAR/Gloucester Folk Museum
JANE CARNAN/Gloucester Folk Museum
TOM DAY/Three Choirs Vineyard
Voice over
Meat from Herefordshire, poultry from Worcestershire and wine from Gloucestershire's finest vineyards.
Just some of the produce on show at a Christmas food festival at the Three Counties Showground in Malvern.
It attracted hundreds of people who were looking for something a little bit different to eat this Christmas.
If you're tired of turkey, then how about a Hereford bred duck.
The Worcestershire goose was going down well too.
The Victorians knew how to celebrate Christmas in style.
They spent as much time decorating the table as they did making the food.
Downstairs kitchen staff worked with a variety of so called’ labour saving devices’to concoct a host of culinary delights.
Along with the chance to nibble a bit of this, there was plenty of opportunity to sample a drop of that.
Especially popular was a Gloucestershire wine that's on sale in France.
There are those who'd say it's still too early to think about Christmas.
But this festival certainly whet the appetite.
The secret life of an embezzler.
Accountant used cash to live it up.
Severn Bridge gantry deaths.
Trial jury still out.
And high spirits.
A Sunday school for the half-pints.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
The rest of the money seems to have been used to finance a double life.
Outwardly he was the respectable accountant advising people how best to invest their life savings.
But secretly he spent much of his time and most of his clients' money living the good life in America and Spain.
Ken Goodwin reports.
CIRENCESTER
TIM MAYNER/Cork Gully
Voice over
A mountain of paperwork has been generated trying to find a mountain of money salted away by Cirencester accountant, Basil Moore.
He told investors visiting here, his former offices in Cirencester, that he could get a better return on their savings by investing in offshore accounts in the Channel Islands.
But it seems the only accounts the cash ended up in, were his own secret ones in Florida and Spain.
When he died in June from cancer, investigators from Liquidators Cork Gulley were called in and soon smelt a rat.
They started to unravel the double life of Basil Moore.
Trusted by his clients, he'd persuaded 25 of them to part with a total of £1.3 million.
Some were pensioners investing their life savings.
So far only £160,000 of that money has been found.
A flick through his passport tells the tale; exotic holiday destinations like the Bahamas.
He says he lived a Walter Mitty lifestyle, lot's of travel, lots of high living.
With such a small amount of cash recovered the chances of any of his former clients getting much of their money back is slim.
He says that the most they'll get is 5 pence in the pound.
It's a cautionary tale.
More money may yet be found, but so complex is the investigation that what really happened to all of the cash may never be discovered.
It's a secret that the man who led a double life has taken with his to the grave.
The jury in the Severn Bridge gantry trial has been sent to a hotel for the night after a whole day trying to reach a verdict.
Two workmen were killed when a maintenance gantry fixed to the bridge collapsed two years ago.
Three companies deny breaking the Health and Safety at Work Act.Gareth Furby has been in court.
SEPTEMBER 1990
Voice over
The Severn Bridge case highlights the dangers facing many people at work.
Only today, a man was killed when he was hit by an automatic crane at the Black and Decker distribution warehouse in Northampton.
Last year, three hundred and forty six people were killed at work, and thousands injured.
Now safety experts are targetting hundreds of companies to prevent accidents and deaths in the workplace.
Gargy Patel reports.
AYLESBURY/Buckinghamshire
MARTIN HOLT/Environmental Health Officer
JUNE 1992/ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
JUNE 1992/HEREFORD
MARCH 1991/SWINDON
HEALTH AND SAFETY FILM
STEPHEN JAKOBY/Law Society
DENNIS CROSSFIELD/Refuse Collector
Voice over
Lifting and carrying heavy bags of rubbish.
Aylesbury's refuse collectors are out on the job around seven hours a day.
Emptying hundreds of bins and walking about 20 miles.
In work like this, lifting badly can lead to serious back problems, and there's constant danger of cuts from glass edges and tins left in the rubbish.
Health and safety experts have been monitoring the system, giving advice on the safest way to do the job.
Last year 346 people were killed and thousands injured each day at work.
This included a man who needed emergency treatment after his hand was caught in a crushing machine at the Unique Packaging firm in Abingdon.
The same day a woman lost a finger after her ring was caught in machinery at the Sun Valley poultry firm in Hereford.
The firm banned the wearing of rings.
And 18 months ago three women won undisclosed damages after being sacked from a Swindon book company when they developed repetetive strain injury or RSI.
Campaigners say official accident figures don't give the true picture.
Many more people should be making injury claims.
But it's not just outdoor workers who're being targetted.
Officials are sending out information packs to 4000 firms in the area, mostly employing office staff.
Here equipment like computer screens can cause problems.
The key is to reduce glare from the screen, and support your back properly.
The message is to learn from previous mistakes and realise good health is good business.
For more than thirty years, the name Richard Baker was syonymous with the news.
If it was history in the making, he brought it to the nation.
But these days he's devoting his time to his first love…music, and has been in the region to launch a series of unusual concerts.
Wesley Smith went to meet him.
GREAT MILTON/Oxfordshire
RICHARD BAKER/Broadcaster
1966/ABERFAN/Wales
1965/LONDON
1969/CAERNARFON/Wales
CLIVE CONWAY/Garcia Conway Duo
The music of Chopin in the grounds of Le Manoir Aux Quat' Saisons in Oxfordshire.
The Garcia-Conway Duo, from Oxford, rehearse for the start of a season of concerts at this top hotel.
Veteran broadcaster, Richard Baker, joined the duo to introduce an evening of music on a theme of food.
It's all a far-cry from when Richard began his career at the BBC as a newsreader.
Richard Baker explains how crude the technical facilities were when he began reading the news in the 1950's.
He explains that his most vivid memories include the Aberfan disaster, Winston Churchill's funeral and Prince Charles' investiture.
These days, Richard is in demand for his expertise in music, presenting a whole range of radio and TV programmes and public concerts.
Musician, Clive Conway, explains that this is the reason why they selected Richard Baker as their narrator for this concert.
They do everything here in style and if you choose, you can even fly in by helicopter.
So, will Richard Baker be expected to sing for his supper?
Richard says he does some songs, but wouldn't inflict them on a paying audience.
Heritage Secretary pledges Government will restore Windsor Castle
FTSE down 9
The hundred shares index closed down nine point five at two seven two two point nine 
The pound is down at one dollar, fifty one and up at two marks, forty two.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Police have set up a regular patrol at a hospital in an effort to cut crime.
It's the first patrol of its kind outside an inner city area and was created after a spate of thefts at the hospital.Ian MacLaren reports.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
PC WARREN KNIGHT/Community Policeman
KEVIN FIDDLER/Princess Margaret Hospital
Voice over
PC Warren Knight is a community policeman patrolling the Old Town area in Swindon.
Princess Margaret Hospital is part of his beat and he's taken to the task quite literally.
A hospital watch project is already in operation here.
There has been a crime problem on the site, particularly of thefts from parked cars.
And the police patrol is seen as a further deterrent in a place where people are often at their most vulnerable.
PC Knight also has the practical benefit of an office in a location, some distance from the town's police station.
And patients on the wards seem to appreciate the police presence.
PC Knight admits there's a lot of ground to cover along the corridors of one of the biggest hospitals in the region.
But he's confident his knowledge of the site and his presence here will prevent crime becoming a major problem.
A pub is branching out into its own form of Sunday trading, and grabbing its customers while they're young.
The Old Swan has become home for a Sunday School class, in order to offer customers a spiritual experience of a different kind.
Kim Barnes reports.
MILTON KEYNES/Buckinghamshire
Rev MICHAEL HOUSTON/Vicar of St Mary's
PETER BOUGHERTON/Sunday School Teacher
GEOFF BEAVAN/Landlord
Voice over
On Sunday, the doors of the Old swan open at the ungodly hour of 10 a.m., but for a new set of pint-sized customers.
The sabbath sees the pub transformed into St Mary's Sunday School and the rafters raised with hymn singing.
The class of toddlers to 12 year olds gather in the lounge bar because the village hall has become too damp and draughty.
No problem about the vicar's reaction; it was his idea.
The landlord's only too happy to oblige.
He gets on with cleaning up behind the bar, while his daughter, Genny takes part.
Holy orders makes a change from last orders.
And for the youngsters, the Old Swan makes the old village hall seem like a hangover.
When the last hymn is sung, it's time to join mums and dads over the road at the church.
Time children, please.
In part two: Front runner: The driver setting the pace in the RAC rally.
What a cheek…the scrum half flattened by a Saracen.
And here is the newsreader: A famous face…in musical mood.
Hello there…
TIM RUSSON
BARRY McGUIGAN
PENNY MALLORY
RICHARD TUTHILL
Voice over
AD LIB RALLY LATEST…over in Gloucester rugby fans have spent the weekend celebrating after a famous win over Saracens…but the price of victory for the cherry and whites was an injury to scrum half Marcus Hannaford which has put him in hospital and put the good name of the sport to the test 
KEITH RICHARDSON/Gloucester Coach
Voice over
It was midway through the second half of Saturday's game at Kingsholm, when what had been a fair game, turned foul.
Marcus Hannaford the Gloucester scrum-half; number 9, was dragged out of this ruck.
He elbowed the Saracens number 8, Barry Crawley, who in turn, threw a punch which floored the Gloucester man.
The incident went unseen by referee and touchjudge.
Hannaford went off not knowing what day it was and is still in hospital receiving treatement for a fractured cheekbone.
Tonight the 2 clubs will look at our film and this is what they'll see.
In slow motion Hannaford turns tries to shake Crawley off and uses the elbow, but watch for the retaliation.
Gloucester and Saracens will have to decide what if any action should be taken.
Apart from that, it was good game.
In the worst of conditions, Gloucester were desperate to win and they made sure of victory in the first half, when Martin Roberts kicked them into a 6-0 lead with 2 penalties.
The cherry and whites charged forward.
Saracens were never in it and when Richard West went over for a try, it was virtually all over.
Another penalty from Roberts gave Gloucester a comfortable half-time lead.
In the second half, Saracens came to life with an early try from winger, 0'Leary and a feeling of fear gripped the crowd for a time.
They were wondering whether Gloucester were about to throw it all away.
Their men rose to the challenge though and with Hannaford off injured by now, fought back to produce another try.
This one was scored by winger, Derek Morgan in the far corner.
But by then, with the mud, it was hard to see who was doing what.
It finished Gloucester 19; Saracens 5 and here's the coach Keith Richardson with his weekly report.
the weekend football brought us plenty of action…a bag full of goals…but only one point and that was won by Swindon…
West Ham five Oxford three…
Bristol City two Swindon two…
Bury two Hereford nil were the scores…here's the action 
Voice over
Welcome back.
Next week the speculation will end and we'll all know what's in the Chancellor's first autumn budget statement.
Mr Clark's job is to cut the government's £50 billion deficit and one way he plans to do that is to spread VAT around more widely.
There's been talk of seventeen and a half per cent being added to food, to public transport and to books and its now believed that VAT on domestic fuel, which was to have been introduced in stages may come in at the full rate in the spring.
Over the next three days we'll be looking at what more tax would mean…
SPITTING IMAGE/Central TV
KATHLEEN BLANCHARD/Pensioner
JOE OSARIO/Age Concern
JOHN GUMMER MP/Environment Secretary
Dr BRENDA BOARDMAN/Oxford University
Voice over
Actuality Spitting Image
one view of plans to put VAT on fuel…but it's not only the scriptwriters who are calling for John Major's head.
The government's announcement this spring that it planned to phase in the seventeen and a half per cent tax over twelve months brought pensioners out onto the streets.
Kathleen Blanchard collected eighteen thousand signatures from pensioners in Swindon alone and took her petition to Downing Street.
I/view Kathleen Blanchard
Female speaker
Everyone was shocked by the announcement.
It's a cruel tax, the government doesn't listen.
They don't know what its like to live on a pension.
Voice over
The pensioners have been supported and even encouraged in their protests by charities, amongst them Age Concern.
They don't believe that government promises of an increase in benefits will properly compensate the pensioners, and worry that those just above the level eligible for benefits will be hit hardest of all.
I/view Jo Osario
Male speaker
Pensioners will have to make cuts elsewhere, and go without television or telephone unless they are compensated properly.
Voice over
While it is certain that VAT will be added to domestic fuel from April next year, what isn't known is at what rate.
Originally it was planned to bring the tax in in two stages starting with an eight per cent rise and then moving up to the full seventeen and a half.
But the Chancellor is now believed to be planning to bring in the full rate straight away.
That would more than double the income for the exchequer next year providing two point three billion pounds.
And as well as the financial incentives for a tax on domestic fuel, the Chancellor must reduce the government's fifty billion pound deficit somehow, there are environmental arguments.
At the Earth Summit in Rio Britain along with the other major powers agreed to limit its greenhouse gas emissions and the Environment Secretary believes the only way to cut consumption is to hit the consumers' pocket.
I/view John Gummer
Male speaker
It's very important for the environment that we do something to stop the amount of CO2 going into the atmosphere.
Voice over
But many environmentalists believe that that argument is simply a red herring.
Dr Brenda Boardman from Oxford University's Environmental Change Unit has been studying the impact for low income households of VAT on fuel.
She believes that any benefit to the environment will be at the expense of poorer households.
I/view Brenda Boardman
With the possibility that keeping a family warm and fed might cost as much as a hundred and fifty pounds extra next year the advice from the experts is to insulate your home…if you can afford to that is.
And tomorrow night we'll be hearing reactions to the possibility of VAT being added to books and newspapers, another area thought likely to be targetted by the Chancellor.
Five tons of holly and mistletoe have been auctioned at the biggest sale of its kind in the country.
It's been a good year for holly berries, and the crop on sale today attracted buyers from all over Britain.
RICHARD BARNETT/Tenbury Wells
NICK CHAMPION/Auctioneer
EASTHAM/Worcestershire
CLIFFORD ADAMS/Farmer
Voice over
For more than a century, they've come from far and wide to Tenbury Wells for the pre Christmas auction of holly, mistletoe and wreaths.
Today saw the first of four weekly auctions, and five tons of holly and mistletoe were brought in by local farmers.
There were around 2,000 wreaths for sale too.
Clearly everyone was in festive mood despite the recession, and bidding got off to a brisk start:
Male speaker
People buy holly early so they can make wreaths.
But it's a wholesale auction, so prices will triple in the shops.
Voice over
Well away from the clamour of the market, farmer Clifford Adams was busy cutting mistletoe in the same way as his father and grandfather before him.
Using a long hooked pole, he yanked down the mistletoe from the boughs of an old apple tree.
Male speaker
It's a Christmas perk for local farmers to sell holly and mistletoe.
Voice over
Meanwhile back at Tenbury, the holly and mistletoe were fetching up to a pound for a pound in weight.
There was an abundance of berries this year, and the traders were delighted:
Whereas there's always plenty of holly, mistletoe was in short supply this year.
And with many old apple orchards being felled, the advice from the countryfolk of Worcestershire is buy the mistletoe while you can.
And finally, a hotel owner is popping champagne corks tonight after being told he can carry on flying the flag.
Local planners admitted they went too far when they insisted he take down his flag pole because it wasn't straight enough.
The planners agree the rules are eccentric, the hotel owner says so are some of the councillors.
TIM HURST Tewkesbury
Cllr DEREK DAVIES Planning Chairman
PETER HANDS Hotel Owner
Voice over
When planning staff at Tewkesbury in Gloucestershire said the Union flag outside the Bell Hotel in the town needed planning permission because the flag pole wasn't vertical, they couldn't have guessed at the outcry.
Since the story appeared on Central News last night, the hotel owner has been swamped with messages of sympathy and support, and the planners have changed their minds.
The Union flag has been flying outside the Bell Hotel for 60 years, and the regulars had pledged to fight for its survival, with or without permission from the planners.
Tonight the staff accepted the council's unconditional surrender with a bottle of champagne.
JACQUIE BEDDOW
Major calls for IRA statement
FTSE down 1
The hundred shares index closed down one point three at thirty sixty nine point three 
The pound is up at one dollar, forty seven and up at two marks, fifty two.
Nurses are being urged to campaign for a pay rise.
The Royal College of Nursing in Oxford is asking its members to write to their local MPs and state their case for a pay award.
The college believes nurses should be given a pay rise because one in four members are the sole breadwinner in their household and most nurses no longer believe that nursing will provide them with a secure job.
A soldier who risked his life to save children wounded in a mortar attack in Bosnia has received his MBE from the Queen.
Sergeant Geoff Newitt, a member of the Royal Army Medical Corps, was in Sarajevo helping protect UN forces when the attack happened.
JESSICA FOWLE/London
Library Pictures
Sgt GEOFF NEWITT/MBE
ELIZABETH NEWITT/Sergeant Newitt's Wife
Voice over
Posing for photographs with his family after leaving Buckingham Palace a newly appointed Member of the British Empire.
It's a long way from the horrors of the war in the former Yugoslavia.
But for Sergeant Geoff Newitt, from Great Milton in Oxfordshire, memories of the night last July which earned him this honour are never far from his mind.
He'd was stationed with the Royal Army Medical Corps in Bosnia protecting the UN headquarters in Sarajevo.
Nine or ten motar bombs exploded in the street outside killing a number of children and injuring others.
Male speaker
They were children and children are the innocent victims of war.
There were some very horrific injuries amongst them.
We managed to bring in five.
A few months later I saw two who'd been evacuated from Sarajevo to Zagreb so they were still alive.
Voice over
Sergeant Newitt says he didn't stop to think about the danger.
His first concern was for the children.
Male speaker
It wasn't till the evening when we sat down and talked about it that I realised it could have been quite dangerous.
Voice over
His wife's got used to the worry of having a husband involved in such risky activities.
Female speaker
At times it comes home to you and you sit and have a weep.
But most of the time you just get on with your life.
Voice over
Today even Sergeant Newitt can't deny feeling just a little bit pleased with himself.
Male speaker
I am actually, it's rather a proud moment in my life.
Voice over
And the couple can look forward to more proud moments in the future, Antony their youngest son says when he grows up he wants to be soldier and be just as brave as his dad.
Complaints about noise have increased tenfold in the past fifteen years, and all the signs are that the problem is still getting worse.
One city has responded by setting up a twenty-four hour response team to help people whose lives are being ruined by noisy neighbours.
STEPHANIE REEVE/Oxford
TUESDAY SPECIAL/Central TV
TONY PAYNE/Environmental Health Officer
Voice over
It's 3 am on a Sunday morning, there's a party going on and there are complaints about too much noise.
For environmental health officer John Waite, it's just another in a long list of complaints about noise.
He says, would someone mind coming to the door?
Sometimes it's not enough for environmental health officers to check out reports on their own — they need police help to get partygoers to quieten down.
He says there's a lot of noise at this party and we need to take strong action to get the noise down.
Back at the party, the police move in.
As can happen all too often, there's an angry response, and arrests are made.
Not every case requires such drastic action, but it's still a growing problem.
In the last fifteen years, the number of complaints about noise levels in Oxford, has risen from 200 to just under 2,000.
A response team's been set up to deal with complaints around the clock.
He says We operate a 24 hour scheme so that people can report any instances of too much noise.
It's now 5:30 in the morning.
The party's finally over for this man and the street can now try and get some sleep.
But the noise response team know that somewhere in the city, there'll be another party next weekend, and for many people another sleepless night.
And you can see more on the problems of noise nuisance in Oxford in the Tuesday Special, tonight on Central at seven thirty.
A woman whose wedding ring was stolen eight years ago has got it back.
She'd put it in her purse for safe keeping, but the purse was stolen.
Now it's been found in a river half a mile from her home.
The problem is the ring doesn't fit anymore.
TIM HURST/Cam
MARGARET BILNEY/Theft Victim
Voice over
Margaret Bilney of Cam in Gloucestershire cut her finger one day in 1985, so she took off her wedding ring and put it in her purse.
Then she left her purse in a telephone box in Dursley by mistake, from where it was stolen.
Now, 8 years later, a builder working beside the River Cam, half a mile from Mrs Bilney's home, has found the purse in the river.
About £15 in cash had gone, but the ring was still inside, together with a bank card and an old house key.
Now though, the ring will have to be stretched before it'll fit the third finger left hand, which has swollen a little since 1985.
Still to come on Central News, the Chancellor's chilling budget prospect.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
GARETH FURBY/M4
Sgt IAN COPUS/Swindon Traffic Police
PC NIGEL PARKES/Thames Valley Police
Voice over
On the M4 near Swindon twenty two vehicles were caught up in crash.
It started as a minor incident involving a petrol tanker, but then other vehicles travelling too fast for the foggy conditions found they counldn't stop in time and crashed as well.
No one was seriously injured, but M4 Westbound was closed bringing traffic chaos.
And this afternoon there was another crash, this time involving four lorries and one car.
Again, say the police, speeding motorists were to blame.
He says they're going too fast.
But this afternoon police patrolling the M40 through Oxfordshire said some motorists were simply ignoring the warnings.
He says it makes you feel like bashing your head against a brick wall.
No one was killed in the two crashes.
But police say that was only down to good fortune and not good driving.
With the bad weather set to continue, they're worried motorists simply won't learn their lesson, and it could just be a matter of time before motorway madness claims more lives.
The owner of an animal sanctuary that's being forced to close down says some of the animals there will have to be killed.
The unofficial sanctuary has been running for four years and is now looking after more than a hundred animals.
But complaints from neighbours means it must close next week.
CLARE LAFFERTY/Hereford
GEOFF BOUCHER/Hereford Animal Sanctuary
DAVID SIMMONS/Hereford City Council
JENNY GRIDLEY/Hereford Animal Rights
Voice over
The Hereford Animal Sanctuary is currently looking after around a hundred and fifty animals.
The list includes thirteen dogs, a pony and forty one goats.
All animals that have been abandoned or rescued from unsuitable owners.
Geoff Boucher has been running this unofficial sanctuary for more than four years.
But he's now got to close it down.
Complaints from some neighbours have forced his landlord and the local council to ask him to find an alternative site.
He has to leave by next Tuesday.
None of the neighbours who'd complained about the sanctuary wanted to talk to us.
The local council was left to express their views.
Animal rights campaigners fear that when the sanctuary closes Hereford will be left without any animal welfare facilities.
Hereford City Council is working with Mr Boucher to try and find an alternative site for the sanctuary.
But they're both aware that time is running out.
Two of the region's police forces are to take part in trials of a new American baton, which could replace the old type of truncheon.
The announcement was made by the Home Secretary, in response to calls by officers for greater protection on the beat.
CHRIS MOORE/Reporting
MICHAEL HOWARD MP/Home Secretary
Voice over
From just a foot long, the extendable side-handled baton can become a formidable weapon in an instant.
In a confrontation, it could mean the difference between survival and serious injury.
Life has become increasingly dangerous for the officer on the streets these days.
The police federation and Association of Chief Police Officers have been campaigning for the introduction of sidehandled batons.
In particular, they're said to help women officers.Today, the Home Secretary announced that Thames Valley and West Mercia police would be trying out the extendable baton.
The police do a difficult and dangerous job, frequently putting their own lives at risk to help others.
We need to make sure that they have all the protection they need.
Now that scientific tests of the new sidehandled baton have been completed, they will be tried out by a number of forces as soon as possible.
Thames Valley Police say the trials are as much to gauge public reaction to the batons as to assess their usefulness to officers.
The new batons will be tried out over six months from the New Year.
But they won't go out on the streets until officers using them have been fully trained.
A second man being questioned about a murder in a flat in Oxford has been released on police bail.
COWLEY/Oxford
The body of Ian Barrett, who was thirty, was found in his flat in Cowley.
He died from head injuries.
Yesterday Colin Griffiths from London was charged with his murder and was remanded in custody for a month.
An elderly man has been attacked by his own dog.
Dennis Griffith, from Swindon was bitten on the face and hands by his golden retriever.
The dog has been destroyed.
Mr Griffith is being treated in hospital.
Good Evening:
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
The body's thought to be that of an adult, and police are now interviewing residents of the house, and trying to trace people who stayed there recently.
Chris Moore reports.
SWINDON/Wiltshire
PETER SANDALL/Wiltshire Police
Voice over
The body was found in the attic of this house on Sheppard Street in Swindon just before one o'clock today.
The house is two knocked into one and used mainly by people working in the area.
The landlady is reported to have seen a red stain on the ceiling of one room.She called the police, and they found the body.
He says; The police have set up an incident room with four teams of officers working on the case.
We are carrying out house to house inquiries and speaking to current and past residents.
A Home Office pathologist and forensic science team are at the scene, carrying out a full investigation.
It's thought the body is that of a man, but it's not believed to have been mutilated in any way.
The body has now been removed to the Princess Margaret Hospital for a post mortem.
The landlady who raised the alarm has been taklen to Swindon Police station to help with inquiries.
She's said to be in a great state of shock.
Her husband is reported to be abroad at the moment.
The jury in the Severn Bridge Gantry trial has been discharged after failing to reach a verdict.
Three companies had denied breaking safety rules after two workmen were killed after a gantry fixed to the Severn Bridge collapsed.
Gareth Furby reports from Bristol Crown Court.
SHARPNESS DOCK/Gloucestershire
Voice over
The wreckage of the gantry now lies in a dry dock.
The huge structure used to hang underneath the Severn Bridge.
It was used by painters and engineers for maintance work.
But in September Nineteen Ninety it plunged a hundred and fifty feet into the river.
Painter Robin Phelps from Brockweir in Gloucester was killed, along with workmate Eric Sullivan.
For the past six weeks at Bristol Crown Court three companies involved in the manufacture or supply of the gantry have been on trail.
The court heard the gantry could sometimes move unevenly, so it was fitted with a mechanism to cope with this.
Pins locking the gantry stucture could be temporarily released.
But in September Ninety Ninety two of these the pins hadn't been locked back into place.
And when the workmen tried to move gantry…a front well fell off the side of the bride…and a then rear wheel cracked.
The prosecution claimed the gantry's design was simply unsafe.
But the defence said the accident wouldn't have happened if Gloucestershire's Robin Phelps had checked the locking pins before trying to move the gangry on.
When the judge called the jury back this afternoon they'd been considering their verdict for one and a half days.
The jury foreman confirmed that more time would make no difference, and the judge said he had no option but to dischage them.
It's estimated the case trial has cost up to a quarter of a million pounds.
The prosecution has now been been given seven days to decide if it wants a re-trail.
Police have arrested six people following an investigation into allegations of sexual and physical abuse at a home for disturbed children.
In all they've questioned twelve present and former members of staff from the school, which has been closed for four months.
Kim Barnes reports.
TODDINGTON/Gloucestershire
DAVID McGRATH/Gloucestershire Social Services
Voice over
New Barns School for disturbed children was closed four weeks early this summer after the vice chairman of governors Peter Righton was arrested.
He was later fined 900 pounds after pleading guilty to possessing indecent photographs of children and importing indecent material.
A joint police and social services investigation was launched.
Now West Mercia police say they've interviewed 12 present and former members of staff.
6 have been arrested and released on bail while the inquiry continues.
A helpline to trackdown ex-pupils led to a number of allegations of sexual and physical abuse.
The school took its pupils from local authorities all over the country.
They've all been sent elsewhere.
The county council says for the moment New Barns remains closed.
Police say three of the people they've arrested are teachers from the school.
No charges have yet been made and their investigations continue.
Buyers from all over the country have been attending the first of the annual auctions of holly and mistletoe.
Prices were slightly down on last year, despite the best crop of berries seen for some time.
Richard Barnett reports.
TENBURY WELLS Worcestershire
BARRY BUFTON Auctioneer
Voice over
As the bell rang to signal the start of the Christmas auction of holly, mistletoe and wreaths, buyers were wondering what effect the recession would have on prices.
Around 70 bidders turned up from all over the country and auctioneer, Barry Bufton was optimistic.
Male speaker
We've got a lot of buyers for a first sale and it's all good quality holly and mistletoe this year.
Voice over
The wreaths sold well, fetching prices over three pounds each, a figure that will double by the time they reach the shops.
But the holly and mistletoe brought lower prices than last year, at around £40 a hundred-weight; a drop of £10 on 1991 prices.
The most sought after is the silver and golden holly, which is essential for making the most attractive wreaths.
This year, the abundance of berries was the best it had been for years.
Bidders seemed pleased with their purchases.
There are 4 more holly and mistletoe sales to come at Tenbury in the weeks up to Christamas.
They've been coming here for over 60 years and even a recession won't spoil the festive spirit.
Prison badly damaged during disturbance
FTSE up 4
The hundred shares index closed up four point two at two seven two seven point one 
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty one and unchanged at two marks, forty three.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
Pub landlords say they face bankruptcy because they're being fined thousands of pounds by their brewery for failing to meet sales targets.
The publicans say the brewery shouldn't be penalising them when the recession is to blame.
Mark Kiff reports.
OXFORD
STEVE DENNY/Publican
TONY STEVENS/Publican
ROBERT DALRYMPLE/Morland Brewery
Voice over
Steve Denny has been serving Morland bitter at his pub in Oxford for six years.
But according to the agreement he has with the brewery, he isn't selling enough…and for every barrel he doesn't sell, it fines him seventy pounds.
Steve Denny says he's supposed to sell 450 barrels a year but has only managed 306 and owes the brewery 4,000 pounds.
He says they've tried to sell more but can't drag people into the pub.
The story is the same across the other side of the city at the Red Lion…
Tony Stevens is facing a fine of eleven hundred pounds for failing to meet his sales targets.
Tony Stevens says he faces bankruptcy.
His business has gone down a third.
They said the sales targets they agreed with Morland were set before the economy slowed down and the drinkers dried up.
The company says it recognises the problems publicans are facing and has already halved the fines.
Robert Dalrymple says its relationships with most of its tenants are excellent but no one can deliver them from recession.
Morland says most of its tenants are meeting the sales targets but those landlords faced with fines say the lights on their pubs could soon be going out for good..
Voice over
A new hospital ward for children opens tomorrow which it's hoped will help take the fear and pain out of their first hospital experience.
Young patients can arrive for surgery in the morning…and be back home by mid-afternoon.
For the John Radcliffe hospital in Oxford it's a way of cutting costs — for the children, it's more like a day at a play school.
Erika Barnes reports.
OXFORD
Mr PAUL TAM/Paediatric Surgeon
KATE O'DONNELL/Tara's Mother
STEVE LEE/Tara's Father
Voice over
This is no holiday; it's a hospital.
And these playmates are patients.
Little Tara Lee is here for an operation to remove a cyst just above her left eye.
Instead of being admitted for the night, she'll be here for just a few hours.
The children's day surgery ward has been opened to make the short stay more comfortable.
It's 9 a.m. and Tara senses something is going to happen, but she's not really sure what.
It's definately too early to get ready for bed.
This is the worst moment for parent and patient alike.
The strange people in masks and gowns are frightening, but the anaesthetic wins the fight and Tara is sound asleep.
Tara is whisked away as the operation begins.
The operation lasts around half an hour.
It's straightforward and the offending cyst is easily removed.
And as if it had all been a bad dream, Tara wakes up soon after.
The reunion with her parents is a huge relief for them all.
It's back to the day ward now and it's only 10.15 a.m. 7 more patients will follow her today.
The next is bright eyed and bushy tailed, whilst Tara is still rather wobbly.
12 noon is lunchtime, even for Tara who's almost ready to go home, just 3 hours after her operation.
She can also show her new found friends that there's nothing to worry about.
The new day ward is named after the late Doris Field, whose money helped get it going.
She would have been pleased that the youngsters who come and go will have fond memories of their day in hospital.
The world's largest porcelain sculpture was being shipped out to the United States today.
It was commissioned by the Disney Corporation, who hope to sell it for sixty thousand dollars.
Ian Maclaren reports.
LEDBURY/Herefordshire
RICHARD SEFTON/Modeller
PAUL BRAZIER/Fitter
TERRY LEWIS/Director
Voice over
Uncle Scrooge McDuck was no meanie when it came to transport.
Disney animator, Carl Barks created the ultimate stretch limo for his character; now brought to life in 3D by Connoisseur, a Ledbury firm that specialises in producing elaborate porcelain sculptures.
McDuck's limo is the most ambitious work they've tackled.
And at 5 ft 3 inches long, the car is believed to be the biggest sculpture of its kind in the world.
But working to scale from a cartoon drawing and meeting a tight deadline posed problems for the sculpture's designer.
Producing McDuck's car wasn't without its headaches.
The bonnet caved in 3 times before the fine detail could be completed.
The car will soon be the centrepiece at a Disney Convention in America.
It has a price tag of $60,000.
Disney executives believe the porcelain models will become another lucrative spin off for their cartoon empire.
And for Connoiseur, the extra work and exposure should bring increased demand.
The final seal of approval for Connoisseur has come from Uncle Scrooge's creator, Carl Barks, who at 92, still marvels at the craftsmanship that transformed his cartoons into fine porcelain.
The body of a young climber has been found in the Scottish Highlands after a three day search.
It's thought he'd been swept off a mountain in high winds.
Mike Rowbottom reports.
WESTER ROSS/Scotland
TERRY DOE/Rescue Worker
SHIRLEY McCIARNON/Duke Of Edinburgh Award Scheme
Voice over
William Howarth was an experienced mountaineer well used to the tough conditions of the Scottish Highlands.
He had chosen to go to University in Dundee so he could be near them.
But the conditions at the weekend were treacherous and he fell to his death.
Male speaker
It's very windy and a lot of my people have had troublew with the high winds, being knocked off the ridge.
Voice over
The 24 year old student had only started his university course this year.
Until then, he had lived with his parents at their home in Princes Risborough.
The parents have now gone to Scotland.
William had set off on Saturday to walk between Ben Dearg and Ben Alligin Hills.
Search parties and helicopters were alerted after he failed to make a rendez-vous.
William was a determined and enthusiastic young man according to his friends.
He was a Duke Of Edinburgh Gold Award winner and helped organise many of their activities in Buckinghamshire.
Today the scheme administrators grieved for him.
Female speaker
He needed to go to university because he wanted to strudy engineering.
But he was very happy to be so near the hills because he loved them.
It was a major motivation for him, but he also enjoyed canoeing and all outdoor activities.
Voice over
William was one of 3 brothers; all of whom had done the Duke of Edinburgh awards.
They were too shocked to make any comment at the family home today.
A car has crashed into the side of a house, after the driver lost control and ploughed through a hedge.
Three people have been hurt, one of them seriously.
Eye witnesses say the car was travelling at high speed along the road shortly before the accident.
Erika Barnes reports.
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
CLAUDE WACHS/House Owner
Voice over
These are the crumpled remains of a car which ploughed through a hedge and into the side of a house in Reddings Road in Cheltenham.
The impact created a hole through the wall.
The broken bricks now lie in the living room.
Male speaker
We'd just finished decorating the room.
We'd decorated the outside and we'd nearly finished.
Voice over
The accident happened as students were making their way home from school.
Eyewitnesses said the crashed car was speeding.
Male speaker
Some how it clipped and swerved and went through the hedge and smashed up.
Voice over
Three people who were in the car at the time were injured in the crash, one of them seriously.
A yachtsman has been reunited with his wife — five months after setting off on a voyage which should have lasted just four weeks.
Len Daniels was attacked by pirates and virtually ran out of rations — but he says he'd do it all again.
Russell Couch reports.
BARRY/South Wales
BETTY DANIELS
LEN DANIELS
Len Daniels had been given up for dead by his wife.
And for good reason.
His trip should have taken a month.
Instead it took five.
’ My first reaction was shock because I thought he was dead.
I barely recognised him.
If I hadn't known it was him I would have just walked past him.’
During his voyage, Len's forty foot yacht was battered by storms, the main sail was ripped from the mast, and the mast itslef was snapped.
Added to that, the steering and rudder was damaged — and he was attacked by knife wielding South Sea pirates.
Even so, he remained quite philosophical.
’ It was a long journey but no more hazardous than any other.
The only difficulties I had was in the last 24 hours when the steering gave me problems.’
Len eventually limped home using a makeshift mast of a saucepan and blanket.
So will he be returning to sea?
’ I can't stop him if he wants to go.’
’ I haven't made any future plans.
That's all I'm saying.’
A health authority chairman has said a hospital facing substantial cutbacks is unlikely to lose its emergency departments.
Doctors and Ambulancemen fear lives could be lost if seriously ill patients have to be ferried twenty-five miles for treatment.
Simon Garrett reports 
OXFORD
Dr DOUGLAS BOYLE/Banbury GP
Dr PETER IREDALE/Oxfordshire Health Authority
NICK VANNOZZI/NUPE Ambulance Branch
Voice over
Protestors greeted members of Oxfordshire health authority as they arrived to discuss the future of Banbury's Horton Hospital.
3 options are on the table, 2 of which could involve acute services being closed.
Option one means the hospital stays as it is but take the money away so it collapses anyway.
Option two is take the doctors away and it collapses.
Option three is to take the hospital away so there's no option is there
Banbury's doctors are united in opposition to any rundown of the Horton.
Male speaker
What we're looking at is the movement of children and maternity care both of which are high risk.
Moving children away from their families 45 minutes down the road…there's undoubtedly going to be danger.
It's not in the interest of patients
Voice over
The health authority meeting decided to launch a consultation document next month to get widespread opinion on their plans.
They need to save money.But the authority chairman now says whatever does happen fears about the loss of acute services are unlikely to be realised.
Male speaker
I don't think with the amount of moneny we've been talking about today that would be the case.
You're talking about small financial change across Oxfordshire.
I don't think we should look for fundamental changes now but we must look at the configuration of services
Voice over
At the moment Ambulance crews take the majority of their passengers there.
A change of destination to Oxford or Northampton could mean emergency cover becoming stretched.
Male speaker
If the Horton General, God forbid, were to close casualty completely sometimes patients will suffer because of longer journey times
Voice over
The authority's promising wide circulation for their consultation document, and no final decision until the response has been evaluated.
A secret valley that's never been open to the public could soon be taken over by the National Trust.
The five hundred acres of woodland and lakes were landscaped by Capability Brown two hundred years ago.
RICHARD BARNETT/Woodchester
CECIL PEARSE/National Trust
Voice over
Woodchester Park is undoubtedly one of Gloucestershire's best kept secrets.
For four hundred years it was owned by a succession of wealthy aristocrats…the valley, woodland and lakes seen as private possessions for their eyes only.
Two centuries ago Capability Brown landscaped the valley…creating a series of four lakes, and planting woodland…
But now the aristocrats have gone.
Their abandoned Victorian mansion has been bought by the local council to save it from ruin.
And at long last, the five hundred acres of Woodchester Park are to be opened to the public.
The National Trust is talking to two landowners with the aim of buying the valley:
Male speaker
It's a magical place that's never been open to the public.
And it should be open.
Voice over
In recent years the estate has been used by the Ministry of Agriculture to research into badgers.
And it's home to a wealth of wildlife.
So the National Trust is keen to retain the natural tranquility of the valley:
Male speaker
Car parking will be on the edge of the valley and the aim is quiet enjoyment.
Visitors will have to tour the valley on foot.
Although there may be one area for mountain biking.
Voice over
As long as the trust can raise the purchase price, it hopes to open the hidden valley to the public within two years.
It plans to fell some of the older trees alongside the lakes to open up the views down the valley.
That will recreate the vista envisaged by Capability Brown for his wealthy masters.
But this time it will be for all of us to enjoy.
Still to come on Central News, a tax on learning.
Welcome back.
With less then a week to go before the autumn budget there's much speculation as to where the axe and the tax will fall.
Last night we heard from some of the people who will be affected when VAT is added to domestic fuel.
Tonight we find out what the effects would be of a seventeen and a half per cent tax on books and newspapers.
MIKE REDMAN/Head Teacher
MARTIN LEE/WH Smith
JILLY COOPER/Author
BARRY LEGG MP/Con Milton Keynes SW
SIMON WRATTEN/Oxford University Press
EDDIE DULLER/Editor
Voice over
At Kingshill School in Cirencester the pupils have a well stocked library.
Staff already have challenging task of keeping up with the demands of an ever changing national curriculum, if every book they bought cost seventeen and a half per cent more they'd simply have to buy fewer books.
I/view Mike Redman
Male speaker
We spend £40,000 a year on books, if there was VAT on books it would cost us £47,000 to buy the same number.
Voice over
And its not just schools who'll be listening closely to the Chancellor's speech next Tuesday, the booksellers and publishers are waiting nervously for his announcement.
Industry estimates predict that VAT could cut book sales by a fifth.
The country's biggest bookseller W.H. Smith based in Swindon have been campaigning against any tax on books.
I/view Martin Lee
Male speaker
Some of the books published now would not be viable.
The range of books on sale would be reduced and that would not be good for the customer.
Voice over
And that's a view shared by those at the sharp end of publishing, the authors themselves.
I/view Jilly Cooper
Female speaker
Many of the smaller authors and publishers will go bust and everybody will lose out.
Voice over
There hasn't been duty on books for more than a hundred and thirty years, in 1860 it was seen as a tax on knowledge and abolished.
But now with a fifty billion pound deficit to contend with the Chancellor is expected to see VAT on books and newspapers as a useful source of income.
I/view Barry Legg MP MK SW
Male speaker
The government has a fifty billion pound deficit and so taxation must be increased in the short term.
Voice over
But that's an argument which those in the book business believe simply doesn't hold water.
I/view Simon Wratten
Male speaker
The income for the government will be small, not enough to solve its problems.
It would cause an outcry and lose votes including mine.
Voice over
The newspaper industry would be just as hard hit…and they've been using all the means at their disposal to wage war with the Chancellor.
Editors of regional papers such as the Oxford Mail predict plummeting sales figures, the loss of small independent publications, and irreversible damage to local community coverage.
I/view Eddie Duller
Male speaker
Newspapers are the last instrument of democracy.
Tv and radio are controlled to some extent by the government.
The local paper gives the ordinary person a voice.
Voice over
While books and newspapers are a likely target for VAT its by no means certain the tax will be imposed and if so at what level and with what exceptions.
But what is certain is that its to their newspapers that many will go to find out.
Tomorrow night in the final part of our pre-budget series we'll be looking at another area which might become subject to VAT, public transport.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
WESLEY SMITH
GARETH FURBY/Thame
HELEN SIMMONS/Patient
ABINGDON/Oxfordshire
Dr PETER TATE/Fund Holding GP
DAVID WILSON/Chief Executive
Dr RICHARD HARRINGTON/Non-Fund Holding GP
Voice over
Helen Simmons has damaged cartiledge in her left knee and finds it hard to walk.
But she may have to wait up to eighteen months for surgery.
She says she'd so anything to get treated straight away.
She just has to muddle through.
Her family doctor has decided not to take in the part Government's health reforms, and become a fund-holder.
But this GP has.
And if Mrs Simmons was registered with him she could well be seen much sooner.
He says they have an othapedic surgeon who comes to the practice once a months, so she could be treated within eight weeks.
He doesn't think it's fair but it depends how the health authority spends its budget.
The fund holding surgery can by-pass the health authority and buys services direct from hospitals.
But non-fund holders still refer patients in the traditional way, hoping that the hospital's budget can cope.
But this afternoon Oxford's Radcliffe Infirmary said its money for non-urgent ear nose and throat operations had simply run out.
Out patients from non-fundholding GPs may now not be seen until next April.
But those from fund-holders could be seen within eight weeks.
He says its all part of the debate about the NHS reform and priorities.
He says the new-style Health Service isn't serving some patients well.
The Radcliffe Infirmary is now asking the health authority for more money.
And the Department of Health says the new system does work provided its administered properly.
But Helen Simmons says she can't wait until the budgets are sorted out.
She's now hoping a charitable trust will soon pay for her operation to be done privately.
A fourteen year old criminal at the centre of a row about trips to Spain paid for by social services may be going back to his grandparents' home there for Christmas.
A court has been hearing details of twenty one offences committed by the boy in a seven month period.
TIM HURST/Swindon
Voice over
The boy, who's 14, but who can't be identified for legal reasons, appeared at Swindon Youth court this afternoon, and pleaded guilty to 21 offences, ranging from shoplifting to assaulting police.
The boy has been in the care of Wiltshire Social Services since he was 9, they paid for his holidays in Spain this summer.
The boy's real mother sat in court for many of the details.
His grandparents, who normally live in Spain, were also in court.
The magistrates were told that from Febrary this year, until early September, he'd been caught shoplifting, he'd attacked police, kicked a police car, stolen a handbag from a 70 year old woman who was now afraid to go out, and caused criminal damage.
Although he'd been kept in secure accommodation 3 times in his life, he was now in a stable relationship with a new foster mother.
His solicitor said for some reason he'd been involved since last December in a campaign of total destruction of both himself and other people, but now there was some hope for the future.
The hearing last 3 hours.
A stolen car has smashed into a bus full of passengers, and burst into flames.
The car had been taken from a carpark in Oxford shortly before the crash on the Woodstock Road.
No-one was hurt.
Police are looking for two white youths who were seen running away.
The first supplies of aid to have been taken in to Bosnia by British army trucks have arrived safely at their destination.
Until now, British forces have escorted United Nation's vehicles.
Today's mission was the first to be carried out entirely by the British army.
22 October 1993/KAREN THOMPSON/Reporting
Major RON ROWLEY/Royal Logistic Corps
Voice over
For the troops from the Royal Logistics Corps who left their base at Dalton Barracks in Abingdon for Bosnia, many had no idea what they would find.
Part of their group, the 60 Artillery Support Squadron, has lead the first convoy of dozens of army trucks taking aid to refugees in central Bosnia.
Their hazardous journey has taken them over the mountains between Metkovic in Croatia to Zenica in Bosnia.
They're carrying 260 tonnes of food, mostly flour…
There's been no outside aid for civilians in Central Bosnia since October the 25th when convoys were halted after the killing of a Danish truck driver…
Refugees are already suffering from bitter cold and hunger.
He says it's upsetting seeing children on the side of the road begging for sweets or any item, it's hard not to be affected
The soldiers from Abingdon have been trained to work in the snow.
But they need all their skills to cope with conditions in Bosnia.
He saysthe weather is the real test.
We hear stories about the dangers.
But local agreements have been made.
Troops have been there some time and they're familiar with locals on the ground.
Really the risk is from the weather and the conditions the roads are getting into.
Appalling conditions are likely to prevent food aid reaching the remotist parts.
After the success of this convoy more may follow.
But with the United Nations anticipating the need for one thousand tonnes of food a day, any aid may come to late to prevent some people from starving.
Campaigners against a new detention centre for the immigration service have held a torchlight protest.
They say the centre, to be based at a former young offenders institution, will treat refugees as criminals.
KIM BARNES/Oxford
SUKE WOLTON/Oxford Workers Against Racism
MARK BUTLER/National Organiser
Voice over
Demonstrators gathered in the centre of Oxford for a torchlight protest at what they say will be a refugee prison.
They want to prevent the opening of a new detention centre at Campsfield House in Kidlington.
It used to hold young offenders before it closed two years ago.Now it's just about ready to take immingrants detained by the Home Office.
She says here in Oxford it's our duty to make sure that the government doesn't gey away with criminalising refugees.
Campsfield will become the largest immigrant detention centre, housing 200 people.
The Home Office says it's for illegal entrants to this country who've been judged unlikely to comply with voluntary restrictions.
But workers against racism say a former prison is the wrong place.
He says it's a symbol of the governments way of treating immigrants.
It's hardly surprising that there's an increase in racist attacks and murders when the message from the top is that immigrants are criminals.
It'll be run by the security firm Group 4, and is likely to open soon although the date hasn't been announced.
Meanwhile campaigners are still hoping they can keep Campsfield closed.
Roman Catholics are claiming they're being discriminated against by a plan to scrap school bus services.
The council says it's trying to save money, and is merely proposing to bring church schools into line with other state schools.
ROBIN POWELL/Swindon
PETER WELLS/Headmaster
JIM D'AVILA/Thamesdown Borough Council
KEVIN SMALL/Labour Leader
Voice over
St Joseph's Comprehensive in Stratton St Margaret is the only Roman Catholic secondary for 30 miles around.
As a result, many pupils rely on subsidised bus services.
But now Wiltshire County Council's proposing that those buses should be scrapped to save money.
The school's Head Master fears that if they were forced to make alternative arrangements, many parents couldn't to give them send them there.
St Joseph's old boy Jim D'Avila, Labour's candidate in Swindon at the last election, says his parents would have sent him elsewhere had it not been for subsidised transport.
He argues that the County Council plan discriminates against Catholics.
Under current national guidelines, parents are obliged to pay in full for transport if the school's more than 3 miles miles away…subsidies only apply to denominational schools.
The County Council claims it's merely proposing to bring church schools into line with other state schools.
St Joseph's claims the Council would be contravening the Education Act by discriminating against schools on denominational grounds.
With a final decision expected in January on whether to scrap subsidised buses, the school's vowing to fight it all the way.
The film director Lord Attenborough has unveiled a plaque to commemorate the restoration of one of the region's finest bridges.
The work's the result of an appeal which lasted nearly five years.
STEPHANIE REEVE/Oxford
LORD ATTENBOROUGH
January 1990
JOHN JONES/Oxfordshire County Council
MOYRA HAYNES/Oxford Preservation Society
Voice over
Lord Attenborough arriving at the newly-restored Magdalen bridge in Oxford.
He'd been invited to unveil a plaque to commemorate the restoration, after featuring the bridge in his latest film, Shadowlands.
He says I'd love to come back to Oxford — it's such a beautiful place.
Many preservation groups across the world have tried and failed to get work done, but they've done it here and I'd love to come back here and work.
The choir from Magdalen college, which also appears in the film, sang at the simple unveiling ceremony.
This is how Magdalen bridge looks today.
The original eighteenth century balustrades have been restored with money raised in a public appeal which lasted nearly five years.
This is what the bridge looked like before the work was carried out.
The old stonework was crumbling and eroded and badly in need of repair.
The Oxford Preservation Trust and the County Council started the appeal to raise the two hundred and sixty thousand pounds needed to complete the work.
The chairman of Oxfordshire County Council says the bridge wouldn't have been repaired without public support.
He says it was all done in stages, bit by bit.
Everyone was so encouraged, once we'd done one part and realised how good it looked.
She says everyone's done so well to raise a quarter of a million pounds — we're just wondering what we're going to do next!
Magdalen bridge has seen more than two hundred winters.
Now it's finally been restored, it'll be tough enough to weather this winter and many more to come.
The land between the River Severn and the River Wye has inspired a new collection of songs and a book of poems.
The man who wrote the music and compiled the volume of verse says it's a testament to his love affair with the area 
SIMON GARRETT Arlingham
JOHNNY COPPIN Musician
From’ SEVERN BORE’Catherine Fisher
Voice over
These riverbanks have inspired musicians and poets for many centuries.
One such is Johnny Coppin.
A successful folk musician with seventies band Decameron, he's collaborated with Laurie Lee, written musical drama, and now released a book of poems and an album of new songs all at once.
Previous work centred on his adopted Gloucestershire encouraged the city boy gone west to expand his ideas
Male speaker
It got my interest going and I went off to Herefordshire, Worcestershire and Mid-Wales and even down to Bristol.
I thought the two rivers both rising on Plynlimmon and then flowing their separate ways like brother and sister then meeting down under the Severn Bridge — I thought that provided a very nice theme for this beautiful border country
Voice over
He reads: Somewhere out there the sea has shrugged its shoulders.
Grey-green masses slip, rise, gather to a ripple and wave, purposeful, arrowing up arteries of the land……past lost lanes, cow-trodden banks, nudging the reeds, lifting the lank waterweed, flooding pills, backwaters, bobbing the floats of fishermen, the undersides of leaves and boats, and gliding, gliding, over Cotswold's flawed reflection……refugee from the ominous petulance of the sea.
The poems in the book are a mixture of classics from well-loved writers to lesser known poets — many of them still writing today
Male speaker
My particular interest is twentieth century poetry, especially modern poets writing now.
This has been a process of discovery finding new writers as well as Mary Webb, AE Houseman and John Betjeman.
It's an anthology for today.
I want it to reflect the living area in the 1990s
Voice over
Johnny Coppin hopes most of all that readers and listeners to his music and poetry collections will get a sense of the spirit of place of the land between the rivers meandering down to the sea 
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Boys guilty of Bulger murder
The two boys on trial for the murder of the toddler, James Bulger, have been found guilty.
The Judge has sentenced them to be detained at Her Majesty's pleasure for’ very very many years’.
Boys named
And the Judge has ruled that the boys can be named.
They are Robert Thompson and Jon Venables.
Children's hospital care condemned
A report has shown intensive care facilities for critically-ill children are seriously lacking.
The Government has pledged to address the problem.
Loyalist weapons seized
Arms and explosives bound for Loyalists in Northern Ireland have been seized by Customs officers in Teesport.
British supplies covoy safe
The British Army aid convoy has arrived safely in Central Bosnia with the first supplies in the region for a month.
Possible ITV ownership changes
The Heritage Secretary, Peter Brooke, has set out proposals to relax the rules governing the ownership of the ITV companies meaning some may be taken over by others.
FTSE down 2
The hundred shares index closed down two point one at thirty, sixty-seven point two.
The pound is up at one dollar, forty-nine and up at two marks, fifty-four.
Cider makers are so short of apples they're urging growers to pick up windfall fruit off the ground.
Cider sales are up seven percent this year…and the makers say that despite a bumper crop, they need all the fruit they can get.
Richard Barnett reports:
HEREFORD
TERRY WATTS/Orchards Director
YARPOLE/Herefordshire
ANDREW BARKER/Grower
Voice over
For over 2 months now, 1,200 tons of apples a day have been arriving at the Bulmers Cider factory in Hereford.
It's been one of the best harvests for years.
But still the cider makers need more fruit, because, despite the recession, sales of cider are rising at 7% a year.
Heavy advertising has promoted cider as a yuppie drink, rather than a tipple for farmworkers and a succession of warm summers has also boosted sales.
Bulmers will be making around 40 million gallons of cider this year — half Britain's total production.
And now the company is advertising in the local paper for windfall apples that would normally be left to rot on the ground.
Male speaker
A lot of apples are lingering on the ground.
The cidermakers can use them all.
Voice over
The 12 cider apple trees in the orchard at Lower House Farm, Yarpole near Leominster haven't been picked for 5 years.
But Andrew Barker spotted the advert in the paper.
Male speaker
He hopes to make about £100 by picking the apples.
It will be Christmas spending money.
Voice over
For growers across Herefordshire, Worcestershire and Gloucestershire the extra demand for apples is truly an unexpected windfall.
Finally…the story of Oscar the poodle who'se about to pioneer a whole new way of life for his breed.
And it looks as if he's going to change the image of poodles for ever.
Elizabeth O'Reilly reports.
MATTHEW BOTTOMLEY/Trainer
You can tell there's something different about Oscar from the moment you see him.
He's not like all the rest.
It has to be said poodles suffer from something of an image problem in some quarters.
People think they're a bit pampered and even a bit posey.
But Oscar is aiming to change all that.
He's in the final stages of training to be a guide dog for the blind.
Traditionally, labrador, retriever or german shepherds are trained to take unsighted people through the perils of city streets and enable them to live as near normal lives as possible.
But standard poodle, Oscar, was a gift to the centre as a pup and is probably a one off.
Polling underway in Irish Republic
FTSE down 17
The hundred shares index closed down seventeen point five at two seven oh nine point six 
The pound is up at one dollar, fifty two and down at two marks, forty two.
That is all from us for now.
Our next bulletin is at 10.30 p.m.
Until then, goodnight.
A village in the region is one of the worst served in the country with no shop, school, pub or post office according to a new survey by the Rural Development Commission.
But locals say they wouldn't want to live anywhere else.
Richard Barnett reports.
EASTHAM/Worcestershire
JIM FROGGATT/Eastham Resident
DILYS FROGGATT/Eastham Resident
Rev PAUL LACK/Rector of Eastham
SUE SYMONDS/Community Council
GEORGE HIPKISS/Resident
Voice over
It's no use coming to the village of Eastham north of Tenbury Wells for a drink; there's no pub.
There's no school, shop or post office either.
The Memorial Hall stands in splendid isolation as the only village amenity.
Eastham is so lacking in facilities, that in a survey of more than 7,000 parishes by the Rural Development Commission, it came bottom.
But locals are incensed at the suggestion they live in the poorest served community in England.
Male speaker
He was council chairman for 18 years.
The report is rubbish.
Female speaker
There is a lack of facilities, but nearly everyone has a car.
Voice over
Eastham parish church, tucked away behind a farmyard, sometimes only attracts 8 worshippers to services.
But the rector says it plays a vital role.
Male speaker
The church is vital as it brings the community together.
Voice over
Hereford and Worcester Community Council helped draw up the damning report on village amenities.
Its director says the aim was to encourage improvements.
Female speaker
It would be possible for the village to have a community shop and part time post office.
Voice over
But the villagers say they're happy in their rural backwater.
Male speaker
A shop would be too expensive and he doesn't want a pub.
Voice over
And if anyone doesn't like living in Eastham, they can always leave.
But they could have a long wait.
The village bus calls just twice a week.
The Prodrive team from Banbury have got their two cars into the top six of this year's RAC Rally which will be coming to a close in Chester in about an hours time…
Ari Vatanen has come second and Colin McRae sixth…a good performance…but the British fans were hoping for more as Tim Russon now reports 
COLIN McRAE
ARI VATANEN
DAVID LAPWORTH/Technical Director
RICHARD TUTHILL/FRANCIS TUTHILL
Voice over
When the great British hope, Colin McRae went to work trying to win the RAC Rally, the last thing he needed; he wanted, was a bad day at the office.
Leading by 2 seconds after 2 days, McRae was on the road to victory; the first for Britain in 16 years.
But yesterday his dream came to an end in the Lake District where he was involved in a crash off the rally course and then suffered mechanical problems.
By the time he reached his service point in Scotland last night, McRae's challenge was over.
Colin Mcrae says his break pipe broke and he finished driving with no breaks.
Today, McRae was chasing lost time and ended up driving into a ditch, but will still be the first British driver home.
Better news of his team mate, Ari Vatanen.
He's gradually worked his way up to second place, but as a one time world champion, he's seen it all before.
Ari says it doesn't get any easier the older you get, but it is still good fun.
2 cars in the top 6 still makes Prodrive the best British team this year.
For the past 4 days, they've been working around the clock and through the night.
David Lapworth, Technical Director, says part of the game is to keep the car in top condition.
Back in daylight, Vatanen has been the driving force behind the Banbury team today.
He couldn't catch the winner, Carlos Saintz, but it wasn't for the lack of trying.
156 cars set off on the rally on Sunday.
This morning, 104 headed for home and only 3 other Central South crews will make it to the finish.
Blown engines, driveshaft failures, the 1,500 mile long route is littered with hard luck stories.
There's been good luck though, for Steve Bennett of Ross on Wye.
He's in the top 30 and should win his class in his first ever RAC Rally.
17 year old, Richard Tuthill, the youngest driver and his dad, who's been acting as navigator will make it too in their old beetle.
What a drive.
Richard Tuthill says he's enjoyed the rally.
Success too for Andy Sharam from Ledbury and his co-driver, Ade Jeffries from Gloucester, who shed 2 stone to get fit.
And somewhere out there, still going believe it or not, is the German entered trabant.
It was last to start and at this rate, will probably be last to finish.
A verdict of unlawful killing has been recorded at an inquest into the death of a tourist shot dead by terrorists while on holiday in Egypt.
Nurse Sharon Hill died when the party of tourists she was with came under fire in an area where terrorists were known to be active.
The coroner said it's up to travel companies to warn customers of any possible dangers.
Ken Goodwin reports.
GLOUCESTER
DAVID GIBBONS/Coroner
Voice over
Sharon Hills parents John and Shiela turned up to the inquest into their daughters death — which happened last month when she was visiting egypt.
Coroner David Gibbons was told that Sharon was part of a group travelling in Egypt with the london based tour company Exodus.
For part of the trip in a flat bed truck they'd been acompanied by armed guards, but no-one had told them why.
The attack came as they were en rout to Assyut…
One traveller said that she heard a man whistling, then hear gunshots.
Sharon had been hit in the stomach adn was beeding heavilly.
Later the group learned from a journalist at their hotel that Sharon had died.
A post mortum was performed on her body in Egypt, then another in england which confirmed its findings.
Out of the three statements from fellow travellors read out to the coroner, non said they'd had previous warnings from either the travel company or the foreign office that the region they were in had experienced previous Muslim fundamentalist acts of terrorism against visitors.
That, says the coroner, should never happen again.
He says that the message from those giving evidence was that they should have been told what the situation was — that terreorist were known to be active in the region.
A verdict of death by unlawful killing wasw recorded by the coroner.
Sharon's parents were to upset to talk after the hearing, but their solicitor said legal action in relation to Sharon's death had not been ruled out.
Hundreds of children are being forced to stay at home because its feared high winds could damage their school buildings.
Now the school governors say the children may have to be bussed to other schools until repair work is carried out.
Ian Maclaren reports.
25 JANUARY 1990/SWINDON/Wiltshire
SUE LONG/Head Teacher
MARTIN CLARKE/Parent Governor
Voice over
An 11 year old girl was killed when the roof blew off Grange Junior School in Swindon, nearly three years ago.
Scores of schools were shown to have similar structural defects.
They've been repaired.
But a new survey has revealed more problems at Park South Junior and Infants schools.
And the school must close whenever winds gusting at more than 50 mph are forecast.
Today, classrooms were empty for the second day running.
Pupils were due to join in a tree-planting project today.
But only a small group of teachers and parents saw it get underway.
Everyone agrees the safety of 500 pupils is paramount.
But the disruption angers some.
The school governors have been offered the opportunity to have pupils bussed to another school.
They've been reluctant until now, but may be forced to reconsider.
Wiltshire County Council says repair work, costing about £180,000, will get underway in January to strengthen the schools' structure.
It's expected to take 9 months to complete.
Kevin Maxwell has been appointed to his first job since he resigned as director of Mirror Group Newspapers following the collapse of Robert Maxwell's business empire.
Mr Maxwell, who lives in Oxfordshire, has been taken on as a part-time consultant for the London recruitment agency, Morgan Chase Associates.
Twenty people have been arrested by police investigating a quarter of a million pound credit card fraud.
The fourteen men and six women were arrested at nine addresses in Northampton.
They were made after a five month investigation codenamed Operation Hydra into the theft and use of credit cards throughout the south-east of England.
A Tory M-P has spent the night sleeping rough on the streets.
The aim was to raise awareness of the plight of the homeless.
Robin Powell reports.
LONDON
GEOFFREY CLIFTON-BROWN MP/Con Cirencester
Voice over
Geoffrey Clifton-Brown's used to all-night sittings, but in the chamber of the House of Commons, not the streets of SW1.
Last night, the Honourable member for Cirencester and Tewkesbury joined 5 fellow MPs in sleeping rough to raise awareness of the homelessness problem.
As well as raising money for the National Trust for the Homeless, the event was intended to promote a National Sleepout next month.
So was he confident of lasting out till morning?
Fortunately for Mr Clifton-Brown, it was a mild night, but he's glad he'll be spending Christmas inside, not out.
Good evening.
ANNE DAWSON
HARRIET RYLEY
SWINDON/Wiltshire
BRENDA WARNE/Friend
GLADYS LANE/Work Colleague
Det Supt TOM FRASER/Wiltshire Police
Voice over
The murdered woman was Christine Campbell.
She was 46 with 3 grown-up children.
Her body was found in the attic of the All Travellers Quest Guest House near Swindon railway station.
She'd been sexually assaulted and strangled and her body forced into a suitcase measuring 2 ft 10 by 2 ft 6.
Today friends and colleagues were coming to terms with her murder.
Mrs Campbell lived in the Morden district of Swindon with 2 of her 3 sons.
She'd been divorced for 12 years.
Until last week, she worked as a cleaner at the local community centre, but colleagues say she'd given up the job to spend more time with her sick mother.
At a press conference, Wiltshire Police revealed that Mrs Campbell had last been seen alive a week ago.
She'd spent last Wednesday evening drinking at the Royal Legion Club in Swindon Town Centre.
At closing time, a friend walked with her to a nearby nightclub, Pasha's.
Mrs Campbell's friends believe her willingness to trust strangers may have led to her death.
50 police officers are working to find Mrs Campbell's killers.
They've already tracked down many of the people who stayed at the guest house over the past week.
They've asked anyone with information to call Swindon — 0793 854986.
The parents of a student whose body was found in a barn fire say he was probably murdered.
They've lodged an official complaint against the police, who they say were treating the case as suicide.
Detectives have now re-opened the investigation, and say they're keeping an open mind.
Gargy Patel reports.
STROUD/Gloucestershire
ANNE JEFFREY/Mother
Rev MICHAEL JEFFREY/Father
CHELTENHAM/Gloucestershire
Det Supt JOHN BENNETT/Gloucestershire Police
Voice over
Marc Jeffrey was studying Philosophy at University.
Just a few days before he was due to start the second year of his course, his body was discovered by fire crews in the remains of a barn fire.
The farm is only about half a mile from his home in Stroud.
Police said they were not looking for anyone else in connection with the discovery.
But Marc's parents refuse to believe it was suicide.
Two months after his death, they want a full investigation…they believe he was murdered.
The couple have lodged an official complaint against Gloucestershire police.
They're angry at the way the case has been dealt with.
Marc's body was badly charred in the fire.
He was identified by dental records and fingerprints.
A post mortem investigation revealed he'd died of carbon monoxide poisoning.
Now a second post mortem investigation is to be carried out.
The action taken by his parents has prompted detectives to review the case, but they say they've always kept an open mind.
Marc was one of four children.
His parents say he was happy and looking ahead to University.
In letters to friends he talked about future plans.
They welcome a new investigation, but they want it done by independent officers.
Michael and Anne Jeffrey hope publicity will uncover more clues, or even witnesses to their son's last movements.
They're convinced Marc was looking forward to life, not trying to end it.
Swindon Town have done it at last, and won a league match.
Their first victory of the season in the Premiership came against Queens Park Rangers at the County Ground last night.
Pictures BBC SPORT/TIM RUSSON/Reporting
JOHN GORMAN/Swindon Manager
Voice over
This is the game…this is the goal the Swindon fans will treasure for ever…their first win in the Premiership…it's taken three months and sixteen games to get it…
Keith Scott got the winner…but manager John Gorman deserves the glory…
He's the man that's kept the team going…the man that's had to brush off all the jokes and mikey taking…the man that's refused to give up the fight
John Gorman says…he's happy but in some ways disappointed that they've had to wait so long for a win…it's been hard week after week…but they've shown great character and the fans have been very supportive
The congratulations have been rolling in today…
Town are still on the bottom of the table but for Swindon the season starts here
The Charles Dickens classic A Christmas Carol is getting a new look with a performance in a cathedral.
It's being staged by a group of disabled students, and one of the highlights is an appearance by the Cathedral Dean…riding a tricycle.
KEN GOODWIN Hereford
CATHY GOWLAND Care Worker
SALLY WHEDDON Student
DEE HARRISON Spastics Society
ROBERT WILLIS Dean of Hereford Cathedral
Voice over
The ghost of christmas future is catching up with Scrooge, and the news is grave.
It's a story that's been told thousands of times since Dickens wrote A Christmas Carol, and now a group of disabled students from Herefordshire Technical college's assisted learning unit are staging their own version.
She says that they just choose the characters then improvise.
It's loads of fun.
It's a challenge for the cast, some of whom are severely disabled.
But being in a wheelchair doesn't stop them having fun — or falling for the leading man.
She says she likes Bob Cratchit. he's a good actor, and has a nice face.
She says it's an amazing achievement.
They're all pros!
And there's a special appearance from the Dean of Hereford cathedral, complete with tricycle.
He says that the dialogue is fun — much of it is made up as they go along!
A Christmas Carol may be an old favourite this time of year — but performed by Herefordshire college students, it's taken on a whole new look.
ANDREW TRYTHALL
Anthony Burgess dies
FTSE up 25
The hundred shares index closed up twenty five point nine at thirty ninety three point one 
The pound is up at one dollar, forty eight and up at two marks, fifty four.
Record profits have been announced by the Oxfordshire-based brewery Morland.
Profit before tax increased by almost sixty per cent to eight million, eight hundred and seventy thousand.
Much of the increase is due to more people having meals with their drinks.
Almost half a million meals were served last year, an increase of forty-seven per cent.
A controversial plan for a bypass around Aylesbury has been delayed by county councillors.
The Department of Transport has put forward proposals for a new route around the south of the town although protestors and the local CBI prefer a route to the north along the present A forty one.
Buckinghamshire County Council has now sent the whole scheme back to the planning committee for re-examnination.