

Prayers urged
THE Women Together for Peace organisation has urged women to pray for peace in the province.
It has urged women to assemble in their streets to pray together and stage silent vigils.
Circle of hatred cuts lives apart mourners told
A CATHOLIC Bishop spoke today of ‘a circular chainsaw of hatred’ tearing through the lives of families in Northern Ireland.
The Auxiliary Bishop of Down and Connor, Anthony Farquhar made the remarks at the funeral of father of six, Michael Edwards, murdered by the UFF early on Friday.
Mr Farquhar said: ‘Over recent times many have spoken of one set of killers as a mirrored image of the other.
Some have discussed which side is the reality and which side is the image — a new expression of the who did what to him first mentality.
‘Hatred’
‘But deep down we all know that we are faced today not with realities and images.
We are faced with an unbroken circle of hatred.’
Bishop Farquhar said that it was a matter of history which part of that circle happened to be passing by as it cut through the life of the Edwards family.
‘We must all pray and work at replacing this circular chainsaw of hatred with a revolving circle that will reflect the light of Christ upon this bloodied city,’ he said.
‘Bitterness’
Bishop Farquhar accused Mr Edwards' killers of hiding ‘in the exchanges of bitterness and hostility spread over previous generations’.
He told them: ‘You are weak people, you will always be weak people unless you can arm yourselves with the strength and courage required to gaze back into the questioning eyes of children’.
Monsignor Thomas Bartley, PP, described the murder as ‘a sacrilege’ and said it was ‘a brutal attack in the dead of night on defenceless people.’
Describing Mr Edwards as ‘a good man, a devoted husband, a caring father and a considerate neighbour’ Mgr Bartley said that no words could decry the depths to which his killers descended.
Mgr Bartley also thanked the neighbouring Protestant community for their support.
‘We know that these murderers are an assault on everyone of whatever denomination who claim Christ as their inspiration,’ he said.
Hundreds of mourners packed into St Michael The Archangel's Church on Finaghy Road North for the service.
They heard Mr Edwards' three eldest children Eileen, Michael and Joseph read lessons.
By Darwin Templeton