

Friends help heart victims to health
HEART attack victims stand a better chance of survival if they have a good network of friends and neighbours, researchers announced today.
A study of more than 1,300 patients showed busy social lives helped patients rally.
Professor Richard Madeley and a team at Nottingham University Hospital studied 1,376 patients including 1,073 men and 303 women between the age of 25 and 84 with suspected heart attacks.
The patients, who came from hospitals in Bath, Northampton, Swindon, York and two hospitals in Nottingham, completed a questionnaire within a week of their heart attack.
It found that while high stress levels and depression did not affect mortality risks, socially isolated patients were 49pc more likely to die following recovery from a heart attack than those with social support.
Eighty-five per cent of women were alive after three years, compared with 81pc of men.
Professor Madeley said: ‘There is no doubt that patients with a strong network of friends do better than those without.’
TV sex talk for teenagers
A FRANK new TV sex education series aimed at teenagers is set to tackle everything from homosexuality to how to achieve a happy love life.
In Talking About Sex, classes of 14 to 17-year-old schoolchildren will hear no-holds-barred discussions on issues such as abortion and being a gymslip mother.
Channel 4 says the show recognises its audience may already have left sexual theory behind and moved on to the practical side of the subject.
Talks on mental health
A SERIES of talks, marking Mental Health Awareness Week, is being organised by Derry Well Woman, beginning on Monday next September 13.
Topics covered will include Women and Eating Disorders on Monday, Women and Violence on Tuesday, Women and Bereavement on Wednesday, Women and Stress on Thursday and A Holistic Approach to Mental Health on Friday.
All sessions will be in the Theatre, Foyle Arts Centre at 7.30pm and admission is free.
Further information is available from Jennifer at the Well Woman Centre, phone (0504) 360777.
A sting in the tail of a story
THIS picture shows a dog which likes its drinking water served from above, and I publish it to illustrate a story about a cameraman.
Gerry Fitzgerald, the Belfast Telegraph's award-winning photographer, took it at a day out by the National Canine Defence League at Ballymena.
He was among, around and in close proximity to about 100 canines of all shapes, sizes and breeds, and he came out of the event totally unscathed.
Hives
And that was what marked it as different from his previous assignment.
This was in the foothills of the Mournes, whence he had been sent to take a photograph of bees and beekeeping.
‘I was making my way over a field to the hives when I ‘sort of’ tripped over one of them and the bees came at me,’he said.
Used to moving fast on jobs, Fitzgerald took to his heels and outran the bees over a couple of hundred yards.
But not before the advance guard had stung him 10 times.
Unsteady
‘They got me on the face, stomach and legs.
The beekeeper took the stings out and the only reaction I had was I felt a little unsteady.’
Did it hurt much, I asked.
‘Only when I laughed,’ he retorted.
But he still got his picture of the beekeeper and his busy little bees.
Catching up with J R Hartley
J R Hartley is one of those names which rings a bell but you can't quite place it until you see the face — and then you remember the television commercial.
He is the star of the 45-second Yellow Pages plug of 1982 which was screened for the following eight years, setting something of a record in advertising circles.
Scene one is the elderly gent wearily prowling round one bookshop after another in a hopeless search for a volume on fly-fishing by J R Hartley.
Singer
Out of luck and exhausted, he returns home, and as a last try, decides to phone.
Magic.
The shop he calls has a copy, agrees to keep it over, and the secret comes out when he is asked to give his name — J R Hartley.
The man who played that part was Norman Lumsden, and I bumped into him when he was in Belfast last Friday to present the awards at an Action MS reception, sponsored by British Telecom.
‘I was in Belfast back in the early 1950s, you know,’ he told me.
‘By profession I was an opera and oratorio singer, and I sang the bass solos in ‘The Messiah’ in the Ulster Hall.’
Fishing
Norman, who is a sprightly 87, entered the movie business late in life.
He did small commercials for Porsche, Nikon and Diet Cola before getting his big break with the Yellow Pages advert.
And since the commercial appeared, Norman has become something of a celebrity in fishing circles, being asked to present trophies and take part in competitions.
Medal
‘Before all this I had never been a fisherman but I have now taken it up and am enjoying it,’ he said.
‘My biggest catch to date is a three and a quarter pound trout from the River Test.’
Norman identified with the cyclists to whom he presented Action MS fund raising trophies — he was a gold medal time trial cyclist in London 50 years ago.
‘We're delighted to have Norman with us today,’ said Ann Walker, director of Action MS.
‘We are also so grateful to the cyclists who raised sponsorship for us, and to BT for their support.’
The shady world of a pimp named Joey
JOEY is a pimp and has lived off the earnings of prostitutes for the past 25 years.
‘I think of myself as a social worker’, he says, in the first of a new series of Inside Story: Immoral Earnings (BBC1, 9.30pm).
‘I might make a little bit more than a social worker and I get to enjoy myself with my clients’.
For Inspector Theo Dawson, head of the Metropolitan Police's Vice Unit, violent pimps are a priority.
‘A lot of people say that living off immoral earnings is a victimless crime.
Clearly it's not and the women are the victims.
I don't think even we realise the level of fear that some of them live with’.
Animal support
I AM writing on behalf of the British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection to ask you to support the Walk for Laboratory Animals on Sunday, September 26, at 31 venues.
If there's not a walk nearby organise your own.
The walk combines a fun day out with the important business of raising funds to help the millions of animals who suffer each year in laboratory tests.
Contact me for a free Walk Pack which includes details of your nearest walk, the walk T-shirt and of course a sponsor form.
JOANNE SMITH
Fund raiser, BUAV, 16a Crane Grove, London N7.
New RVH post ‘will cut heart surgery waiting list’
THE waiting time for heart surgery should be dramatically cut with the appointment of a fifth cardiac surgeon at Belfast's Royal Victoria Hospital.
It will also mean that Ulster patients will no longer have to be sent to English hospitals for heart operations in a bid to shorten the waiting list.
The new surgeon is Dr Gianfranco Campalani from Ferrara in Italy.
He has also worked at leading UK hospitals including Guys in London and Harefield in Middlesex where he was part of the transplant team headed by Dr Magdi Yacoub.
Patients
Dr Connor Mulholland, director of the Royal's cardiology unit, said that up to 1,100 heart operations could now be performed annually at the hospital.
Upgrading of surgical wards is to undertaken to handle the increased throughput of patients.
‘It means the long waiting lists for surgery and outpatients will be substantially shortened in the next few months,’ Dr Mulholland said.
‘Certain patients will now spend less time in hospital before their surgery is carried out’.
By Laurence White
Denholm's widow launches appeal for AIDS hospice
ACTOR Denholm Elliott's widow, Susan, has launched a £2m appeal for an AIDS hospice on Ibiza in her husband's memory.
‘I think Denholm is directing this whole business because it's rolling so quickly,’ said Susan (50).
‘I just feel it has been totally taken out of my hands.’
‘Donations’
The bisexual actor, who died of AIDS last October, at the age of 70, was diagnosed as HIV-positive six years ago.
Three years later, he learned he had AIDS.
His widow said yesterday: ‘Money started coming in for a Denholm Elliott Project without me appealing for it and we already have several thousand pounds from British donations as well as £5,000 from Ibiza, where we lived.
‘Denholm is calling in all his favours.
People are doing it for him because they loved him very much and he was a very funny guy as well as a kind person.
‘The floodgates have opened without anyone even trying,’ she said.
Friends have approached Susan and offered their help for fund raising projects.
Queen drummer Roger Taylor has volunteered to organise a super-group for a concert on Ibiza next summer, while impresario Cameron Mackintosh has donated his musical ‘Five Guys Named Moe’ for a one-off performance on September 17 on the island.
The project is being co-ordinated by Red Ribbon International and money raised will be used for a 30-bed complex to care for people with HIV and AIDS.
Biography
American-born Susan, married to Denholm for 31 years and mother to his two children, Jennifer (29) and Mark (26), was just 19 when they married.
She is also working on a biography of his life which will discuss his bisexuality.
It was an issue he preferred to keep quiet during his lifetime because he feared that it might have an adverse effect on his family.