

Channel 4 chief sticks to his guns
CHANNEL 4 boss Michael Grade claims the station could double its viewing figures if it was prepared to go downmarket.
Speaking in Belfast during a visit to launch an £11m schools programme package, the flamboyant chief executive pledged the company's commitment to quality broadcasting.
‘We could double our ratings tomorrow by abandoning what we stand for,’ said Mr Grade.
‘But our ratings growth has been achieved without diluting the mix of programmes.
This year, we've enjoyed the highest ratings in our history.’
Mr Grade said the channel would continue to produce hard-hitting programmes such as‘Bloody Bosnia’ and the highly-acclaimed series on homelessness.
Channel 4's support for the British film industry will also continue.
‘We ARE the British film industry, actually,’ joked Mr Grade, puffing on his customary giant cigar and attired in the now familiar monogrammed braces.
‘Seriously, we sustain the industry almost alone.
To date, we have financed around 180 films, including recent successes like Howard's End, The Crying Game, Damage and Naked.’
Channel 4 put up a fifth of the funding for Howard's End, which brought an Oscar for Emma Thompson, and a third of the money to make Neil Jordan's Crying Game, starring Ulster-born actors Adrian Dunbar and Stephen Rea.
Highlights of the channel's ‘Film on Four’ series this autumn will include the Joseph Locke story, Hear My Song, and a film about Brian Keenan by local producer Davy Hammond.
Mr Grade would like to see many more programmes made by Northern Ireland producers.
‘We have a dedicated fund set aside for the regions, specifically Northern Ireland and Scotland and we systematically go around the country to meet independent producers.
When we're in Scotland, we regularly pay for Northern Ireland producers to come over and talk to us.
‘But they are not producing programmes to the extent that we would like.
It may be to do with a certain understandable nervousness because they are so far away from the London scene.
‘However, there's such as wealth of material and talent here.
I'd like to see more producers coming to us with ideas, telling us what they want to do, not waiting for us to tell them what we want.’
A former controller and managing director designate of the BBC, Mr Grade has been a vociferous critic of the Corporation's programme policy.
His much-publicised remarks have been followed more recently by outbursts from veteran India correspondent Mark Tully and playwright Denis Potter.
Mr Grade believes the Corporation is making a rod for its own back.
‘The BBC is going through necessary change.
It was due for considerable internal reform.
But I think much of the pain and agony of change was avoidable.
It's possible to achieve change by taking the staff with you, not dragging them kicking and screaming behind.
‘I'll always be a supporter of a strong, independent and properly funded BBC.
I would set my face against the casualisation of the Corporation.
It's the cornerstone and bedrock of programme production in this country.’
Michael Grade: Question of principles.
There's such a wealth of material and talent in Northern Ireland — I'd like to see more producers coming to us with ideas and telling us what they want to do, not waiting for us to tell them what we want
Birds are back with a bang
WHEN it was first screened in 1989, Birds of a Feather (Sunday, BBC1, 8.20pm) caused outrage, not because of the language, but because viewers had never heard women speak like that on television before.
But the public took to this comedy of two sisters going it alone while their husbands are in prison, and now it is watched by an estimated 12m viewers.
In this week's episode, the first of a new series, Sharon creates her own ‘big bang’ in Chigwell, making her and sister Tracey homeless.
Late one night she forgets to turn off the gas after heating up some left-over mutton vindaloo, and a loud explosion rocks the mansion as Tracey's beautiful designer kitchen goes up in smoke.
Of course, it is next-door-neighbour Dorien who comes to the rescue, inviting the girls to stay with her.
But it is no selfless move by the man-eating Dorien — having the girls is preferable to having her mother-in-law stay with her.
Tower play: The Beautiful People in Baywatch (Saturday, UTV, 5.40pm) find themselves in the centre of a hostage drama this week when an escaped prisoner holds Summer and Stephanie.
Stunning Story — and venue a gas!
ALTHOUGH the temporary loss of the Grand Opera House was a major disaster, unbelievably, good has come out of evil in the shape of a production of West Side Story by Opera Northern Ireland that must surely be a landmark in local theatrical history.
Equally dramatic has been the emergence of a new venue, the former Gas Works, converted into a theatre almost at the drop of a hat, a transformation that clearly shook last night's capacity audience at the first performance in the Klondyke Building.
Bernstein's classic, a 20th century version of the Romeo and Juliet story transferred to Manhattan, and a biting commentary on contemporary life in any big city, with its bitter gang rivalries, is just as relevant to Belfast today as it is to New York.
In West Side Story, Bernstein has welded elements of popular theatre with the usual operatic conventions, the integration and juxtapositioning of contrasting styles of musical expression offering an amazing amalgam that is musical theatre at its most stunning.
The current production is a triumph on every level, and after witnessing both the dress rehearsal and the initial performance, niggling criticisms are far overshadowed by the immensity of the achievement.
The stage set is a masterpiece of ingenuity and construction skills, and despite some acoustic problems yet to be solved, no praise could be too high for the really splendid contribution of the Ulster Orchestra under our own Christopher Bell, who has also conducted the work in Dublin.
The splendid choreography by Ann-Marie Brady was also an eye-taking feature.
Also responsible for the set design and amazingly effective lighting, Michael Poynor's production made superb use of his youthful cast.
No doubt there are more vocal riches in, for example, the recording by opera stars Kiri Te Kanawa and Carreras, but against this, the sheer vitality and brilliantly disciplined movement and energy of Poynor's conception was something beyond price.
There were many memorable and often moving episodes, indeed, more than I can find space to record, and to Lata Sharma (Maria), David Curry (Tony), Maurice Jay (Riff), Petrea Cooney (Anita), Michael Lally (Bernardo) and the others in the cast, not to mention the excellent rival gangs and, of course, the stage crew, my congratulations and heartfelt thanks for a rich and rewarding theatrical experience.
‘Showdog’ Tara is girls' best friend
TARA, the golden retriever with a theatrical bent, came face to face today with the two little girls who will star with her in the musical Annie.
Gillian Smith (10) and Denise Farrelly (13) are playing the title role on alternate nights at the Arts Theatre from next Tuesday 14.
And Tara (6), owned by Leslie Patton of Bangor, will be Sandy, the faithful dog who befriends the little orphan girl.
Which means that if Gillian and Denise have any problems with the part all they'll have to do is take a cue from Tara, for she is a seasoned performer who starred in Fortwilliam Musical Society's production of the musical.
‘She knows just when to roll over, give a whoof and never misses a line,’ says director Peter Kennedy.
‘In fact Tara was the first member of the cast I signed up.’
Show stoppers: The two ‘Annies’ Gillian Smith (left), 10 and, Denise Farrelly (13) with ‘Tara’the theatrical Golden Retriever.
Opera House names the day
THE Grand Opera House is re-opening on Tuesday, December 14.
The comeback of Belfast's best-loved theatre — 100 years old in 1995 — will be marked with a pantomime.
‘Jack and the Beanstalk’, starring Jimmy Cricket, May McFettridge and Candy Divine, will run throughout the Christmas period until January 29.
Refurbished
Artistic director Michael Barnes revealed today that the Opera House, devastated by a terrorist bomb in May, will only be refurbished partially by the re-opening date.
‘But the public won't notice and the theatre will be totally safe,’ he said.
It will be the spring before all the rebuilding work, costing hundreds of thousands of pounds, is finished.
‘The main damage was at the back, to dressing rooms, for example, and there will still be a lot of work to do by the time December arrives.’
An Opera House booking office is open once again, at 17 Wellington Place.
Telephone bookings can be made at 0232–241919.
By Eddie McIlwaine
Satellite ‘sneak’
A COMIC behind-the-scenes look at what it's really like to run for President in the United States is offered in Feed (BBC-2, 11.55pm).
This compendium of ‘out-takes’, from the campaign trail in the pivotal 1992 New Hampshire Presidential primary, leaves the viewer wondering at the knowledge that one of these men will actually become president!
The film-makers used a chink in the technological armour to record the candidates in their unguarded, uncensored private moments.
When a candidate is preparing to be interviewed ‘on air’, there is usually a period of five to 10 minutes before the interview proper when a live satellite link will be sent back to network headquarters.
During this time, anyone with a satellite dish can watch and listen to the candidates as they prepare for their interview.
Rival families
LES Dennis returns with the nation's favourite family game show with more families from around the country becoming friendly rivals as they battle to win Family Fortunes (UTV, 7pm).
Over one million pounds has been given away since the series began and audience figures last year topped 14 million.
Les Dennis has been presenting ITV's top game show for seven years and was just 14 years old when he started out on a career in showbusiness.
Touchy subject
ACTRESS Siobhan Redmond has revealed that she nearly quit showbusiness to run a mobile massage parlour.
‘I had daft wee notions about setting up a mobile massage unit going round theatres at matinees getting people's shoulders out of their ears and calling it Feels on Wheels,’ said the Glasgow-born actress.
Red-haired Siobhan starred as Don Henderson's cheeky sidekick in TV's Bullman and is about to appear as a detective sergeant in the BBC1 police drama Between the Lines.
Dad's honour
ACTOR Bill Pertwee, known to millions of Dad's Army fans as the officious Air Raid Warden Hodges, hosts a 25th birthday tribute to the BBC TV comedy tonight.
Pertwee, whose catchphrase was ‘put that light out’, will be joined by Jimmy Perry, co-writer of the series, at London's Imperial War Museum.
Those expected to attend include broadcaster Freddie Trueman.
Redgrave bid
ACTRESS Vanessa Redgrave has arrived in Macedonia to try to organise a series of concerts in aid of the child victims of the war in former Yugoslavia.
She met several leading actors and musicians as well as representatives of the Soros foundation which is financing the concerts.
She told Macedonian radio: ‘My colleagues are willing to join me in concerts in several cities in former Yugoslavia.’
TV deadlock
TV chiefs are no nearer reaching a decision on the future of ITN's News At Ten, despite a meeting of all 15 independent television station heads yesterday.
‘The council is still considering all the available research but no conclusions have yet been reached,’ an ITV spokeswoman said tonight.
Jon
OUTRAGEOUS journalist Jon Ronson, winner of the Periodical Publishers Association Columnist of the Year award for his work in ‘Time Out’, makes his television debut in a new six-part series of comedy investigations.
Tonight, in Get Good Ratings With Sex (BBC2, 6.50pm), he embarks on a hilarious and increasingly frenzied mission to chase the ratings by getting sex into the programme.
ross
IN THE LAST of the series, presenter Jonathan Ross, introduces a final mind-expanding miscellany of Fantastic Facts!
(UTV, 7pm) including: from the USA —‘Bag Shag’ the best way to retrieve your balls after a hard round of golf and Athos the Upside Down Man who supports his entire body weight on one rigid digit.
Jonathan also reports on supermarket till number 13 at the Widnes branch of Asda, which has amazing fertility properties.
Carol A MODEL housewife slowly goes to pieces as one disaster follows another in Carol and Company: Diary Of A Really, Really Mad Housewife (BBC1, 11.05pm), a one-act comedy starring Carol Burnett.
Abi is in need of a loo or two
IT will be a great relief to Abi King at the Arts Theatre if the props she needs for a new play can be turned up by the public at large.
Abi appealed today — for urinals.
They are needed to dress up the stage for the production of Willy Russell's Stags And Hens which is about to go into rehearsal at the Arts.
The comedy is set in the men's and women's loos of a 1970s nightclub in Liverpool.
‘We've tried just about everywhere,’ said Abi who works in marketing.
Sale
‘But out-of-work urinals don't go on sale every day of the week.’
She's hoping a pub or hotel where renovation is being carried out will solve the problem at the Arts.
Her phone number is 0232–242819.
Stags And Hens, produced by Charles Nowosielski, opens at the Arts on September 29.
So there is some urgency about the need for a loo.
By Eddie McIlwaine
GLENGORMLEY
Variety concert to aid handicapped
A VARIETY concert at Glengormley High School next week will raise funds for a local home for the profoundly handicapped.
The Mossgrove Singers, the Crusade Echoes Choir, the Barleywhite Folk Group and comedienne Marjorie Rea are among those taking part in the show next Friday, September 17 (7.30pm), in aid of the Martin Residential Trust.
Tickets costing £3 (£2 for senior citizens) are available from the Trust and the Cornerstone bookshop, Ballyclare Road, Glengormley.
Neil Johnston meets James Kelly, doyen of Ulster journalism ‘It's been a great game to be in…’
AN INTERVIEW with James Kelly, the doyen of Ulster journalism, is like an entertaining walk through the pages of Irish history.
After 64 years in the inky trade, his pen is still busy, his eye for the news as discerning as ever.
And he retains the sense of wry humour which he reckons every newspaperman needs, if only to keep him sane.
Asked to sum up in a sentence the essence of his long career as a reporter, he considers the question for a few seconds, laughs, and says: ‘I don't think I could do better than quote my old friend the late Jimmy Robinson, who was the Daily Mail's man in Belfast for many years.
‘What he told me was: ‘The more you do, the more trouble you get into’’
And in a lifetime spent covering the major developments and events in Northern Ireland, he has had ample evidence of the truth of that remark.
Born in 1911, James Kelly grew up in West Belfast and caught the journalism bug early.
‘I had an uncle who was assistant editor of the Irish News and I used to take his supper down to him.
‘The whole atmosphere of the place fascinated me.’
He plagued the then news editor of the Irish News, an Englishman called Redwood (‘a bloody tyrant, but a fine journalist’) for a job, and his entreaties were finally answered.
In September 1929, at the princely salary of five shillings a week, he started work as a junior reporter on the paper for which, 64 years on, he now writes a weekly column.
‘By God,’ he recalls, ‘those early days were an experience.
The Irish News had a small staff, and there I was, at the age of 18, sent out to compete with senior men, some of them, I remember, dressed like Edwardian ‘mashers’.’
After 18 months of this baptism of fire, he picked up a paper one night and read about a proposed new daily newspaper in Dublin, the Irish Press.
Having just had a row with the acerbic Redwood, Kelly decided to apply for the job as assistant to whoever the new paper appointed as their Belfast representative.
He sent off an application and was puzzled to receive two replies.
One was from the editor, regretting that there were no vacancies, the other was from the news editor, asking him to come to Dublin immediately for an interview.
He did so immediately — and found himself appointed not as an assistant but as the Irish Press's first Belfast staffman.
He smiles as he recalls a TD asking in the Dail if nothing was being done ‘to suppress this Republican paper’.
‘No,’ was the sour Government reply.
‘By the look of the first issues it will suppress itself.’
That did not happen, of course, and Kelly was their man in Belfast during the formative years, reporting, for example , on the unemployment riots in the city in 1932 — the October Revolution, as it was called — when the common denominator of hunger united the Falls and the Shankill.
That was also the year of the opening of the new Parliament Buildings at Stormont by the Prince of Wales, who, it was rumoured, was less than enthusiastic about coming to do his royal duty.
‘MY prevailing memory of that occasion,’ says Kelly, ‘is that in the middle of his speech, delivered in sepulchral tones, a waitress dropped a full tray of crockery in the balcony.
‘The heir to the throne gulped nervously, the assembled dowagers glared upwards and the poor girl fled from the scene.’
But one of the best stories in the Kelly collection concerns how he disrupted a social weekend in Northern Ireland for the former Prime Minister, Ramsay MacDonald.
This was in the early 30's when the economic war between England and the Republic was at its height and representatives of both governments happened to be attending the Imperial Economic Conference in Ottawa.
Kelly heard that MacDonald was flying to Mount Stewart, the Co.
Down home of the then Air Minister Lord Londonderry and, in his report of the visit, added a speculative paragraph to the effect that the trip may have been due to‘a message from Ottawa’ and could well precede a peace making trip to Dublin.
It was the perfect example of ‘the more you do, the more trouble you get into’.
All hell broke loose, Mount Stewart was besieged by the media, and one Fleet Street paper went as far as accusing MacDonald of duplicity.
In vain did he protest that he was here on holiday and nothing else.
He cut the visit short, returned to Downing Street and Kelly, the author of his misfortune, got a telegram of congratulation from his boss.
In 1934 he joined the Irish Independent, with whom he worked for an eventful 50 years, latterly as its northern political editor.
For them he covered the war years in Ulster.
‘I was there when Milburn Henke, the first American GI to set foot in Northern Ireland, stepped off the ship,’ he said.
‘I asked him how he had been chosen for this honour and he told me ‘I was pushed’’.
Stories he covered during his long association with the Independent included the historic meeting between Terence O'Neill and Sean Lemass, the suspension of Stormont — he'd now seen it both open and close — the Sunningdale talks (‘the Press corps played a lot of poker’) and many more turning points in history.
‘Because I was for so many years a one man operation,’ he says, ‘I was always right at the centre of things.
In that respect, I was different from other reporters who were on a big story one day and a ‘bun worry’ the next.
‘But I've enjoyed every minute of it and remain as fascinated today by the cut and thrust of politics as I ever was.
‘Mind you, there doesn't seem to have been a moment's peace since I started out in the Irish News away back in 1929.
But it's been a great game to be in, and it has given me some marvellous memories.
I have no regrets.’
And, at the age of 82 (‘I don't feel it’), this grand old Press warrior is still putting a candid pen to paper.
He may well cause a bit more trouble yet.
Former Telegraph journalist dies
FORMER Belfast Telegraph journalist and Ireland's Saturday Night columnist Gerald Rafferty has died suddenly, aged 68.
Well-known for his Listen Here A While column on music, folklore and country characters, Mr Rafferty worked for the Belfast Telegraph for 25 years.
Born in 1925 at Drummamore, just outside Armagh, Mr Rafferty had a variety of jobs, including farm labourer, insurance salesman, bread delivery man and nurse in a mental institution, before entering journalism.
He contributed stories to the Armagh Observer as a teenager and later got a job on the Dungannon Observer.
Sub-editor
Mr Rafferty moved to Belfast and joined the Irish News in the 1950s and in 1962 he began work as a sub-editor with the Belfast Telegraph.
In 1983 he underwent a quadruple heart by-pass operation and retired in 1987.
But he continued to broadcast and write a weekly column for the Armagh Gazette as well as completing a book of rural tales, And the Band Played On, published by Friar's Bush Press.
He died suddenly at his Lisburn home last night and will be sadly missed by his wife, Lena; children, Geraldine, Pauline, Catherine, Noel, Louis and Bronagh; and grandchildren Sean, Jaren, Christopher and Paul.
Gerald Rafferty: Missed
CARDIFF
Marti battles on despite cancer fear
MARTI Caine is to go ahead with plans for her role as the Red Queen in Snow White at Cardiff's New Theatre — even if cancer strikes her again.
‘Now that I've had the frocks made, I think I will definitely do the pantomime — even if they have to suspend me from pegs,’ she declared.
Doctors have told Marti (47), that her body could not withstand any further chemotherapy or radiotherapy treatment.
The Red Queen role was the same part she had to pull out of 18 months ago because of ill health.
REPUBLIC
Mia's freedom
ACTRESS Mia Farrow does not have a new man in her life now that she has split up with film director Woody Allen.
Interviewed by the Irish Independent, she said: ‘Any man would be mad to take me on with all these children.
And the last thing I need in my life right now is a madman.’
She is filming a comedy, Widow's Peak, in the Republic with Joan Plowright and Natasha Richardson.
LONDON
Prince's surprise concert
DIMINUTIVE pop star Prince ended his European tour with a surprise live concert in front of 200 fans at Radio One.
The American singer played five songs including his hit 1999 during the 30-minute lunchtime concert in Broadcasting House, Portland Place, London, yesterday.
‘It was brilliant, actually,’ said a Radio One spokeswoman.
‘The last time there was a rock concert there was in 1968, with Jimi Hendrix.’
Heavy on the greasepaint!
THE summer's gone — but the Old Museum Arts Centre in Belfast has heralded its new season with a spring in its step.
This month promises to be a busy one in College Square North, with theatre, dance and visual delights.
The Armada Festival will once again take to the boards, but this time with a difference.
This year's festival will see performances taking place in three cities simultaneously — Derry, Dublin and Belfast.
The six companies involved in this year's event are WildCard and Theatrevision from Dublin; The Decidedly Average Theatre Company from Coleraine; Clockwork from Galway, and Hoi Polloi and Scarecrow from Belfast.
The festival kicks off on Monday, September 13 and runs until Saturday 18, with shows beginning at 8pm.
Later in the month, Replay Theatre Company's headline grabbing show ‘Yours Truly’ will open at OMAC before beginning a tour of secondary schools around the province.
The play, written by Marie Jones, examines the problems and pressures facing young teenagers today.
At the end of September, Opera Theatre Company's ‘Jenufa’ will open in the Old Museum.
One of the most dramatic and beautiful of all operas, it concerns a woman who conceives a child out of wedlock and is rejected by the baby's father; she is concealed by her stepmother, who, out of concern for the girl, drowns the baby soon after its birth.
Early booking essential for this one!
Elsewhere, the Lyric Theatre continues its production of Jennifer Johnston's ‘How Many Miles to Babylon?’
The Lakeland Players are preparing for their curtain call at the Ardhowen Theatre in Enniskillen.
The company open tonight in Arnold Helsby's ‘The Camel's Back’, a light-hearted comedy about a farmer's will.
The Riverside Theatre in Coleraine is preparing for its first production of the new season.
Gemini Productions will present J B Keane's ‘The Matchmaker’ at the end of September — the Irish comedy about a man who helps those in search of the perfect partner.
In Belfast, Peter Kennedy's wonderful musical ‘The Widow or Bust’ is still being performed with great gusto at the Arts Theatre by First Act Musical Company; while the Group Theatre is once again open for business — the Belvoir Players are on stage in Sam Cree's ‘The Mating Season’until the weekend.
Soldiering on: A scene from ‘How Many Miles to Babylon?’
Earthly paradise: Mount Stewart open for autumn walks.
Bingham cuts the cautious approach
CENTRE STAGE
CAUTION is usually the key word for Northern Ireland manager Billy Bingham.
But he has thrown it to the wind which will swirl round Windsor Park tonight by naming no fewer than THREE centre forwards in his side to face Latvia.
Philip Gray returns to the attack alongside Jimmy Quinn and Iain Dowie as Bingham goes for goals in this World Cup Group Three encounter.
Gray, recently signed by Sunderland in an £850,000 deal from Luton missed the last two internationals — against Lithuania and Latvia away — because of injury.
He was widely expected to replace Reading striker, Quinn, but instead will play alongside him.
There is no place for the in-form Michael O'Neill, now a Hibs player, or Nottingham Forest winger Kingsley Black; both are on the substitutes bench.
The midfield trio will be Michael Hughes, Jim Magilton and Kevin Wilson.
As expected Mal Donaghy reverts to centre back to cover the absence of injured skipper Alan McDonald; Bingham believes the match is too big to ‘blood’ new recruit Pat McGibbon.
‘It's a positive looking team and hopefully we can get a positive result,’ said Bingham.
‘It would be nice to grab a few goals and with that in mind I'm using all three of our main strikers.’
Eye trouble
A late scare involving defender Gerry Taggart was averted; the Barnsley man has developed an eye infection which will need sustained treatment but was passed fit to play tonight.
Mind you, the conditions won't help with a damp blustery night expected.
It remains to be seen how Taggart's vision stands up to the floodlights — and the driving rain.
‘I'll have to see a specialist when I get back to Barnsley but the eyes feel much better today,’ said Taggart.
‘I was in agony earlier in the week; my eyes were stuck together every morning!
‘I'll have to keep them open tonight; we're expected to win but we can't take anything for granted in World Cup football.’
The build-up to this game has been a relaxed one and that's not really surprising.
Neither team will qualify for next year's World Cup finals in the United States so the outcome is hardly crucial.
But Bingham wants to end his managerial career on a high note and is determined to get something out of each of the last three games.
It will be a major shock if Northern Ireland, despite losing skipper Alan McDonald, do not achieve a comfortable win.
Latvia, frankly, are no great shakes and Northern Ireland's 2–1 victory in Riga last season shattered the home side.
Firepower
The return of Philip Gray, who missed that game, should provide extra the extra firepower needed for a two or three goal victory.
Worthington's promotion to captain is the only good news this week for his club Sheffield Wednesday whose four England representatives — Andy Sinton, Chris Woods, Des Walker and Carlton Palmer — were all left out of the side to face Poland.
The Ballymena man said: ‘I'm really pleased about getting the job and I hope we can mark the occasion with a victory.’
Turning soft on hard rock
LOOKING for rock with a hard edge and a soft centre this weekend…?
Look no further than the Front Page in Belfast on Fridays and Sunday nights when The Dead Handsomes — the alter ego of The Adventures with leading lights Terry Sharpe and Pat Gribben — play a highly danceable mix of classic and bang up-to-date covers.
Dublin rockers The Jenny Newman Band are there on Saturday night, and the Lovedogs take the Wednesday night (Sept 15) spot.
The Arms of Venus De Milo are at Maddens on Friday night; on Tuesday night (Sept 14) Laserlove play the Jordanstown Inn.
Proving they're anything but, Belfast rockers Lazy are back on the road, still basking in the glory of supporting US outfit Poison and very nearly stealing the show.
Lazy — a year old last month — are at The George, Ballymena, on Friday (Sept 10) and the next night (Sept 11) at the Rosetta in Belfast.
Their demo ‘Infamous First Words’ is still in demand, while the band — Paul Compton, Nicky Conway, Philip McCarroll and Finn McGinn are putting the finishing touches to another — both will be available at the shows.
Looking ahead to next Saturday (Sept 18) the Rosetta plays host to the Waterbratz from London.
They claim they are neither punk nor heavy metal, but can change tack from rock n' roll to thrash at the drop of a hat.
As yet unsigned, Waterbratz have notched up their third demo ‘Plastermind’, the most aggressive to date.
Frontman Hilda — so called because he used to put his hair in rollers — says influences are as diverse as Motley Crew, Van Halen, Thin Lizzy, even the Monkees.
Confused?
Don't be — check out The Waterbratz at the Rosetta on the 18th.
Summer is all but gone, school's in for winter and already there's movement on the big name concert scene that's been all but dormant of late.
The end of the month — September 26 — brings US indie grunge four-piece The Breeders to the Limelight.
The following evening, the Ulster Hall hosts the gutsy folk and rock of Brighton lads The Levellers.
And of course a stormer of a gig is assured when Carter USM grace the Mandela Hall at Queens on the 30th.
More on these gigs and interviews with prime movers later in the month.
Could the Christmas marketing rush for album sales be starting already?
In any case, a couple of notables reached us this week.
John Mellencamp continues on his American dream on ‘Human Wheels’, his 12th album release.
And volume six of ‘That Loving Feeling’ is out for incurable romantics everywhere.
Gabrielle and ‘Dreams’ kick off what is a fair mix of old and new.
Highlights include ‘A Little Time’ from The Beautiful South, ‘Young At Heart’from The Bluebells and the Righteous Brothers ‘Unchained Melody’.
Indie grunge: The Breeders
Mary goes it alone in song
MARY Duff, who sings so well with Daniel O'Donnell and Dominic Kirwan, will be out on her own on Sunday at the Fort Lodge Hotel in Enniskillen, making her favourite hoedown sounds.
Mary plays a prominent part in the new Kirwan television series produced in Carlisle by Border Television and Ritz Records.
It will be screened in the coming winter.
The band Canadian Pacific will be the guest artists at Monkstown Country Music Club tomorrow night.
Solo star: Mary Duff
West Side for Klondyke
THEATREGOERS will be able to assess the potential of the Klondyke Building as a venue for grand opera when four performances of Bernstein's West Side Story will be performed there by Opera Northern Ireland this week.
Bernstein's splendid orchestral score will be played by the Ulster Orchestra, conducted by Belfast-born Christopher Bell, who now holds important musical posts in Edinburgh.
For this up-dated version of the Romeo and Juliet story, producer Michael Poynor has assembled a large, youthful cast which has been rehearsing all summer.
Poynor has also designed the production.
The refurbished Klondyke Building is part of the old Gas Works located on the Ormeau Road with an entrance almost opposite Donegall Pass.
Traditional seating, two-thirds of it raked, is available for 600 patrons, but all are unreserved.
Performances start at 7.30pm Wednesday–Saturday, and supervised car parking facilities will be available within the Klondyke complex.
THE current series of BBC Tuesday lunchtime recitals continue on September 14, when the soloist will be Michael d'Arcy, violin.
Performances start at 1.15pm.
Whicker takes late spin round his world
WHILE I share Alan Whicker's ire at his new series being screened late night, it will nevertheless continue to be compulsive viewing.
In Whicker's Miss World (UTV, Tuesday, 10.40pm), the veteran globetrotter breaks through the chaperon cordon to join Joan Collins, Ivana Trump, Gary Player, Sidney Sheldon and other judges to observe their secret deliberations.
While 83 international beauties battle for the title in Bophuthatswana's ‘Lost City,’ Alan meets visiting celebrities like Jerry Hall, Richard Branson and Brigitte Nielsen.
RACHEL got pregnant at 15 because she wanted to leave school and get her own home.
Michele is 22 and expecting her fifth baby — her children have been fathered by two different men.
Janet lies to the authorities to ‘fiddle’ extra welfare benefits for her children.
Panorama (BBC-1, Monday, 9.30pm) asks: Should the taxpayer foot the bill for thousands of single mothers like these, who live alone but have several babies and expect the State to pay for them?
ON Easter Saturday, 1992, two incendiary devices destroyed SD Kells, a fashion shop in Lisnaskea.
‘Business as Usual,’ the third in the series Plain Tales From Northern Ireland (BBC-2, Thursday, 8pm) tells of the determination of Roy Kells and his staff to re-open less than six months later.
This was not the first time the UDR lieutenant colonel has faced danger.
His shop, just a few miles from the border, was firebombed in 1973 and rebuilt.
Then several years later a gunman appeared in front of him: ‘A man stood there, four feet away and fired a gun at me.
I looked into his eyes and he looked into mine and five shots went over my head,’ recalls Roy.
IN 1992, Birmingham was designated the UK City of Music.
The honour may have come as a surprise to some, but England's second city has never played second fiddle in the music business, spawning such performers as The Moody Blues, The Spencer Davis group, Black Sabbath, ELO, Duran Duran and UB40.
Motorcity Music Years (C-4, Wednesday, 12.05am) is a three-part series celebrating Birmingham's musical successes, each covering a decade from the 60s to the present.
GERRY Kelly returns for his fifth season of chat and entertainment in Kelly (UTV, Friday, 10.40pm.) with a bright new update to the title music, programme titles, and a re-decorated studio to greet his guests and live audience.
Gerry tells me he plans surprise items and human interest stories, as well as making use of the UTV satellite uplink vehicle to do local interviews live in the show.
Gerry Kelly: Back on the box.
May's ready tae bate yer ears
Corn plaster queen lands weekly spot on ‘Kelly’‘She's a one-woman shock force’
SHE is Ulster's very own Queen of Grunge.
Long before shapeless cardigans and outsize feet were making their fashion comeback, May McFettridge was blazing a style trail in elastic stockings and corn plasters.
And so what if her dentures are a few molars short of the set.
So what if she has only three frocks to her name (‘cuts down on the washin'’) Or if her ‘fur’ coat looks like it was handed down from Wilma Flintstone.
This woman has a talent as big as her shoulder muscles.
And, as they say in showbiz circles, a star is brawn.
Banter
Over the next 40 weeks May will be bringing her own inimitable wit to the Ulster viewing public with a regular slot on the Kelly show (UTV, Fridays at 10.40pm).
So just what can we expect from the woman who put the ‘broad’ in broadcasting?
Delicately readjusting her knicker elastic, May reveals that she'll be out and about, meeting the people, sharing a bit of crack and banter with her adoring public.
This week The Belfast Telegraph caught up with her in Royal Avenue, where the living legend was, typically, being mobbed by fans.
‘Och, what about ye, Sadie?’ cried one enthusiastic onlooker.
May fixed him with a glare, ‘Sadie?’ she snapped, ‘Sadie?
I'll Sadie ye.
I'll bate the bake aff ye!
I'll bate ye round the ears till ye think ye're surrounded.’
Alerted by her dulcet tones, a crowd began to gather outside a downtown boutique and May generously offered a few fashion tips to the throng.
‘Luk at thon in a shellsuit,’ she called as a middle aged shopper hurried by, ‘I thought you had to be a glue sniffer to wear a shellsuit.’
She nodded sympathetically to a passing workman, ‘I see the launderette was closed.’
May is surprisingly coy about her own wardrobe.
With vital statistics rumoured to be 41-39-extra large, she will only admit that her dress size is ‘the biggest.’
She sees no need to diet but that doesn't stop her from encouraging others to get the pounds off.
‘Luk at the belly on that,’ she calls to one portly gentleman, ‘They say he has a waterbed.
If you ask me, he's drunk it.’
She admits she's glad of the television work.
Ferrets
Recently deserted by her husband Cruncher (‘He left me for a wee young thing of 58’) she's found it hard enough to make ends meet in the past.
She wouldn't contemplate doing the double though, she confides as a group of youths hurry past.
‘Aye, mention doing the double and they take off like ferrets wi' their gutties on,’ she sighs.
Her Kelly slot won't stick to any particular pattern.
According to producer John Deering it will vary from week to week with May reporting live from throughout the province on people, places and products.
‘May is our roving reporter.
She'll be a sort of one woman ‘shock force’.
A cross between Anneka Rice and Roger Cook,’ he adds.
May says she is looking forward particularly to meeting the people — particularly the men.
She has a sharp eye for a toyboy.
And a sharp word for those she feels don't measure up.
‘I see you got your hair cut by the scenic route,’ she remarks to one gentleman who has neatly slicked a few strands over his bald patch.
It's the sort of quip that explains a lot about May.
When you first meet her you're intrigued to know what happened to those missing teeth.
When you spend a bit of time in her company you suspect it might have something to do with her outgoing nature and rare charm.
Gerry Kelly, you have been warned!
An Irishman remembers friend Bing
WHAT was Bing Crosby really like?
The Irishman who knew him best, George O'Reilly will be telling patrons of the Lansdowne Court Hotel intimate stories of his famous friend on Thursday October 7.
George, who was a friend of the Old Groaner for 25 years, will be talking about how Bing came to record White Christmas which became the world's greatest hit even though Crosby wasn't impressed by it at first.
And the evening will include a session with rare and seldom heard recordings by the star.
O'Reilly will also reveal star singers who Bing liked.
And he will talk about the affection Crosby had for Ireland.
He visited Northern Ireland with Bob Hope in wartime.
The story goes that their car broke down on the way to Larne, and they had to hitch a ride to get to the boat on time.
Chipps are off
ARE the Chippendales too hot for Belfast?
The beefcake male strippers are set to play the Olympia Theatre on September 27 and October 2.
But Wonderland promotions haven't arranged any dates for Belfast this time.
Which is going to disappoint an awful lot of women who flocked to see them in town a year ago.
Wonderland say there simply aren't any dates available — the Chippendales could do with double the number of weeks in the year.
Exodus for rock AMERICAN rockers Aerosmith are to play a one-off concert at the Point Depot, Dublin, on October 27 — but the driven rock stars can't make it to Belfast either.
There will be an exodus south of the border for this autumn date.
Aerosmith are calling this their Get to Grip tour.
The band with Steve Tyler as lead singer are famous for songs like Sweet Emotion, Dream On and Walk This Way.
LA lawlessness
CARON Wheeler's new album Beach of the War Goddess is out on EMI next week.
It features 13 of her own songs and a cover of the Jimi Hendrix classic Wind Cries Mary.
The title song, now a UK single, is all about the life of the black woman in modern times.
Caron wrote it in the aftermath of the '92 riots in LA where she was living at the time.
The Chippendales: No Belfast dates
Tour sends message of harmony
MEMBERS of the 85-strong Western Youth Orchestra have returned after a two-week tour of Canada and the United States, marking their 21st anniversary.
Michael Murphy, chief executive of the Western Education Board, said they had ‘conveyed a message of hope for the future harmonious relationship of all communities in Northern Ireland’.
Discussions with civic leaders in Toronto, Pittsburg and Cleveland would hopefully lead to commercial and trade links with those cities, he said.
Ben gets a broomstick
IF YOU want a chuckle catch Ben Elton as a buffoon, riding a broomstick across the screen this weekend at the MGM in hometown director Kenneth Branagh's Shakespeare film Much Ado About Nothing.
And then look forward to a winter date with the man in the flesh at the Ulster Hall on October 19.
He's what they used to call an alternative comic, although that description is already a bit out of date.
Elton is aware he's coming to the hometown of a lot of great traditional comedians like Frank Carson, Roy Walker and Jimmy Cricket.
But he's prepared to be judged on the kind of material that has made him a television star.
Ben Elton: On stage and screen.
Taking over
TEEN sensation Take That are 8–1 favourites to be number one in the Christmas pop charts.
Second favourite is a duet by Elton John and Kiki Dee — and hard-pressed pop star Michael Jackson is fourth at 16–1.
Mixed up with the mob
YOU can't beat the Mafia when you're stuck for a good idea for a film.
Gangsters have long been a good source of drama for the filmakers and there's barely a star in Hollywood who hasn't been ‘mixed up’ on screen with the mob at some point in his career.
Now it's the turn of Tom Cruise who stars as Ivy League hotshot lawyer Mitch McDeere in Sydney Pollack's adaptation of the John Grisham bestseller The Firm.
McDeere is offered a job with law firm Bedinini, Lambert and Locke who are euphemistically known as ‘tax specialists’ in Memphis.
The young lawyer is bowled off his feet by the offer of a brand new Mercedes, a great house and having his student loans wiped out.
But all this comes at a cost, one which McDeere only realises as his new employers' real work becomes increasingly clear.
‘McDeere is a great student, dedicated, hardworking and ambitious,’ says Cruise of his character.
‘For any firm, that's quite a catch.
You want someone young, hungry and willing to put in a lot of hours.
‘He thinks he's got it made, but he realises things aren't quite what they seem and the question is, what is he going to do about it?’
Generally the cast list is impressive, even if you have to accept that Cruise is fresh out of law school at about the age
(it obviously takes years to graduate).
Gene Hackman, enjoying a new lease of life following his Oscar-winning performance in ‘Unforgiven’ after a series of disasters, is one of the firm's stalwarts, and McDeere's mentor.
Jeanne Tripplehorn — who you may care to remember, rather laughably, was the one who ‘dun it’ in ‘Basic Instinct’— is McDeere's wife, while Holly Hunter, who has been rather quiet of late, turns up as a lovesick secretary.
Other notable names are Ed Harris, Hal Holbrook and Gary Busey.
‘The Firm’ reflects people's awareness in the 90s of the possibility of waking up to realise you're not who you wanted to be,’said director Pollack.
‘We've just been through a decade where we watched surface responsibility get peeled away from a lot of people and institutions.’
‘The Firm’(15) opens across Northern Ireland from Friday.
Tom Cruise has a look at life from both sides of the law in ‘The Firm’.
Reaching a high level
THANKS to a couple of decent albums and energetic live shows, the LEVELLERS are currently enjoying a healthy profile in music circles.
Their second album, ‘Levelling The Land’, released back in 1991, has clocked up double gold status in the UK and enjoyed healthy sales across Europe.
On top of that, last year's ‘Fifteen Years’ EP zoomed into the top of the singles chart and the recent
‘Belaruse’ did likewise.
And their third album, which is actually untitled, should do even better now that they have notched up a few hit singles to go along with the hit album.
In fact, the new long player has already been perched at number one in the UK album charts, and it could be around for quite a while.
That's because it's a breath of fresh air compared to some of the muck that passes for music in the popular music charts.
Levellers play music which has vitality, a sense of adventure and piles of gusto.
Their sound is hard to sum up.
In it you'll find punky tinges and folky tinges plus power pop surges.
It's a mighty brew, and it's a sound which could well carry them to a much higher level of success, if that's what they want.
Departures
Three separate studios were used by the Brighton band during the past three months as they put together the tracks included on the new album.
They visited Wales, Bath and Surrey.
Eno collaborator Marcus Dravs teamed up with the band to produce the disc, which contains nine original tracks and a song from a little known Brighton band called McDermott's Two Hours.
It's entitled ‘Dirty Davey’ and is a cracking wee tune.
Departures from the sound created on the first two albums include an appearance by bagpipes and female backing vocalists, plus whistle, hurdy gurdy and horns.
The horns are particularly effective.
They put real bite into the opening track ‘Warning’, which is a good pointer of what is to come.
If you can't punch the air and stomp your feet to it, then you must be a cardboard cut-out.
‘Julie’ is a classy acoustic rumble until it breaks into a Highland swing midway through when Callum Williams adds the skirl of the pipes.
The bagpipes sequence is quite neat, and reminiscent of parts of ‘Belfast Child’ by Simple Minds, but lacks something.
I reckon our own world champs Field Marshal Montgomery would have done a much better job.
As is usual with Levellers, the lyrics are political.
Themes cover everything from the sorry state of the environment to how money corrupts on to how people are persecuted because of their appearance.
All of the tracks are punchy and bright, and there are some great hooks dispersed through the ten tunes.
‘The Player’ is a flowing beaut, while ‘This Garden’has a chorus which gets right under the skin.
This is all good wholesome stuff.
With their third album, Levellers have produced a tasty brew which deserves to be heard.
They could be big fish, but their heartfelt politics should mean they will not become part of the corporate rock machine.
Some people, after all, do not think money is god.
(Album courtesy of Makin' Tracks).
ALBUM REVIEW by Nigel Tilson
All that jazz and even more
BUDDING young jazz musicians are being given the chance to shine with the launch this autumn of the Ulster Schools' Jazz Orchestra.
The orchestra is the result of an intensive summer course organised for local young musicians by south Belfast man Ken Jordan.
‘For the last four summers I had been working at Appel Farm Arts and Music Centre in New Jersey as head of music,’ Ken explained.
‘This summer I decided to stay at home and present a jazz/big band summer course, similar to the programme at Appel Farm, having seen the progress made by the pupils in America.’
The three-week course was open to all young musicians and involved over children form across the province.
Ken is now launching the Ulster Schools' Jazz Orchestra, the first rehearsal of which will take place next Saturday at 2pm in Methodist College.
‘We will try to accommodate everyone who is interested,’ Ken said.
Fee for membership for the coming term, which ends with a concert in the Crescent Arts Centre on December 11, is £25.
However, sponsorship is being sought for the next term and it is hoped sufficient funding will be secured to avoid a repeat fee.
Report by Michael Walsh
Tonight, tonight, West Side Story's on tonight
TWO hundred kids got a special preview of ‘West Side Story’ on Tuesday night, thanks to Opera Northern Ireland.
The doors opened to the general public last night at the Klondyke Buildings, Ormeau Road.
Opera Northern Ireland wanted local children to see its dress rehearsal of the popular musical, and regarded it as an opportunity to help with community development.
The children travelled from the nine Belfast Action Team areas, including Ballybeen, Monkstown, Shankill, Andersonstown, Suffolk and the Falls.
Feargal McSorley from BAT said: ‘Many of those who attended Tuesday's performance are involved in drama groups within their school or youth club, so of course they are delighted to get the opportunity to see a modern classic being staged by the very talented opera company.’
The show runs until Saturday for anyone else interested in going along.
Historical Society re-vamps it image
FORMER Irish premier Garret FitzGerald will deliver a public lecture at Queen's University in November as part of its revamped Historical Society programme.
The invitation, like last year's to Enoch Powell, is likely to be viewed as controversial.
But society secretary Craig McCullough says it is in the wider interests of the group to listen to all viewpoints.
‘Some concern has been voiced at our decision to invite political figures to speak at what is, after all, a historical society,’ he said.
‘But all politicians we invite are asked to lecture on historical topics, giving totally fresh and unique outlooks on the issues addressed.
‘Our society has a large and varied membership and this year's lecture programme will reflect the wide range of opinion among the society's members.’
Last year the society's committee made a decision to relaunch in a bid to attract more members and introduce a more entertaining programme.
Traditional film nights were ditched and lectures, which had been poorly attended, were radically reduced in number.
Spokesman Brian Adams explained: ‘The historical society is one of the oldest clubs at Queen's but for a long time it seemed to have fallen into a plodding routine.
‘A decision was taken to strengthen the social side of the society and this year we are continuing our policy of a mix of social and academic events.
‘Plans are already well advanced for a new formal which will have the added attraction of a free champagne reception and all-night party afterwards.’
Bread and butter…
NOW that the Zooropa extravaganza has passed by along with the Trip to Tipp, Slane and various other festivals, it's back to bread and butter fare for promoters.
The autumn/ Christmas period is traditionally a busy time for gigs, and that should be the case again this year.
However, the concerts may not be as thick on the ground as in previous years because the province's main promoters have had their fingers burnt on a few occasions during festival season and they are not taking any big risks for the remainder of the year.
Nevertheless, the purse strings have been loosened sufficiently to provide a palatable enough feast.
Coming to Belfast this month are THE BREEDERS and LEVELLERS, while next month sees JETHRO TULL in town.
RUNRIG are due to visit in November along with TAKE THAT, while MEATLOAF is here in December and UB in January.
THE BREEDERS, who play the Limelight on September (£8.50), hail from Ohio in the States and play what can be best described as grunge.
Their first album, ‘Pod’, released some three years ago, was a big success and reached number in the UK charts without being heavily marketed.
Since then, they have released a couple of impressive extended plays, ‘Safari’ and the more recent ‘Cannonball’, and they have just unveiled a new long player in ‘The Breeders' Last Splash’.
Stomp
GROOVES
Sisters Kim and Kelley Deal, who both play guitars and sing, formed the band in '89.
Prior to that, they were an acoustic duo who played at truckstops and saloons.
The other members of the band are Jim MacPherson on drums and Josephine Wiggs on bass.
GROOVES
LEVELLERS, who started out as The Levellers but seem to have dropped the ‘The’, are fast becoming big noises on the rock circuit.
GROOVES
Since forming in' in Brighton, they have steadily built up a huge following thanks to classy record releases and action-packed live shows.
Their music has hints of The Waterboys, New Model Army and The Clash and it's perfect for a good ole stomp.
GROOVES
After releasing a couple of singles on their own Hag label in 1989, they signed for Musidisc the following year and released a debut album in ‘A Weapon Called The Word’, which has since gone on to earn them a silver disc.
GROOVES
However, after putting out a couple more singles in 1990, they then signed for their current record company China and unleashed the indie chart-topper ‘One Way’ in September '91.
A month later came their second album, ‘Levelling The Land’, which was well received and has now sold 200, copies in the UK alone, giving it double gold status.
GROOVES
And in Europe, where they have played several big festivals, they have notched up over 100, sales with the second album.
Popular
GROOVES
Since it was released they have built on their following with three excellent singles, ‘Far From Home’, the ‘Fifteen Years’ EP and the recent hit
‘Belaruse’.
GROOVES
The five-piece outfit play the Ulster Hall in Belfast on September
(£11, £10) as part of a UK tour to promote their latest long player, which is actually untitled, although some would say it is self-titled.
GROOVES
Levellers will perform in front of 70, people during the tour, and already well over 50, tickets have been snapped up, so get cracking if you want one for the Belfast gig.
These guys are popular.
GROOVES
UB may be pencilled in for a show in the King's Hall on January
(£16.75, £18.75), but their popularity is reflected in the fact that tickets are already flying out the door.
GROOVES
Since they formed in Birmingham way back in 1978, they have been leading players in the UK's reggae movement, even if their sound has become rather commercial in recent years.
GROOVES
They have sold over million albums around the globe, played around a thousand sold-out shows and enjoyed numerous hit singles.
Their ‘Labour Of Love’ albums, which feature covers of reggae classics, have been particularly big sellers.
GROOVES
Over the years they have been inducted into the Maori nation in New Zealand, a rare honour, have packed soccer stadiums in Uruguay and Chile which make Wembley look like a park pitch and have successfully led the way for numerous reggae bands to grab a slice of the American popular music market.
GROOVES 
Sequel
Deliberately low-key, they have let their music do the talking for over years.
GROOVES
The Belfast date is part of a tour to promote their current chart-topping album ‘Promises And Lies’, which is their first album of original material for some time.
Mind you, the first hit single from it, ‘Can't Help Falling In Love’, was a Presley standard.
The current hit ‘Higher Ground’ is one of their own.
GROOVES
Meanwhile, MEATLOAF is coming to the King's Hall on December to play tracks from his long-awaited sequel to the blockbuster ‘Bat Out Of Hell’ album.
Tickets are now on sale at usual outlets.
GROOVES
Another top rock outfit, AEROSMITH, have signed up for a show at the Point Depot in Dublin on October
(£16, £18).
GROOVES 80.
Led by lively frontman Steven Tyler, the band have enjoyed a remarkable resurgence in recent years thanks to the mega-selling ‘Pump’ album of a few years back and several hit singles, including ‘Rag Doll’, ‘Love In An Elevator’, ‘Janie's Got A Gun’and ‘Livin' On The Edge’.
GROOVES
Their most recent album, ‘Get A Grip’, released back in April, was their 11th studio long player to date, and they have sold over million discs around the globe.
GROOVES
They were always a big league band in the States, but it's only in the last five years or so that they have been rising up the Euro league.
I love ya, tomorrow
TWO young Belfast girls have been given the chance to play one of the most sought after theatre roles of them all.
Gillian Smith (10) and Denise Farrelly (13) will be playing the coveted part of little orphan Annie in the Arts Musical Youth's new production which opens on Tuesday.
The show, directed by Peter Kennedy, runs until Sunday evening at the Botanic Avenue theatre.
Meanwhile, at the Old Museum Arts Centre, the Armada Festival begins on Monday with the first of six productions by young Irish companies.
Julian swapping bow ties for school blazers
WHACKY TV personality Julian Simmons is appealing to schools throughout Belfast to help the charity by participating in a ‘Schools No Uniform Day 1993’.
On a date chosen by each school, pupils will be able to spend a day in ‘civvies’ in return for a donation to the Deaf Self Help Society, of which Julian is patron.
The same day teachers will get the chance to wear their school's uniform for a small contribution.
Sponsored by Coca Cola, the event will raise money towards a minibus enabling the society to bring people with hearing difficulties on visits and holidays as part of its ‘Getting To Know You’ project.
Snud a large, red, hairy monster — and mascot of the society — will be going along to schools to collect the donations.
Prizes will be awarded for those who raise the most money.
For more information contact Glenn Oakes at Deaf Self Help Society,
Snud keeps the ‘No School Uniform Day Gang’ John McConnel (DSHS director), Glenn Oakes (DSHS fund raiser), Julian Simmons (DSHS patron), Mark Carson (Coca-Cola), Joanne Logan (Coca-Cola) and Lorraine Johnston (DSHS administrator) in line.
The same old song
IN America, MICHAEL McDONALD is one of the better known solo performers in popular music spheres.
But McDonald has never enjoyed the same profile this side of the Atlantic.
A quick spin of his ‘Sweet Freedom — The Best Of’ compilation album of a few years back is proof enough that he has had many hits in his home patch without making similar in-roads here.
Indeed, the song ‘Sweet Freedom’ is perhaps his best known ditty in these climes even though he has released tons of songs for the consumption of the masses.
Mind you, it is rather surprising that McDonald, a top session man turned star performer, has not established himself as a big noise in Europe.
His music is the kind of accessible and easy listening fare churned out by the likes of Michael Bolton and Lionel Richie, who have both shifted considerable numbers of discs in European markets.
The fact that he's not pin-up material like Bolton and does not quite have the same vocal dexterity as either Bolton or Richie probably has a significant bearing on his lack of success in Europe.
Marketing folk here always like to promote a face as well as a product.
Formula
As far as the material goes, his is more than equal to that served up by the aforementioned pair.
He writes catchy tunes with lavish pop hooks and huge slices of melody.
Rough edges are few and far between.
Having said that, most of the songs on his latest long player, ‘Blink Of An Eye’, sound very familiar.
He uses a formula which has been tried and tested on several occasions in the past.
In the mix, you'll invariably find funky guitar splashes, soaring keyboard washes, sassy horn blasts, a bubbling bass line and huge helpings of vocal harmonies.
For the most part, it's the same old song.
When he does break away from the norm, and that's not too often, there are some interesting results.
The first part of ‘Matters Of The Heart’ is a stark, atmospheric piece which is rather hypnotic.
The use of the triangle and finger cymbals is particularly effective against a backdrop of keyboard.
His version of the Carol King/Gerry Goffin song ‘Hey Girl’ is pretty decent as well.
A dreamy affair, it has soothing qualities.
Most of the other material has been written by McDonald himself.
In sticking to his formula, McDonald sometimes gets a bit carried away.
The shortest song, the funky and inviting ‘I Want You’, weighs in at four minutes, seconds.
The longest, ‘For A Child’, runs for nearly eight minutes.
Now, if he was churning out stunning guitar solos and loads of rhythm variations, a tune lasting eight minutes might be bearable.
But ‘For A Child’ only has a slight tempo shift, a trumpet solo and a blast of flugelhorn to give it some extra zest, and it's simply not enough.
Boredom quickly sets in.
McDonald has some well known musicians, such as Pino Palladino and Benmont Tench, helping him out on the disc, but even their presence fails to add the bit of gloss that is evidently lacking.
‘Blink Of An Eye’ is certainly an easy listening disc, but it's just too easy.
It washes over your head without making you sit up and take notice.
(Album courtesy of Makin' Tracks).
REVIEW by Nigel Tilson
Helen Carson discovers why the sisters are doin' it for themselves Women building on success
WINDSOR Women's Centre will, quite literally, be building on its own success, when members don hard hats to construct a new complex at Broadway.
And a pioneering construction course, run by women for women, will provide the group with the necessary bricklayers and joiners needed to convert five derelict properties into a new women's centre.
Building work is due to start in November, and when it's complete the women's group will be transferring its operations from Rockview Street to the new Broadway premises.
Billie Rudyard, who is co-ordinating the course, explained: ‘The women will be able to get ‘hands on’ experience during the course, by doing some of the work at the new centre.’
And construction is, apparently, an extremely viable business option for women, despite the current lull in the building trade.
‘Women builders can work from our workshops and take on private commissions, if they want to set up on their own,’ she said.
‘And we believe women would prefer women builders.’
Students can complete the 12-month credited building skills course for women in two parts — spending one day at Millfield for building skills, and the other day at Windsor Women's Workshops, where they will concentrate on personal development.
Allowances are also available from a European fund NOW (New Opportunities for Women).
These include £ for creche and £ for travelling expenses.
The construction course will run on Tuesdays (Millfield Technical College) 9.30am-2pm and Thursdays, 9.30am-2pm (Windsor Women's Workshops).
It starts on Tuesday, September 14.
Enrolment takes place next Thursday (September 9), at 10am at Windsor Women's Centre, Rockview Street.
The new complex will mean even more facilities for local women, under one roof.
Windsor Women's Centre currently employs members of staff and is hoping to increase that when the new centre opens.
Once up and running it will operate a drop-in facility with a kitchen and dining room, open to the public for lunches, or just a cup of coffee and a chat.
Upstairs, there will be classrooms as well as computer, craft and homework rooms for children to use.
And the adults will be able to co-ordinate the centre's activities and publicity from a dark room, meeting and staff rooms.
An advice centre and outdoor play facilities will also feature at the new centre.
Education liaison officer Tracie Dougherty outlined what else was on offer.
For women keen to get back into the workplace or further education, a Women Returners course starts on Tuesday, September 14, from 10.30am-12.30pm.
The nine-week project offers practical advice on application forms and CVs, as well as information on further and higher education options.
A popular weekly evening class is the Access Course, which is designed for those considering higher education.
It is an Open University course which studies ‘Modern Ireland North and South’ and will run on Thursday nights, also starting on Tuesday, September 14, from 10.30am-12.30pm.
Other classes include assertiveness, GCSE sociology, woodwork, crafts and creative writing.
For further information on any of the courses and grant information, contact Tracie at Belfast 235451, or drop into the centre at
Rockview Street, Donegall Road, Monday to Thursday between 9.30am-4pm.
Women learn woodwork skills at Windsor Women's Workshops.
The women can put their new-found building skills into practice at the new Broadway complex.
Vorsprung durch Technik
IT'S the opening line of their new album, and it perfectly summed up their stunning live spectacular —‘Zooropa…
Vorsprung durch Technik’.
For U2's Zooropa experience, which ground to a halt in Dublin on Saturday night, was a technological rollercoaster ride.
Vorsprung durch Technik, which roughly translates to ‘created using the best technology’, meant huge banks of videos, a colossal stage and a stunning light show, all wrapped in a huge sound system.
The Euro leg of the Zoo TV tour promised to be spectacular and, on the evidence of events at Dublin's RDS Showjumping Arena on Saturday night, it was.
The stars turned out in force to see Bono and the boys bring a mega tour to a close.
Mick Jagger, Bob Geldof, Jim Kerr and several other well known celebs were there to witness a truly amazing event, along with 35, fans.
The same number had been there the previous night as well.
For more than two hours, the band who are without question the biggest rock outfit on the globe at present lit up the Dublin sky with a breathtaking assault on the senses.
It was simply mind-bending stuff.
There was so much happening either on the stage or on the huge banks of videos that it was difficult to take it all in.
Not surprisingly, the four Dubliners who rule the rock world featured relatively new material in their set.
A lot of it was from ‘Achtung Baby’, the album through which they reinvented themselves and took their act to new heights.
Calls
Only a few tracks from the current album ‘Zooropa’ were aired.
Guitarist The Edge took the mike to give us ‘Numb’, while Bono and the rest of the lads took to a satellite stage to deliver the soothing and pulse-filled ‘The First Time’.
‘Fanfare’, taken from the album ‘Lenin's Favourite Songs’ but featured on U2's latest, was in there too.
The vibrant ‘Zoo Station’ kicked everything off and right from the word go it was going to be something special.
The visual impact was incredible.
A mass of footage whizzed across the screens.
The Zoo TV Tour has seen Bono making phone calls to all and sundry, including Bill Clinton and John Major.
And on Saturday, he contacted the UN only to be greeted with an answering machine.
With reference to those suffering in Sarajevo, a raw version of the classic Beatles song ‘Help’ followed.
On the music front, the ‘Achtung Baby’ material sounded brash and gutsy in the live arena.
‘Ultra Violet (Light My Way)’ was one of the highlights, ‘Even Better Than The Real Thing’kicked hard, ‘One’was scintillating and ‘Love Is Blindness’hypnotic and powerful against a backdrop of city lights in black and white on the video screens.
Old faves were aplenty.
The classic ‘Bad’ sounded fresh as a daisy, ‘Running To Stand Still’was stripped to the bone, a speech from Martin Luther punctuated a storming version of ‘Pride’, and huge burning crosses filled the screens during the anti-war tirade ‘Bullet The Blue Sky’.
And smoke billowed from seven huge masts which held it all together.
Stunning.
Clever
In addition, ‘New Year's Day’ was as potent as ever and ‘When Love Comes To Town’was catchy and pert despite being stripped down.
On the visual front, Bono donned a disgusting gold suit on unveiling his alter ego MacPhisto towards the end, and earlier supermodel Naomi Campbell, girlfriend of bassist Adam Clayton, swaggered onto the stage for a quick waltz with the lead singer.
There was also a clever sequence during ‘Satellite of Love’ in which Bono did a duet with the man who wrote the song, Lou Reed.
Thanks to the wonders of technology, Reed appeared on a huge vidiwall to take part in the sing-a-long.
On top of that, a veiled belly dancer appeared during a thumping good rendition of ‘Mysterious Ways’.
All in all, it was a non-stop rock cabaret of incredible intensity.
It's difficult to see how they will ever better it.
Meanwhile, a band from Washington DC's famous Dischord stable are coming our way next week.
HOLY ROLLERS are playing Richardsons in Belfast's Victoria Street on Tuesday as part of an extensive European tour to promote their latest album, which is simply entitled ‘Holy Rollers’.
Formed in as a three-piece, they now have four members in their ranks and play music which has been described as a cross between Sonic Youth and Stiff Little Fingers.
Supporting them next Tuesday will be Unison Tut.
Tickets, priced £3, are available at Dr Robert's and Heroes & Villains in Belfast.
Venue
And don't forget that a week of American music is still in full swing at Belfast's Rotterdam Bar, while Queen's is playing host to a major roots festival this weekend.
Featuring music, song and dance, the ‘Harvest Festival at Queen's’ features the likes of Sharon Shannon, Begley and Cooney, The Voice Squad, Ten Wheels For Jesus, Cathal Hayden and many, many more.
It gets underway tomorrow (Friday).
A major new venue for live music is now up and running in Bangor.
Known as The Belfry (formerly The Coachman), it is staging a live gig every Saturday night featuring top Ulster bands plus up and coming acts from other climes, and the organisers hope to stage other shows throughout the week, too.
A free bus service to and from the venue is available from Belfast.
Buses leave Shaftesbury Square at 8pm and 9pm, returning at 12.30am and 1.30am.
There will also be special promotions each week and a disco featuring Downtown's Johnny Hero.
The organisers say they hope to cater for all tastes at The Belfry, and they're certainly trying their best.
This Saturday sees JOYRIDER in action there, while FOUR IDLE HANDS will be on stage next week, followed by FLYING SAUCER CULT the week after that.
Admission to the gig is £ before 11pm.
Popular local outfit GHOST OF AN AMERICAN AIRMAN released their new album in the States earlier this week.
Import copies should be available here soon.
Finally, Norman Boyd, the man behind the now defunct Preacher John, has formed a new band and is on the lookout for a singer.
They play original material in a Chili Peppers vein.
Anyone interested should contact Norman on Belfast 640529.
A celebration of brush strokes
COIFFURES and connoisseurs alike will enjoy a visit to Stafford hair salon in Belfast's Queen Street.
For brush strokes of a different kind are on show at the city centre salon through paintings by Belfast artists Fiona Connolly and Donna McGarrigan.
The salon, which was formerly a linen mill, has had its two top floors converted into gallery space, and the exhibition of local talent opens tomorrow (Thursday, September 2).
The collection includes pieces in both oils and watercolours, with a range of still life paintings.
10.
The women describe their work as ‘a two dimensional collection of thoughts, experiences and dreams, translated through the medium of paint’.
Fiona has worked on set designs for the Royal Ballet Company in Dublin, and Donna has produced pieces for the Belfast Denver exchange.
And both artists have shown at the Belfast Young Contemporary Gallery in Oxford Street.
Art is alive…
‘A LIVING art’ is how east Belfast man Stephen Whiteside describes the world of bonsai.
The craft has been his hobby for the past years, and in that time he has seen it grow immensely in popularity.
Secretary of the Northern Ireland Bonsai Society, Stephen decided last month to open Cregagh Bonsai.
It's the first business specialising in the miniature trees and plants to open in Belfast.
‘The beauty of bonsai is that it appeals to all ages,’ he says.
‘Members of the society range from their early teens to people over 70.
And my three-and-a-half-year-old son Christopher has two trees of his own to look after.
‘In my own terms, I would describe myself as a fanatic as far as bonsai goes.’
According to the dictionary the name bonsai is Japanese, although they are relative newcomers to the art.
It began around 3BC when man was more nomadic in nature and needed plants that were portable.
It spread to the Chinese around 2, years ago and then reached Japan where they cultivated it into the art form it is today.
And it wasn't until the end of the Second World War that the tiny trees made it to the west.
‘It is the bonsai dish that restricts the growth of the roots as well as the special mixture of peat and soil used,’ explains Stephen.
Types
‘They are pruned back and wire can be attached to the branches to shape them into any design you want.
‘If you replant the trees in the ground they will revert to normal.
‘You can bonsai anything from rose bushes to oak trees.’
There are two basic types of bonsai tree — tropical, which can be kept indoors, and outdoor plants and trees.
The tropical tree, typically an evergreen, needs little attention but owners need to be wary of temperature as central heating systems can have an adverse effect.
Stephen, who specialises in the outdoor variety, bought his first bonsai tree as a seedling from a garden centre and from that point on became hooked on the idea.
‘As a child my hobby was building model airplanes.
However, I have always had an interest in gardening so this was obviously the ideal hobby,’ he explained.
‘At one time I had over trees in the garden but that took up so much time, so I have whittled that down to around or 60.’
The main branch of the Bonsai Society meets on the second Friday of every month in Cregagh Library.
As well as trying to solve members' problems and holding workshops, the society also takes part in various festivals around the country.
It was represented at the International Rose Festival at Sir Thomas and Lady Dixon Park in July.
Interest
‘Initially people think bonsai trees must be quite difficult to keep, but all it takes is a few minutes a day to see they are properly watered.
‘My trees are kept in the garden and they have been covered with snow and frozen solid in the winter but they have all survived.
They are extremely resilient.
I also have a sycamore that is years old.’
As yet Cregagh Bonsai is in its infancy but Stephen is in no doubt that the interest in the trees will give him more than enough business to handle.
‘My aim is to sell people good quality trees at a reasonable price,’ he explains.
‘There are people who are prepared to take advantage, selling trees under false pretences, valuing them at a lot more than they are worth.
Sometimes you will find people selling ordinary plants just stuck in pots and sold as bonsai.’
The Northern Ireland Bonsai Society's next meeting after the summer break is next Friday and new members are welcome.
Stephen Whiteside can be contacted on Belfast 702316.
‘In my own terms, I would describe myself as a fanatic as far as bonsai goes’ Cregagh Bonsai owner Stephen Whiteside surrounds himself with the love of his life.
Report by Peter Hutcheon
A bloomin' good show!
CARNMONEY will be coming up roses at the weekend as the local Presbyterian Church hosts one of the biggest events in its social calendar.
On Friday it will stage the church's 82nd annual flower show.
The event is in aid of missionary and church funds.
Last year £1, was raised for projects at home and in the overseas missions.
And the show is open not just to those with green fingers.
As well as cups for cut flowers and floral art, prizes are also up for grabs for best vegetables and farm produce, cakes, preserves, and handicrafts.
Doors open at Carnmoney Presbyterian Church Halls on Friday at 7pm.
College courses
NORTH Down and Ards College offers over courses for adults in its five centres.
Beginning this autumn, courses are designed to cater for all tastes and interests.
Irrespective of their aims, adult students have a number of things in common, they like the college atmosphere, welcome the encouragement which they receive from tutors, enjoy meeting other students and wouldn't miss their class for the world!
With a list ranging from vocational and leisure courses to adult basic education, there's something for just about everyone.
Further information about the range of courses on offer can be obtained from North Down College, but you'll need to hurry because enrolment for vocational courses takes place today in Newtownards and tomorrow (Thursday) in Bangor from 6–8pm.
Details of enrolment for other courses will follow within the next week.
Shameless Shaz does what she does best
AND so the Sharon Stone bandwagon trundles merrily on.
Now firmly perched at the top of the Hollywood ‘A-list’ of actresses, it seems strange that her career has been made up entirely of films that really haven't been all that good.
Of course‘Basic Instinct’ finally made her name, but all that really offered was a touch of controversy in a decidedly average thriller.
Before that there was a string of flops stretching back over years (‘Police Academy 4’ and ‘King Solomon's Mines’would have ended most careers).
And now we have Sliver which was the subject of much wrangling and hasn't exactly set the world on fire.
The news that no less than five new endings were shot due to poor reaction at the preview screenings hardly augers well.
But still Ms Stone has the world at her feet and her reputation remains, if untarnished isn't quite the right word, intact — the uncrowned ‘Hottest thing in Hollywood’.
The essential appeal in ‘Sliver’ is the voyeurism of apartment building owner Zeke Hawkins (William Baldwin) who has set up an elaborate video system to monitor what his tenants get up to behind closed doors.
Gruesome
Enter our Sharon as book editor Carly Norris, looking for somewhere to hang her hat after ending her unhappy marriage.
Unbeknown to Norris, the sliver—a name given to tall narrow apartment buildings by New Yorkers — has been the scene of some pretty gruesome goings on.
And she becomes rather alarmed to discover the previous occupant of her room bore an uncanny resemblance to her and had a penchant for bungee jumping without a rope.
Competing with Mr Perv for Norris's affections is true crime author Jack Lansford (Tom Berenger) whose interest has been aroused by the building's grisly past.
Fleadh winner
A 15-YEAR-OLD south Belfast girl has won the Irish Harp section of this year's All-Ireland Fleadh.
Mernie Gilmore took top honours in the 12–16 age group.
This is the first time she has won the championship, taking second and third places in previous competitions.
Folk club
A NEW Sunday Folk Club is up and running in the Hatfield Bar on the Ormeau Road.
This weekend, top harmonica player Brendan Power and guitarist Frank Kilkelly will be taking to the stage, at around 8pm.
Based in London, the pair play acoustic music which blends a wide range of influences, including soulful blues, bluegrass, jazz, trad reels and even Vivaldi.
Power, a New Zealander, plays the blues harp and the chromatic harmonica.
He featured on Sting's most recent album.
Kilkelly, from Mayo, was once a member of the popular outfit Hotfoot and is a leading session musician.
Julian picks a winner!
Zena Blair went shopping in the Northcott Centre last week and came back with a computer in her trolly.
The Glengormley girl was the lucky winner of an Apple Mac computer in the centre's back to school competition.
She is pictured with her mum Christine and TV personality Julian Simmons who drew out the winning entry.
Classes are postponed
THE programme of classes at Ards Arts Centre, badly damaged in an IRA bomb attack in July, has been postponed until the new year.
Alternative venues are being sought for other arts events on the pre-Christmas schedule.