

Cushendall on course
CUSHENDALL'S determination to hold onto their Antrim senior hurling crown has been very much in evidence during this year's campaign to date.
And this determination is likely to be further underlined when they meet Ballycastle in Sunday's final at Casement Park.
The Ruiari Og outfit swamped Loughguile in he semi-final — a win that bolstered confidence in their camp as they bid for back-to-back honours.
With Sambo McNaughton, James McNaughton, Leonard McKeegan, Alistair McGuile and John Carson in fine fettle just now, the 'Dall possess the kind of fire-power necessary for success.
Ballycastle, though, have their quota of shooting stars and have the not inconsiderable incentive of attempting to dislodge their great north Antrim rivals.
It should be a close, hard game but Cushendall may perhaps just have the edge.
In the Down hurling final replay Ballycran will meet Ballygalget.
Both teams have met in the decider so often that they are vastly familiar with each other 's style of play.
A plethora of Down stars will be in action but Ballygalget could have something to spare at the finish.
In the Ulster Club Championship Shield final Dungannon will meet Keady at the Athletic Grounds, Armagh.
The Tyrone champions have made fine strides lately while Keady are back on top in the orchard county.
Keady are an amalgam of youth and experience and are taken to win — but Dungannon will press them hard.
Tomorrow's Antrim fixtures are: Div 1A Football 6.30 — Dunloy v St Johns, J Graham.
Div 1A Res Football 5.00 — Dunloy v St Johns, M Hasson
‘Room for improvement’ admission on weed worry
WEEDS five feet hight have turned many grassy areas in east Belfast Housing Executive estates into jungles, it was claimed today.
DUP councillor Sammy Wilson said that for the second year running he had been swamped with complaints from local people who feel they are living in ‘eyesores’.
And today the Executive admitted it could do better when it came to grounds maintenance in that area of the city.
‘It is disgraceful.
The Executive obviously has a very serious problem when it comes to looking after these areas,’ said Mr Wilson.
View
‘One woman told me she used to have a great view from her window across a local park.
Now she can't see over the weeds.
‘I have contacted the Executive on behalf of people many times and they have told me they will do something about it.
Promises
‘On some sites I've had at least four promises since May that work will be carried out.
I tell residents this but the work never happens.
It makes me look a liar.’
Mr Wilson said that last year the Executive had paid their own direct labour organisation to maintain open spaces ‘but they never cut grass or pulled a single weed.’
‘They told me that this year they have employed a private contractor who is supposed to cut grass at least twice a month and weed once a month but its not happening,’ he added.
An Executive spokesman said: ‘The Executive realises there is room for improvement in the grounds maintenance services provided in east Belfast.
‘We are actively pursuing the matter with the contractor employed on its behalf to carry out this work.’
Mr Wilson added: ‘When many of the developments were being built tenants associations and public representatives pointed out that publicly-owned areas were prone to vandalism but it was never envisaged they would be subject to such official neglect.
‘Senior officials in the Executive have spoken a great deal and written much about delivering a quality service.
It is time they started delivering on their promise.’
In the ‘jungle:’ Sammy Wilson walks among the weeds which are a growing problem in east Belfast.
By Gail Walker
Robinson duo in final ‘test’
THE Robinson family could have a big influence on the outcome of the Armagh senior football championship final on Sunday.
Brothers Jim and Dixie have been to the fore during Maghery's charge into the decider and Lurgan aces Clan na gael know that they must combat this dual threat if they are to succeed.
Dixie's free-taking and Jim's pace have been features of Maghery's progress to date but the Lough shore men know that Clans represent a massive hurdle.
For their part, the Davitt Park men, with a mixture of old and young players in their side, are keen to add another string to their bow.
They have played some fluent football to date and their finishing has been clinical.
Resilient
Defensively, Maghery are strong and resilient but will need all their resources in this department if they are to contain the Clans.
After all, the Lurgan outfit can boast the talents of Barry and Kevin O'Hagan as well as the mercurial skills of Diarmuid Marsden all of whom played for the Armagh Minor side last year.
While Maghery will look in the main to the Robinson brothers, they can also bank on the experience supplied by Martin Toye.
Toye has been in the Armagh county squad in recent years and is a proven forward capable of turning the tide in his team's favour.
He is a capable finisher and his experience of the big occasion will come in useful in a Maghery side gunning for their first title.
They have been beaten finalists on three occasions and the setbacks now act as a spur to the present squad.
‘It would be pleasant to lift the McKillop Cup especially as we have had a tough campaign so far.
Still, the matches we have played to date have helped to induce self-belief in our side and I am optimistic that we can succeed,’ says Jim Robinson.
His own searing speed and subtle distribution of Jim Robinson, though, will be key weapons while Clans know that Dixie will punish any indiscretions.
It will be a tight, hard game and perhaps it may take a replay before a decision is arrived at.
By John Campbell GAA
Shooting star: Martin Toye will have a key role in Maghery's bid.
Get back to a taste of nature
IF you like to feel at one with nature when you are having a tipple, you could do a lot worse than to make for the upstairs bar in the Shaftesbury Inn on Belfast's Antrim Road.
While nestling behind your drink in the upstairs bar you are surrounded by a veritable rainforest of shrubs and plants — with a great view of Belfast Lough.
The complex was rebuilt after a firebomb attack more than a year ago, and its owners certainly have made the most of the opportunity.
Downstairs the bar's lay-out has been cleverly designed so as to lend a feeling of space without losing a certain cosiness.
So you would feel equally at home there with a group of friends on a night out or just popping in for a quiet drink and a chat.
Historical
The decor is impressive, with all sorts of artefacts suspended from the ceiling and attached to the walls.
It is the sort of place where you find a different object of interest every time you go back.
On my last visit I noticed that an image of James Joyce had been engraved on a tiny glass window on the seat behind me, and other historical figures literally emerged from the woodwork when I looked a little closer around the bar.
Pity they couldn't actually have joined us because I was last there on a Monday night and my four friends and I swelled the numbers beyond double figures.
It is a wee bit disconcerting when you can hear yourself think in a pub these days.
Venturing upstairs is like entering another world.
To the left is a wide, airy area that is given the feeling of a conservatory by huge windows overlooking Belfast Lough and all that foliage.
Transformation
On a summer evening it is a superb setting for a drink and I believe that food is also served in that area.
Round the corner and again a transformation, this time the decor is that of a university study with huge creaking bookcases crammed with dusty volumes.
The Shaftesbury Inn provides a backdrop for every mood, it would seem.
Again unfortunately the only thing lacking was people, but perhaps in Monday we picked a bad night to sample the crack as locals tell me the place livens up as the weekend approaches.
The drink was reasonably priced, my round of a glass of wine, a coke, a pint of lager and a bottle of Max cider came to £5.09.
The staff were amiable, but there again they had plenty of time to be.
So try the Shaftesbury — it really could grow on you, especially the upstairs bar!
Derry honour Coulter
RENOWNED composer Phil Coulter was today appointed president of Derry City Football club.
Derryman Coulter replaces James McCauley who died a year ago.
It's a major boost for the North West club who regard Coulter as one of their most famous sons.
CYCLING
Final ‘10’ event
THE final UCF road cycling event of the season takes place this evening at Burnhouse when the Vets League has its last event, a ‘10’ on the Moira Road with the first rider off at 6.45.
The NICF still have two Saturday Road Race League events to go.
This week's is at Carrickfergus (11 a.m.) promoted by Team Madigan CC.
Jamie Hunter (Toyota North Down) who broke the 12 hour record last Sunday, has the form to take an overall lead before the final race at Randalstown next week.
The UC's Mountainbike league is also coming to a close with the final event at Rostrevor on Sunday.
Alastair Martin (Ards — Mike the Bike), second in the Grundig ATB championship last week, has a better record than anyone else on the Kilbroney Park course.
ATHLETICS
Wonderful Wang WORLD champion Wang Junxia fulfilled her ambition to become the first woman to run under 30 minutes for the 10,000 metres when she today slashed an astonishing 42 seconds off the world record.
The 20-year-old clocked 29 minutes 31.80 seconds in Beijing's Workers' Stadium, to break Norwegian Ingrid Kristiansen's seven-year-old world mark of 30:13.74.
And it was also a massive improvement on Wang's time in the Stuttgart world championships last month when she clocked an Asian record of 30:49.30.
Wang, who also won gold at last year's world junior championships, comes from the high altitude province of Qinghai and altitude training was given as one reason for the staggering success of the Chinese women in Stuttgart with gold medals in the 1,500m, 3,000m and 10,000m.
Loughrey through
TUESDAY'S play in the first round singles events having been rained off were played yesterday in the 31st Dun Laoghire Bowling tournament in Dublin.
Ulster bowlers showed up well with Willie Loughrey from Portrush, a senior inter-association bowler 11 win over Phillip Darcy in the first round and then beat Paul Doyle 21–15 in the second round.
Loughrey now meets CYM'S Fra Brady in this third round match later today.
Irish international selector Eddie McNally and his wife Nancy reached the fourth round of the mixed pairs after beating E McErlean and M Campbell 16–13 in the previous round.
Eddie also got through in the singles with a 21–7 win over Eddie Price and Maureen Fearon, the Irish international bowler from Dungannon beat L. Hill 21–17 and then teamed up with Fra Brady to beat A and M Hoey in the mixed pairs.
Meanwhile the last event in this season's NIWBA programme is the final of the NIWBA Mary Moore trophy, sponsored by Parkgate Garages which will be played at Ward Park next Tuesday between Divis No1 and Donaghadee.
Lucky winners
SUPERDRUG T-shirt competition — 50 lucky winners have received their T-shirts.
The answer was ‘Honeysuckle’.
WAYMASTER competition — the 40 lucky winners have been notified by post and each receives a Nouveau Jug Water Filter.
UNBLEST may be able to get the better of a top quality field for the Group Two Laurent-Perrier Champagne Stakes at Doncaster tomorrow.
James Fanshawe's charge has been improving with every race and finished a head second to Turtle Island in the Group Two Gimcrack Stakes at York last time.
Prior to that game performance Unblest beat Torch Rouge by three-quarters-of-a length over this course.
He can improve again and take his first Group prize.
Bal Harbour could turn out to be the main danger.
A colt by Shirley Heights, he is sure to go on to better things following a narrow debut victory over Shepton Mallet at Newmarket in July.
Mashair is progressing well and could be good enough to take the Listed O & K Troy Stakes.
John Dunlop's filly will not be inconvenienced by the ground as she won her maiden on good to soft at Salisbury.
She followed that effort by finishing a length second to Rainbow Lake in a Listed race at Newbury and is clearly improving.
Frenchpark is another who should relish the conditions and could win the Coal Trade Benevolent Association Conditions Stakes on his first run of the season.
A promising two-year-old when trained in Ireland by Con Collins, Frenchpark won the Group Three Beresford Stakes at the Curragh by a head on good to soft ground.
Lyphard's Delta is expected to complete a five-timer in the Group Three Abtrust Select Stakes at Goodwood.
The daughter of Lyphard, whose dam was a top American filly, won the Group Two Nassau Stakes here in July.
LINFIELD are expected to return to Europe tonight — and straight into an international row over television rights.
Should Dinamo Tbilisi's appeal against dismissal from the European Cup fail, the Blues will play FC Copenhagen at Windsor Park next Wednesday.
That game however will clash with two proposed ‘live’ games involving Manchester United and Rangers.
The ‘gate’ at Linfield's match could be affected and the Irish FA will demand compensation on behalf of the Blues for lost revenue.
Negotiations between the Irish FA, their Scottish counterparts and BSkyB, who are showing the Rangers v Lavski Sofia game are ongoing with regard to Linfield's potential reinstatement.
But so far the IFA have had no communication from the English FA, ITV or Manchester United (away to Honved) over potential compensation.
‘I would have thought they would have been in contact by now,’ said secretary David Bowen.
‘Should the Manchester United game go out live, any local club affected are entitled to compensation.’
There's little chance of the IFA blanking the game out, as they attempted to do several years ago when a United match interfered with the Glentoran v Steaua Bucharest tie.
But the local football authorities will protest at any attempt to transmit live football without prior consultation with them.
The Blues, who expect to sign Glentoran star Raymond Campbell today are anxiously awaiting the result of Tblisi's appeal against dismissal for alleged bribery of match officials.
‘Goalden’ strike as Bingham's men reap triumph hat-trick THE MIGHTY QUINN
Northern Ireland 2 Latvia 0
WET, WET, wet at Windsor Park…and win, win, win for Northern Ireland.
The rain lashed stadium last night bore witness to a little bit of footballing history, with Billy Bingham's men recording a third successive World Cup victory for the first time.
Goals from Jimmy Quinn — his first for three and a half years — and Philip Gray — his first in a Northern Ireland shirt — lifted the hearts of 6,500 fans who had braved the inclement elements.
Sadly, the gloom of World Cup failure prevails; Denmark's 1–0 defeat of Albania earlier in the day rendered even the most optimistic mathematician's calculator redundant.
The win-win-win sequence of recent months has a pleasing symmetry but the draw-win-draw start to the campaign had already produced an incline that proved ultimately insurmountable.
Low-key
Perhaps that scenario led to the low-key approach to last night's encounter which was more entertaining than the Test Card — but only just.
Let's not, however, dwell on negative aspects of what was after all a further morale boost to our international prospects.
Bingham wants to leave a fitting legacy to his successor and all the signs point to him achieving this.
Gray, for instance, looks a class act and although last night's display was not his most dynamic in a green shirt he marked it with a goal of sheer quality.
Right back Gary Fleming's renaissance at international level is now complete, exemplified by another purposeful display.
And Keith Rowland looked comfortable when he came on for his first cap in the second half…another lad who can do a useful job for Northern Ireland in years to come.
The night, however, belonged to Quinn, one of the oldest men on the park.
Sceptics — myself included — questioned Bingham's wisdom of picking the 33-year old Reading striker ahead of one of our more mobile midfielders such as O'Neill or Black.
But Quinn, playing a withdrawn role behind the two main forwards responded with one of his best performances for Northern Ireland; easily the man of the match.
He put the home side on their way with an excellent goal in the first half, had what looked like a perfectly good effort ruled out in the second and caused the Latvians all sorts of problems with his well timed runs from deep.
Revelled
His positioning helped Iain Dowie — the pair have tended to get in each others' way on past occasions — and Dowie revelled in the extra space.
Like Quinn, this was one of his best displays on a murky night when no Northern Ireland player could be faulted for effort.
The home side dominated a first half climaxed by Quinn's goal after 33 minutes.
Michael Hughes swung in a corner kick from the right and the big striker timed his run perfectly to glance a header past Oleg Karavaev.
Quinn nearly got a second just before the break but this time Kavavaev was equal to a close-range effort after Gerry Taggart had provided the opportunity with a bustling header.
Quinn's steady head found the rigging again midway through the second half, from new skipper Nigel Worthington's cross, but this time the ‘goal’ was disallowed.
Video re-runs hinted that Dowie had impeded a defender thus giving Quinn the necessary space but it seemed a harsh decision.
It would have given Northern Ireland breathing space; at 1–0 there was still a trace of anxiety in their play and Latvia, for whom Popkov and Charando had looked dangerous in the first half were never totally out of it.
Unlucky
Taggart was unlucky to see a header, from the impressive Fleming's cross-shot, cannon back off the crossbar but Northern Ireland made the game safe ten minutes from the end.
Again Fleming was involved, linking up with Mal Donaghy before finding Gray on the edge of the penalty area.
The new Sunderland striker steadied himself before blasting an unstoppable left-foot drive past Karavaev.
The back-lift was imperceptible, unlike the joy in the Northern Ireland camp.
Bingham's men had reigned in the rain; what a pity the deluge of good results had come too late to save the harvest.
Northern Ireland: Wright, Fleming, Worthington, Taggart, Donaghy, Magilton (sub Rowland 68), Wilson, Quinn, Dowie, Gray, Hughes.
TABLE TENNIS
Cowan, Slevin team up at Brentwood
JONATHAN Cowan teams up with Ireland's top table tennis player Colm Slevin in the Peniel 5 Star Open championships at Brentwood International Centre over the weekend.
Shankill player Cowan, the former Irish Junior number one, is no longer eligible for Junior events and welcomes the opportunity to share the team bench with the legendary Slevin, now competing for Lubeck in the German National League.
The Irish pair have arguably the most difficult group in the 12 team international event, run by the Peniel Academy Parent Teacher Association, facing Belgium and Switzerland.
The Belgians, Thierry Cabrera and Phillipe Saive, start as favourites, and Switzerland's Thierry Miller and Sen Sidler, will be smarting having lost to Ireland in the 1993 Worlds.
The complete team line-up for Peniel is: Group 1: Belgium, Switzerland, Ireland; Group 2: England, Scotland, Norway; Group 3: France, Grove 2, Peniel 1; Group 4: Grove 1, Peniel 2, Denmark.
SOME 2,500 Northern Ireland supporters gave last night's World Cup game a miss — even though they had bought tickets at £10 a time.
Official attendance at Windsor Park was 6,500 but gate receipts for the international reflected a crowd of 9,000!
The bizarre case of the stayaway fans can be however be easily explained.
It's the legacy of the Irish Football Association's promotion, whereby fans buying tickets for last night's Latvia game were given the opportunity to purchase a similar amount for the Republic of Ireland's visit in November.
But nearly a third of the supporters who took advantage of the offer did so with only the Republic game in mind — and didn't bother turning up last night.
There is, however, trouble and confusion brewing.
Buying a ticket for last night's game does NOT guarantee one for the all-Ireland clash in November — unless a formal application was made at the time of purchase to the IFA office.
Many fans believed all they had to do was hand over the ticket stub for the Latvia game to get one for the visit of Jack Charlton's men — that plainly is not the case.
But Irish FA secretary David Bowen said today: ‘The offer was clearly advertised.
‘It stated that supporters who bought tickets for the Latvia game at our office could register for a similar amount regarding the Republic's visit.
‘Those people — and thousands of them went through the proper procedure — will be contacted later this month and given the opportunity to purchase their tickets for the next home game.’
The Northern Ireland v Republic match on November 17 is a guaranteed sell-out and the ‘Latvia promotion’ was obviously a success in terms of a boost in gate receipts.
But supporters who didn't apply through the proper channels could find themselves missing out on Billy Bingham's swansong match.
Those who stayed away last night missed Northern Ireland making history by completing a hat-trick of World Cup victories for the first time.
Goals from Jimmy Quinn and Philip Gray — his first for the international team — were enough to see of the Baltic challenge although Denmark's victory over Albania earlier in the day put paid to our last fading hopes of qualifying for the World Cup finals in America.
Supporters who bought tickets for the Latvia game at our office could register…
SNOOKER
McVeigh hits 122
CIARAN McVeigh from Parkside Snooker Club, Lurgan whitewashed Kieran Erwin 3–0 in the Drumgor Top 64 tournament last night opening up with a 122 break.
Paul Campbell 0, Kieran Erwin 3; Robert Bartlett 3, Eddie McDermott 1; Colin Bingham 3, Barry McNamee 2; Kieran McAlinden 3, Michael McDonald 2; Michael Connolly 3, Conor McVeigh 1; Michael Sweet 1, Patrick Wallace 3; Jonathan Finlay 1, Michael Connolly 3; Kieran Erwin 0, Ciaran McVeigh 3; Paul Lenfestey 3, Robert Bartlett 0; Colm McGuckin 1, Colin McCullough 3.
Play continues on Sunday at 12 noon.
Danish ‘pointer’
DENMARK scraped a narrow but precious 1–0 over Albania in Tirana yesterday to stay in second place in Group Three.
It was a 63rd minute goal from Frank Pingel which kept the European champions on course for the World Cup finals.
Pingel got the vital score after taking a pass from Brian Laudrup and slotting the ball past helpless Albanian keeper Foto Strakosha from close range.
The Danes had several scares in the second half, notably in the final minute of the match when Sulejman Demollari beat Peter Schmeichel but struck the bar.
The Danes are one point behind leaders the Republic of Ireland and three ahead of Spain, who have a match in hand.
Pete pips Chang in US
WIMBLEDON champion Pete Sampras overcame his gutsy childhood rival Michael Chang to book his place in the semi-finals of the US Open last night.
Second seed Sampras established himself as the odds-on favourite to win his second US Open title with a 6–7 7–6 6–1 6–1 victory.
‘The last two sets were probably the best two sets I played in a long time,’ said Sampras, who became the youngest ever US Open champion at 19 three years ago.
After two thrilling sets containing the best tennis of the tournament so far, Sampras seized control of the match during the second set tie-break.
He dominated the tie-break 7–2 and after allowing seventh-seeded Chang to hold his first service game of the third set, Sampras went on an amazing burst, running off 11 games in a row to lead 5–0 in the fourth before Chang won another game.
‘I think I ran out of gas a little bit there,’ said Chang, the youngest ever French Open champion in 1989 at 17.
‘But you've got to hand it to Pete.
He raised his game to another level and when he plays his best, he's a really tough player to beat.
He's probably one of the most talented players out there.
He can do everything.’
Earlier last night, two women's quarter-finals that were postponed from the rained-out day session were played one lasted three sets and the other three games.
Second seed Arantxa Sanchez Vicario of Spain claimed a place in the semi-finals when Natalia Zvereva of Belarus retired through illness after losing the first three games in eight minutes.
‘I never waited so long to play a match and I only played three games.
Eight hours is a long time to wait to play three games,’ said Sanchez, last year's runner-up to Monica Seles.
In the other quarter-final, 12th-seeded Czech Helena Sukova held off Katerina Maleeva of Bulgaria 6–4 6–7 6–3 to return to reach the semi-finals for the first time since 1987.
‘I am very happy,’ said Sukova, the losing finalist in 1986.
‘It's been a long time since I've been in the semis of a Grand Slam tournament.’
Pete Sampras: in top form.
Smiles — but no Irish style
Republic of Ireland 2 Lithuania 0
ALMOST there.
If Spanish eyes are crying and the Irish smiling in Dublin next month then Jack's jolly green giants can dispense with the calculators.
The Republic, 2–0 winners over Lithuania yesterday, are on the brink on qualification for next summer's World Cup finals.
That's the good news.
Less satisfying was the style in which the Republic got their vital win.
‘It was our worst performance for a long time,’ said manager Jack Charlton whose side will still need a point from their trip to Belfast in November if they don't beat the Spaniards.
Command
Goals from John Aldrigde (four minutes) and Alan Kernaghan (25) put the Irish in command early on.
With Lithuania not given a snowball's chance, Lansdowne Road sat back and waited for the avalanche…and waited…and waited.
The floodgates didn't open.
Indeed, the understrength Lithuanians, who had fought back from two down to get their first Group Three point in Belfast, could have inflicted similar embarrassment on the Republic.
The visitors had by far the better chances in the second period but they lacked the confidence to take them.
‘At 2–0 I thought it was going to be easy but in the end it wasn't easy at all,’ admitted Charlton in his after-match press conference.
‘We can do an awful lot better than that but we have the two points and that's what matters.
‘We won't get way with that against Spain, if we give them that much room.’
Everything went to plan in the opening stages with the Republic piling forward and causing all sorts of anxiety in the Lithuanian defence.
Aldridge, who had an effort blocked in the second minute, secured the dream start in the fourth.
Denis Irwin chipped a nice ball to Steve Staunton on the left wing and Aldridge got on the end of a fiercely-driven centre.
Everything pointed to a one-sided match.
The press photographers certainly thought so with 30 lenses behind the Lithuanian goal and none remotely near Packie Bonner at the Wanderers end of the ground.
Man of the match Kernaghan's first international goal was a firm header from Irwin's cross seconds after Apanavicius had cleared a Kevin Moran header off the goal-line.
Slumber
That, remarkably, was the end of the scoring.
If Lithuania had scored, as they should have done several times in the second half, maybe that would have shaken the Irish from their slumber.
Baltusnikas shot wide, scarcely believing he had so much room in the Republic's penalty area; Bonner finger-tipped a Kirilovas shot round the post; Slekys shaved the post with a close-range toe-poke; and then Bonner saved again from Stumbrys.
Slack stuff from the Republic who didn't increase their goal difference by as much as they would have liked.
But they got the main job done and now they want to do the same against Spain next month before heading to Belfast for a party.
REPUBLIC OF IRELAND: Bonner, Irwin, Phelan, Moran, Kernaghan, Keane, Townsend (sub Whelan 68), Houghton, Quinn (sub Cascarino 74), Aldridge, Staunton.
LITHUANIA: Stauce, Ziukas, Baltusnikas, Kalvaitis, Tereskinas, Apanavicius, Baranauskas, Skarbalius (sub Staliynas 83), Stumbrys, Kirilovas (sub Maciulevicius 68), Slekys.
Referee: R Pedersen (Norway).
France close in on finals
Finland 0 France 2
FRANCE remained on course to qualify for the World Cup finals when they beat Finland 2–0 in
Tampere.
Laurent Blanc with a header and Jean-Pierre Papin with a penalty scored the goals which put France top of group six.
Injury-hit Bulgaria stayed in the hunt for a qualifying spot by holding Sweden to a 1–1 draw in Sofia.
France have 13 points, Sweden 12, and Bulgaria 10.
Frank Pingel's second half goal gave Denmark a 1–0 victory over Albania in Tirana, keeping the European champions unbeaten and one point behind the Republic of Ireland in group three.
Florin Raducioiu scored all four goals as Romania retained second place in group four with a 4–0 victory over the Faroe Islands.
Russia, already sure of qualification in group five, defeated Hungary 3–1 in Budapest.
Women pipped
NEEDING four points from the six singles to beat Scotland on the opening day of the Womens Home Internationals at Hermitage Ireland could not quite bring it off and lost in the end by 5–4.
Aideen Rodgers, the baby of the Irish team, provided the first point while Irish champion Eavan Higgins came up with half a point, finishing all square with Scottish No 1 Catriona Lambert in the top match and Eileen-Rose Power finished birdie, birdie par to win her match by one hole.
But Tracy Eakin three putted the 13th and 16th to lose by one hole and new cap Barbara Hackett went down 3 and 12.
Mary McKenna, playing in the tournament for the 25th year, could have made it a tie by winning the bottom match but she lost the 15th and 16th to go two down, won the 17th with a big birdie putt and salvaged a half when her opponent, Fiona McKay drove into bushes at the 18th.
The one Ulster girl in the team, Strabane's Lynn McCool, celebrated her 21st birthday by making her international debut in the foursomes but she and Mrs Power lost 4 and 2 to Alison Rose and Fiona McKay.
World Cup Group 1: Scotland 1 Switzerland 1.
Group 2: England 3 Poland 0.
Group 3: Albania 0 Denmark 1, Northern Ireland 2 Latvia 0, Rep of Ireland 2 Lithuania 0.
Group 4: Faroe Is 0 Romania 4, Wales 2
RCS 2.
Group 5: Hungary 1 Russia 3.
Group 6: Bulgaria 1 Sweden 1, Finland 0 France 2.
Anglo Italian Cup (Qual rnd): Derby 3 Nottm Forest 2, Leicester 0 West Brom 0.
European U21 Group 3: Albania 1 Denmark 0.
Dettori's double joy
FRANKIE Dettori showed why the top owners and trainers are beating a path to his door with a brilliant double at Doncaster.
His riding of the filly Marina Park to dead heat with King's Signet in the Doncaster Bloodstock Sales Scarbrough Stakes was that of a man inspired.
It was the second time this season Dettori and Michael Roberts have split a decision after Shujan and Haddaaj proved inseparable at Sandown in July.
Earlier Dettori, wearing the second colours of Sheikh Mohammed, ran away with the Worthington Best Bitter Park Hill Stakes on Anna Of Saxony.
Gold target
Nicky Carlisle, sporting stitches in a face wound suffered at Leicester on Tuesday, gained the perfect boost when driving course specialist Amron to a half-length victory in the Tote Portland Handicap.
The Jack Berry-trained sprinter is unbeaten in five visits to Town Moor and this success earned him a 7lb penalty for the Ayr Gold Cup which takes his weight to 8st 12lbs.
‘It's a pity it's not run at Doncaster because Amron would be a certainty,’ Berry joked.
Soft
Torrential rain saw the going at Doncaster change to soft after the second race which pleased trainer Richard Hannon almost as much as his 3,212–1 treble supplied by Rajmapata, Flight Lieutenant and Tickerty's Gift.
Rajmapata found the best surface up the far rail in the Carrie Red Fillies Nursery, Flight Lieutenant got up to beat Roberty Lea in the Harcros Timber & Building Supplies Stayers Final, and Tickerty's Gift collected the Cowies PLC Limited Stakes.
A smiling Hannon simply said: ‘The ground has come right for Assessor in the Doncaster Cup.’
Leger leader
Armiger surged to the head of the St Leger betting as heavy rain produced the soft ground in which he revels.
Henry Cecil's colt pulverised his rivals to win the Racing Post Trophy at Doncaster last autumn and is now guaranteed similar conditions as he bids to return to Group One winning form on Saturday.
A persistent downpour at the track rapidly reduced the going from good to firm to soft, a change which could threaten the participation of Royal Ballerina.
The dual Oaks runner-up is not at her best on soft ground and trainer Michael Kauntze has left her in the Prix Vermeille at Longchamp on Sunday.
Lemon Souffle, favourite for next year's 1,000 Guineas, has been overlooked by Ladbrokes in their betting for Sunday's Moyglare Stud Stakes at The Curragh.
Richard Hannon's unbeaten two-year-old, off the course since July with an injured stifle, is only third in the bookmakers' list for the Group One contest.
Spain Lane, trained by Andre Fabre and third behind Coup de Genie and Psychobabble in the Prix Morny, has been installed 5–2 favourite from Tommy Stack's Las Meninas on 3–1, with Lemon Souffle, the mount of Lester Piggott, at 7–2.
Comeback
Hernando will begin his comeback at Longchamp on Sunday when he competes in one of three important trials for the Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe.
The colt last ran when second to Commander In Chief in the Irish Derby.
He is expected to return in the Prix Niel.
One of eight horses engaged in the Group Two contest, Hernando's rivals include Dernier Empereur, Le Balafre and Ireland's Shrewd Idea.
Andre Fabre's Oaks winning fillies Intrepidity and Wemyss Bight head the entries for the Prix Vermeille, which has also drawn Paul Cole's Bright Generation and Richard Hannon's Dana Springs.
Only Royale, winner of the Yorkshire Oaks, has just three rivals Modhish, Vert Amande and Dariyoun in the Prix Foy.
David Elsworth has been fined £750 by the Jockey Club's Disciplinary Committee for incorrectly recording the vaccination details of the filly First Veil, his fourth breach of this rule in the last year.
Frankie Dettori: Inspired riding
UNBLEST SET TO POP THE CORKS
UNBLEST may be able to get the better of a top quality field for the Group Two Laurent-Perrier Champagne Stakes at Doncaster tomorrow.
James Fanshawe's charge has been improving with every race and finished a head second to Turtle Island in the Group Two Gimcrack Stakes at York last time.
Prior to that game performance Unblest beat Torch Rouge by three-quarters-of-a length over this course.
He can improve again and take his first Group prize.
Another who may be able to take the step-up in class in his stride is Azhar in the O & K Troy Stakes.
A winner of two handicaps this season, Azhar is as tough as they come and should be able to hold his own in this stronger company.
Last time out the Michael Stoute-trained colt narrowly missed landing a Listed race at Chester, being headed in the final strides by Nassma.
Mashair is progressing well and will be hard to beat in the Coal Trade Benevolent Association Conditions Stakes.
John Dunlop's filly will not be inconvenienced by the ground as she won her maiden on good to soft at Salisbury.
She followed that effort by finishing a length second to Rainbow Lake in a Listed race at Newbury and is clearly improving.
Half Term could bounce back to winning form in the Sun Princess Conditions Stakes following his expensive defeat in the Celebration Mile at Goodwood.
Frankie Dettori's mount did not get a clear run in the Group Two event but, despite finishing last of six, was only beaten around two lengths by Swing Low.
Before that, Half Term ran an excellent race to finish a short head runner-up to Eurolink Thunder in the Group Three Beeswing Stakes at Newcastle, and he clearly has the ability to win here.
Lyphard's Delta is expected to complete a five-timer in the Group Three Abtrust Select Stakes at Goodwood.
The daughter of Lyphard, whose dam was a top American filly, won the Group Two Nassau Stakes here in July.
Henry Cecil, trainer of Lyphard's Delta, also looks to have a certain winner in Bal Harbour in the Listed Stardom Stakes.
A colt by Shirley Heights, he is sure to go on to better things following a narrow debut victory over Shepton Mallet at Newmarket in July.
Bruce is ready to play the game
HAVING attained peak fitness on the golf course during the summer, Bruce is fighting fit and ready to tee off a new season of Bruce Forsyth's Generation Game (BBC1, 8pm) the show in which the stars are the family couples taking part.
Rosemarie Ford is also superfit as she dashes regularly between London and Bristol, where she is starring as Grizabella in ‘Cats’.
I'm really looking forward to making the new series of the ‘Generation Game’, says Rosemarie.
‘I know now to expect the unexpected, but the one thing I can be sure of is that we all have lots of laughs making the show.’
Blind pursuit
DAREDEVIL blind pensioner Joe Collier (74) is making plans to perform a charity bungee jump at a secret location outside his home area to beat local councils which blocked his spectacular leap.
District authorities in Devon banned the jump in the county because of fears over the type of crane to be used, said Mr Collier, who has been blind for 22 years.
Province's travel agents reply to Which? criticism
ULSTER travel agents offer a wider range of holidays and fairer advice than do many mainland operators, it was claimed today.
The chairman of the Northern Ireland Association of British Travel Agents, Ailbe McMurray, defended the record of local firms after Holiday Which magazine attacked some British agents' performance.
Limited
The Which? survey found many were providing a limited holiday-selection and biased information, thanks to a virtual stranglehold by the major tour operators.
Thomson, Airtours and Owners Abroad control more than half the entire British package-holiday market and all own or have links with chains of high street travel agents.
The magazine claimed that in 37pc of the multiple travel agents visited researchers were spontaneously offered only holidays from the linked company, with no other choice.
However, independent agents were much less likely to plug the three main tour-operators.
Mr McMurray said he did not believe the findings related to Northern Ireland, because none of the three firms had significant links with the province.
‘We don't have Thomson and although Airtours have bought Aspro they don't actually have any travel agents here,’ he said.
‘Owners Abroad have a link with Thomas Cook, but it does not in any way cause these sort of problems.
‘Generally people here can expect more-balanced advice on the best holiday for them and a wider choice than from many mainland agents.’
In a public survey, almost three out of four people thought that travel agents should give independent advice regardless of their financial links with any one operator, but only just over half, 54pc, thought this happened in practice.
Holiday Which? says it is concerned that consumers are being kept in the dark about the links between travel agents and the tour operators.
Links
None of the Lunn Poly or Thomas Cook branches had any signs informing customers of their links with tour operators.
The Office of Fair Trading is investigating claims that the big tour-operators and their chain of travel agents are using their muscle to restrict customer choice and tighten their grip on the market.
By Gail Walker
Disabled charity's open week
THE Londonderry-based Voice organisation this week highlighted their Welfare Rights' Department.
The charity caters for the needs of the disabled and their carers.
The main emphasis of the charity department, which is based at 9 Clarendon Street, is to deal with disability benefit queries.
The department also represents people at social security tribunals, appeals and reviews.
The welfare rights' workers can be contacted by calling in to the office or by telephoning 271441.
Pinta glasses raised to Mourne milkman Jim
AFTER 17 years of delivering pints without missing a day through illness, Jim McConnell has proved the cream rises to the top — by winning the Northern Ireland Milkman of the Year award.
Jim, who lives and delivers in Kilkeel, Co Down, has only failed to make his round once — and that was in a snowstorm in 1977 when his delivery van had to be towed out of a drift.
The job has not soured his taste for milk, as he often drinks two pints a day and he still enjoys doing his round, which takes in some of Ulster's most spectacular scenery around the Mourne Mountains.
Healthy
‘I always have a pint a day and sometimes maybe two.
‘I get up at a quarter-to-five most mornings.
It is a very healthy job, although it does have its drawbacks, when it is raining or snowing.
‘I play hockey and I have never missed a day through sickness in 17 years, even with torn muscles and ligaments,’ he said.
Paris
Jim, who is aged 40 and has two children, was today awarded with his prize — a weekend for two in Paris — at a ceremony in Malone House in Belfast.
He will go on to represent the province at the UK finals in London next month.
Jim was nominated for the competition by Mrs Eunice Graham, who has won a year's supply of free milk.
By Ian McTear
CRICKET
Irish face Northants
IRELAND will renew acquaintance with Northants in next season's NatWest Trophy first round.
The Irish were beaten back in ‘87 by 88 runs against a side which then had six Test players, including Allan Lamb.
Northants played here two years later in two one-day matches, again winning both with ease.
The match takes place on June 21 with the winners away to MC Wales or Middlesex on July 6.
First round draw: Berkshire v Kent, Cambridgeshire v Hants; Cheshire v Durham; Cumberland v Leicestershire; Devon v Yorkshire; Glamorgan v Lincolnshire; Gloucestershire v Derbyshire; Lancashire v Scotland; Minor Counties Wales v Middlesex; Norfolk v Worcestershire; Northants v Ireland; Northumberland v Notts; Oxfordshire v Somerset; Surrey v Staffordshire; Sussex v Essex; Warwickshire v Bedfordshire.
Second round (July 6): Cambs or Hants v Berks or Kent; Cheshire or Durham v Gloucs or Derbys; Cumberland or Leics v Warwicks or Beds; Devon or Yorks v Oxford or Somerset; Glamorgan or Lincs v Sussex or Essex; MC Wales or Middlesex v Northants or Ireland; Norfolk or Worcs v Northumberland or Notts; Surrey or Staffs v Lancs or Scotland.
ATHLETICS
Top Kenyan for Bangor
NORTH Down Athletic Club is set to renew it's Kenyan connection when they stage their Festival of Running in Bangor on Saturday, September 18.
Setting his sights on the lucrative prizes up for grabs in the Daily Mirror/Manx Airlines sponsored event is classy Kenyan Jimmy Muindi, the current World Junior steeplechase champion.
The Bangor event, the richest 10K road race in Ireland, has a long Kenyan tradition.
Last year it was won by Gladstone Kabiga, the year before by Joseph Chesire and Kip Rono was successful in 1988 and '89.
Now Muindi (21) has joined the exclusive African set, and he will start hot favourite to pocket the first prize of £500.
Reigning Belfast Marathon champion Gerry McGrath will spearhead the Republic of Ireland challenge and North Down are optimistic 10K specialist Gerry Curtis will also take the starter's gun.
Also Bangor-bound is Tim Hutchings of Crawley in England who was twice runner-up in the World cross country championships, and the first international lady to be snapped up is Plymouth's Marion Sutton, who ran for Britain in the recent World track and field championships in Stuttgart.
North Down are keen to attract as many fun runners as possible.
Entry forms are available from sports shops and leisure centres and should be sent to Barry Scarth at 15 Windmill Road, Bangor, BT20 5RA.
Seles set to say yes
MONICA Seles will be in the line up for the TSB Women's Tennis Classic in Dublin towards the end of the year — but there is an ‘if’ involved.
Her appearance in what already promises to be a sell out spectacular is dependent upon her feeling no ill effects after her participation in a tournament in France during the week prior to the December 3–5 Dublin extravaganza.
But organisers are confident that Seles, one of the greatest players to have graced the world stage in modern times, will be able to take part in the RDS event which also features several other leading players.
Sean Curtis, TSB Head of Marketing, states: ‘We had entered into negotiations with Mark McCormack's IMG company in February of this year and a couple of months later everything was finalised.
Then came the stabbing incident which forced Monica to cancel so much of her programme for this year but we are now optimistic that she will have fully recovered before our tournament.’
With Martina Navratilova, Arantxa Sanchez, Mary Jo Fernandez and Barbara Rittner already confirmed for the RDS event it looks like being even more high profile than last year's inaugural undertaking.
‘Most of these players took part last year and were delighted with the facilities and hospitality’ says Sean Curtis: ‘We aim to make this year's tournament even better and, believe me, the phones have already been buzzing in relation to tickets even though they will not available until the end of this month.’
The line up for the Classic will be completed next week when Tennis Ireland confirm the name of the Irish player who will receive a ‘wild card’ entry — a development that will undoubtedly add interest to the overall programme.
OLYMPICS
Ulster backs Manchester
NORTHERN Ireland sport is throwing its weight behind Manchester's bid to host the Olympic Games in 2000.
Six sporting bodies pledged their backing to Dick Palmer, general secretary of the British Olympic Association, and Peter Knowles, Manchester 2000 Sport Liaison, who visited the House of Sport at Upper Malone today.
The message of support was signed by Don Allen of the Sports Council for Northern Ireland; Billy Stewart, the Northern Ireland Commonwealth Games Council; Ewart Bell, Institute of Coaching; Joan McCloy, Council of Physical Recreation; Mary Peters, former chairman of the Ulster Games Foundation; and Ian Bamford of the Ulster Sports and Recreation Trust.
In an affirmation of support to Palmer and Knowles they: ‘Wholeheartedly and unreservedly support Manchester's bid’ and ‘strongly urge International Olympic Committee members to decide in its favour.’
The Ulster representatives feel that Manchester is capable of staging a games of ‘unparalleled quality’ which would be of lasting benefit to world sport.
Manchester has strong support, including that of Prime Minister John Major, but Sydney, Australia, remains favourite to be given the 2000 Games.
The decision will be taken by the International Olympic Committee on Thursday September 23.
HOCKEY
Italy beckons
THE Ireland women's hockey squad will travel to Italy for a weekend training camp in November as part of the build-up to next year's World Cup finals in Dublin.
Although precise details have still to be firmed up, Terry Gregg's panel are likely to face the Italians in two friendly internationals.
It has also been agreed that Italy will pay a reciprocal visit to Dublin in April when they will take part in a Four Nations competition to replace the Home International championships, following England's decision to pull the plug on the domestic series last season.
Wales have also confirmed that they will be taking part and Ireland's other opponents have still to be determined.
BELFAST
Shotguns found in abandoned car
POLICE were today examining an arms find after a car turned back and drove off from a checkpoint on the outskirts of Belfast last night.
The RUC recovered two sawn-off shotguns, a 38 pistol, a .22 pistol, several shotgun cartridges and five hand-held CB radios with a base station from undergrowth near a car abandoned in Good Shepherd Road, in the Poleglass area of Dunmurry.
NEWRY
Sellafield plea
NEWRY and Mourne Council has backed unanimously plans for a public inquiry into the thermal-oxide-reprocessing plant at Sellafield in Cumbria.
Members were told by the chief environmental health officer, Hugh O'Neill, last night, that he feared there were still aspects which suggested there could be radio-active emissions from the plant.
Advice days at Queen's
QUEEN'S University will hold open days on Thursday and Friday this week, offering sixth-formers information on more than 90 subjects.
Duns v Celtic
DUNDELA and Donegal Celtic should be the match of the day in the second round of the Cawoods Steel Cup on September 18.
The game at Celtic Park, is a repeat of last year's Intermediate Cup final which the Duns won 3–2 on penalties.
Holders East Belfast take on Amateur League champions Killyleagh which also has all the makings of a cracking tie.
B Division leaders Ballymoney United take on neighbours Glebe Rangers from the Ballymena and District League while RUC after defeating H & W Welders, entertain Dervock.
The outstanding first round game between Orangefield OB and Cliftonville Olympic, takes place at Solitude on Thursday night.
The second round draw is: Crewe Utd v 1st Bangor; RUC v Dervock; Downshire YM v Linfield Swifts; Dromora Village v Bangor Res; Carrick Ranges Res v Drumaness; Donegal Celtic v Dundela; Ballymoney Utd v Glebe Rangers; Northern Telecom v Enkalon; Orangefield or Cliftonville Olympic v Larne Tech OB; Donard Hospital v Dundonald; Killyleagh v East Belfast; Connor v Comber Rec; Ballynahinch v H & W Sports; British Telecom v 1st Liverpool; Kilmore Rec v Crusaders Res; Saintfield Utd v Ards Rangers.
The semi-finals of the Harp Intermediate League Cup sees Dungiven against Portstewart while Cromac AFC take on Oxford United Stars.
Dates and venues have yet to be decided.
Tapie sues
MARSEILLE owner Bernard Tapie will today sue the French soccer authorities following UEFA's decision to ban the European champions from this season's competition because of allegations of bribery.
Tapie's suit will aim to force the French Federation and French League to name Marseille as the country's representatives to play AEK Athens in the first round on September 15.
It gives the two bodies until tomorrow to do so the deadline UEFA gave French officials to choose a replacement team.
‘The decision made by UEFA is contrary to all principles of law.
Olympique Marseille was not heard, an appeal is not possible,’ said club lawyer Francis Szpiner.
‘Marseille could not defend itself.
That sort of justice is contrary to the most elementary laws.’
SOCCER
Under pressure
PETER Swales is unlikely to find any escape this week from the pressures of being one of soccer's most powerful men.
The Manchester City chairman is facing the challenge of how to deal with a big cash approach from former Maine Road favourite Francis Lee.
One-time England star Lee, a member of City's 1968 title-winning side and now a highly successful businessman, insists he is not planning a takeover of the Blues.
But the 49-year-old does want a place on the board so he can invest a reported £8million.
Says Lee: ‘I have never lost my affection for Manchester City where I spent so many happy years during the club's successful period, and like so many others I have been disturbed by the events of the last few weeks.’
TABLE TENNIS
Saturday start
THE domestic table tennis season kicks off at Shankill Leisure Centre on Saturday with the Shankill Junior and Graded Open championships.
Tournament organiser Ussher Watson picks up again with the popular Class Two and Three events, a great hit with League players last year, and part of the Tri-Sport Mini and Micro Prix.
However, top Junior trio Michelle McGreevy, Andrea Glover and joint Micro-Prix champion Dominic McGreevy have been excluded from the Class Three event, as well as Gary Derrick, another joint winner and Ballymena's Maurice Johnston gaining promotion.
Windsor Clarke re-enters Class Three and should start as favourite for the Shankill title.
Watson also includes Junior, Cadet and U12 categories and will take entries at Belfast 647934.
Iceland warms to competition
ICELAND Group today warned that the UK food market is becoming increasingly competitive as it announced a jump in profits.
The company, which is in the process of a major expansion drive aimed at moving away from its traditional freezer centre image, made pre-tax profits of £30.1m in the six months to July 3 from £24.22m previously.
Chairman and chief executive Malcolm Walker said: ‘There is no doubt that the food retail market in the UK is becoming increasingly competitive, but we are confident of our ability to trade well in this environment.’
At the start of the year Iceland agreed to take over 48 foodhalls from Littlewoods, including Belfast, as part of its expansion drive which will see 100 new shops this year.
The interim dividend is raised to 1.2p from 1.03p while earnings per share climbed to 7.24p from 5.93p.
Townsend's testing time
SOCCER SKIPPER Andy Townsend will go through a vigorous fitness test today before declaring himself fit to lead the Republic of Ireland against Lithuania in Dublin.
The Aston Villa midfielder has been troubled by a hamstring injury which saw him miss three FA Carling Premiership games but is confident of playing in the Group Three qualifier tomorrow.
He took things easy during yesterday's training at Clonshaugh but will have a stiffer work-out today before manager Jack Charlton names his starting 11.
Full blast
‘I had the full 90 minutes against Everton a week ago and got through okay.
Naturally I don't want to risk a recurrence of the trouble, but equally, I hate missing any Ireland match and I'll be giving it a full blast in the final training session to make sure I'm 100 per cent.
‘Having been to the World Cup finals the last time, I want more then ever to be part of everything and I fancy we can get there again by beating not only Lithuania, but Spain and Northern Ireland as well.
It would be a great way to do it.’
Striker Tony Cascarino, Townsend's former clubmate at Stamford Bridge, also has a hamstring problem and may have to forego his usual place on the substitutes' bench.
Cascarino did not train yesterday but Manchester City left back Terry Phelan proved his full recovery from tonsillitis.
Apart from injuries manager Jack Charlton insists he won't leave key players out of the side to safeguard them from possible suspension.
Roy Keane, Niall Quinn, Ray Houghton, Steve Staunton and Kevin Moran will all incur a one-match ban if they pick up a second yellow card tomorrow.
That also applies to likely substitute Eddie McGoldrick — and it would mean missing the crunch tie with Spain on October 13.
But Charlton said: ‘I can't consider watering down the team for Lithuania in anticipation of Spain.
I'm just going to rely on my players behaving themselves and trust that the referee interprets the rules with the realisation that it is a competition.’
And Charlton is quick to scotch suggestions that the Lithuanians will provide a cakewalk before the much bigger battle against Spain.
He said: ‘As far as I'm concerned this one on Wednesday is the big game at the moment.
We are not looking any further yet.’
A sell-out crowd will pack Lansdowne Road for tomorrow's game which has a 2.45 kick-off.
A business approach to fashion
The long and short of a day at the office
NOTHING characterised the late 1980s so much as the short skirt.
Welcomed by women of almost all ages as comfortable and a declaration of female sexuality, the short skirt suit with power dressing shoulder-padded jacket was simply the best for oozing confidence at the office.
But fashion, as always, changed and the short skirt fell — literally — from favour and started skimming the ankles.
While some women have carried on wearing short at the office, the eye has quickly adapted, and a look that was once considered sharp suddenly looked old fashioned.
But fashion has moved on again — short can once again look good.
Already re-invented by top international designers, the short skirt will undoubtedly be picked up by the high street stores, and once again start to look new.
Confused?
Don't be.
While there are few hard and fast rules about what is precisely right to wear at the office this season, there are some pointers to keep you heading in the right direction.
SHOULDERS — the line is softer, but not as rounded as last season.
Some are lightly padded simply because it is more flattering to most women, and also gives a better line to the garment.
The only rule here is not to go for exaggerated styles.
SKIRTS — above the knee is fine, thigh-high is not.
They are feminine and flattering, for greater confidence when you walk.
Long skirts are important, but purely straight is out and impossible to walk in anyway.
Stretchy long tube skirts are an alternative, but they too are impractical: if you sit for most of the day you will undoubtedly get knee-bagging, and they are not flattering to most posteriors.
Long skirts with splits look good — choose one with a slit at the back or a discreet side slit, and when trying it on in the changing room, look at yourself sitting down.
It may look good when you are standing, but if you reveal acres of thigh when sitting at a business meeting, you'll never be taken seriously.
TROUSERS — a viable alternative to the skirt for office wear.
No longer frowned on by even the most traditional institutions, they can look chic and incredibly efficient.
The wide-cut style still reigns supreme over slimmer styles, and are easier to wear.
Keep the overall silhouette slim with a tailored or belted jacket and soften up the whole effect with a feminine frilled blouse or floaty scarf around the neck.
DRESSES — long consigned to the back of the wardrobe in favour of suits and separates, the dress made a welcome return in delicate floaty fabrics and shapes.
It smartens up this autumn, looking tailored and trim at just above the knee, or lean and layered for longer lengths.
Look out too for sumptuous soft knitted dresses this autumn.
The dress is particularly ideal for trans-seasonal wear, and also for dressing up with accessories for socialising after work.
SHIRTS AND BLOUSES — in crisp white cotton with big collars and turn-back cuffs, or softer with waterfall necklines and frilled at the wrist, an essential item for the autumn office wardrobe and is a perfect foil to more masculine tailoring.
As more women strive for senior and management positions, the question of clothing has to be tackled in order to compete in a male-dominated environment.
Although many women have the confidence to wear softer clothes rather than masculine suits in order to be taken seriously, the wider choice can bring confusion about exactly what to wear, not only at the office but more importantly at a job interview.
Research shows that interviewers will make a visual impression which influences their decision within the first 45 seconds.
While some of this is a question of chemistry, it is the style in which you dress which says most about your personality and the way you operate.
Looking like you just stepped out of a fashion magazine is not essential, but being dressed in tune with current trends is as important as being aware of current events.
SHARP polyester/ viscose mix jacket (£34.99) is softened by wearing a lace body under it.
(£9.99).
From C&A.
THE Wool Pack — Soft and elegant cardigan dress, £69.99 from Empire.
Ring direct on 0345 200 400.
SOFTLY tailored trouser suit with belted jacket and wide-legged trouser in dark grey melange.
About £240 from Marella.
Stockists include Classic, Enniskillen; The Dresser, Warrenpoint, and Pizazz, Newtownards.
SOFTLY tailored crepe trouser suit for office chic.
Belted jacket with buttoned patch pockets, £39.99, with easily worn matching wide legged trousers, £27.99.
Add a lace top for a touch of glamour, scoop neck, long sleeved top, £24.99.
All from Dorothy
Perkins.
SPLIT Level — Sophisticated tailoring, new neutral tones from Great Universal.
Belted suit and long slim line pencil skirt with split, in raspberry, teal and black, £69.99.
Freephone 0800 269396.
ISLE OF WIGHT
Back on track 500
A PAIR of 100-year-old railway carriages have returned to the tracks after years of restoration by Isle of Wight rail buffs.
The carriages were once coupled together on the Merstone to Ventnor West branch line, but were sold to become seaside chalets in 1938.
Now the vehicles have been re-united on the Isle of Wight Steam Railway.
BELFAST Arthritis Care, Olympia leisure centre, 7.30pm.
Head injury support group, Joss Cardwell Rehabilitation Centre, 397c Holywood Road, 7.30pm, second Thursday of each month.
Senior Citizens Club, Morton Community Centre, Lorne Street, 2pm—4pm.
Ben Madigan Art Society, The Library, Salisbury Avenue, 7.30pm.
Staff Association Photographic Club, Belfast City Hospital, 7.30pm.
Phil McVeigh, portrait lighting.
Poetry at The Linenhall, Medbh McGuckian and Cathal O Searcaigh, 6pm.
Exhibition of salt glaze pots by Jane Hamlyn, Crescent Arts Centre.
Ulster Humanist Association, talk by Helen Lewis, Regency Hotel 8pm.
The Mating Season by the Belvior Players, Group Theatre, 8pm.
West Side Story by Opera Northern Ireland, Klondyke Building, 7.30pm.
Paintings by John Crabtree, One Oxford Street.
Blood Transfusion Service, College Street, 10am — 1pm, 2.30pm — 5pm.
The Medal in Britain, British Museum Travelling Exhibition, Ulster Museum.
CARRICKFERGUS
Blood Transfusion Service, Town Hall, 2pm — 4.30pm, 6pm — 8pm.
FIVEMILETOWN
Blood Transfusion Service, St Johns Hall 2pm — 4.30pm, 6pm — 8pm.
NEWRY
Newry and Mourne Fostercare Centre, William Street, open to public from 2pm — 4pm.
PORTADOWN
Little Shop of Horrors, Junior Phoenix Players, Town Hall Theatre, 8pm.
SAINTFIELD
Saintfield Heritage Society — talk on the first recorded invasion of Ulster, Saintfield Library 8.15pm.
FERMANAGH
Lakeland Players present the Camel's back, Ardhowen, 8pm.
BANGOR
Bangor Horticultural Society Inter-society vegetable competition, Bloomfields shopping centre.
Historical Society, Good Templar Hall, Hamilton Road, 8pm, Dr ATQ Stewart on the 1798 Rebellion in Co Down.
CARRICKFERGUS
Friendship Centre, Methodist Church Halls, Albert Road, 10am to 3pm.
DONAGHADEE
Mothers Morning Club, Community Centre, Manor Street, 10am to 12 noon.
LARNE
Family helpline and counselling service, telephone Larne (0574 260206) 8pm to 8am.
OAP's Lunch, The Can, Christian Community Centre, Victoria Road, 12pm to 2pm.
CLASP, single parents meeting, The Can, Christian Community Centre, Victoria Road, 7.30pm.
CARRYDUFF
Pet dog training, Unionist Hall, Saintfield Road, 7.30pm.
NEWTOWNABBEY
Care and Friendship Centre, Church of the Good Shepherd, Monkstown, 9.45am to 1.30pm.
BALLYMENA
Gamblers Anonymous, Probation Offices, Bridge Street, 8pm.
ARMAGH
Armagh City and District Arts Committee Photographic Exhibition, County Museum.
Details for inclusion in this column must be received in writing three days before publication.
Please state clearly the date, time, and location of the event.
Winemark get taste of success
WHAT is that special quality in a wine that makes it an award winner?
Could it be the years of experience it takes to know where the grape is just ripe or perhaps the skill needed to reach that perfectly balanced wine.
Whichever it is, Winemark seems to have a taste for it.
For the second consecutive year, Winemark have entered a selection of wines in the International Wine Challenge 1993 and, with more than 130 medal winners, this year's success can only confirm that the quality of their wine is of the highest standard.
Before deciding to stock any wine, Winemark look extensively at the quality and reliability of the winery, but when it comes down to it, it's the taste that makes the difference.
After all, that's what enjoying wine is all about.
The International Wine Challenge has grown since its inception in 1984 to become the world's largest and most respected wine competition.
The challenge attracts hundreds of the world's best wine tasters, including 30 Masters of Wine.
The winner is chosen solely on the personal judgment of these Masters.
Less than half the wines listed were selected for awards making the standard set one of the highest in the world.
It's difficult to tell which wines will win, and easy to say when wine is good, but it takes that little bit extra to make it a winner.
WINEMARK Caption
Bright outlook: The stylish image of award-winning Winemark today.
Golden oldies relive youth in rugby bash
A 90-YEAR-OLD Japanese man will be among more than 5,000 former rugby players from around the globe who will be re-living their youth in Dublin later this week.
They will be taking part in the eighth international Golden Oldies Rugby Festival at University College, Dublin, which has attracted 160 teams from 26 countries.
Festival spokesman Joe Leddin said: ‘The Japanese man was born in 1903 and intends to play, as he has done at previous festivals.
We will have another half dozen players who were born before 1920.’
The Carrickfergus Geezers, a team drawn form East Antrim clubs, will represent Northern Ireland.
They will include Alan Phair, who lined out for King's Scholars, Portadown and Malone, and Ray McClelland, a former Academy player.
Each team will play three non-competitive games over three 20-minute periods.
The rules state that there must be no pressure scrums or tough tackling.
By Michael Devine
SPLIT level — Sophisticated tailoring, new neutral tones from Great Universal.
Belted suit and long slim line pencil skirt with split, in raspberry, teal and black, £69.99.
Freephone 0800 269396.
By Sally Bain
Time out to dream of an ideal home
IT didn't take the small but determined palmist, medium and clairvoyant Verran Boswell to tell me I would never afford the ‘Dream House’ at the Ideal Home Exhibition.
But she did anyway.
With a firm grip on my hand, she pulled me away from a display of hi-tech gadgets and told me I was not going to be a millionairess.
She also mentioned I was going to the dentist next week (correct), I would travel often (debatable) and that I would still end up with a lot of money (probably wrong).
Rival
Ms Boswell, who was born in Ireland but stays on the move, is a veteran of exhibitions and just one of the many attractions on offer.
Her rival, Madam Lee, at the other end of the King's Hall, Belfast is another.
Sandwiched between the pair is a vast array of goods, ranging from the luxurious to the novel, the exorbitantly priced to those selling for a few pounds.
You could splash out on a kingsize Strata waterbed costing around £2,800.
The firm has already offered Coronation Street romeo Reg Holdsworth one for his honeymoon.
With the big day looming closer, Richard Middleton, president of the firm's UK operation, says he expects to hear from Granada TV any day now.
Marketing
Or you may want a state-of-the-art aquarium.
The brightly-lit hexagonal tanks range in price from £99 to £695.
‘We brought them over from England this week,’ said Laurence Cooper, marketing manager of Aqua Design, which is based at Weston-super-Mare.
‘This is always a good show.
The tanks are not difficult to transport and we just hire the tropical fish from a pet shop in Belfast.’
If the stress of battling your way through the thousands of people milling around 200 stalls gets to you, then try Dove Healthcare Limited's electronic acupuncture.
The machine costs £170 but is guaranteed to cure 100 problems.
However, I spent most time with an exhibit that was great fun and completely free — BT's Videophone.
The firm has four of them alongside a host of other fascinating phone products on their large stand at the front of the hall.
You and a friend can give each other a call.
Technology at your fingertips and the chance to have a much-needed sit down as well.
What more could a girl want?
A million pounds.
Float on: Laurence Cooper with one of his unusually-shaped fish aquariums at the Ideal Home Exhibition.
Reflected glory: Liam Reilly from Mirror Factory, one of the many new stands at the Ideal Home exhibition in the Kings Hall, Belfast.
ARDGLASS
Protest walk
A GROUP of mothers and daughters are to take to the streets later this month in protest at plans to close an old people's home in Co Down.
Relatives of residents are Ardview House in Ardglass, are to stage a seven mile walk from Downpatrick to the fishing port.
The protest walk will precede a public rally planned for the village on Saturday, September 18.
Derby pace hots up
By Robert Fenton
GREYHOUNDS
THE Respond Irish Derby reaches the second round stage on Saturday night with difference of opinion as to the market leader.
Most of the layers make Francie Murray's Lisglass Lass the 7–1 favourite but some of the Dublin bookies making Greenane Squire either joint top fancy or outright market leader.
Both should make the quarter-finals following the second round on Saturday night, Lisglass being well drawn in trap five in heat six while Greenane Squire, one of Ger McKenna's hopes, has a more difficult hurdle in the third heat which features the Antrim-based bitch Ballinderry Love who wears the red sheet and the Davy Lennon-trained Leading Escort in six.
Ger McKenna's Crestar, the fastest of the first round winners, features in heat two with Oaks winner Libertys Echo and Mabel Blair's Blackwater Lady who has every chance of making further progress for the Larne trainer.
Daleys Denis, from Brendan Mullan's Newry kennels, is showing up well and will be a strong fancy to score from trap one in the final heat which sees Farloe Melody again in trap three from where he was second behind Ramblers Bridge on Monday night.
Saturday night's heats: Heat one — Colorado Green, Fly Smasher, Ramblers Bridge, Researcher (W), Billy George (W), Duagh Colours (W).
Heat Two — Libertys Echo, Blackwater Lady, Jamie Icy Mist (W), Crestar (W), Rockglen Dasher (W), Barefoot Dash (W).
Heat Three — Ballinderry Love, Ballygroman Bill, Greenane Squire, Maryville Kistler, Supplement (W), Leading Escort (W).
Heat Four — Tahiti Touch, Kilcloney Chief, Mr Holsworth, Home Truths, Radical Prince, Barefoot Racer (W).
Heat Five — Never In Touch, Superfine Darkie, Doc (W), Honour Dad (W), Ringside Reaper (W), Drumsna Queen (W).
Heat Six — Oak Hill, Hakuna Matata, Seventh Choice (W), Slippy Mint (W), Lisglass Lass (W), Bustyhill Dandit (W).
Heat Seven — Colorado Flame, Red Bug, Summerhill Gift, Halton Dancer, Kenmare Gem (W), Market Rascal (W).
Heat Eight — Daleys Denis, Paddy Fox, Farloe Melody (W), Longvalley Manor (W), Oyster Cottage (W), Carrigeen Blaze (W).
Lifford
LIFFORD greyhound card for tomorrow at 8.00pm 325 — Pampas Paddy, Terrace Pirotte, Stadium Blitzer, Fast Rabbit, Vintage Vale, Farloe Buzzard.
Reserve Gangway Snow.
Phillip heads for Skerries
By Jimmy Walker
MOTORCYCLING
PHILLIP McCallen will make his first Irish road race appearance of the season outside the North West 200 and Ulster Grand Prix when he rides in the Loughshinny Club's meeting at Killalane near Skerries on Saturday and Sunday.
This is the final meeting of the Irish road racing season and has also attracted English stars Simon Beck and Robert Holden.
McCallen will be riding his 750 Castrol Honda in the open race against Beck on a Ducati along with Holden who is also making his first Irish national road race appearance.
In addition Joey Dunlop, Johnny Rea and new Regal champion Ian King are in the main event.
There will be two open races and this will also be the case with most of the other classes.
With Brian Reid deciding to ride at Scarborough, Joey Dunlop has the 250cc championship wrapped up but there is a possibility his brother Robert will be in action on a Yamaha.
James Courtney, double winner in the Manx Grand Prix last week, Gary Dynes and Denis McCullough are also in this class but once again McCallen would have to be the favourite.
McCallen also rides in the 600cc race where Joey Dunlop appears again along with King and Rea.
Dunlop won this race at Carrowdore last Saturday but again McCallen will be hard to beat and he could complete a treble similar to his performance at the Ulster Grand Prix.
Racing begins on Saturday with roads closing at noon and practising at 12.30.
Then the opening race will be on Saturday evening when one of the Classic races and the 125cc-200cc take place.
On Sunday, the racing starts with the Support class followed by the first Open race, then the second 125–200cc, the 600cc, the Junior (250–350–400cc) followed by the second Classic race, and the Enkalon Grand Final which sees most of the riders on the line and McCallen out to repeat his win of last year.
However it might be expecting a lot for him to win four races and it could be that Simon Beck, who starred at the TT, will score his first Irish success.
On Sunday the roads close at 11.00am and open at 6.30pm.
James Kelly: His pen is still busy, his eye for the news as discerning as ever.
Picture by Rick Hewitt.
Extra time for heritage buffs
STATELY home Mount Stewart is the flavour of the autumn.
If you fancy a tour today or over the weekend the mansion and its famous gardens are still open.
And it will be like that all through September, by public demand.
Mount Stewart has enjoyed such a bumper summer season that the National Trust has extended it by a month, every day except Tuesday.
Opening times at the house are 1pm-6pm, the gardens can be walked in from 10.30am till 6pm and the shop and tearoom will be staffed from 1.30pm till 5.30pm.
Heritage Weekend is being celebrated at National Trust properties all over the province on Saturday and Sunday, including Castle Ward near Strangford where the newly-restored cornmill will be producing flour, just as it did in its heyday, on both days (2.30pm-5pm).
Gray's Printing press in Strabane is also open on Saturday (2pm-4pm) to show how text was composed by hand using individual metal letters to make up each word.
Wellbrook beetling mill near Cookstown will be open on both days (2pm-6pm) and visitors will see how water power was used to transform coarse linen.
The sawmill at Florence Court in Co Fermanagh will be the focal point, with the mill race, water wheel and saw mechanism restored (1pm-6pm).
And Bessbrook Development Group will mark Heritage Day on Saturday with a series of events in its model village, which was designed by the famous Richardson linen family in the late 19th century.
There will be an exhibition in Derrymore House and guided walks around the Trust estate (1pm-5pm).
Tom Carr, arguably Ulster's best known artist, did some of his best work in Europe.
See for yourself what Carr got up to with the sun on his back in an exhibition of his paintings on the continent.
It goes on today, tomorrow and Saturday at the Ulster Museum, Belfast.
Everybody was talking about Christopher Columbus in 1992, 500 years after his epic voyages.
According to the Ulster Museum they're still agog at the doings of the sailor.
An exhibition called Old World, New World is going on there right now devoted to what Chris got up to in 1492.
The Ulster Folk Museum at Cultra is the place to be this weekend — or any time this month — if you're in love, happily married or about to be so.
An exhibition going on there is called Tying the Knot.
And, yes, it's all about marriage traditions in Northern Ireland.
If you've only seen a De Lorean car in the Back to the Future films then drop in at the old plant in Dunmurry on Saturday afternoon (3.30) where the dream machine was produced.
It's now occupied by Montupet who are allowing the legion of De Lorean fans to drive their cars on the old test track once again.
Montupet are opening the old test track to the public and the De Lorean Owners Club is putting 20 of the cars on display.
Members are coming from Switzerland, Germany, Holland, France and England and Scotland and one member is bringing his De Lorean all the way from Australia.
The club is having a rally in Northern Ireland to celebrate its 10th anniversary.
McMaster off to Ballymena
By Jim Stokes
RUGBY
BANGOR'S former Ulster stalwart and Ireland B winger Terry McMaster has joined Ballymena and could be in their starting line-up for Saturday's clash with Dublin king-pins Lansdowne at Eaton Park.
McMaster moved from the seaside to take up a new teaching post in Drumahoe near Londonderry last week, and decided to make the break with the club he has served so well for a decade.
Now 31, McMaster was a prolific points gatherer in his heyday, running in tries or kicking prodigious penalties.
He played in every position in the Bangor back-line and had been a regular member of the Ulster squad that swept the boards in the inter-provincial championships in the last nine years.
A few seasons ago, the much-travelled primary schoolteacher was on the verge of a full international appearance, but had to be satisfied with a B cap against Scotland in Galway.
Although his career may be on the wane, he should still prove a useful asset to Ballymena, who just pipped top Junior side Coleraine for the veteran's services.
‘At the end of last season I had all but decided to finish my career playing junior rugby,’ said McMaster.
‘But I got myself extremely fit during the summer and got the bug again.
Ballymena will be the nearest club to my new home, so it was only natural to play for them.
‘But to be honest it has broken my heart to leave Bangor.
I have been with them since 1981 and won at least six Senior Cup and League medals as well as a host of Boston Cup honours.
I had a lot of happy times at Upritchard Park.
‘But I had to be realistic.
My wife is expecting and I'm building a new house near Ballymena, so there was no sense really in chasing all over the country.
‘Now I'm looking forward to a new challenge.
After their relegation last season, Ballymena will be out to prove a point, and I hope that I can help them achieve that.’
Terry McMaster: Ballymena's new capture.
Mr Ronald Blackburn
RONALD Blackburn, a former clerk of the Northern Ireland Assembly, has died.
He was 69.
Mr Blackburn, a Belfast man, was clerk for the Northern Ireland Parliament from 1970 to March, 1972, and then clerk of the Northern Ireland Assembly in 1973–74.
He was also clerk of the Northern Ireland Convention in 1975–76.
He later produced the Blackburn Report on the reform of Licensing Law in Northern Ireland which the Government implemented throughout the 1980s.
Born in February 1924, he was educated at the Royal Belfast Academical Institution and the University of London, where he studied law.
In the 1940s, he worked for the Northern Whig and then for the Intelligence Corps and the Foreign Office.
He took early retirement from Stormont in September, 1979, and was a Planning Appeals Commissioner for Northern Ireland from December, 1979, to February, 1989.
ENGLAND
Bobby Bridge
FOOTBALL fans flooding to England's crunch World Cup match against Poland at Wembley tonight will pass under a bridge named after one of England's greatest players.
Stephanie Moore, widow of Bobby, captain when England lifted the trophy at Wembley in 1966, was formally opening the Bobby Moore Bridge at lunchtime.
At the same time, Public Transport Minister Roger Freeman was cutting a tape to launch the pedestrianisation of Olympic Way, which stretches from the bridge area to the stadium.
LONDON
Buddy saluted
BUDDY Holly fan Bobby Vee owes his first break in the showbusiness world to the singer's death.
Vee was one of the acts who took Holly's place at a concert on the night he was killed, and a pop manager spotted him and signed him up.
The 50-year-old singer, currently in Britain to help celebrate Buddy Holly Week, sponsored by ex-Beatle Paul McCartney, was presenting a prize today at the Rock Brain of Britain competition in London's Victoria Palace.
CARIBBEAN
Royals sunshine tour
THE Queen and Duke of Edinburgh are to go on a major visit to the Caribbean next February and March.
Their sunshine tour, some of it aboard the Royal Yacht Britannia, will take in eight countries — Anguilla, Dominica, Guyana, Belize, the Cayman Islands, Jamaica, the Bahamas and Bermuda.
The yacht will also host a number of ‘sea days’, used by the Government and trade associations to drum up business for Britain, before and after the tour.
Marti Caine: Panto vow
Griffin makes a fine start
IRELAND'S defending featherweight champion, Paul Griffin, got his European championship campaign off to a winning start in Bursa, Turkey last night with a hard fought 6–5 win over Lazlo Bagnar of Hungry.
However, Dubliner Griffin picked up a bad eye injury on the way to defeating the triple national champion with the last punch of the fight.
Many ringsiders felt the 22-year-old from the Mount Tallant Club had won quite convincingly and there was quite a few surprised faces when the final scoring was announced.
Griffin's next bout is tonight against the German champion Siegmund Franke, who won his first round contest 13–0 and Belfast's World bronze medallist Damien Kelly will have his first fight of the championships.
Ireland's representation has already been halved due to first round defeats by Antrim's Mark Winters and Ardoyne's Eamon Magee who was stopped with 40 seconds to go in the final round.
Winters went down 8–6 to Nahgettin Issever of Turkey in what the majority of impartial observers saw as a clear ‘hometown’ decision.
No easy games says Charlton By Lyle Jackson
AS THE finishing tape nears, the hearts are beating faster in Dublin.
A win over Lithuania — anything else hasn't even been contemplated — and the Republic will be on the very brink of qualification for the World Cup finals in the USA next summer.
But Jack Charlton is now trying to warn against complacency, though many in the Republic are already celebrating.
‘We have to be totally focused on this game, it's one we have to win,’ says Charlton, who, with the exception of suspended Paul McGrath, was able to name a full strength line-up yesterday.
‘Lithuania aren't a bad side and people should have a sense of perspective — there are no easy games in international football.
‘In certain situations Lithuania can be dangerous.’
Missing
However, Lithuania aren't going to be as dangerous as they might have been as several of their top stars didn't make the trip.
Ivanauskas, Narbekovis and Jermanis are missing because the Lithuanians couldn't afford the insurance required by their clubs.
The Republic will be satisfied with a win by any margin although the statisticians eagerly point out that Ireland need four goals to complete 100 goals at Lansdowne Road and five for a century in the World Cup.
It's another sell-out at Lansdowne Road this afternoon, only the thriving black market will have tickets for sale.
Those packing into the ground are convinced the USA passage is booked and that worries striker Niall Quinn.
‘People think we just have to turn up but the players don't see it that way,’ he says.
Qualification
‘We'll be every bit as fired up as if we were playing Spain.’
It is Spain who visit Lansdowne next month before the Republic wind up their qualification programme in Belfast.
By the time they take the Windsor pitch they want to have their USA place safely in the bag.
Today presented the Republic and Denmark, who play Albania tonight, with a chance to open a gap on Spain in Group Three.
Victories would put the Irish on 17 points, Denmark on 16 with Spain still on 13 although the Spanish would have a game in hand.
November 17, when North meets South in Ireland and the Danes go to Spain, looks like being an eventful day.
Irvine waits to take over
By Sammy Hamill
MOTORSPORT
DESPITE the confirmation by the Irish-owned Jordan Formula One team that Marco Apicella will replace Thierry Boutsen in Sunday's Italian Grand Prix at Monza, Ulster driver Eddie Irvine is standing by in the wings to take over later in the season.
Apicella will drive at Monza and probably in the Portuguese Grand Prix a fortnight later.
But I understand Eddie Jordan plans to draft in Macau-based Irvine for the final two races of the year in Japan and Australia.
Second
Depending on how Apicella performs this weekend, he may even come in for Portugal.
Irvine, from Conlig, Co.
Down, currently races in the Far East and is lying second in the Japanese Formula 3000 championship.
He also competes for Toyota in the Japanese sports car series and earlier this year headed their team in the Le Mans 24-hour race.
Wales on final road
MARK Hughes believes Wales are becoming one of the most difficult teams to beat in international soccer.
The Manchester United striker, who will tonight win his 51st cap for his country when they take on the RCS in a vital World Cup qualifier in Cardiff, believes this is one of the best Welsh teams for years.
But Hughes is adamant that despite their glittering array of striking talent with himself, Ryan Giggs, Ian Rush and Dean Saunders in the side Wales are taking nothing for granted.
Victory against the RCS is a necessity for Wales, and if they can follow that up with wins against Cyprus next month and Romania at home, they will have qualified for the World Cup finals for the first time since 1958.
WALES (probable): Southall (Everton); Phillips (Notts Forest), Bowen (Norwich), Aizlewood (Bristol Cty), Symons (Portsmouth), Young (Crystal Palace), Horne (Everton, capt), Hughes (Man Utd), Giggs (Man Utd), Rush (Liverpool), Saunders (Aston Villa).
HEARTS defender Craig Levein today gazed ahead to his vision of Scotland's international future and immediately demanded to be part of it.
The centre back, who earns his 12th cap against Switzerland in Aberdeen tonight, is convinced that the current crop of young players can take the world by storm.
Unfortunately it may not be this World Cup, for the Scots have just a minuscule chance of qualifying.
SCOTLAND: Gunn (Norwich), McKimmie (Aberdeen), Robertson (Rangers), Bowman (Dundee Utd), Irvine (Aberdeen), Levein (Hearts), Booth (Aberdeen), Nevin (Tranmere), Durie (Tottenham), McAllister (Leeds), Collins (Celtic).
RUGBY
Armagh win
A CANADIAN touring side Clansmen of Edmonton, played two matches in Armagh last night at the start of their visit to Ireland.
They went down 9–6 to an Armagh 1st XV.
The visitors second string were beaten 24–12 by an Armagh Select.
Sharpe hopes to reach new ‘goal ‘
THE bookies offer a tempting 10–1 that in-form Lee Sharpe will open England's goal account and premiere his celebratory dance routine at Wembley against the Poles tonight.
But even though the 23-year-old winger fancies himself after four in three games for Manchester United, his wallet will stay in his pocket.
‘Last season I used to feel good about certain games and I put bets on myself.
Then I went out and missed sitters and lost the lot!’ he admits.
Besides, Sharpe's caution is justified since Graham Taylor has picked a team full of players itching to be the one whose finger pulls the trigger that will release the World Cup tension of the past few months — and in the process bring much-needed relief to manager Graham Taylor and his backroom team.
Paul Gascoigne has been given the freedom to roam forward, David Platt will be looking to add to his remarkable haul of 12 goals from his last 14 games, and Paul Ince reckons it's about time he opened his England scorecard.
But it is up front where the experts ply their trade and both Ian Wright and Les Ferdinand are bouncing with confidence.
Determined
Wright is determined at last to become as prolific for his country as he always is for Arsenal especially with Alan Shearer lurking in the wings for Holland next month.
Partner Ferdinand has had his back to the wall in the last few months, a troublesome disc plaguing his attempts to establish himself last spring and resulting in him coming home early from America.
‘Last season finished badly for me, now I've got the chance to put it right,’ he says.
His injury is now completely cured and, after an early season rocket from Loftus Road manager Gerry Francis, he has put himself back on the trail to match last term's 24-goal haul.
The last time Ferdinand played at Wembley he hit the Dutch post and though Platt popped in the rebound, he said: ‘I want to go one better this time and score.
Confident
‘I feel confident every time I go out.
I think my strengths are my pace, my strength in the air and obviously I can score goals.
I hope I frighten defenders.’
He will if Sharpe's crossing is up to scratch.
Although he has found a new cutting edge to his game, after managing just five goals in his previous 104 league games, it is as a creator that Alex Ferguson most cherishes him.
‘People go on about my goalscoring now and expect me to score in every game now I've hit a purple patch.
But I still see myself as more of a supplier,’ says Sharpe.
By Rob King
SOCCER
Young awards
FIVE of the province's finest young football prospects will be recognised by Coco-Cola at an awards ceremony on before tonight's the World Cup match between Northern Ireland and Latvia at Windsor Park.
These young ‘stars of the future’ are products of the Coca-Cola ‘Centres of Excellence’which are administered annually by the IFA from September through to May The 1993 winners of the hail from Banbridge, Londonderry, Portadown, Newry and Belfast.
The culmination of this summer's ‘Fun Weeks’ also take place.
Five under-12 teams representing Londonderry, Omagh, Warrenpoint, Criagavon and Castlereagh will demonstrate their ball skills and take part in a team competition.
DARTS
Top throwers
NORTHERN Ireland's top 42 County dart stars will be in action at the Blue Circle Club, Magheramourne, Larne, on Saturday September 25.
They will play for a place in the preliminary round of the £135,000 Embassy World Professional Championship to be staged in London this December.
Players competing at the Blue Circle Club for this prestigious championship must register between 12.00 and 12.30pm.
IAAF contest ruling
THE International Amateur Athletic Federation (IAAF) are seeking to overturn a US court decision which awarded 400 metres world record holder Butch Reynolds about £18 million in damages.
Reynolds successfully sued the IAAF after he was banned following a positive dope test in Monte Carlo three years ago.
The 29-year-old American finished second in last month's Stuttgart world championships.
In July, US federal judge Joseph Kinneary rejected an appeal by the IAAF in Colombus, Ohio, against the original judgment.
The IAAF has argued that US courts have no jurisdiction over the international body.
IAAF spokeswoman Jayne Pearce today confirmed that the federation did not accept the Ohio court decision and would appeal to a higher court in Cincinnati.
Federation legal sources said they hoped to launch the appeal in December and added they were ‘very hopeful’ the Ohio decision would be overturned.
CRICKET
Released
Hampshire are to release batsman Julian Wood and left-arm spinner Ian Turner at the end of the season.
Wood, 24, has played in 27 first-class matches and scored 960 runs without ever being able to hold down a regular spot.
Turner, 25, took 53 wickets in 24 first-class matches for the county but has been overtaken by Darren Flint's progress this season.
Floodlit date for Barbarians
By Jim Stokes
RUGBY
ULSTER will play the South African Barbarians under the Ravenhill floodlights on Friday October 29.
The date was pencilled in during the summer, but the tourists, who will effectively be a near Springbok side, wanted a Saturday fixture.
Now they have finally agreed to an Ulster Branch request for an evening fixture and will fly into the province immediately after wrapping up the English part of their trip on the previous Wednesday.
And overtures may be made to the visiting New Zealand Under-21 News side to also bring their game forward to make it a big evening double-header.
They were due to face an Ulster Under 21 side at Ravenhill on October 30 with the usual afternoon kick-off.
Souffle runs in Moyglare
By Jimmy Walker
RACING
LEMON SOUFFLE, England's top two-year-old filly was declared today for Sunday's £100,000 Group One Moyglare Stud Stakes at the Curragh.
Lemon Souffle will be ridden by Lester Piggott.
Trained by Richard Hannon, Lemon Souffle hasn't run since she scored at scintillating victory in the Cherry Hinton Stakes at Newmarket in July.
After that she was installed ante post favourite for next season's One Thousand Guineas but then a pulled muscle forced her to miss her next outing, the Lowther Stakes at York.
Red Rita and Rohita, who were second and third respectively behind Lemon Souffle at Newmarket have also been declared for Sunday's Curragh race.
Flight of fancy
FURTHER Flight looks all set to take his second successive Doncaster Cup tomorrow.
The Barry Hills-trained seven-year-old was a model of consistency last season, winning this Group Three event and a trio of other contests over distances around two miles.
But, like so many of his stablemates, he struggled to find his form in the early part of this term and has only recently returned to his best.
The grey son of Pharly demonstrated his newly-regained well-being with a cosy victory over Silverdale at York three weeks ago.
He cruised along contentedly on the bridle until being sent into the lead a quarter of a mile out and then galloped on resolutely to win by one and a half lengths.
A reproduction of that performance would certainly see Further Flight home in front of tomorrow's opposition.
Nobody seemed to have any doubt that Pencader would trounce his rivals on his debut at Newbury last month.
Peter Chapple-Hyam's colt was virtually unopposed in the market, shortening up to 4–6 favourite after opening at evens.
Favourite backers had few anxious moments about the narrow margins involved in their investment, however, as Pencader was always up with the leaders and quickened at the furlong pole to score by two lengths.
The son of Caerleon is a progressive type, apparently certain to come of a few pounds for that introduction, and should be good enough to take the Queen's Own Yorkshire Dragoons Stakes.
The May Hill Stakes, frequently an early guide to the following year's Classics, is much more tricky to predict.
However, a chance is taken with John Dunlop's Bulaxie, whose only race to date brought an encouraging third in a big field at Newmarket.
The daughter of Bustino appeared to have no chance at halfway on that first outing, since she was well in arrears of the front-running hot-pot Hawker Hunter.
Nevertheless, such was Bulaxie's finishing drive that she eventually finished third, beaten only a neck and a short-head.
Given normal improvement, Dunlop's attractive filly should again find herself figuring in the shape up.
SELECTIONS Further Flight, 3.10 Mistle Cat, 3.40 Cambara, 4.10 Arjuzah, 4.40 Phyllan.
FOLKESTONE: 1.45 Number One Spot, 2.15 Monkey's Wedding, 2.45 Home Park, 3.15 Mr Bergerac, 3.45 Resonant, 4.15 Ragtime Song, 4.45 First Bid.
NEWTON ABBOT:2.20 Spring To The Top, 2.50 Othet, 3.25 Tri Folene, 3.55 Trumpet, 4.25 Ilewin, 4.55 Knightly Argus.
Pegasus Cup shocker
EUROPEAN Cup Winners' Cup Division B champions Pegasus must take part in women's hockey's Sharwoods Irish Senior Cup preliminary round for the third successive season.
The team that swept all before them in Amiens to bring home European silverware have been handed a trip to Cork where they will take on Ashton for a place in the Irish Cup first round proper.
Officials from the leading Ulster team have voiced their opinion in the past that there should be some of form seeding for the preliminary round, and now it has raised its head again as they prepare for a long trip south on November 6.
Last year they met Civil Service in the preliminaries and the year before it was Muckross.
The only other preliminary round tie this season involves Greenfields and Galway, two Connaught teams.
Top clash
Meanwhile, fierce rivals Pegasus and Portadown, two of the teams being tipped for honours, meet head-on when the new Renault Ulster Senior League women's hockey season starts on Saturday.
Last year's Cup Winners Cup Division B champions against last year's Irish Senior Cup winners is certainly one to whet the appetite for what is World Cup season.
Portadown coach welcomes back former Irish international winger Susie Kinley, only to find that Adele Sloan takes her place on maternity leave, whereas Pegasus coach Eilish Macken has a strong midfield line-up to call upon now that international panellists Claire Samways, Jeanette Turner and Claire McMahon have been joined by Kim Mills.
International Laura Brown remains available before heading off to university.
Champions Randalstown begin against North Down in what is a dress rehearsal for their Winemark Ulster Shield first round tie a fortnight later at the same venue.
Randalstown have a handful of early injury problems to overcome, with goalkeeper Mary Nugent (groin), Kirsty Bonar (ankle ligaments) and Jayne Armstrong (back) all causing headaches and striker Rhoda Campbell set to go into hospital next week for an exploratory knee operation.
Missing
The Comber girls have lost Anne Hill, who has stepped down, Shiela Newell (pregnant), Caroline Craig (UUJ) and Kathy Mitchell (Pegasus).
Ards can start with a win over Collegians while newly promoted Knock will be hoping to get something from their trip to Civil Service team.
Relegated Victorians have a tough opener at Owls, one of the promotion favourites, while Banbridge and Mid Antrim have difficult trips to Coleraine and Grosvenor respectively.
Newly promoted Friends Old Girls must wait a fortnight before making their senior debut — opponents Queen's are excused this week and next week is a free date due to Irish coaching.
Renault Senior League Section One — Ards v Collegians (Jordanstown, 4pm), Civil Service v Knock (Stormont, 2-30pm), Pegasus v Portadown (Jordanstown, 2-30pm), Randalstown v North Down (Antrim Forum, 2-30pm).
Section Two — Coleraine v Banbridge (Coleraine, 2-30pm), Grosvenor v Mid Antrim (Grosvenor, 2-30pm), Owls v Victorians (Mossley LC, 4pm).
Susie Kinley: the former international returns to Portadown after missing most of last season
Contests in Tyrone
THE Tyrone County Committee of the Young Farmers' Clubs of Ulster held their annual soil-assessment competition at the farm of Noel Hemphill, a member of Drumquin YFC.
Diane Stevenson, of the Department of Agriculture, assisted with judging in the competition, in which 21 people took part.
Results: 1, Samuel Hawkes, Seskinore; 2, Valerie Campbell, Newtownstewart; 3 (tie), Linda McKelvey and Hilary Campbell, Newtownstewart.
Nine clubs and more than 50 competitors took part in the tractor-handling and farm-safety contests held at Omagh showgrounds.
Results: Tractor-handling: Boys: 1, Richard McFarland, Clanabogan; 2, Marcus Hamilton, Strabane.
Girls: 1, Sandra Armstrong, Trillick; 2, Lorna Buchanan, Strabane.
Farm safety: Over all: 1, Robert Waugh, Derg Valley.
Boys: 1, Robert Waugh; 2 (tie), Samuel Robinson, Derg Valley, and Aubrey Hawkes, Seskinore.
Girls: 1 Shirley Crawford, Seskinore; 2 (tie), Rae Smyth and Linda Turner, Drumquin.
Quiz
The Tyrone YFCU annual senior county quiz will be held at Langfield Youth Hall on September 17.
YFCU president Ian Buchanan will be the guest speaker at the county dinner to be held on September 24 in the Royal Arms Hotel, Omagh.
Kilrea YFC member Robin Bolton is having an interesting time in America on an exchange trip sponsored by the Bank of Ireland.
During his time away, he has visited a potash mine, two dairy farms and attended a rodeo, as well as becoming an expert on 4H country fairs.
One dairy farm he visited on the way to Albuquerque had 750 cows which were milked three times a day through a 24/24 side-exit herringbone parlour.
Forage and concentrate was all bought in and the animals were kept in outdoor feedlots.
This was a small farm, with its neighbour carrying about 1,500 cows, and the largest unit in the area had about 3,000 cows.
Robin found the average milk-yield for the area was about 33kg per cow daily.
Dunmore
DUNMORE greyhound card for tomorrow at 8.00pm Alexandra 435 — Mr Midway, Lucky Person, Stratfords Flyer, Valiant Bird, Forest Dean, Cushie Arrow.
Directors Cup first round heat 5 410 — Move Cruiser, Bondy's Pride, Greenmount Snap, Is It Gold, Simple Confusion, Derrychrin Pat.
Reserve Floating Booze.
Greencastle 575 — Boyhill Snig, Fair Mittens, Bonny Time, Tea Money, Shean's Lad, Senior Willie.
Directors Cup first round heat 6 410 — Paddington Bear, Hot Spot Yankee, Ardroe Lady, Forget Me Not, Hennery's Randy, Cora Jack.
Belmont 575 — Dunsilly Draper, Minorca's Fly, Murlough Blue, Southill Lady, Scrabo Rose, Lady Spark.
Directors Cup first round heat 7 410 — Flight Delayed Hymer Bluebell, That's The Story, Flamingo Chas, Duffy's Legend, Buffalo Hiker.
Knockbreda 525 — Star Profile, Jocem John, Introduction, Mossgreen Chief, Mombassa Taxi, Wings of Love.
Reserve Lily's Shop.
Directors Cup first round heat 8 410 — Fennessy's Friend, Mossgreen Harp, Dargan Lad, Bilboa Bunny, First Go, Sparta Hook.
Floating Reserve Milewater Storm.
Stormont 410 — Frosty Mick, Fed by Fred, Leading On, Twelfth Girl, Captain Blue, Warrem Flag.
RAFA Wings appeal
SINCE 1943 the Royal Air Forces Association has provided a welfare and community service for serving and former members of the Royal Air Forces and their families.
Some 2.5m people are eligible for our help.
We deal with over 40,000 welfare cases each year and the number is rising.
By the end of the decade, well over half of those who qualify for assistance will be aged over 80, mainly those who served in the Second World War or their widows.
Increasingly, we are being asked to play our part in providing care in the community to those who can no longer rely on public welfare services.
In addition, we maintain some convalescent and long term support facilities.
We are proud of the work but it all costs a great deal of money.
The bulk of our income is raised through the generosity of the public during our annual Wings Appeal which this year will be held from September 13–19.
We will be making street and house-to-house collections during Battle of Britain Week.
Please help us in our work, in our 50th anniversary year, by giving to our collectors or by sending a donation to the Appeals Director, RAF Association, War Memorial Building, 9–13 Waring Street, Belfast BT1 2DW.
Council presses for funds to help Ulster Peto centre
NEWRY and Mourne councillors are to press education authorities to fund Dungannon's Buddy Bear Peto Centre, to help four young children suffering from cerebral palsy.
Parents of the children said they had made ‘remarkable progress’ through Budapest's conductive education programmes.
They said two of them, Anna-Marie Treanor and Daniel Murphy, have been referred to the Buddy Bear centre.
Hope
Parents hope that two others, Clare Donaghy and Sarah Quinn will also be sent there soon.
But mothers of the four told the council: ‘We have been funding our children's special education — £1,500 monthly per child plus travel arrangements — since January 1993.
‘Our funds are totally exhausted but we are determined our children will continue to derive enormous benefits that they have gained from their education in Dungannon.’
The Buddy Bear Centre — a former school — is currently without public funding, until the Department of Education carry out an inspection to assess it.
The councillors agreed to the mothers' request to meet education officials to try to speed this up.
Video link to the past
Rail thing: Actor Thomas Clugson, playing the part of William Dargan (the father of Irish Railways) stands in the middle of the Lagan central bridge section of the new X-Harbour Rail Link.
The location is the set for a promotional video for the Ulster Folk And Transport Museum's new railway collection building at Cultra.
The building will be opened on September 30 and the video, The Iron Horses Are Back In Harness, will run in their purpose-built presentation theatre on the site.
William Dargan, built the Co Down Railway and the Northern Railway that the new bridge will link together when completed
50th anniversary for plough contest
THIS is a golden year for the Northern Ireland Ploughing Association.
Arrangements are well advanced to celebrate the 50th anniversary on a Tyrone farm late next month.
Surviving
Over two days — October 20 and 21 — Northern Ireland ploughmen will be joined by colleagues from England, Wales and the Republic on the Moy farm of Joe Patterson for the annual championships.
Efforts are also being made to have there some of the surviving competitors in the association's first match, on the Limavady farm of the late John C Drennan on February 16, 1938.
Tree-planting
To mark the occasion, a commemorative tree-planting ceremony will take place on the first day of the championships.
Among visiting ploughmen this year will be Ray Robson and Adrian Brewer from England, both of whom were at the World Match at Limavady two years ago.
On that occasion Adrian represented England and Ray was team manager.
Wales
Also visiting will be Eifion Thomas and Ray Goodwin from Wales and several competitors from south of the border.
On the judge's list will be Liam Rohan and John Somers from the Republic; Pip Davies from Wales and John Hill and Sonny Smith from England.
Vintage
A spokesman for the NIPA said: ‘As usual there will be classes for young farmers, ladies, vintage, horse and visitors.
Ample space has been provided for trade exhibits and demonstration purposes.
‘We still have some trade space available and anyone wishing to be present at the championships should contact us at 0232 370222.’
By Michael Drake
MY great-grandfather, Thomas Patrick Halpin was born at Ballymacarrett in July 1856.
His parents were John Halpin (Halfpenny) and Margaret Magennis (McGuinness) who married on October 21, 1849, at St. Matthew's, Belfast, and emigrated to Australia with their sons on April 15, 1863, from Liverpool on board the ‘Montmorency’.
I would be grateful for any information your readers can provide.
CHRISTINE LLOYD 9 Burns Lane, Silkstone, Queensland, 4304, Australia.
Gordon bids to maintain family glory
THE name of Syd Fairweather was once synonymous with the Ulster Professional Golf Championship.
That was in the 30s and 40s and another Fairweather will be attempting to emulate those feats next week.
The present day edition of the clan is Gordon, the Knock six footer, who partners Neil Manchip (Royal Co.
Down) and Gary Stevenson (Royal Portrush) on Monday as the 1993 Irish News sponsored £6,000 championship tees off at Lurgan.
It's a 36-holes stroke play event played over two days.
Gordon Fairweather has a lot to live up to.
His late grandfather won the title seven times between 1931 and 1948.
He also reached the 1944 and 46 finals losing to Jimmy Adams and the great Fred Daly but surely the '31 decider must go down in history as one of the most one-sided ever.
Syd demolished John Hamill by 12 and 11 in the 36 holes match.
He also had an easy win over John McKenna four years later — the tussle ending seven and six.
Now it's back to stroke play as Gordon Fairweather makes another bid to put the family name back on the trophy,.
Climbed
However, it's David Jones who is the betting man's favourite.
The ‘Longfellow’ of Irish golf has climbed to the rostrum before and is short priced to do so again.
The 42-year-old Knockbracken sweep swinger added yet another honour to his long list last weekend when he won the three-day Coca Cola pro-am at City of Derry's Hilltop Prehen course.
The crown is vacant because of a rare rule in the PGA.
Darren Clarke cannot defend the title he won so easily last season — because he's not available to play in next Wednesday's pro-am tournament which is not part of the championship but a social day out for the amateurs.
‘Our rules dictate that all the players in the championship must be available for the pro-am and we cannot bend the rules even for Darren.
I know he would have liked to defend his title,’ said Irish region PGA captain Hanna.
Clarke has bigger things on his mind next week.
He's amongst the qualifiers for the Lancome trophy at Paris.
So is David Feherty, another former winner of the Ulster pro title.
The championship is all the poorer because of their absence.
Back to back championships were played at Lurgan in 1976 and 77.
Eddie Polland was the winner of the card and pencil contest with a four rounds total of 290 but a year later Barry Brennan bettered that score by nine shots.
Polland is now living in Spain and no longer involved in competitive golf while Brennan returned to the amateur ranks shortly after his success.
Catching problem: Salmon stealers hauling fish fortune
Ulster girls in top gear
WOMEN'S hockey in Ulster can accelerate into the new season this weekend with a sense of security (writes Graham Hamilton).
In a year when there has been considerable fund-raising to meet the Irish Ladies Hockey Union's initial £m target, to help stage the World Cup finals in Dublin in July, Ulster officials are delighted to have successfully negotiated a year's extension on Renault's sponsorship of their senior leagues.
The company's three-year package ended in April, but this week Renault UK's area manager Ray Stevenson confirmed that they would be backing the Ulster set-up for another 12 months.
This season is an important one for the women's game, and accordingly the league programme starts a fortnight early to ensure an early finish and accommodate senior coach Terry Gregg's plans.
The opening round of fixtures brings together fierce rivals Pegasus and Portadown on Saturday, and two of Ireland's rising young starts, Lyndsey McVicar and Claire McMahon — who will be training alongside each other for most of the season in preparation for the finals but who will face each other in the first league fixture — went along to the Ulster Garages at Belfast's Boucher Road, to help launch details.
Bridge is new place to meet
THE Bridge, a new venue, has been opened by Raymond Murphy at the Hercules Bar, Castle Street, Belfast.
Gay McIntyre, winner of a Belfast Telegraph EMA award, and his quartet will be playing there on Saturday night.
Tomorrow night it will be the Neil Everett Trio.
‘I'D like to spend eternity with the Admiral.
I'd like him to be my lover in the afterlife’— Historian Jan Morris discussing the subject of her latest work, Lord Fisher, Admiral of the Fleet.
He died in 1920.
THERE is a fetid and corrupt core to the prison system in Britain which means that one spark can cause a conflagration’— Frances Crook, director of the Howard League for Penal Reform.
‘ARISE Sir Turnip!’ —Sun headline describing England manager Graham Taylor after the team's 3–0 World Cup victory over Poland at Wembley.
‘YES, I was fired up — I always get like that when I've had a bit of stick and I have had a lot of stick lately.’
Paul Gascoigne on his performance after being booked and scoring England's second goal.
BLUES GUN FOR TOP SPOT THIS SATURDAY
ELD face the challenge of a resurgent Cliftonville at Windsor this weekend in a battle to decide which side finishes top of the TNT Gold Cup Section A.
With both teams having already secured their places in the knock-out stages of the competition, home advantage in the quarter-finals is at stake in Saturday's clash.
The Blues go into the game with maximum points from their two group ties, having scored five goals and conceded only one.
But that pales in comparison with Saturday's opponents who have found the net no fewer than nine times in their last two games, again conceding only the single goal.
Cliftonville's recent vein of rich form means Linfield need to win if they are to play their next Gold Cup fixture at Windsor.
Frankie Parks' side's performances over the past few weeks will be envied by Blues' boss Trevor Anderson.
Despite their smooth progress in both domestic cup competitions, Linfield have failed to recapture last season's championship-winning form, their inspired display against Dinamo Tbilisi apart.
Undeserved
Last Saturday at Castlereagh Park, Ards had most of the play but second-half goals from Dessie Gorman and John McConnell clinched an undeserved victory for the Blues.
Anderson will know that Ards' failure to take their chances is unlikely to be repeated by the buoyant Reds.
Kick-off at Windsor Park on Saturday is at 3pm.
Distillery Seconds and Linfield Swifts occupy twelfth and thirteenth positions, respectively, in the Wilkinson Sword B Division Section Two table, having both lost their opening matches 3–1.
And judging by their weekend clash in the first round of the Cawoods Steel and Sons Cup there could well be as little to separate the teams at the end of the season as there is at present.
But after a topsy-turvy match at Midgley Park it was the Swifts who booked their place in the second round, running out winners.
Meanwhile, RUC's bid to capture one of the few trophies to have eluded them in junior soccer got off to a much more convincing start as they trounced Harland and Wolff Welders in the first round of the cup competition.
Eventful
The police always looked on top in an eventful first half and translated their superiority into goals just before half-time.
Three minutes before the interval Millen struck to break the deadlock and Love made it two a minute later.
RUC stepped up a gear in the second half and added another three to their tally, through Whiteside, Coyle and Magill.
Darren Black's goal four minutes into time was scant consolation for the east Belfast side.
In the second round the police entertain Dervock at New Forge Lane, while the Swifts have an away match against Downshire YM.
The ties will be played next Saturday, both kicking off at 2.30pm.
Och aye, it's time to dance
LOCAL people are being invited to don a kilt and shake a sporran with the launch of a series of classes in Scottish country dancing.
The Royal Scottish Country Dancing Society was founded in Glasgow in and now has over 23, members.
This winter the Belfast branch of the society is to conduct classes teaching the basics of the art in Belfast, Bangor, Helen's Bay, Lisburn and Whitehouse.
And it's inviting adults of all ages to go along and join in the fun.
According to the organisers no previous dancing experience is needed for the classes, which they say will also provide plenty of exercise and the opportunity to meet new friends.
In the Belfast area, a weekly class is being held each Monday at 7.30pm in St Columba's Parish Church Hall on the King's Road, starting from next week.
Each Wednesday at 7.45pm St Thomas's Church Hall on the Lisburn Road will be alive with jigs and reels.
And there will also be a fortnightly class, starting next Saturday, in Windsor Presbyterian Church Hall, also on the Lisburn Road, at 7.30pm.
For further information contact Vera on (0247) or Elma on (0247) 465071.
Race will be great ‘quack’!
FEATHERS will fly on Saturday at the Mayor of Castlereagh's duck race at Shaw's Bridge.
The ducks will be putting their best beak forward at 3pm in the charity dash, which will raise money for Cancer Research.
And the ‘quack’ will be good when over 1, ducks take to the waters of the River Lagan.
And punters needn't get in a flap if they haven't reserved their duck yet.
To reserve one, simply contact the Community Services Department, Castlereagh Borough Council,
Cregagh Road, telephone Belfast 799021, or the race organisers on the day.
The first beak across the line wins £ for its owner.
A day out
TEN housebound Belfast residents will be paying the Ulster Folk Museum a visit to celebrate Senior Volunteer Action Day, thanks to the efforts of the Voluntary Service Belfast.
The day has been organised by its Retired and Senior Volunteer Programme members, all aged between and 80.
RSVP co-ordinator Anne Sweeney explained: ‘There are a lot of retired people out there who have valuable skills to offer to their community through volunteering.
‘This outing is just one example of what can be achieved.’
Anniversary party plan
THE East Belfast and Castlereagh Childminders' Group will hold its tenth anniversary party at the Joss Cardwell Centre,
Holywood Road, at 7.30pm.
All members, past and present, are welcome.
Fashion show
A FASHION show with a difference is being held at the Beechlawn House Hotel in Dunmurry next Wednesday.
UTV's Pamela Ballentine will compere the show which will feature clothes from Deja-Vu, the nearly-new shop on the Lisburn Road.
All proceeds go to Concern Worldwide and Lepra and tickets are available from both charities and at Deja-Vu.
Report by Peter Hutcheon
Great strides
Striders continued their total domination of the local athletics scene when they won the Panasonic Northern Ireland League for the 18th consecutive time at the weekend.
The Ballymena and Antrim team, though, pushed them to the limit, finishing just two points adrift.
Lagan Valley finished last and, despite beating RUC in the last meeting, could not avoid the drop to division two.
Women team up for new season
THE Northern Ireland Women's Football Association has released details of two competitions to be played this month.
There will be a fixture today at the Junior Stadium, Sydenham for the Sam Wilson MBE Memorial Cup.
Bangor Ladies v Post Office United kicks off at 7.30pm.
And Post Office United will be in action again at the Junior Stadium, Sydenham on Tuesday September 14, when they take on Belfast Amazons for the Premier Cup.
Autumn fair
ROSEMARY Presbyterian Church will hold its annual autumn fair this Friday evening.
The event will double as a flower show in the Eakenhead Memorial Halls on the North Circular Road at 7.30pm.
Belfast venue for senior citizens' rally
ULSTER'S senior citizens will hold a major outdoor rally in Belfast city centre next week.
The rally, organised by the Northern Ireland Pensioners' Convention to mark the European Year of Older People, will take place in Cornmarket next Friday.
Hundreds of pensioners from all parts of the city are expected to attend to hear Harry Munday, general secretary of the British Pensioners' Association, and other guests highlight issues of particular interest to the elderly.
These include the government's plans to charge VAT on coal, gas and electricity bills.
The rally will also be addressed by Amanda Hallaway, chairperson of the Youth Committee of the Northern Ireland Congress of Trade Unions, who will talk about bridging the generation gap.
As part of the pensioners' day of action, Age Concern Northern Ireland and the Northern Ireland Pensioners' Convention will launch the publication ‘Maximising Mobility’.
It's a report of the conference of the same name, organised by Age Concern's ‘Age Action’ project in January as part of the UK programme to mark the European Year of Older People.
The report focuses on the importance of transport and mobility in enabling older people to fully participate in and contribute to the life of the community and contains recommendations aimed at addressing the mobility needs of older people.
Advice on how to make sure you ‘wear it well’ this season!
Chill out with winter fashion
FORGET dull colours and dreary clothes, the depressing wardrobe which normally heralds the autumn chill — instead, warm to winter in cosy and colourful casuals.
River Island's creative combinations of design, rich colour and new fabrics build a versatile wardrobe for autumn/winter.
Layering is the key this season; freedom to create an individual look with your own combinations of fabrics, shapes and colours, with tone-on-tone neutrals complementing both formal and casual winter outfits perfectly.
For tailoring, the softer silhouette prevails with simple, modern shapes, relaxed lines and the drape and sheen of new clothes.
Unstructured trouser suits with wide pants, wrap skirts and loose, round necked shirts are based around a neutral palette with aubergine, chocolate, cream and grey.
The look extends to outer-wear where easy, belted styles in camel or charcoal are the perfect winter coat.
Pinafores and fit-and-flare coats, ruffles, cuffs and heeled lace-up boots evoke Edwardian elegance, while grandad collars, pinstripes, waistcoats and tweeds are a stylish re-writing of the 20s workwear look.
The casual range offers real winter warmth.
Knitwear suits every mood with a wealth of texture, colour and pattern, layered on with denim in every shape and form — skirts, dresses, jeans and jackets.
Jersey looks feminine but natural with pointelle and lace trims, contrasting perfectly with tougher fleecy lumberjack checks, bodywarming waistcoats and luxuriously padded and quilted parkas.
The sharp style of leather and suede is an essential this season; stand by with a wardrobe of contemporary classics including shirts, jeans and western-style jackets in black, rich brown and tan.
Eveningwear makes a dramatically glamorous entrance.
A surprising and sophisticated collection of dresses offers the stunning effect of sleek column shapes, barely-there straps and exquisite beading.
Crepe palazzo pants teamed with an all-over lace jacket or a simple mandarin-collar tunic are a beautifully understated alternative.
Choose shoes, scarves, bags and hats from the rich variety of the accessory range, crafted from natural materials; finishing touches are in shades of wood, spice and versatile warm neutrals.
Cool comfort…soft suede shirt (£89.99), teamed with a caramel textured sweater (£26.99) and leather jeans (£69.99), available from River Island.
Making a splash…red jersey shirt (£26.99) layered with an ecru jersey cardigan (£29.99) and a red/multi striped jersey top (£16.99) and stone stretch twill trousers (£29.99), all from River Island.
Rule change
THE rule limiting goalkeepers to four steps and that outlawing backpasses will be introduced at primary school level this season.
And penalties to decide cup ties have also been abolished.
Instead, in a replay, the number of corners awarded in extra time will be used to decide to outcome.
The rule changes will apply in competitions such as the NIE Primary Cup, but local associations are free to use the old rules if they wish.
Don't miss European Heritage Day
TAKE a step back into the past this week and indulge in a feast of Northern Ireland's cultural and historical heritage as part of European Heritage Day.
Since 1991, European Heritage Day has been celebrated across Europe by people keen to preserve their culture and heritage.
This year September and 12, have been set aside to give the public a chance to visit important buildings that are usually private, and take part in guided tours, exhibitions and demonstrations throughout the province.
In Northern Ireland these events are co-ordinated by the Federaton for Ulster Local Studies, supported by the museums, libraries, public record offices and heritage development companies.
Taking the lead this year is the Environment Service which will open monuments free of charge.
The Ulster Museum, Ulster Architectural Heritage Society, East Belfast Historical Society and Belfast Naturalists' Field Club have events lined up.
Attractive alternative
THE benefits of car leasing are something that have traditionally been considered the preserve of the business sector.
For years companies who have fleets of cars have used this method of payment instead of buying outright.
Leasing has never, however, been an option for the private customer.
For most individuals this has been no great loss, the system usually being considered a much more complicated procedure than simply walking into a showroom and purchasing whatever took your (and your pocket's) fancy.
But that looks all set to change, for all the undoubted benefits of leasing have now become widely available to the man in the street.
Most of the major manufacturers now have leasing-type schemes specially designed for their private customers.
And the terms of such schemes are so attractive that they are now a real alternative to the traditional method of securing a set of wheels, that of outright purchase.
Basically all the major schemes have the same rules, with a couple of subtle differences.
Purchasers choose the model of their choice, what sort of mileage they expect to cover and what size of deposit they wish to put down — usually between and per cent.
They then agree with the dealer how much it will be worth in two years' time, which is the optional final purchase payment.
Monthly repayments are calculated on the difference between the selling price (less the deposit) and this final payment.
Method
At the end of the two years purchasers can either trade it in for a new car, pay the final payment and keep the car, or hand the car back and have nothing further to pay.
What this means in practice is that through these schemes, monthly repayments are considerably reduced, which means customers save money or can afford a higher specification model if they wish.
And buyers also have an easy method of disposing of their cars and obtaining new ones every couple of years, which in turn means low maintenance costs.
TOYOTA'S ‘TERMS’ scheme sums up what the manufacturers say they are offering —‘worry-free motoring on a low, no hidden extras, fixed monthly budget’.
The Japanese firm, like most other manufacturers, offers the chance to include an extra monthly fixed payment to cover all scheduled servicing and maintenance to help purchasers budget even better.
And the ‘Terms’ agreement also means that if the car is off the road for repair the dealer will provide a replacement vehicle free of charge.
FORD was the first company to introduce this leasing-type scheme for its private customers.
‘OPTIONS’ has been running for over ten years in America, four years on the UK mainland and over two years in the province.
The company thus boasts to have ironed out all the difficulties which can arise with such schemes.
With Ford, purchasers can choose a one, two or three year agreement.
A few months before the agreement runs out, the dealer phones to discuss the three standard options.
If wished the dealer will then work to get a good price for the car, the benefit of which is passed on.
In addition the scheme allows customers to trade the car in at any participating ‘Options’ dealership, not just the one where the agreement was originally made, for any make of car.
PEUGEOT ‘PASSPORT’ offers a choice of keeping the car for two or three years, with purchasers selecting annual mileage bands of up to 6, 12, or 24, miles per annum.
The offer applies to all the cars in the Peugeot range and can even be used to buy a low-mileage Lion Used Car.
To qualify models have to be less than months old, have covered under 15, miles and have a full service and maintenance history.
With ‘Passport’ the car is also covered by Extended Warranty and full AA cover for the term of the agreement.
VAUXHALL ‘CHOICES’ allows an initial minimum deposit of only per cent and again is available across the company's full range of models.
Choice
It also offers the chance for customers to decide whether they wish the term of agreement to run for two or three years.
70.
Vauxhall points out that many companies are at present replacing company car schemes with a cash alternative.
This cash alternative can be used to obtain a new Vauxhall under ‘Choices’ with many of the same advantages of a company car.
RENAULT ‘SELECTIONS’ is available on Renault 5, Clio, and Espace models.
With ‘Selections’ the term of agreement can be for either two or three years.
It is similar to other schemes in allowing customers to reduce their monthly repayments in comparison to outright purchase or choosing a higher specification car than they could normally afford.
‘Selections’ also offers the option of SelectCare protection, which means that in case of redundancy or sickness the regular monthly repayments will be taken care of.
ROVER ‘SELECT’ is available on most of the firm's model ranges, again with the choice of a two or three year repayment period.
As before the benefits are low monthly repayments, maintenance and repair bills kept to a minimum, and a selection of three end-of-agreement alternatives.
As well as the peace of mind of a guaranteed future value at the end of the agreement Rover also offers the customer the opportunity to insure their payments against the risks of sickness, accident, redundancy and even loss of life.
Memorable time for local cricket sides
CRICKET by Peter Hutcheon
IT was a weekend to remember for North Down's cricket sides, Bangor cementing their Section One future and North Down lifting the Schweppe's All-Ireland Cup.
The cup triumph will go a long way to easing the memory of their loss to Waringstown in the final of the Touche Ross Senior Cup last month and caps a solid season for the Comber side.
And they managed the seven wicket win over Brigade without the services of professional Raman Lamba, who is not eligible for cup matches.
Instead, it was Ireland batsman Charlie McCrum who made the difference, scoring and also conceding just runs in his overs, picking up one wicket along the way.
All in all it was an excellent performance by North Down in the field, limiting the North West side to after they had won an important toss.
But they wasted a good position at to two to lose the next eight for runs, the North Down bowlers sharing the wickets evenly.
McCrum had his eye on a century when he cruelly slipped at the crease and was run out, but his stand of for the second wicket with John Gilliland, who made 32, put his side firmly in the driving seat.
Condemn
Robin Haire and Adrian Semple made sure of knocking off the remaining runs, leaving them with an over and a half to spare.
Meanwhile, Bangor had some celebrating of their own to do when they beat North at Upritchard Park on Sunday to condemn Ballymena to Section Two cricket next season.
The fact that the North batting line-up was significantly altered from the start of the season should take nothing away from Bangor's performance in recording a 74-run win.
They reached with the opening partnership of between Andrew Williamson and Peter McCall, the cornerstone of their innings.
That result surpassed Saturday's victory over Downpatrick by runs, a match also played at Upritchard Park.
Sam Beckett and Noel Johnston each posted scores of as Bangor reached for eight.
Holywood could yet clinch the single Section Two promotion spot but they seem intent on staying where they are for the time being.
Saturday's defeat of leaders Muckamore by Cregagh left Holywood with an excellent chance of catching up with the leaders, but on Sunday they conspired to lose all wickets for a mere when chasing Carrick's total of 177.
Holywood still have a game in hand over Muckamore, but are points behind.
They really need to win their last two games and hope Muckmore lose their last outing of the season.
Instonians stay up
INSTONIANS completed their first season back in Section One at the weekend having achieved their objective of staying in the top flight.
Ballymena were confirmed on Sunday as the team to make the drop when Bangor defeated a depleted North side by runs.
North themselves had contributed to Ballymena's fate when they beat them by runs on Saturday at Eaton Park.
Bangor could yet overtake Instonians in the table in their last match, but the south Belfast team's haul of points is a good foundation for next year.
Professional Russell Adams rounded off his season with a splendid during his side's innings of for seven against Lurgan at Shane Park on Saturday.
But he, and the team, could only manage to take one wicket as Lurgan went on to reach for one.
North's uncharacteristically poor season was typified by the defeat at the hands of Bangor on Sunday, Mark Napier's unbeaten the only bright spot of the 74-run loss.
Waringstown kept up the pressure on leaders Lisburn with a 45-run win over Woodvale at Ballygomartin Road on Saturday.
Chasing 199, which included a half century from Ireland all-rounder Paul McCrum, the north Belfast side managed just for nine with Chris Davis top-scoring with 35.
Just for kids re:vision
NOW that the dreaded NHS frames are part of school folklore, youngsters are no longer afraid to be seen in specs.
Jam-jar lenses are a thing of the past as lightweight, plastic lenses, like mum and dad wear, are available for kids too.
And with the new school term in full swing, parents should take advantage of free eye-testing for children up to the age of 16.
Youngsters are unable to compare their sight with others and are unlikely to complain of poor vision, which is why it is essential to get their eyes tested every year.
A new voucher system enables kids to choose attractive and colourful frames, which reflect the brightness of mountain bikes and skateboards.
Lightweight British-made frames are also available for tots from 18-months upwards from good opticians.
Eye, eye…the Garfield collection of frames is available from most good opticians.
Designed for four to 16-year-olds, the resilient frames are available in bright colours.
BANGOR ARE AIMING TO BOUNCE BACK
SHELL-shocked Bangor will be putting all thoughts of last weekend's drubbing behind them as they attempt to reach the quarter-finals of the TNT Gold Cup on Saturday.
They have to beat Ballyclare comfortably to be certain of going through, although a draw would be enough if Carrick can do no more than draw with Glenavon at Taylor's Avenue.
Glenavon now lead Section C with six points from two games, while Bangor and Carrick both have three points, although Bangor have a better goal difference.
After their mauling of the Seasiders, Glenavon picked up £1, from sponsors TNT for becoming the first side to score goals in the competition, with Trevor McMullan knocking in the sixth with two minutes left on the clock at Clandeboye.
The long trek to Cyprus last week may well have contributed to Bangor's heavy defeat on Saturday — their first in domestic football in games — but it was also down to some poor defending and mistakes by goalkeeper Stephen Eachus.
Trouble
It came at the end of a pretty miserable week for the Seasiders after their failure to reach the first round of the Cup Winners' Cup in Cyprus.
Hearts were fluttering when Mark Glendinning put Bangor ahead early in the game, but Apoel Nicosia hit back and Eachus again was partially blamed for letting in the Cypriot team's winner.
Again on Saturday Bangor had the lead, this time Johnny Magee finding the net before things went wrong.
Things are not going so well over at Castlereagh Park either just at the moment with Ards manager Paul Malone possibly landing himself in trouble with the authorities.
He criticised referee Herbie Barr's handling of the 2– defeat by Linfield on Saturday, saying his performance was ‘a disgrace’.
In the past, the IFA has clamped down on such outbursts against referees and is now looking into the matter.
And Malone is even managing to get in trouble with himself at the moment.
He fined himself a week's wages for joining in a shouting match with Linfield officials after Tommy Leeman was booked for a tackle on Lee Doherty.
Malone had to be restrained by players and his own officials in the row that ensued.
The result on Saturday leaves Ards, together with Newry, with no points from two games and out of the competition.
The two meet at the Showgrounds this Saturday to play for pride — and players for places — in the final game before the Irish League campaign gets underway.
There was no doubting that Saturday's was a better performance for Ards than the 5– defeat by Cliftonville the week before, but goalscoring is becoming a real problem.
They had the chances against Linfield in the first half, and both Michael O'Hagan and Martin McGaughey, playing for the first time against his old club, went close.
And late in the game, after Dessie Gorman and John McConnell had put Linfield ahead, Darren Erskine had a penalty claim turned down when John Easton appeared to pull him back.
Ards Seconds had little more luck in the Steel and Sons Cup, losing out to Donegal Celtic 5– in Saturday's first round.
Bangor Reserves, though, made it through to the second stage with a 2– win over Chimney Corner at Allen Park.
SOCCER by Peter Hutcheon
Abbey open to public
ONE of the most significant monuments in the care of the DoE will open to the public free of charge this weekend.
Marking European Heritage Days on Saturday and Sunday, the abbey, which gives its name to Grey Abbey, is throwing its doors open to visitors.
It is celebrating its 800th anniversary this year and to mark the historic milestone the DoE has recreated a magnificent herb garden in the abbey's grounds.
Grey Abbey was founded in by Affreca, wife of John De Courcy, and will open from 10am to 7pm on both days.
Mandi Millar takes a walk down some of Belfast's memory lanes
Building for the future on the past
BELFAST.
It isn't a particularly beautiful city in the sense that Paris, London or Dublin are.
As centres of commerce, finance and fashion their buildings reflect the sardonic elegance of a bygone era.
But it was an era when Belfast was building its reputation as an industrial centre.
Its buildings were functional, housing engineering plant, looms, rope works and warehouses rather than the genteel families of Georgian businessmen.
But although mundane by then contemporary standards, the architectural legacy even those most utilitarian structures have left is vital in bridging Belfast's industrial heyday to its role today, fostering a pride in the past and optimism for the future.
But, according to the Ulster Architectural Heritage Society, these older buildings are under increasing threat.
In order to identify those most at risk and encourage potential restorers from the public and private sectors to take on buildings in need of rescue, the Buildings At Risk Service has been set up.
20.
Historic
Funded by the historic monuments branch of the Department of Environment, the service is operated by architect Helen Hossack from the society's offices in Belfast.
‘Belfast is a remarkably intact example of a city which underwent an industrial revolution,’ explained Helen.
‘I think there is a growing appreciation of our old buildings, many of which have great worth as individuals and as parts of a larger piece.
‘We're trying to point out the buildings which have stood the test of time; buildings built by craftsmen who knew what they were doing, who used quality materials,’ she added.
The society will periodically produce a bulletin highlighting the most pertinent and interesting examples of ‘old Belfast’.
These bulletins will be available free to anyone who is interested and the first one will be published next month.
St George's Market is one of the buildings on the Buildings At Risk register.
Standing at the corner of May Street and East Bridge Street it was built by JC Bretland and completed in 1896.
Today it's the property of Belfast City Council.
Landmarks
Built of redbrick with sandstone dressings, its large top-lit interior makes the market one of the city's landmarks.
But increasing maintenance costs and changes in hygiene rules have prompted the council to invite proposals for its redevelopment.
So far, though, proposed schemes would retain the building very much intact.
Only time will tell though.
Riddel's warehouse in Ann Street was completed in 1867, and is owned by the government.
A ‘High Victorian’ building, it was built for an Irish metal merchant and has most of its interior courtyard and galleries intact.
Its position beside Musgrave Street police station puts it in the same difficult position as many old buildings beside security installations.
The warehouse has been empty for many years, but holding repairs have meant at least that water penetration to the fabric is reduced.
Conservation
The former Ewart's warehouse, opposite the Ulster Hall in Bedford Street, lies within the Linen Conservation Area.
Completed in 1869, it is privately owned and in its heyday was a large linen warehouse, built of Scottish sandstone and designed in opulent Venetian Renaissance style.
Its future, however, is uncertain, extensive plans to integrate the building into part of a much bigger new-build scheme having been put on hold.
In Victoria Street Lytle's and McCausland's warehouses were completed two years before Ewart's.
If you look closely at the facades of these adjoining buildings you'll see fine stone carvings of animals, vegetables and fruit.
This is probably the most important building at risk in the city.
A grade A listed building its restoration is in jeopardy as the new office block which was to have been its salvation remains unlet.
The scale of the problem at the Belfast Gas Works site on the Ormeau Road is daunting.
Completed in 1889, the site is owned by the council and has been virtually levelled.
Remaining are the main office block, the Klondyke Building (recently re-roofed), the retort house, the metre house and engineering workshops.
Vandalism
These fine examples of the city's industrial past have endured extensive vandalism and although the site is reasonably secure, theft of original material is still a problem.
The former Walpole brothers' linen warehouse in Alfred Street also lies within the Linen Conservation Area and was completed in 1912.
Opposite St Malachy's Roman Catholic Church this Edwardian warehouse is one of the finest buildings in the area, built of red brick and Giffnock stone.
The first floor is occupied and the others are to let.
There is planning permission for a restaurant on the ground floor.
You can find out more about these buildings and others like them by contacting Helen Hossack on Belfast 660809.
She works at the Ulster Architectural Heritage Society at
Stranmillis Road, Belfast.
The society has about 1, members across the Northern Ireland, people from all walks of life with a common interest in learning about preserving architecture of value.
Riddel's warehouse, Ann Street.
p/36/
Former Walpole Brothers' linen warehouse.
p/ 36/
Site of former Belfast Gas Works, Ormeau Road.
p/36/
Lytle's and McCausland's warehouses, Victoria Street.
p/36/
Former Ewart's linen warehouse, Bedford Street.p/36/
St George's Market.
p/36/
‘Journey in Understanding’
A ‘JOURNEY in Understanding’ will begin at Belfast's YMCA later this month.
The programme of the same name will promote growth in mutual understanding and cross community awareness between Protestant and Catholic communities.
The 10-week series of group workshops, bringing together people from diverse backgrounds, begins on Monday September 27.
City YMCA cross-community co-ordinator David Porter believes the programme is an opportunity for people to meet, develop friendships and awareness of the issues which both divide and unite them.
‘It's the start of a journey in which all are committed to grow in respect and acceptance of others in order to live and work together in the city,’ he said.
The course costs £15, or £ for senior citizens, students and the unemployed.
Each series in the Journey of Understanding is limited to a maximum of adults made up of equal numbers from both communities.
Participants will also have the chance to go on a residential weekend.
Norman's All Stars to play a fund raiser
AN all-star team led by former Northern Ireland and Manchester United star Norman Whiteside is to play a fund raising match for the Boys' Model team.
The pupils are heading off to America next summer for the World Cup and the Norman Whiteside All Stars XI game is one of a number of fund raising exercises planned.
The side will be playing a Northern Ireland Supporters' Club Select XI at Paisley Park Football Stadium on the West Circular Road on Friday, kick-off 6.30pm.
Joining Whiteside will be Irish League managers Billy Hamilton, Nigel Best and Trevor Anderson alongside former players Lyndsay McKeown, Colin McCurdy and Peter Dornan.
Tickets cost £ and a crowd of around 1, is expected to turn out.
Women team up for the new season
THE Northern Ireland Women's Football Association has released details of two competitions to be played this month.
There will be a fixture tomorrow at the Junior Stadium, Sydenham for the Sam Wilson MBE Memorial Cup.
Bangor Ladies v Post Office United kicks off at 7.30pm.
And Post Office United will be in action again at the Junior Stadium, Sydenham on Tuesday September 14, when they take on Belfast Amazons for the Premier Cup.
Boots seek ‘Children of the Year’
THE search is now on to find the Boots Northern Ireland ‘Children of the Year 1993’.
In association with Farley's, Boots is looking for the bonniest baby up to the age of months, and the Best Girl and Best Boy up to the age of five.
Each of the company's stores here will choose a local winner in the three categories.
They will then go through to a grand final.
A Parasol portrait photographer is available in the Boots branch in Bangor's Main Street this week to photograph any young hopefuls for the competition free of charge.
Local winners will receive a Boots Bathtime Gift Set, a Farley's teddy bear and a winner's certificate.
The three overall winners will receive an Olympus Super Zoom 35mm camera, £ worth of Boots gift vouchers and a selection of toys.
Weekend School
THE Ulster People's College is to celebrate the 75th anniversary of Irish women obtaining the right to vote.
The celebrations will form part of the college's third annual Robert Lynd Weekend School, which begins next Friday.
Several leading community activists are to speak at the event, and topics scheduled for discussion include ‘Women, Unionism and Nationalism’ and ‘The Struggle For Women's Suffrage’.
The School celebrates the life and work of Protestant radical journalist Robert Lynd and of radicalism in Irish society.
It is being staged in the cross-community college's base at Adelaide Park, Belfast.
Boston Cup milestone
THE organisers of the Smithwick's Boston Floodlit Cup are celebrating the 20th anniversary of the competition this year.
The tournament, played at Bangor Rugby Club, has become one of the highlights of the Ulster rugby season.
Speaking at the draw, Les Fryer of sponsors Smithwick's said: ‘We are delighted to be continuing this important sponsorship and our association with the sport in general.’
In the first round Malone play Portadown, Queen's play Ballyclare, Armagh play CIYMS and Instonians play Ards.
Banbridge, Dungannon, Bangor and North have byes to the second round.
Making the draw for the Smithwick's Boston Cup are Les Fryer of Smithwick's, Bangor president Bertie Styles, Julie Davidson of Smithwick's and Ards president Will Brown.
Fireworks at the Valley
THE Newtownabbey skyline will be ablaze with colour this weekend as the blue touch paper is lit on the Valley Leisure Centre's annual fireworks display.
Saturday's display is one the largest regular fireworks shows in the province and marks the start of the centre's winter programme of leisure activities.
The first rocket will be sent into orbit by Newtownabbey mayor Arthur Kell at 8.30pm.
Admission to the display is free.
Prior to that, at 7pm, the centre's main hall will throw open its doors for a charity fair organised by the Newtownabbey Community Development Agency.
Bronze for Tracy
A NORTH Belfast student has come home from her first attempt at the British Long Distance Swimming Championships with a medal.
Nineteen-year-old Law student Tracy Gates lifted the bronze medal at Lake Windermere on Saturday in a meet which attracted the cream of the British long-distance swimming scene.
In windy conditions, Tracy, who picked up the Irish Ladies title at Lough Erne last month, completed the 10. mile course in five hours and minutes.
She was followed in by Groomsport's Grainne Gunn, in fourth place, in a race won by reigning British champion Rachel Godburn in a time of four hours, minutes.
Conor Gunn, Grainne's brother and the current Irish Men's Champion, finished fourth in the male competition.
The result rounds off a very successful season for Tracy, who returns to her studies at Newcastle University later this month.
Over the winter months she will continue to train in a bid to ensure that her second visit to the British Championships next year will yield a medal of a different colour.
Mother and toddler group
THE Apostolic Church in Willowfield Street will host a mother and toddler group on Friday September 10, between 10am and 11.45am.
The group will meet on every subsequent Friday.
Old and new members are welcome.
For further information, contact Dawn Cooke, telephone Belfast 793770.
Car boot sale
ST Dorothea's Church car park in Gilnahirk will be the venue for a car boot sale next Saturday (September 11), between 11am-1pm.
Cost per car is £ with a donation going towards the Church Building Fund.
IT'S BACK TO BASICS FOR BLUES
AFTER the glamour of mid-week European Cup competition it's back to basics for Linfield on Saturday as they travel to Castlereagh Park for a TNT Gold Cup clash with Ards.
The Co Down side are likely to prove easier opponents for the Blues than last night's adversaries, Georgian team Dinamo Tbilisi.
And manager Trevor Anderson will be hoping that Saturday's game will spark his men into something like the form they showed in clinching last year's championship.
Nevertheless, the Windsor Park team are so far undefeated in domestic competition, and are on course to retain the Ulster Cup title.
They face Ballymena United in the quarter-finals next week.
The Blues opened their TNT Gold Cup campaign last Saturday with a 3–victory against Newry at the Showgrounds.
But their performance, as on other occasions this season, was laboured to say the least.
Philip Knell struck twice in two minutes shortly after half-time to save the Blues' blushes after Ultan McCabe had put the home team in front.
New boy Gary Peebles added a third for Linfield just before the end but the scoreline did little justice to a spirited Newry side reduced to ten men after the second half dismissal of David Coleman.
Bid
Anderson will be anxious to counter the slump in form before the Blues' primary target this season, the Smirnoff Irish League Championship, gets underway in a fortnight's time.
The club's move to secure the services of Glentoran winger Raymond Campbell is at present on ice.
Linfield's £25, bid for the player has been put to the Glens' board but is certain to be rejected.
It is expected that the price tag will have to exceed the previous local record of £32,000, paid by Glenavon to Coleraine for Raymond McCoy two years ago, if Campbell is to join the limited band of players that have made the move from The Oval to Windsor Park.
With or without Campbell the Blues should have few problems against an Ards side that crashed to a 5– defeat at the hands of Cliftonville in their first TNT cup tie at the weekend.
Kick-off at Castlereagh Park on Saturday is at 3pm.
Meanwhile, Linfield Swifts kicked off their B Division Section Two challenge at Midgley Park with a disappointing 3– defeat by Glenavon's second string.
Glenn Rainey opened the scoring for the home team after minutes but a more experienced Lurgan side always had the edge and goals from Kennedy, Williamson and Smith sealed their victory.
In Section One, RUC gained a hard-fought one goal victory away to Harland and Wolff Welders on Saturday, fullback Ian Mulligan scoring.
But the police lost out at Newforge Lane on Tuesday evening, going down 1– to Queen's.
This Saturday RUC meet the Welders again, this time at home in the first round of the Steel and Sons Cup, while Linfield Swifts face Distillery Seconds at Midgley Park in the same competition.
Kick-off for both games is at 2.30pm.
SOCCER by Michael Walsh
Greenfingers go gold and win local garden competition
GREENFINGERED gardeners in Castlereagh have swept the boards in the Housing Executive's Best Kept Garden competition.
The contest to find ‘budding’ Percy Throwers was the brainchild of residents, who also make up the judging panel, along with executive representatives.
Judges remarked on the high standard of the entries, despite the lack of summer sunshine recently.
The winners were: Mr and Mrs Alexander Dodds, Braniel; Mr and Mrs John Hanvey, Ballybeen; Mr and Mrs Samuel McMurray, Dundonald; Mr William and Mrs Lorraine Irwin, Tullycarnet and Mrs Elizabeth Kane from Vionville.
Ballybeen winners Mr and Mrs John Hanvey, from Brooklands Drive, won the ‘top seed’ in their area.
Braniel woman Mrs Alexander Dodds (centre), was presented with her prize for the ‘Best Garden in the Braniel Estate’ by judges Mr Albert Crooks and Housing Executive district manager Mrs Lorraine Campbell.
‘Don't blame the manager’
SIR, Glentoran Football Club supporters cannot blame manager Robert Strain for the team's pathetic continuation of form from the previous 92/ season.
Glentoran fans surely must realise that their team's pathetic form is simply due to the fact they support a pathetic team, and to lay the blame with the manager is just as pathetic as their team's poor performances.
Walter Dickson, Glentoran Memorial Society, East Belfast.
Stepping out
SENIOR Citizens in Newtownbreda will be tripping the light fantastic tonight at the Mount Oriel Centre, Saintfield Road at 7.30pm.
For the Newtownbreda Old Tyme Dance Community Group is looking for new members to join the dancers who meet every Thursday night.
For further information, contact Mrs K Scott; telephone Belfast 703410.
Belvoir club's birthday
Indoor Bowling Club will celebrate its 20th anniversary next Monday night in Belvoir Activity Centre, at 7.30pm.
And despite a large membership, the club is appealing for new bowlers to join.
For further information, contact Mr A Jordan,
Grays Park Avenue; telephone Belfast 644993.
Bodifit kicks off!
NEW fitness club Bodifit kicked off last week with an official opening by the Glentoran football squad.
The gym, at the junction of the Newtownards and the Albertbridge Roads, offers aerobics, step aerobics, callisthenics , circuit training, fitness and over-40s classes.
It is supervised at all times by fitness instructors with qualifications from the Northern Ireland Institute of Coaching.
They are trained on all aspects of aerobics from the beginners' level to advanced step.
The club also wants to develop a social side, and once established it intends to organise trips and holidays for members.
Everybody is welcome to come and see the facilities, have a free trial and computerised fitness test.
For further information, telephone Belfast 458065.
Charity relay for Ethiopian hospital
This weekend sees over runners from Ulster hospitals taking part in a province-wide 320-mile relay to raise cash for a counterpart in war-torn Ethiopia.
Hospital staff, from consultants to students, will start the marathon run at The Royal Belfast Hospital for Sick Children at 10am on Friday, September 3.
They'll cover a route taking in all Ulster hospitals providing services for children.
Former Olympian and Commonwealth Games champion Mike Bull will join other guest runners when the first party calls in to meet the Lord Mayor, Reg Empey, en route to the first stop at Daisy Hill Hospital in Newry.
10.
‘The aim is to raise £10, to build an extension to the Gimma Regional Hospital in southern Ethiopia,’ explained Dr Nigel Rollins, a senior registrar at The Royal Hospital for Sick Children and a member of the group which organised the run.
The existing hospital in Gimma serves 1.
million people and is in a bad state of repair after years of civil war.
‘Staff are only able to provide very basic care and their ability to treat seriously ill and malnourished children is severely limited,’ the Belfast doctor added.
Running day and night, those taking part aim to complete the relay inside hours.
After reaching Newry, their next port of call is Craigavon (8pm Friday) and then Enniskillen (8am Saturday), Omagh (2pm Saturday), Londonderry (8pm Saturday), Coleraine (2am Sunday), Ballymena (8am Sunday) and finally Dukes Hotel back in Belfast (3pm Sunday).
MARATHON Backing the medics are The Royal Hospital Group, Knockdene Garages, Isaac Agnew, Fiat dealer Mervyn Stewart, Textflow and Trisport.
STRANG IS FIT TO RETURN TO ENGINE ROOM
CLIFTONVILLE midfielder Shaun Strang looks likely to be fit in time for Saturday's TNT Gold Cup clash with Newry.
And that is excellent news for Reds manager Frankie Parks who is increasingly worried he won't have men fit enough to write their names on the team sheet.
‘I was down to just one spare player for the game against Ards and the knock to Strang was another bad blow,’ he said.
Strang, a major component in the Reds' midfield engine room, collapsed under a hefty tackle from Ards skipper David Jeffrey during the 5– win at Solitude on Friday night.
He had to be carried from the field and the club immediately cancelled their flight bookings for the Scot as a precaution.
Both Jim McFadden and Philip McNamara are out with long-term injuries, while Pat McAllister, Joe Kerr, Sean McKenna and Marty Magee were not fit enough to take part in Friday's match.
Gerry Flynn, who still has not fully recovered from a hernia operation, was thrown into the fray against Ards, as was newcomer Fran Hitchcock for his first game, and they both marked the occasion with a goal.
The offer of £1, from Gold Cup sponsors TNT for the first side to score goals in the competition must have been tempting to the Reds, who more than doubled their tally for the season to date on Friday.
‘Quality’
As well as Hitchcock and Flynn, Mark Gill weighed in with two and Tim McCann rounded things off with a glorious strike minutes from the end.
‘It was an excellent performance, particularly after the poor result against Bangor,’ added Parks.
‘We scored some quality goals and it was good for the fans whose support so far this season has been fantastic.’
They play Newry this Saturday at the Showgrounds and it's an excellent opportunity for the Reds to move a step nearer their target of a quarter-final place.
Their last group match in the competition is against Linfield.
Meanwhile, Crusaders have replaced Barry Hunter with Ray Duffy, a 28-year-old centre back from Dublin.
The club negotiated with Limerick City over the weekend.
The defender had been playing with Limerick on a short-term contract.
Duffy was due to make his debut in last night's Ulster Cup quarter-final against Larne at Seaview.
The Crues made a positive step towards making the second stage of the TNT Gold Cup with a 3– win over Omagh Town in their first group match on Saturday.
Jim Gardiner made the breakthrough in the first half, then Roddy Collins and Michael Cash finished things off with further goals in the last ten minutes.
This Saturday they entertain Distillery, 3– winners over Coleraine last weekend.
Crusaders Reserves made a winning start to their B Division Section Two campaign on Saturday.
Jackie Kerr, Crawford McCrea and Gary Murray were on target for the Crues during their 3– win over Omagh Town Reserves.
SOCCER by Peter Hutcheon
Cycle safely
IF you're cycling on the Lagan Towpath, look out for pedestrians.
That's the message from the Department of Agriculture which has embarked on a safety drive.
DANI has also erected safety signs at strategic points and rangers from the Lagan Valley Regional Park will be giving out leaflets to cyclists.
Some of the safety precautions cyclists should consider when approaching or passing pedestrians on the towpath include:
Slowing down and, if necessary, stopping.
Ringing your bell or making your presence known in good time.
Being considerate when passing walkers and doing so slowly.
Slowing down at all corners and giving way to pedestrians.
Local award winners
BUSINESSES in North Down have benefitted from work carried out by two university students.
Stephen O'Neill from Belfast was asked by Munster Simms Engineering in Bangor to reduce the number of cartons used by the company in its 700-strong product range.
And 22-year-old Carole Stringer, who was born in Bangor and now lives in Hillsborough, developed a database in a joint venture, by the Northern Ireland Chamber of Commerce and Industry and North Down Chamber of Commerce, to promote business in the area.
The pair's efforts were rewarded when they won awards in a United Kingdom enterprise scheme.
10.
Carol, a student at Exeter University, won the award for the ‘Best Presentation’, and Stephen for ‘The Most Enterprising Student’.
The North Down winners were among undergraduates working for local companies under the STEP scheme.
STEP is a scheme held annually throughout the UK to enable small companies to employ the expertise and knowledge of university students during July and August.
Woodvale avoid drop
WOODVALE ended any doubts about their Section One future at the weekend with an excellent win over North at Ormeau.
Saturday's victory leaves the north Belfast side in sixth place in the league, points ahead of bottom side Bangor.
For North it has been a disappointing season and Saturday's 57-run defeat summed up their form this year.
Akram Raza with and Stephen Warke with did most of the damage, taking Woodvale to for seven at the close.
North lost openers Charlie Beverland and Colin Magowan cheaply, both departing for two, and slumped to all out from under overs.
The problems for North continued on Sunday when they lost by runs to Downpatrick at their home ground.
Chasing a total of 194, again they lost Beverland and Magowan cheaply, for and nine.
Mark Napier led a brief revival, hitting 71, but no-one stayed with him and they finished the overs on for nine.
Downpatrick also clinched a victory over the other south Belfast Section One side at the weekend, seeing off Instonians by seven wickets at Shane Park on Saturday.
Instonians were dismissed for 122, the Co Down side easily passing that total in just over overs.
Hockey trials
QUEEN'S ladies' hockey team is preparing for the new season and looking for fresh talent.
Any new student interested in joining the squad is welcome to attend the first training session on Wednesday September 8, at the Dub playing fields, 2pm.
Newcomers are also welcome at the next session on Monday September 13, at the PEC in Botanic Gardens, 5.30pm.
At last styles to flatter the masses If the fashion fits
THE oft fickle world of fashion has a lot to answer for with its shapes and sizes demanding that women change themselves to fit the latest trend or quirk.
There is, however, a growing awareness among some enlightened fashion outlets that the new consciousness among women is simply to accept what they are — and High Street stores are now cutting the cloth to fit us — rather than vice versa.
Research shows that not only is fashion unpredictable, it is also out of step, with over per cent of the female population size and above, and per cent under 5'2’.
Despite these facts it is still incredibly difficult to find great, fashionable clothes in these sizes.
But River Island has solved the problem for big girls this autumn with ‘XL’, a new casual range for women in sizes and 18.
And voluptuous girls aren't the only ones to benefit, for what woman hasn't worn that wonderfully comfortable ‘borrowed from the boyfriend’ look.
If you prefer easy-to-wear, over-sized clothes this range is also geared towards you.
The ‘XL’ range is cut from quality, natural-fibre fabrics, in simple but stylish shapes.
Colours, from a natural palette, focus on blues, neutrals and red-tones.
‘XL’ extends the choice for larger women, offering easy, casual dressing, with a true sense of style.
Another group overlooked by the fashion world are petite women.
Next recently announced that it will be addressing this imbalance when its new Donegall Place store opens.
And Wallis's store in Castle Place, Belfast, will go one better than all the rest, by stocking both petite and large size ranges, which go up to 16.
The petite range is an extension of its existing stock, but styled particularly for women under 5'2’, to fit and flatter the shorter figure.
‘XL-ent’ clothing from River Island…stonewashed denim jacket (£47.99) with blue jersey shirt (£29.99) teamed with blue/ecru striped jersey top (£18.99) and blue marl leggings (£16.99).
Short and neat…red fitted wool mix jacket (£65) and trousers (£39.99), also in grey/black (Wallis).
Red multi-colour beads from Wallis jewellery range.
Shoes by Cable and Co.
International tourney getting underway
THE draw has been made for the first round of this year's Harp Masters International Hockey tournament, run by Annadale Hockey club.
The tournament, which will be held next weekend, will be based primarily at Lisnagarvey and Blaris, with some first round matches to be played at the Valley and Olympia leisure centres and Mossley Hockey Club.
The action begins next Friday with all the first round matches being played.
First round losers will take part in a subsidiary competition.
In the main event the winners will pick up a cheque for £ while the runners-up will receive £250.
Guinness manager Ken Morrison said: ‘We are delighted to be helping stage this year's tournament and it demonstrates our commitment to hockey in Northern Ireland.’
The first round draw is: Annadale v Raphoe, Queen's v Instonians, Holywood v NICS, Newry v Ballynahinch, Mossley v Lisnagarvey, Cliftonville v Bangor, Cookstown v Antrim and Collegians v Glasgow Western.
Ken Morrison of Harp with hockey players Sam Allison (Annadale), Julian Stevenson (Lisnagarvey), Ken Moris (Holywood) and Steve Wilson (Annadale) at the launch of the
Harp Masters International Hockey Tournament.
New player appeal launched by Schools' Football Association
THE Northern Ireland School's Football Association is looking for talented young players for the coming international season.
A similar appeal in May turned up new faces, several of whom are still in the reckoning for a place on the under-international panel.
Secretary Jim McDowell says he will still consider players who may not yet have had the chance to come forward for consideration.
‘We have had tremendous success with this appeal year after year, as it always turns up an unknown, usually from a school whose traditional sports do not include soccer,’ he explained.
Players must be on July 31, 1994, and names should be forwarded to team manager David Cairns,
Castlemore Avenue, Belfast 6, with the player's full name, address, date of birth, school and playing position.
The first game scheduled for this season is against Slovakia in November.
North Down aim to make amends
NORTH Down will put the memory of their Senior Cup final defeat behind them as they try to make amends by winning the Schweppes All Ireland trophy.
North West side Brigade stand in the way of North Down's success — and they look to be formidable opposition.
They looked impressive in seeing off Malahide in the semi-final and the five-pronged bowling attack will most likely be unchanged for the final, which begins on Saturday.
They have strength in the batting line-up as well with internationals Marshall Kilgore and Stephen Smyth to call on.
But North Down have earned a lot of respect with their performances this season and Robin Haire, Adrian Semple and Charlie McCrum are all potential match winners.
The final is being staged in Rathmines.
The Waringstown jinx struck again for North Down on Monday evening to finally end any chance the Comber men had of catching NCU Section One leaders Lisburn.
Waringstown completed a four wicket win, easily catching the North Down total of for seven.
North Down may well have condemned neighbours Bangor to Section Two cricket next season after their run win over them on Saturday.
A century from professional Raman Lamba set up the total of for two with Sam Gilliland making an unbeaten 74.
Bangor were bowled out for with two and a half overs still remaining.
That defeat was followed up on Monday evening with another, this time by Lurgan, which leaves the Seasiders firmly rooted to the bottom of the table.
Lurgan made it past Bangor's total of with just three balls to spare, Craig Irwin's innings of doing most of the damage.
Jumble sale
HOLYWOOD Methodist Church is holding a jumble sale this Saturday in the church halls.
Beginning at 10.30am, there'll be all the usual stalls, and if anyone would like to donate items they should be left in the church halls before Friday evening.
Relax into yoga classes
RELAXATION is good for the immune system and will help fight off illness, according to devotees of yoga.
And yoga, they argue, can contribute to a healthy and more successful life.
Each year an increasing number of people take up yoga to aid relaxation and treat stress-related illnesses, and courses are currently on offer in Queen's University and Holywood.
Teaching men and women of all ages, and all levels of physical fitness, the Yoga Centre aims to show people how to live a fuller life.
Enrolment for both classes is in the university's senior staff common room next Monday at 7pm. 10.
A stitch-up!
HAVE you ever made a wedding dress?
If so, then why not take it along to the Ulster Folk and Transport Museum next Tuesday and let it be admired.
Perhaps it's a one-off you made yourself or had made for you, or maybe you run up spectacular gowns as a matter of course.
Either way, a welcome is extended to everyone to join in a chat on this special day for embroiderers and dressmakers.
Beginning at 11am, the discussion will be opened by well-known dress designer Joanne Ferguson.
Currently based in Newtownards, Joanne's beautiful embroidery work is on view at the ‘Tying the Knot’ exhibition in the museum.
Normal museum charges will apply to this special event.
Inside Job expands range
INSIDE Job is celebrating its third birthday by adding Poppy, Story Book, Animal Krackers, Jacada and Pepe Penaliver to its already extensive children's range.
On offer at the shop is a full design and make up service for cots, cribs, Moses baskets, bedding and curtains.
Exclusive mobiles and personalised names add the final touch to that special person's nursery.
At Inside Job the most important person is the customer and a complete service is available to everyone, whether they are designing a whole house or simply choosing a border.
The staff at Inside Job like to take the time to help each customer select the appropriate style, fabric, carpet, wallpaper, paint, upholstery and any other soft furnishings that are needed.
But they don't stop there!
Inside Job realises the importance of carpet fitting, painting and decorating, blinds and quilting, so these, together with a full soft furniture design and make up service, are on offer to each customer.
To help the customer select the ‘right’ style, the company constantly updates its stock and has recently added to its existing ranges Harlequin, Interior Selection, Today's Interiors, Jab, Romo, Craig and Rose and Brian Yates makes.
Go along and have a complimentary tea or coffee at the shop between 9.30am-5pm, Tuesday to Friday and 9.30am-4pm on Saturdays.
You could be a winner after all, the junior branch of the Royal Society for Nature Conservation, wants kids to put their artistic talents to the test in its Fina Arts Competition.
The winner will carry off a camera and their entry, along with the best runners-up submissions, will be featured in Watchword, the national magazine of Watch.
The competition, sponsored by Fina plc, challenges children to create a picture of their local environment using paint, crayons, collage or photography to provide a visual record of how their neighbourhoods shape up environmentally.
‘We are trying to spread the message that caring for the environment can be fun for everyone,’ explained Wayne Talbot of Watch.
Pictures should be sent, before October 30, to Fina Arts Competition, The Green, Witham Park, Waterside South, LINCOLN, LN 7JR.
Entrants should remember to include their name, address and age on a label on the back of each piece of work.
Sale now off
A BRING and Buy Sale in Holywood this weekend has been cancelled.
The sale, in aid of the Leprosy Mission, due to be held on Saturday at
Demesne Road in the town, will not now take place.
The organisers have apologised to all those who had planned to attend the event.
Peace sale
CAKES, toys, bric-a-brac and much more will be on offer at a sale in Peace House in Belfast this Saturday.
Beginning at 11.30am, the sale at
Lisburn Road, has been organised by the Community of the Peace People, with an admission charge of pence per person.
Lone mum sells everything to follow her ambition Nikki dared to dream and won
NIKKI Marks is putting her money where her mouth is — and giving up virtually everything to do so.
The South Belfast mother of four is selling her Newtownbreda home, the house contents and her car to follow her ambition and build a better life for her family.
For the 30-year-old lone parent has been accepted to take part in an eight-month course in dance and fitness at ‘The Jazz Academy’ in Bristol.
It is the only course in the United Kingdom which will qualify her to set up a dance and fitness college in the province — a business, she believes, which will afford her children security for the future while fulfilling their mother's lifelong ambition.
But faced with the dilemma of what would be best for her four young children in the meantime Nikki, from Mountmichael Park, had considered trying to find someone to temporarily look after them.
She approached the Herald and Post in July with her public appeal for help.
‘I got a lot of response from the article and my request for someone to move into my home and look after the children while I was away for the eight months in Bristol,’ she said.
But unable to find the right person, Nikki has now decided to take the children with her, although it means uprooting them from home and friends.
Determined to make a go of things, Nikki is not letting financial constraints get in the way of what she believes is the best long-term course of action for the kids.
‘I have my house and my car up for sale to help pay for costs when I'm over there.
I've just been told that I will receive a grant from the Education and Library Board, which will be used to support my children and pay part of the course costs,’ explained Nikki.
‘I'm very grateful to the Board for the grant, but I have estimated it will cost us around £ a month for a two bedroomed flat in Bristol, and I have the kids' uniforms for college and all my books to buy.
‘So I'm really hoping for some sort of sponsorship for the eight months we're away,’ she added.
While Nikki is at college, her children will be attending a local school.
‘The college has been great offering to find a school for the children, and after school I will be encouraging them to join in the dance and fitness classes for children at the college.’
But Nikki has promised she will be back.
With great hopes for the future, Nikki, a former aerobics and fitness teacher, is keen to encourage all her former pupils to look out for her when she comes back.
‘We leave on September 11, but watch this space, I'll be back!’ she promised.
If anyone would like to help Nikki with sponsorship for her course, she can be contacted on Belfast 705524.
Keeping their heads well above water was one of the teams in the Flogas Raft Row in aid of Mencap and the Northern Ireland Hospice.
The team (from left) Jeff Bell and Ian Stewart, Stephen Jemphrey and Mark Stewart, John McCaffery and Chris Riddels all paddled their way from Carrickfergus to Bangor and, on the final leg, from Bangor to Groomsport and Millisle.
Local golfer Colin Carnson from Helen's Bay Golf Club receives his trophy from Irial Finan of Coca Cola for scoring the best net at the Coca Cola Open Youth Team Tournament at Donaghadee Golf Club.
Looking on are Peter O'Hara and Tom McNulty. p/35/23.
A delighted Sheelagh Cooley from Bangor Golf Club is congratulated by Irial Finan of Coca Cola and Maisie Nelson on scoring second net in the Coca Cola Girls' Open Stroke Competition at Donaghadee Golf Club.
Pre-season tourney at Grosvenor
A of teams will be competing in this year's hockey tournament at Grosvenor Ladies' Hockey Club, heralding the start of the new season.
The event at the weekend is the biggest pre-season competition in Northern Ireland, with teams competing in three sections: senior, intermediate and junior.
The tournament gets the club's 40th anniversary celebrations off to a flying start and, with the season just a week away, represents the last chance for the clubs to test their form.
The balloon went up
A NEWTOWNARDS man is to spend a luxury weekend in Limerick, all thanks to a balloon.
Of the 5, brightly coloured balloons released at the Portaferry triathlon in July, it was Trevor Boyd's which travelled the furthest, to Scarborough on the north east coast of England.
And now the Newtownards man will be heading off for an all expenses paid weekend at the four star Castle Troy Hotel in Limerick, courtesy of competition organisers Co-Operation North.
Triathletes visit
VLC for top class event
THE province's top triathletes are set to converge on Newtownabbey this weekend as the borough hosts the last major event in the
Northern Ireland triathlon calendar.
The annual P&O European Ferries-sponsored event gets underway on Sunday at 10am from the Valley Leisure Centre.
Competitors face a half-mile swim in the Valley pool, a 15-mile cycle, ending with a run of 4. miles.
Up for grabs are six travel awards from Larne to Cairnryan for the first male and female in each of three age categories.
And the organisers are also inviting novice and first-time triathletes to compete for one of a dozen spot prizes.
The entry fee is £7.50.
For further information contact the Valley Leisure Centre.
CINEMA BY Peter Hutcheon
Great oaks from little acorns…
THE Little Acorns Playgroup will hold an open day tomorrow (Friday) at Clarawood Tenants' Association Hall, between 10am and noon.
The playgroup was started by two local mothers, Ruth Livingstone and Jillian McFrederick, who hold recognised child care qualifications.
At the open day mothers can come along and see the facilities for themselves.
There will be up to places available daily, from 9.30am-12.30pm Monday to Friday, except for Wednesdays.
The mid-week session will cater for children of pre-school age (three to four-years).
The playgroup will open on Monday.
Little Acorns is offering its service at £ a morning, and funding for equipment was provided by OBAT (Outer Belfast Action Team).
For further information, contact Ruth Livingstone; telephone Belfast 651055.
Residents' AGM
THE annual meeting of the Mid-Donegall Road and Sandy Row Tenants' Association is being held is the Sandy Row Community Centre on Tuesday September 28.
The meeting begins at 8pm and is open to all residents in the area.
Watersports centre is in the pipeline…
SOUTH Belfast could soon have a new watersports centre.
The Bryson House charity is aiming to raise sufficient money to have the proposed centre operating on the Lagan within the next few months.
The charity has been running a six-week summer scheme based at Shaftesbury Recreation Centre, on the banks of the Lagan, for the past three years.
This year's, which finished last week, was hailed as a great success with children from the most disadvantaged parts of the city taking part in a number of activities, including canoeing, swimming, rowing, water safety and windsurfing.
A model of the proposed centre was on display at the recreation centre last week.
Bryson House director Peter McLachlan said: ‘I am delighted to say that Belfast City Council has approved the initial planning stage for the watersports centre.
‘It will prove to be a tremendous resource for the people of this city.’
Councillor Alex Attwood, chairman of the council's client services committee, said he was delighted with the work at the Shaftesbury centre this summer.
Scheme
‘I am very pleased at the progress made and hope the concept of a watersports centre on the Lagan becomes a reality in the near future,’ he said.
During each of the six weeks of the scheme, children from both sides of the divide in Belfast were brought together at the centre for a week of water sports.
Each group was accompanied by a group leader from their area and coached by staff from Bryson House and qualified instructors.
Peter McLachlan explained: ‘The challenge, excitement and novelty of these activities enables the social and personal development of the children.
‘The staff also strive to develop an atmosphere of security, encouragement and friendly acceptance.
‘This in turn promotes the development of understanding, respect and relationships between the children, adults and traditions.
Children are not only encouraged to be proud of who they are, but to discuss any differences.’
A total of children attended this year's scheme.
Youth clubs taking part included the Newhill in Whiterock, Turf Lodge, Markets, Dee Street, Morton and Whitewell and Longlands from Newtownabbey.
Report by Peter Hutcheon
Birthday celebrations
THE East Belfast and Castlereagh Childminders' Group will meet on Tuesday, September 14, at 7.30pm.
There will be an assertiveness class with Rosemary Donnelly and a special tenth birthday party for the association.
All members, past and present, are invited to join in the celebrations.
Super students from Our Lady and St Patrick's College, Knock between them achieved grade As in the recent
GCSE exams.
They are (from left) Sara Louise Murray (eight As and one B), Jennifer Grimes (nine As and one B), Gareth Hagan (As), Elaine Murray (nine As and one B), Aisling Quiery (eight As and two Bs) and Ciaran McGuigan (nine As and one B).
Four of the Night Owls Swimming Club, based at Templemore Avenue Pool, were having a ‘splashing’ time before heading off on a club trip to Donaghadee following a successful fund raising effort recently which brought in over £1, for a local charity.
Taking a dip are (from left) Leah Holland, Glen Fields, Louise Bryans and Carl Allistair.
Youngsters packed into the Christian Fellowship Church at Strandtown last week for the ‘Babysit for Mexico’ appeal which is raising funds to help young Christians do vital work with Mexican street children on a future visit.
Judith Wright (centre) joined in the fun with local kids (from left) four-year-old Kathryn, Barney (two), Philip (five) and six-year-old Rachel.
Dundonald couple George and Agnes Neill, from Drumadoon Drive, celebrated their 50th wedding anniversary recently.
George and Agnes were married in St Martin's Church of Ireland, Newtownards Road, and have four children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren.
NO JOY FOR BLUES
IT was a case of so near and yet so far for Linfield at Windsor Park last night.
They bowed out of the European Cup at the hands of Dinamo Tbilisi, but they certainly went down fighting in front of around 6, spectators.
The game ended 1–1, the Blues losing out 3–2 on aggregate to the Georgian champions.
Dinamo won the first leg of the preliminary round tie 2–1.
However, Linfield can hold their heads up high.
They thoroughly deserved a draw last night and, if luck had been on their side, they might even have won the game.
Trevor Anderson's side were fiercely committed throughout.
They battled for everything and had the Georgians running scared on several occasions.
A fortnight ago in Tbilisi, Dinamo turned in a stylish performance, and only for the heroics of goalkeeper Wesley Lamont the Blues would have lost by more than two goals to one.
However, at Windsor the Georgians rarely got their act together.
Their goal, in the 46th minute, came from their first shot on target, and it was a real sickener for a Linfield defence who otherwise were as solid as a rock.
A long clearance from a Dinamo defender fell kindly for their winger Shota Arveladze and he lobbed the ball over the advancing Lamont from the edge of the box.
But, apart from a 10-minute period in the second half during which Dinamo appeared to toy with the Blues, Linfield did not let their heads drop.
And they were eventually rewarded for their endeavour and spirit with a cracking goal.
It came in the 70th minute.
Lee Doherty set Alan Dornan free down the right and his cross from the by-line was headed home superbly by Garry Haylock.
Four minutes later, Linfield sub Dessie Gorman, who had replaced Philip Knell just after the Georgians scored, came close with a reflex header from a mis-hit shot from Gary Peebles.
Then, Dornan fired in another great cross which was well collected by the Dinamo keeper.
Haylock repeated the dose six minutes later, but it was just out of reach of Ritchie Johnston.
Johnston, who scored a superb goal in Tbilisi in the first leg, had an outstanding game, and he almost forced extra-time at the death.
He got on the end of a Gorman cross from the right but the Dinamo keeper, at full stretch, managed to keep his header out.
Wesley Lamont was rarely troubled.
Apart from the goal, he was only really tested on one other occasion, making a good stop at the feet of Dinamo's other winger, Artchil Arveladze, just before Haylock equalised.
In the first half, Linfield, playing in their first Euro tie at Windsor Park for six years, never gave the Georgians a chance to settle.
Both Doherty and Stephen Beatty fired in decent crosses early on to test the Tbilisi keeper and then Johnston almost get on the end of a long punt upfield by Dornan.
A neat interchange in the 24th minute set up a good chance for Dinamo's Djamaravli, but he scooped his shot high and wide.
Johnston had two snapshots which just went inches over.
Just before half-time, Doherty had a strong header well saved, while Johnston nipped in well to get on the end of a Beatty cross only to be forced wide by the keeper.
Before Linfield equalised they had a couple of efforts.
Beatty shot weakly when put through by Johnston, while Haylock was unlucky with a good strike which was deflected out for a corner.
And Doherty, who worked tirelessly, might have done better with a John Easton cross, his header going over the top.
In the end, Linfield left the pitch to a standing ovation from the Windsor faithful.
It was well deserved.
Nigel Tilson reports
Wesley Lamont had a quiet night at Windsor against Dinamo Tbilisi, but the Blues bowed out of the European Cup after drawing 1–1.
Donaghadee man offers adventure trips on lifeboat A rescue drama awaits…
NOT many people can claim to own a lifeboat, but one Donaghadee man can.
For Quinton Nelson owns and runs a unique service for anyone who fancies doing something that little bit different.
Coming from a long line of seafarers, Mr Nelson has been running a pleasure cruise business for many years, taking would-be sailors out on fishing and boating trips.
So what made him decide to invest in a lifeboat?
‘I realised in this day and age that people are looking for something that wee bit different, and we found with the long spell of bad weather we've had over the summer months that people want to stay inside,’ explained Mr Nelson.
‘It was a direct result of seeing the need for something different that could allow people to go out to sea no matter what the weather was like outside, that I went to see the lifeboat just over a year ago.’
Very taken with the boat, and with the help of the Northern Ireland Tourist Board, Mr Nelson bought the ton vessel and brought it back to Donaghadee.
‘We had very little work to do to it because it had been kept in great condition throughout its time as a lifeboat on the Isles of Scilly,’ he explained.
Record
With a touch of paint, the ex-lifeboat The Guy and Clare Hunter — it was named after two of its most generous benefactors — took to the high seas of Belfast Lough for the first time this summer.
Exactly the same model as the Sir Samuel Kelly lifeboat, which for many years served Donaghadee, and which is now on display in the town, the 38-year-old Isles of Scilly lifeboat had an illustrious record of saving lives before her retirement in 1981.
With a top speed of 8. knots (around miles per hour to land lubbers), the wooden boat was built to withstand just about every weather condition at sea.
Nothing has been changed within the cabin below deck and the wheelhouse, although there is some evidence of modern technology.
‘No expense was spared on boats in those days with brass fittings both inside and outside the boat.
I wanted to keep her exactly as she was up until her retirement years ago,’ said Mr Nelson.
And now those with a sense of adventure and sometimes a good pair of sea legs can join in the fun on board the former lifeboat.
For Mr Nelson is offering groups of up to people a unique opportunity to form part of a crew on The Guy and Clare Hunter.
Whether for an hour or even a full day, once you step on board it's all hands on deck as crew members don their lifejackets and take to the seas in the adventure of a lifetime.
Enquiries
It's the only lifeboat in the United Kingdom to offer its passengers the chance to take the wheel and helm and even perform sea rescues, with stuffed dummies, not the real thing, of course.
And Mr Nelson has already had several enquiries from local companies keen to use the lifeboat as part of management training programmes.
‘I've had businesses and lots of youth groups contacting me extremely interested in going out in the boat.
It is very much up to individual groups to decide how long they want to go out, where they want to go and what they want to do,’ said Mr Nelson.
In fact, he has even carried out a number of burial-at-sea ceremonies with ashes scattered across the waves.
‘The great thing about this boat is that we can take it out in all kinds of weather throughout the year, and everyone will be perfectly safe on board.
After all, it is a lifeboat,’ he quipped.
For further information about trips on the lifeboat, contact Quinton Nelson on Donaghadee 883403.
Aboard The Guy and Clare Hunter, in the wheelhouse, is her owner Quinton Nelson.
p/36/21.
‘The great thing about this boat is that we can take it out in all kinds of weather throughout the year, and everyone will be perfectly safe on board.
After all, it is a lifeboat’— Quinton Nelson 
Report by Caroline Cooper
Society meets
THE Northern Ireland Agrophobia and Anxiety Society will meet in Newtownards on Tuesday September 21.
The meeting is being held at
Victoria Avenue and begins at 7.30pm.
MAKE SURE THIS CAP GOES IN NDOWN EDITION.
THERE'S ANOTHER VERSION FOR SERIES
Jean Walsh (left), from Bangor, is in two of the safest hands in Ireland pictured beside legendary goalkeeper Pat Jennings as she and colleague Barbara Blundell launch a charity duck derby scheduled for Belvoir Park this Saturday afternoon.
All money raised will go towards the work of the Cancer Research Campaign in Northern Ireland, of which Jean is press officer and Barbara is area appeals organiser.
Pat will ‘kick off’ proceedings on the day at 1.15pm when he launches 1, balloons before setting off on a fun walk with everyone who has come along.
p/36/
Village celebrates its ancient history
HUNDREDS converged on the little village of Grey Abbey recently to celebrate the founding of its Cistercian church years ago.
Almost two years' preparations culminated with a magnificent floral display, a beating the retreat ceremony and thanksgiving services, along with an opera, performed in the grounds of the old abbey.
The old abbey was built at the end of the twelfth century after a severe storm at sea.
Affreca, daughter of the King of the Isle of Man, had been on her way to these shores to marry Sir John de Courcy but was caught up in a violent storm.
She vowed that if she survived she would build a monastery as thanks for her life being spared.
Fulfilling her promise, construction began on the monastery in Greyabbey, with craftsmen from the house of Holm Cultra in Cumbria carrying out the work.
Majestically surrounded by beautiful parkland, the old abbey consists of a church, chapter house, cloisters, refectory and other associated accommodation.
Enjoy a party in the park!
THE congregation from Orangefield Presbyterian Church will see out the few remaining days of summer as they plan a family fun day this Saturday at Orangefield Park.
The Cycle Track will be the venue for ‘The Party In the Park’, which will feature a children's programme, family games, live music and drama, a barbecue and a tea marquee.
The evening programme is aimed at teenagers and features a live band and soup kitchen.
One of the event organisers, George Sproule, said: ‘The idea behind the fun day is to show that being part of the church is not limited to once a week on Sunday.’
The main musical part of the day will be a staging of Graham Kendrick's ‘Crown Him’ production at 6pm.
For further details, contact Orangefield Church Office, telephone Belfast 799391.
Get in shape
CONTOUR has now been in existence for three years.
During that time Cathy and Margaret have created a thriving, successful business.
The salon boasts a friendly, relaxed, ‘health club-style’ atmosphere.
The partners take pride in the high standards of service offered to clients using toning tables and sunbed facilities.
Hygiene and safety take priority on the sunbeds while personal supervision is regarded as of the utmost importance on the toning tables.
Using toning tables to slim and tone the body is still a relatively new concept which can only be appreciated by personal experience.
For this reason Contour is offering a free, no obligation trial — you've nothing to lose but inches.
An adventure in Africa
EAST Belfast student Kirsten Thompson has spent the summer installing a water supply in a Namibian desert and collecting life-saving data on endangered rhino!
And it's all thanks to Raleigh International that the 26-year-old woman, from Glencregagh Park, was able to undertake the exciting project in South West Africa.
Formerly known as Operation Raleigh, the charity aims to develop young people by providing them with the opportunity to work on demanding environmental and conservation projects in remote areas of the world.
Raleigh International's current expedition in Namibia has young volunteers, aged between and 25, working on eight projects all round the country.
During her time in Africa, Kirsten was able to build up relationships with Namibians.
One group in particular, The Himba, a nomadic tribe, provided guides for Kirsten to take part in a tough 200km trek close to the Angolan border.
Venturers also worked closely with locals to build an adventure playground for an orphanage in a settlement in the Namibian Desert.
Basic
‘I've learnt to do so much more than I ever thought I was capable of, from mixing cement and laying bricks, to walking 200km in a fortnight,’ said Kirsten.
‘I've also learnt a lot as a person, living in very basic conditions in remote parts of Namibia, and working closely with people from all kinds of backgrounds,’ she added.
Raleigh International operates in conjunction with such bodies as the Namibian Ministry of Wildlife Conservation and Tourism, giving the volunteers first hand experience of preserving and conserving African wildlife.
Its work is varied.
This year it has included installing solar powered waterpumps to provide year round water for wildlife at waterholes.
The charity has also staged hour game watches and constructed a bird hide.
The expedition finishes next week, and Raleigh is planning its fifth tour of Namibia in 1994.
Anyone aged between and who wants to volunteer for Raleigh International must be able to speak English and swim.
For more information, write to: Raleigh International, Raleigh House,
Parsons Green Lane, London SW 4HZ, enclosing a stamped addressed envelope.
Kirsten Thompson on location in Namibia with Raleigh International.
Off-sales opening
LEADING family-owned off licence chain Russells Cellars is opening a new off-sales at
Holywood Road, at the junction of Circular Road, tomorrow.
It will replace premises at Victoria Road which have now closed.
The Russells Cellars chain, established years ago by East Belfast businessman Philip Russell, is well established in North Down and Greater Belfast, with outlets.
According to Colin Russell of Russells Cellars, this new branch will keep a selection of some of the finest wines, beers and spirits available in Belfast.
He said: ‘We are delighted with this new off-sales and are now able to offer our customers an even greater choice of products.
The premises have been completely refurbished in our corporate style and the large purpose-built car park will make shopping much more convenient for the people of the Belmont Road area.
‘However, we are aware that there has been some opposition to our off-licence in Holywood Road, but we would like to assure residents of our commitment to the area.
We are a socially responsible drinks company and rigorously use the national Proof of Age Card Scheme in an effort to eradicate underage drinking.’
STRAIN TO RING THE CHANGES?
WHOLESALE changes could well be made for this Saturday's Gold Cup game following Glentoran's latest disappointing defeat against Portadown.
The Glens need to beat Larne at Inver Park to be sure of reaching the quarter-finals and manager Robert Strain is looking to make a few alterations in his line-up.
In could come David West, who has just returned from holiday, while Colin Ramirez and Gary Macartney, substitutes at the weekend, may be in the starting line-up.
But Strain is short of choices as the Seconds are having an even worse start to the season; they have gone all five games of the new season without a win.
Johnny Jamieson picked up a first half knock in the 2– defeat by Portadown but he is expected to be fit in time for Saturday.
It was the second time in a fortnight the Glens had gone down to Portadown, but Saturday's was a much brighter performance than the 3–
Ulster Cup quarter-final defeat.
Place
For lengthy periods the Glens were on top, especially after Jamieson had cancelled out Trevor Smith's opener.
The win secured Portadown's place in the next stage of the competition and they are expected to see off Ballymena on Saturday in their final section game.
If they do, a draw will be good enough for Glentoran, but a win in the last game before the start of the Irish League would be a welcome boost.
The Glens and Ballymena both have three points from two games, but Ballymena have a better goal difference.
Meanwhile, Dundela and Donegal Celtic were paired in the second round of the Steel and Sons Cup when the draw was made on Monday evening.
It's the pick of the ties although the game between holders East Belfast and Killyleagh will attract a lot of attention.
The Celtic Park tie is a repeat of last year's Intermediate Cup final which the Duns won 3– on penalties after a hard-fought match.
Dundela made it through to the second round with a 4– win over Armoy at the weekend, but they needed extra-time to do it.
Stephen Doey gave the Duns a first half lead, but that was cancelled out through Holmes after the break from virtually Armoy's first chance of the match.
In extra-time Doey popped up with a second, while Stephen Hanvey and Paul Wilson also got on the scoresheet.
This Saturday Dundela return to league action with a visit to Queen's, a side who have recorded impressive wins over RUC and Brantwood so far this season.
Amateur League side East Belfast began their defence of the Steel and Sons trophy with a 5– win over Malachians on Saturday.
Mark Tollerton started them off with two early goals, then Billy Neill, Jim Joy and Mark Dunwoody settled the affair.
Their opponents in the next round, Amateur League champions Killyleagh, beat Ballyclare Reserves 2– on Saturday.
Harland and Wolff Welders crashed out of the competition at the hands of RUC, going down 5– at Newforge at the weekend.
This Saturday they take on Cookstown at Tillysburn in a league match, kick-off 2.30pm.
SOCCER by Peter Hutcheon
Backing for Olympic bid
BELFAST Lord Mayor Reg Empey is supporting Manchester's bid to host the Olympic Games.
Speaking at the House of Sport on Tuesday to Manchester councillors, Mr Empey said the city had the wholehearted support of Belfast.
‘I have no doubt that Manchester has the facilities and foresight to provide an outstanding venue for one of the world's greatest festivals of sporting excellence,’ he told them.