

Fishy factor in personal freshness
EMBARRASSED body-odour sufferers often cannot do anything about their personal freshness problem, researchers announced today.
Fish odour syndrome, one of the most common causes of smelly perspiration and bad breath, is inherited.
Sufferers admit to suicidal tendencies, feelings of shame, social isolation, depression and paranoia, according to a report in the British Medical Journal.
The discovery that a gene is responsible for all this misery follows a study by researchers at St Mary's Hospital Medical School, London.
It was found that one in 15 among 200 people with odour problems investigated had a condition called trimethylaminuria — or fish odour syndrome.
It is caused by an inability to break down trimethylamine, a by-product of food digestion that smells strongly of fish.
This chemical is usually turned into an odourless substance, but some unfortunate carriers of a faulty gene cannot do this — and the unaltered chemical is secreted in breath and sweat, causing the sufferer to smell strongly of fish.
The 11 sufferers identified in the study said the smell blighted their relationships with the opposite sex, wrecked promotion prospects at work and led to addiction to cigarettes, alcohol and drugs.
People ‘pestered’: Volume is ‘too loud’
Preacher problem
NORTH Down council is taking action to silence a ‘hallelujah chorus’ of street preachers after protests about their noise.
Popular Unionist councillor Valerie Kinghan said local people were ‘completely fed up’ at the din from the gospellers who are using powerful amplification to put their message across.
‘There have been occasions when there were three different speakers all preaching at the same time, attempting to drown each other out.
‘Their favourite venue now is at the town clock where there is a natural amphitheatre which carries the sound right across to the Pickie area and local residents are sick of it.’
She said some of the preachers also ‘harassed’ passers-by to take their Gospel tracts.
People
‘Many are very insistent and they try to press leaflets on people which I think amounts to harassment.’
One local resident said he was sick being ‘pestered’ by the preachers.
‘They're worse than the people trying to flog time-share holidays when you're abroad.
They just won't take no for an answer.’
Now the council is demanding that preachers apply for prior permission to use council property and they can only spread the ‘good news’ at specified times and one at a time.
But Mrs Kinghan fears this will not end the racket.
Move
‘I'm afraid they'll just move onto the public pavement and keep up their din.
I'm beginning to think the only answer is to ban them altogether.
‘If I want to hear a preacher I go to church, it's a matter of personal choice.
The problem with these street preachers is that you don't get the choice not to hear them.’
By Mary Kelly
Coroner warns on fume danger
A CORONER warned householders to regularly clean coal heating systems after a man was found dead in his home from toxic fumes.
William John McCoubrey (35) lay dead in his house at Blackmountain Grove, Belfast, for two or three days last March before he was found by a relative.
A post mortem examination report showed he died from poisoning by carbon monoxide due to inhalation of fumes.
A Coal Advisory Service expert examined Mr McCoubrey's gravity feed boiler and discovered there was almost a complete blockage at the T-box where the boiler joined the vertical chimney.
Nursing strain
INCREASING workloads, job insecurity and changes at work are taking their toll on nurses' health, a report shows today.
Health units have found that over the past two years nurses have taken more time off sick with qualified nurses taking an average of 14 days off each year.
JAPAN
Ton-up treat
A RECORD 4,802 Japanese who are 100 years or older will celebrate their long life this month, the Government said today.
The number of centenarians, which rose by 650 as of September 1, compared with the same date last year, was the highest in 23 years, the Health and Welfare Ministry said.
How the young in Ulster compare
YOUNGSTERS in Northern Ireland smoke more, drink less and have been offered drugs more often than their British counterparts.
They also get the largest amount of pocket money in a week — £5.20, compared with a UK average of £3.62 — and are most likely to put it in the bank.
The snapshot of the lifestyles of the province's youngsters was taken by a survey for The Early Times newspaper, involving 200,000 young readers with an average age of 13 nationwide.
It revealed Ulster youngsters were the most likely to have been offered drugs (21pc compared with a national average of 10pc), were least likely to drink (21pc compared with 30pc) but were most likely to smoke (36pc compared with 18pc).
Health
There was more bad news on the health front as they were the least likely to say they try hard for a healthy diet (37pc compared with 24pc).
They are also unhappiest with their appearance, as only 61pc were happy with theirs, against a national average of 69pc.
On the family front they were the most likely to put their parents in a home (43pc compared with 29pc).
This may be connected to the fact that the youngsters came bottom as far as hugs were concerned, as 57pc said their parents hugged them compared with a national average of 70pc.
Couple
Traditional values still hold sway as 86pc of Ulster youngsters thought it was important for a couple to marry before having children, when the national average was 72pc.
They were also the most likely to say Dad would not make a good job of being a housewife and should be out at work (57pc pc compared to 38pc).
They were also the most likely to say the Government does not care about education (92 pc compared with 66pc).
By Ian McTear
Youth tells of doubt over Royals' future
THE Royal Family is facing an uncertain future, according to the nation's youth.
Of the 200,000 young people who responded to The Early Times Survey, 53pc thought Britain no longer needed a monarchy.
The good news for Prince Charles is 70pc believed he could still be king, despite his separation from Princess Diana, but the bad news was only 45pc thought he would be a good one.
Broken
As far as law and order was concerned just over half believed bringing back the death penalty would decrease crime, while 64pc said sentencing was ‘too soft’ on adult criminals.
Only 17pc admitted to having broken the law and 66pc said juvenile punishments were ‘far too soft’.
At school, more than half (54pc) said they had been bullied and 45pc thought their teachers could not cope with the bullies.
Despite constant complaints about falling moral standards among the young, 92pc said they believed in marriage, although 72pc thought it was better to live together first.
Health
By the age of 13 years 24pc have already been on a diet, which is hardly surprising as 38pc do not like the shape
Fear of loneliness
WATERFALLS, buttons, dwarfs and bagpipes are among the more bizarre causes of phobias among Britons but their biggest fear is loneliness, according to a study by psychoanalyst Michael Whitenburgh who runs stress clinics in Liverpool and London's Harley Street.
Bereavement — a time for help
A NORTHERN Ireland bereavement conference is to be held in Londonderry next week.
The two day conference will hear experts from the Republic of Ireland and the rest of the UK discuss the problems facing bereaved relatives.
Denise Bond, of the Foyle Cruse counselling service, which is hosting the annual seminar for the first time, said demand for help had never been greater.
She said: ‘We were founded in Derry in 1988 in response to people increasingly realising they needed help.
‘Quite a few people suffer mental health problems because their problems arising out of a bereavement are not being dealt with.’
Fears
Ms Bond stressed the versatility of the service provided by Cruse.
She said the organisation's counsellors visited family homes because many people feel unable to come into the office.
Many of the people the organisation helps have lost a relative who has committed suicide.
And while this year's conference will discuss a range of problems, Ms Bond said the organisation wanted to highlight the fears facing the elderly.
She said: ‘Elderly people often have smaller groups of friends and family to support them.
Bereavement can leave them devastated and with many difficulties.’
Ms Bond, who is the acting chairperson of the Foyle Cruse management committee, said the organisation needed 20 more counsellors to work effectively.
She appealed for potential volunteers to contact the organisation for their next training programme which begins in October.
The charity can be contacted by writing to Cruse Bereavement Care, Foyle Branch, 9 Crawford Square or by telephoning 262941 between 9.30am-1.30pm.
By David Walmsley
The need to keep the Irish wake alive
THE Irish wake is regarded by many from outside Ireland as an excuse for a boozing session.
But others in the professional psychological field regard the institution as an effective and important way of dealing with grief.
The Church also recognises the wake as a legitimate bereavement process, but elements within it now believe that much of the burial process is being undermined by new social and commercial pressures.
Keep The Party Going (UTV, 10.40pm) seeks to explore these changing attitudes towards the traditional wake, and the threat to the survival of this aspect of Irish culture.
Boom and bang…
TO MANY people explosions and disaster in Northern Ireland are synonymous, but near Derrylin in County Fermanagh, both the security forces and the local people work together to turn explosives into a profit-making industry.
Quarrying and cement are boom industries in this part of the world — and now where farming used to be the only viable source of income, hundreds of people have found regular work, reveals Plain Tales from Northern Ireland: A Controlled Explosion (BBC-2, 8pm).
At McCaffrey's Quarry, a couple of miles outside Derrylin, blasting day involves the watchful eye of the security forces.
Since the 19th Century, Irish ‘liberationists’ have looked to quarries for their explosives and security has always been heavy; several dozen soldiers, with two helicopters, back up a kernel of three RUC explosive experts.
This film, the second in the series, captures the surprising joviality of the blast — the foreman joking with a policeman and the RUC representative smiling and laughing.
Children in need
I WAS told this story of a young single mother, and I pass it on as an example of life in this grand country.
Although this is just one case, it is probably being repeated hundreds of times every week.
Finding herself in severe financial straits she went along to the appropriate authority to ask for money to buy food for her children.
First she was asked if she had savings in excess of £2,000.
Having got this joke out of the way, she was then told no she could not have money for food, but she could have cash for a carpet.
Not having the culinary skills to extract nourishment from this household item she passed on to her second request; could she have money to buy uniforms for her kids to go to their new school?
No problem, she was told, you can have it — but not just yet.
It seems there is a waiting list for uniform grants, because so many people cannot afford to buy them and will not put their children through the humiliation of going to school without the proper uniform.
They suggested she borrow the money until such time as they could let her have it.
That is what she had to do.
Meanwhile, back in Austria, where I have spent quite a lot of time, the school kids are very confident and self-assured.
They are good with tourists, because even the young ones can get by in English and French.
But the Austrians, an efficient, polite and cultured people, are backward in that they have not yet advanced to the school uniform.
The kids go in jeans, jumpers and trainers, or anything else they fancy wearing.
Austrian parents do not have to suffer the embarrassment of going and asking for charity just to send their children to school looking like everyone else.
Community challenge
HOSPITALS, community centres and local charities are set to reap the rewards from the work of local youths who are taking up the Post Office Community Challenge.
The youths will make up teams representing government departments and agencies as well as some of the province's leading businesses for the ‘Challenge Anneka’ style event.
On September and the teams will congregate in Belfast, Londonderry, Comber, Donaghadee and Fermanagh to each attempt a project benefitting the local community.
These include the building of an outdoor play area at the Royal Victoria Hospital, the conversion of an old barn into an educational nature room at Castle Espie in Comber, and the erection of a fence at the Marie Curie Beaconfield home in east Belfast.
Teams will have just hours to complete the projects.
The Post Office-sponsored event is part of the Youth Challenge ' initiative organised by the Industrial Society.
Get physical
PLAY centre Tumble Tots, in Donaghadee, is a specially designed facility to improve the physical abilities of youngsters.
All the equipment was created by Olympic coach Bill Crosgrave and the programme is aimed at improving children's skills of balance, co-ordination, agility and climbing.
In each 45-minute session, kids are encouraged to climb, hang, catch, slide, bounce, jump and somersault.
The format is constantly changing and classes are divided into four age groups; walking to two, two to three, three to school age and Gymbobs to seven years.
For further information on your nearest centre, contact Claire, telephone (0247) 888432.
Exercise that body
IT'S official…fitness isn't freaky any more, with more people cycling to work, women flocking to exercise classes and more men taking up their favourite obsession — football.
With a heightened awareness of nutrition, more people are making regular exercise part of their daily routine, taking time each week to work-out and tone up.
The growing trend towards fitness means more people are reaping the rewards, not only of better health, but a trimmer figure and glowing skin.
Pedal-power is making a comeback to the city's streets and cyclists will tell you it's the only way to motor, and you beat all the traffic jams.
Bikers get more out of life, so climb down off your exercycle and get out and about for some fresh air.
Wherever your wheels take you, cycling is seriously good fun and saves you a heap of dosh!
Since the introduction of the magic lightweight mountain bike, cycling has become the United Kingdom's second most popular active sport and hundreds of cycle clubs hold events right through until October.
If the great outdoors does not appeal to you, however, what about step aerobics.
‘The step’, as it is better known, is one of the most popular and effective fitness crazes to sweep across the Atlantic from the USA.
Ability
Step aerobic classes are springing up everywhere, so there's bound to be one near to you.
For the classic Ulster pear-shaped woman, step aerobics works on the areas you'd rather not think about, that is hips, thighs and bum.
So if you have rather more behind than you'd like, step up.
Stepping is a structured exercise class with an ability level for everyone.
The step can be set at three different levels and each level increases the intensity of the work-out by per cent.
Fight the flab with fat-burning aerobic dance which is another alternative for those who only want to shake in the right places.
You could always make a splash at your local pool.
Swimming is one of the most effective exercises, working every muscle in your body for all-over fitness and body-confidence.
And women aren't the only ones who want to make exercise part of their daily routine.
Soccer-mad males can be seen all over the city, armed with their kits, taking on their colleagues in five-a-side games at local leisure centres.
They may never make it to Wembley, but just remember girls, all the frustrated football commentators among them just might get it out of their system when they're actually on the pitch!
Raising awareness about depression
EVERYONE has had the feeling of the Monday morning blues, but imagine if that feeling was overwhelming and lasted months or even years.
That is what depression means to four per cent of the province's population.
However, there is light at the end of the tunnel according to Aware, an organisation that was set up in to help provide support and information for sufferers and their families.
This week it has launched the Depression Awareness Week Nationwide campaign to inform and heighten public awareness about depression.
Aware's Belfast support group has been up and running for a year and helps people cope with a range of depressive illnesses.
By encouraging them to keep up their medication and allowing them to talk through their problems sufferers learn to cope with their illness.
Depression is an overwhelming feeling which dulls thinking, mood and concentration, disrupts sleep, saps energy and interest in food, sex, work and everyday activities.
In addition to coping with the illness itself many sufferers also have to cope with the misconceptions other people have about the illness.
‘Many people believe that depression is something that the sufferer brings on themselves and all they have to do is pull themselves together,’ explained Sean O'Reilly of Aware.
Fear
‘This isn't very helpful because nobody chooses depression and most of the time sufferers are not in a position to help themselves,’ he added.
Fears about other people's attitudes to their condition, coupled with their own guilt and shame, make sufferers reluctant to admit to others that they are depressed.
‘People still feel that depression carries a stigma,’ Mr O'Reilly claimed.
Indeed, three out of four people hide their depression from employers, supervisors and work colleagues.
Depression can have a devastating effect not only upon the person's family but also on their job.
Currently one in workers suffers from depression in Northern Ireland, and absenteeism because of the condition exceeds that even for ulcers, diabetes, high blood pressure or arthritis.
High levels of absenteeism, reduced productivity, uncharacteristic accidents or bad decisions are the tell tale signs of depression.
A massive 3,324, working days were lost because of depressive illnesses between and in Northern Ireland alone.
Early treatment means less time lost at work, increased productivity and the avoidance of the costly knock-on consequences of depression in the work place.
Causes
Without treatment, depression can drag on for months or even years, and yet over per cent of the most severe depressions can be helped quickly.
The biggest danger facing a depressed person is the likelihood that they will attempt suicide.
people died by their own hand here in 1992, the majority of whom had been suffering from depression.
Depression has a variety of causes and can be precipitated by a major loss, a poor self image or by having a genetic predisposition for the condition.
Reactive depression follows a major loss and its severity is proportional to the depth of the loss.
Personality based depression happens to people with poor self-image, or to someone who is heavily dependent on others for emotional support.
Endogenous or unipolar depression has a biochemical basis, often occurring without apparent reason.
In manic or bipolar depression, bouts of depression alternate with periods of excessive elation or mania of similar length.
Following on from
, Aware is holding its annual Daisy Day from September to and is appealing for volunteers to help sell Michaelmas Daisy and viola plants in aid of the organisation.
For further information phone Des Storey at Belfast 427830.
Report by Maria Husin
Teaching the teachers
A NEW practical course for Sunday school teachers and youth leaders called ‘Taught to Teach’ is being launched by the Belfast Bible College.
Classes start on Thursday September 9, and cover topics such as how people learn, programme planning, lesson preparation, communication skills and the resources available.
Further information can be obtained from the registrar at the college in Glenburn House, Glenburn Road South, Dunmurry, BT 9JP; telephone 301551.
Things are hotting up in local classrooms
LOCAL schools will benefit from a £400, project aimed at reducing energy waste in classrooms.
Work is currently underway in almost mobile classrooms in schools and colleges across Northern Ireland to eliminate heat loss.
The work should be completed by the end of the year and is part of the government's drive to reduce energy consumption in the public sector by per cent by 1996.
Announcing the scheme Education Minister Michael Ancram said he expected savings up to £100, a year as a result of the improvements.
These savings, he said, would be retained by schools for the benefit of the education service.
‘Schools and colleges are now responsible for their own budgets and I would encourage them to grasp the opportunity to make further inroads into energy wastage by investing savings in energy efficiency projects,’ said the minister.
Mr Ancram stressed the need for all energy users to be aware of the need to reduce energy consumption in order to limit the harmful effects of carbon dioxide emissions on the earth's environment.
‘By our actions today we can improve the quality of life for future generations,’ he added.
OAPs ‘come and go’ as they please
LOCAL senior citizens will be able to broaden their horizons later this month thanks to concession travel deals between Northern Ireland and the Republic.
Come And Go Week, starting on September 29, has been organised by Co-Operation North as part of the European Year of Older People.
During the week OAPs travelling in either direction will be eligible for substantial travel concessions agreed with the major travel companies.
They will also receive a Co-Operation North discount voucher booklet, offering special rates for accommodation, meals, entertainment and leisure activities.
Initial indications show that already over 1, people are planning to take advantage of the week, which more than firms and businesses are supporting.
Come And Go Week hopes to encourage the creation and re-establishment of contacts between senior citizens on both sides of the border.
It offers older people the chance to revisit places of interest which they maybe haven't seen for years.
The week should also provide an important focus for the creation of more general links.
Cultural
Groups of older people involved in sporting, leisure, cultural and church activities are being offered assistance in setting up exchange visits with their counterparts across the border.
‘Co-Operation North, which aims to advance mutual understanding and respect between the people of Northern Ireland and the Republic, was especially keen to become involved in this major project because we believe that older people have a vital role to play in promoting better understanding and tolerance between the people of Ireland, north and south,’ said
Tony Kennedy, chief executive of Co-Operation North.
To participate, senior citizens in Northern Ireland aged 65-plus need only produce their concession fare pass, as issued by Ulsterbus, to receive their discount voucher booklet from any main Northern Ireland Railway station or Ulsterbus office when buying their rail or bus ticket.
If you're travelling privately you can get the booklet from the Northern Ireland Tourist Board or Bord Failte offices.
Pictured at the launch of Co-Operation North's Come And Go Week were (front from left) Andy Barr from Bangor; William McDevitt from Whiteabbey; Jack Myers from Belfast, Tony Kennedy, chief executive of Co-Operation North (back left) and Stephanie McCormick from Co-Operation North.
p/36/
Child minders say ‘no’ to smacking
ULSTER childminders have said ‘no’ to smacking.
A mother in England recently won the right to permit a childminder to smack her child as a form of discipline, but the Northern Ireland Childminding Association has rejected this form of physical punishment.
Irene Bell explained the local group's stance: ‘NICMA believes there are more positive and effective ways of setting limits and teaching children good behaviour than physical punishment.’
She claimed the group fears smacking can get out of hand and involves the risk of more serious physical injury.
The recommendations from NICMA are quite simple, as Irene explained: ‘Reward good behaviour — most of the time children are good.’
She pointed out how to deal with a child, for example, who has run away near a busy road: ‘You should explain to a child that it is creating danger, or is in a dangerous situation.
‘In this instance, some people would smack the child, but it is better to explain where the danger lies and remove the child from that situation.’
The Childminders' Association is all in favour of‘hugs and cuddles’ even when a youngster is behaving badly.
20.
Charter
‘A child should be respected as an individual with its own rights,’ she stressed.
As for problem kids, the association feels this is a matter for discussion with their parents.
And if parents try to pass the buck by instructing childminders to ‘give them the odd slap’ they will be disappointed.
‘We would not accept that,’ said Irene.
‘Our Quality Charter states that NICMA members are expected to work out a policy on discipline which does not include smacking children,’ she said.
‘We wouldn't allow a childminder to smack, because a smack is too hard to define.
Where does a smack end and abuse begin?’
She pointed out that smacking is particularly problematic for childminders who are often alone with a child.
‘When you are working in isolation, there is no-one else around to verify what exactly happened.’
NICMA has a built-in insurance policy to cover its employees against allegations of child abuse.
But as Irene said: ‘Children respond much more to love and affection than they do to physical punishment.’
The NICMA stance dates back to October when it adopted a ‘no smacking’ policy at an Annual General Meeting.
One working mum from Newtownabbey who leaves her one-year-old daughter with a childminder agreed that slapping isn't always the most effective way to teach children good behaviour.
Limit
‘I asked my childminder to do what I do when Laura is naughty, and that is tap her on the hand and tell her ‘no’— and that is all,’ she explained.
‘In fact, I wouldn't even call it a slap, because she doesn't cry, she just looks at me and laughs.’
And the mother is confident the childminder doesn't go beyond this limit as she doesn't slap her own children at all.
‘The only problem I would have with the NICMA's recommendations is that Laura is too young to understand everything that is explained to her,’ she said.
And as a mum, she believes there is a difference between a parent disciplining a child and a childminder reinforcing the rules.
‘Some parents punish their children harder than they should,’ she pointed out.
‘I agree with the Childminders' Association on that.
How do you differentiate between a slap and severe physical punishment?’
The local mum said the most effective way to teach Laura is to take her away from whatever she is doing wrong and keep saying ‘no’.
‘She always goes back to the attraction, but if I keep saying ‘no’ she will eventually learn not to do it.’
WHAT do you think.
Does the occasional slap do a child no harm, or is physical punishment not the solution for a misbehaving youngster?
Write to: Smacking Debate, Herald and Post Newspapers, Royal Avenue, Belfast BT IEB.
‘Children respond much more to love and affection than they do to physical punishment’— Irene Bell 
Report by Helen Carson
Therapeutic service…
THE Red Cross is urgently seeking more volunteers for its fast-growing Therapeutic Beauty Care Service.
Due to an increasing demand for the morale boosting treatment, the Red Cross is now looking for more Hand Care and Beauty Care volunteers to spend half a day each week with patients in local hospitals.
Training is available at regular intervals throughout the province.
The beauty care service is mainly aimed at long-term patients, who have been found to benefit from such treatment.
For more information, contact Mrs Norma Groves, Therapeutic Care Organiser, British Red Cross Society,
University Street, Belfast, BT 1HP, telephone 246400.
UNICEF appeal
A LITTLE goes a long way with UNICEF.
A sum as small as £ can prevent children from going blind by providing Vitamin A capsules for a year.
The ‘every little helps’ message is what the organisation will try to get across during UNICEF Week, which runs between September and 25.
Concentrating on promoting funding for its health care and nutrition projects around the world, UNICEF is asking the public to support it by sharing a meal with someone at work or at home and setting aside a donation which would then go to fund its work.
Further information is available from UNICEF's Regional Office at
Lisburn Road, Belfast, BT 7EN, or phone 660978.
UNICEF, the United Nations' Children's Fund, works in countries around the globe to save children's lives.
It receives no funding from the UN and relies on voluntary funding.
‘Green’ courses
CONSERVATION Volunteers, which has its training centre at Dendron Lodge in Bangor's Clandeboye Estate, is running a series of courses over the next month or so at the Lodge.
This weekend, there is a course on wooden stile construction, while the theory and design of footpaths will be discussed on September 28.
Then, on October 1, there will be an opportunity to learn essential first aid techniques, and on October the subject is tree propagation.
The conservation group is also providing a working holiday at Murlough Nature Reserve at Dundrum from September until October 2.
Volunteers will be constructing steps along a coastal path.
For further information on the work of Conservation Volunteers and the various courses, phone Bangor (0247) 852817.
Healing therapy
ONE of Europe's most successful healing therapies is on its way to Belfast.
‘The Tony Quinn Holistic System’ will be the subject of a free video show and demonstration in Belfast's Wellington Park Hotel next Monday, at 7.30pm.
The therapy works by increasing the healing and life energy within the body, bringing about better health.
It is used in the treatment of asthma, migraine, depression, panic attacks, backache, stress and various other ailments.
Tony Quinn is an expert in holistic therapy and has been studying and working in the field for years.
He has clinics in Dublin, London and Armagh.
And he plans to hold Belfast clinics on a bi-weekly basis.
These will be run by Geraldine Goulding, who is in charge of the Armagh centre.
Kids' clubs keep summer on the boil
IT WILL be summer all over again at Dundonald International Ice Bowl when a new Kids' Club starts on Saturday, September 11.
Youngsters aged between seven and can join in the fun at the Ice Bowl, the Lough Moss Centre and the Robinson Centre, from 10am-1pm.
Activities will include trampolining, Laser Quest, arts and crafts, squash, archery and swimming, to name but a few.
The club costs £1. a morning, and kids can register at their nearest centre.
For further information, contact Dundonald International Ice Bowl, telephone Belfast 482611; Lough Moss Centre, Carryduff, telephone Belfast and the Robinson Centre, telephone Belfast 703948.
Report by Helen Carson
Have you time to spare
HAVE you an hour or two to spare?
If so, then War On Want Northern Ireland could find work for your idle hands.
It's looking for volunteers to help with its annual flag day and street collection in the Greater Belfast area.
If you're available on Friday or Saturday October 1–2, contact War On Want's head office at
Rugby Avenue, Belfast 232064, giving your name, address, telephone number and the area in which you can collect.
A ‘rail’ help for travellers
BELFAST rail users now have a new centralised information service to provide fast and accurate timetable information on all Northern Ireland Railway services, including their cross-border and cross-channel trains.
All timetable enquiries should be directed to the new NIR information centre in Central Station on Belfast 230310.
The centre is open from 6.30am to 11pm Mondays to Saturdays and 9.15am to 9.30pm on Sundays.
People living outside Belfast will still have to contact their main local station for rail information, but after business hours their calls will now be automatically re-routed to the new information centre.
Booklet launched
A BOOKLET containing information for patients suffering from mental health problems has been produced by staff at the Belfast City Hospital.
The booklet has been published specifically for patients who attend the South Belfast Day Hospital, part of the Belfast City Hospital.
As well as general information, the booklet also advises patients about their times of attendance, medication and transport arrangements.
Sister Norma Spence of Belfast City Hospital said: ‘We carried out an extensive survey asking patients to suggest ways in which the service at the day hospital could be improved’.
‘Lack of available information was one of the problems highlighted, so with this colourful and informative booklet now available we hope the situation will be improved,’ she said.
For further details telephone 0232–329241, extension 2035.
How to broach ‘that’ subject
MUMS dreading the prospect of talking to their teenagers about adolescence will be relieved to know help is at hand in the form of the ‘Tampax Teen Talk Line’.
Tambrands, the makers of Tampax, have launched the talk line to coincide with the new school term which, they claim, is an appropriate time to raise the sticky subject of growing up.
The Tampax Teen Talk Line is a series of six advice lines, specially recorded for Tampax by well-known ‘agony uncle’ Phillip Hodson.
Each advice line addresses different concerns that mothers may have, while offering practical advice and reassurance on how to broach the subject.
Topics covered include:
At what age should I start discussing periods with my daughter?
How will I know when my daughter is approaching puberty?
What do I tell my son about adolescent changes?
Can my daughter, who started her periods, use tampons?
What should I do if my daughter suffers from period pains?
Toxic Shock Syndrome: The Facts.
Listeners calling the talk line can chose the subject of their choice, and everyone is offered a Tampax Teen Talk Kit which includes a booklet for mum, called ‘Between Ourselves’.
There is also a ‘Boys' Talk’ booklet, as well as a starter kit for girls which includes a booklet, ‘A Time For Answers’, a pack of Tampax Mini tampons and a handbag container.
The advice lines last between two and three minutes, and all the money raised will be donated to the NSPCC.
Calls are charged at 36p a minute off peak, 48p peak.
Readers can call ‘Tampax Teen Talk Line’ on
Painting the town green
BELFAST murals are being used to spread a ‘green’ message to city dwellers.
And rather than depicting various hues of political opinion, the new murals make an environmental statement.
Painting the town ‘green’ is the aim of the Forest of Belfast project, which has so far involved over people, alongside local artists, to paint the community murals.
Fantastic painted foliage is appearing in streets and adorning gable walls, bringing the country into the city.
The latest painting is a colourful mural in Ballybeen Estate, where artist Ken Parker has incorporated ideas and images from children's paintings at Ballybeen Activity Centre.
Castlereagh mayor Tommy Jeffers praised the schemes, adding: ‘Not only do these excellent murals reflect the latent ability contained within community groups across the city, they also relate a very important message — trees make a vital contribution to our way of life.’
He added: ‘As a community, we must do all in our power to encourage the planting of new trees and preserve our existing tree and woodlands.’
Other Forest of Belfast murals are featured at Kinallen Street, Lower Ormeau Road, painted by Rita Duffy, and the Lower Falls Road junction with Shiels Street, by artists Rosie McGurran and Grainne Thompson.
And artist Terry Gravett is due to start work in September on a mural at the back of the main stadium of the Oval Football ground, which will be visible from the Sydenham Bypass.
The Forest of Belfast, which was launched last June, has also organised tree planting, educational and arts events.
Lower Ormeau mudspill is rapped by residents
MUD being transported away by lorries as part of a dredging scheme on the River Lagan is still spilling into the streets of the Lower Ormeau, the local residents' group has claimed.
And it alleges that in some cases traffic is being severely disrupted on the busy road after cars have been covered in slime dragged up from the river bed.
Michael Goodman, spokesman for the Lower Ormeau Residents' Action Group, said he had hoped any problems would have been ironed out following a meeting with Laganside, the DoE and the contractors last month.
‘The views of our community were forcibly put at this meeting and to their credit the contractors did halt the work during the community festival,’ he said.
‘But we were told that when the work resumed there would be no cause for concern as the mud and filth being dredged from the Lagan was to be carefully loaded into ‘sealed lorries’ which would be washed before being driven away.
‘This has proved to be completely false as none of the lorries we have seen being used have been sealed.’
Break
The meeting between the residents and the authorities was called because of numerous complaints about the amount of mud falling from the lorries.
Laganside agreed to review safety procedures during the week-long break to accommodate the Lower Ormeau Community Festival.
The corporation also said it would consult with the local residents about the operation and regretted not having approached them before the work began.
Mr Goodman said if Laganside was in any doubt about the amount of sludge being dropped by the lorries a representative should be sent to watch them driving past.
‘People have to stand well back from the edge of the pavement or else risk being splashed by the mud and water spilling from these ‘sealed’ lorries,’he said.
‘Should you happen to be driving in the vicinity of the lorries, extreme caution is advised.
A number of motorists have found to their cost that the spills are sometimes more substantial.’
PROPOSAL FOR FREE WASTE COLLECTION QUESTIONED
THOUSANDS of ratepayers across Ards could be left to foot the bill if a controversial council proposal to introduce a free waste collection for Orange halls goes ahead, the Department of the Environment has warned.
The warning came after a meeting of Ards Borough Council last week in which Ulster Unionist Ronnie Ferguson put forward a motion that the council should offer free collection of waste to the Orange Order, which has halls dotted all over the borough.
But, while outlining the grounds for imposing a charge for waste collection, a spokesperson for the DoE insisted such a decision could not be taken lightly.
‘This is governed by the Waste Collection and Disposal Regulation (1992), which sets out various categories of waste which are lifted.
They are laid down as commercial, industrial and household waste.
And this is a matter which requires a good deal of research into the overall implications of introducing free collection of refuse,’ she explained.
Ultimately it is up to individual councils to decide who they are going to levy charges upon for the collection of waste.
10.
Catalyst
‘Each council can decide what to do and interpret the regulation and law to fit its own area.
What we would point out is that if Ards Borough Council does decide to go ahead with this, it will be ratepayers who are going to bear the cost of such a move,’ added the DoE spokesperson.
The proposal, which caused a storm at last week's council meeting, has led to further suggestions that other organisations throughout Ards could soon be demanding free refuse collection.
Alliance councillor Larry Thompson warned that if such a motion was passed and implemented it would act as a catalyst encouraging other groups and organisations to apply for the same free waste collection.
And if these applications were not approved then the council could face court action from numerous groups.
Mr Thompson said that groups such as the GAA, Masonic lodges, playgroups, golf clubs and many other organisations could be clamouring to be first on the list for the new free service.
At present waste is only collected free of charge from churches and charitable organisations.
‘The council really needs to consider fully the effect this would have upon the ratepayers, particularly if other groups come along asking for similar dispensation,’ the DoE spokesperson also explained.
It is understood that councillors who voted in favour of the motion are now to consult with the Department of the Environment over the legality of offering waste collection free of charge to Orange halls.
It is not the first time the council has been at the centre of a disagreement over charges for collection of waste.
Five months ago, councillors were forced to have a change of heart about introducing extra charges for the collection of domestic waste from caravan sites in the borough after furious caravanners raised strong objections to the decision.
Vionville Community House opens
VIONVILLE Residents' Association will officially open Vionville Community House tomorrow (Friday) at 10am.
The community house was donated to the residents' association by the Housing Executive and will be run by volunteers from the estate.
Funding from OBAT (Outer Belfast Action Team) has been used to provide equipment for the centre as a community facility.
Food aid
NEWTOWNARDS dairy company Pritchitt Foods has offered a helping hand to refugees in the former Yugoslavia by donating milk powder to a Bosnian relief mission.
The company is supplying cases of Milac Milk Powder which, when mixed, will make up over 12, pints of milk.
A convoy will leave Bristol on Friday week, transporting vital items such as disinfectant, towels, nappies and baby products to the war-stricken country.
Pritchitt's distribution manager Robert Hamilton sees off the consignment of milk powder bound for Bosnia.
Committed to the community
Advertisement feature
WITHIN two months Connors Chemists Ltd has completed the rebuilding of its Newtownards store, which was devastated in the bomb attack in the town in July.
Picking up the pieces was no easy task but Connors was one of the first traders to get back on its feet, temporarily setting up shop in a portacabin.
Commenting on the upheaval, store manageress and pharmacist Paula Morgan said: ‘Although the bomb completely devastated our premises we felt that because of the nature of our business we had a loyalty to our customers to continue trading.
‘The portacabin provided us with a way to offer them the best possible service under the circumstances.’
‘The bomb in Newtownards was not the first time Connors Chemists has had to cope with the aftermath of a blast.’
Over the past two years five of its stores have been damaged in explosions caused by terrorists.
Connors stores were hit last year in the bombing campaigns which destroyed Dungannon and Lurgan town centres.
More recently Smiths Chemists in Ballyclare, owned by Connors, was the target of a petrol bomb attack, which caused extensive damage.
Hitting the headlines again, Connors was one of the many businesses affected in the Bangor and Portadown bombs this year.
However, as was the case in Newtownards, repairs began immediately and stores continued trading throughout.
Marketing manager Nigel Graham explained: ‘We feel that we are a community chemist so business must continue as quickly as possible.
‘We will set up temporary facilities if the building is unable to support normal trading.
If space is restricted we will offer a small section of essential goods.
Support
‘Basically we will do as much as we can to help our customers, especially in such difficult circumstances.’
Response to this strategy has been very encouraging in Newtownards.
Community spirit is demonstrated through regular customer support.
Paula Morgan described this support as ‘tremendous’.
‘Customers said it was great that we were open because it showed some normality in the town.’
Paula was also surprised at how much concern was expressed by local people about the staff.
‘A lot of people asked me if the staff would lose their jobs.
I was able to reassure them that those staff not required on site would be relocated into other company stores.
All the Newtownards staff are from the town.
‘Two of our employees have worked for over years at this location, Briege Mullan and Arlene Beckett.
In fact Arlene has been working here for years.’
Paula herself has been manager and pharmacist in the Newtownards store for one and a half years.
On Friday, the store is staging a grand re-opening to celebrate the complete refurbishment, which offers customers a brighter, more spacious shopping environment, yet with the same friendly service they have come to expect.
To mark the occasion Newtownards mayor Wilbert Magill will be officiating at the ceremony.
Connors Chemists Ltd is one of Northern Ireland's leading companies with branches province-wide, including four Smiths Chemists stores.
Its prompt action and speedy recovery is an example of its commitment to the local community and its leading contribution to the regeneration of the town centre.
Connors Chemists manageress and pharmacist Paula Morgan and one of the Newtownards branch's longest serving staff members, Briege Mullan, chat with customer Mrs Eleanor King.