

That top secret document in full IN view of all the talk about a resumption of political talks, I've been looking at the last word of the Ulster Unionists on the subject, delivered just before the plug was pulled last October.
I shouldn't even be discussing it, because all the parties were under an overdone oath of secrecy.
But here it is, all five foolscap pages, and it makes quite interesting reading.
It was put forward on two conditions — that the Republic define ‘a means whereby the aggressive and irredentist Articles 2 and 3 in the Irish constitution would be removed’ and that the SDLP give ‘a de facto commitment to a Northern Ireland where all constitutional parties would be able to play a meaningful role’.
As the paper states, there wasn't ‘a single positive response’.
Just supposing the two conditions were met, what were the Unionists proposing?
It is far too wordy and vague, but here is my summary, for what it is worth.
The section on the principles underpinning a devolved government makes it clear that the Unionists are only interested in democratic structures, accountable only to the electorate of Northern Ireland.
There must be protection for the rights and aspirations of groups and communities.
There must be ‘open and unambiguous acknowledgment of the status of Northern Ireland’.
On nationalist rights, the Unionists accept that although they would be happy as an integrated UK region, ‘a significant proportion’ of the 38pc (now up to 41pc) Catholic community may aspire to a united Ireland.
They hereby accepted the three main demands of the SDLP — minority rights would be guaranteed, nationalists would have a meaningful role in the administration and ‘there would be a recognition of the desire by the nationalist community to forge closer and more visible links with the Irish Republic’.
Thus, they tabled proposals for a Bill of Rights, an Assembly where they (the Unionists) considered the SDLP would have an effective role and an Inter-Irish Relations Committee — avoiding the unmentionable Council of Ireland — representing a formal link between the Belfast assembly and the Dublin parliament.
This committee would have (a) encouraged trust and co-operation between unionists and nationalists, developing a practical basis on which north and south could implement joint action on issues of common interest;(b) initiated studies on matters of mutual interest or misunderstanding and (c) consulted with heads of departments and their officials on such matters.
Decisions could either be taken by the heads of departments or referred back, perhaps for legislation, to the respective assemblies.
Executive authority might be delegated to autonomous north-south agencies like the Foyle Fisheries Commission.
The Unionists concluded that there was a basis for at least an interim settlement.
Convergence was ‘possible and vital’.
The purpose of an interim agreement would be to create confidence in the democratic process and to unite the law-abiding people and the two sovereign governments, to defeat ‘political violence’.
There were other areas of concern which, in an ideal world, should be addressed, the Unionists said.
‘However, the reality is that such matters will only be successfully resolved when a greater degree of trust and cohesion has been attained as a result of working together.’
It's a pretty modest document, which was never going to appeal greatly to Dublin or the SDLP, who would have to abandon the leverage they have through the Anglo-Irish Agreement.
But, as a means of trying to break the deadlock and restore a little democracy, it was certainly worth discussing.
It still is.
Carrick murder inquiry
A MURDER inquiry was launched today after a mother and daughter were found strangled in a house in Carrickfergus.
The bodies of Kate Curran, in her 50s, and her 32-year-old daughter Angela were discovered in Mrs Curran's Edenvale Avenue home.
Another daughter, Patricia, is recovering from stab wounds after being slashed in the neck and wrists at her Coronation Road home two miles away.
A man — believed to be her estranged husband — was found in bed at the house in Coronation Road.
A man was taken to Whiteabbey hospital under police guard for treatment.
He was discharged after two hours back into police custody for questioning.
Police said that they seized knives at the Coronation Street house.
They went to the house around 9am after receiving a telephone call.
Running
Shortly afterwards officers smashed their way into Mrs Curran's bungalow where they found the victims' bodies in separate rooms.
‘We are treating this as murder, but we are not looking for anyone else in connection with it,’ an RUC spokesman said.
The killings are not believed to be terrorist-related.
Eye witness Wilma Farrara, who is deaf, said she saw a man running up the path to the bungalow around 8.15am.
Speaking through an interpreter she said: ‘I saw a man running up the path to the house.
Early
‘I suppose it must have been about a quarter past eight.
I hadn't seen the man before.
‘He wasn't carrying anything in his hand that I could see.
I didn't automatically think that anything was wrong.
‘But I did feel a bit funny afterwards because it was so early and I didn't remember seeing the man around the house before.
‘I didn't see whether he went into the house or not.
And I didn't see him come out.’
Another neighbour, who didn't wish to be named, said she had seen the man in the area on previous occasions.
‘He was always about the place.
I saw him only last night just around the corner.
‘He doesn't live here, though.
I think he lives a fair bit away.’
Sedation
Another local woman said: ‘Angela always called in on her mother before she went to work in the mornings.
‘She was a lovely wee girl and you would never have heard her saying a bad word about anybody.’
Patricia was under heavy sedation at her home where she is being comforted by relatives.
30.0 She is understood to have a nine-year-old daughter and worked with her sister at Neill's newsagent shop in the Co Antrim village.
Manageress Angela had been employed at the shop for 20 years while Patricia worked there three mornings a week.
Owner David Neill said: ‘The whole community is shocked and I have no words to describe what has happened.
‘Angela worked in the shop before she left school, delivering papers and when she left school she joined us fulltime.
‘She was a lovely wee girl and never missed a day.
The customers thought the world of her.
She was popular and very well known.’
Distressed relatives: The scene at the house in Coronation Road, Carrickfergus Angela Curran: ‘Popular girl’ By Martin Hill and Nigel Gould
NEWRY
RM's ‘marriage guidance’
A SOUTH Armagh man who told Newry Magistrates Court he was going to get married when he got out of prison, was told he ‘could get married there now’ by Regional Magistrate Gerry Harty.
An RUC Inspector yesterday said Martin William Benson, 22, of O'Reilly Park, Mullaghbawn, was caught by a Dunnes Stores detective at Newry's Buttercrane Centre.
He pleaded guilty to two charges of theft of articles of clothing.
Mr Harty said Benson had a substantial sum of money in his possession and sentenced him to six months imprisonment on each of two charges to run consecutively and consecutive to a sentence he was presently serving.
POMEROY
Stolen ‘MoT’
A POMEROY man found in possession of a vehicle test certificate and two insurance certificates stolen in England was fined £140 at Cookstown Magistrates Court yesterday.
Ciaran Kelly (23), unemployed of Gortindarragh Road pleaded guilty to handling the documents knowing them to have been stolen.
Prosecuting counsel said the matter came to light when the police stopped a vehicle driven by Kelly and became suspicious of a vehicle test certificate as the date of issue on it was a Sunday.
DUNGANNON
Traders act
A NEW Traders Association has been formed in Dungannon.
Dungannon Chamber of Trade and Commerce replaces the former Chamber of Trade, and the first major issue it will tackle is the continued closure of the security barriers around the town centre.
ARMAGH
Public inquiry
A PUBLIC inquiry is to investigate Armagh area plan which was drawn up by the DoE.
Thirty eight objections have been lodged to the proposals contained in the document.
£9m facelift ‘a morale boost’ for RVH group
A £9.5m facelift for the Royal Belfast Hospital for Sick Children was announced today.
The work, which will take about six years to complete, will provide a new operating block, intensive care unit, outpatients' department, accident and emergency unit, medical records centre and new main entrance.
Redevelopment
Accommodation for teaching, child assessment, occupational and speech therapy and ENT services will be provided in the space created by the redevelopment.
The scheme involves replacing buildings, some of which date to the 1930s.
Over the past five years, the Department of Health has spent £13m on projects at the Royal hospitals complex.
These include an extension to the cardiac surgery unit, upgrading of neonatal facilities and the provision of a Magnetic Resonance Imaging scanner.
A further £8.5m is being spent on new mortuary and laboratory services and an extension to the School of Dentistry.
This work is expected to be completed within 12 months.
Reputation
John Hunter, chief executive of the province's Health and Social Services, said: ‘The redevelopment of the Children's Hospital represents a major boost to the Royal Group and will consolidate its already high reputation as a centre of medical excellence.’
The work is a timely boost for morale at the hospital which is anxiously awaiting the Eastern Health Board's review of acute services.
There are fears that some specialities may be removed from the site.
Sir George Quigley, chairman of the Royal Hospitals Trust, welcomed the plans: ‘This work will further enhance the quality of service we are dedicated to bringing, not just to the children of Belfast, but because the hospital is a regional referral centre, to children from throughout Northern Ireland.’
Five injured in loyalist bomb attack on house
FIVE people were treated for shock after loyalist bombers struck at a Belfast house.
Windows were shattered in the blast, at Farnham Street in the Catholic lower Ormeau area.
The attack bore all the hallmarks of a loyalist murder bid.
The bomb, containing 150 grams of explosives, was planted outside the house shortly before 1am.
An RUC spokesman said five people suffered shock in the explosion.
The attack followed the RUC Chief Constable Sir Hugh Annesley's warning that loyalist terror gangs are planning a bombing campaign on both sides of the border.
Sir Hugh said loyalists were rapidly developing their bomb-making skills.
And intelligence reports suggest that the UDA now has a ‘significant’ quantity of powerful Czech-made Semtex explosive, used in the past by the IRA.
Farnham Street is close to the route taken by a controversial Black Preceptory parade a fortnight ago.
It passed off peacefully.
Five Catholics were shot dead as they watched TV racing in Sean Graham's bookies' shop nearby in February 1992.
By Martin Hill
Thieves are caught on camera by own victims
HEARTLESS thieves who robbed two young Japanese tourists in Belfast have been captured — on film.
Kumi and Maki Shigetomi, from Tokyo, had taken pictures of the attackers who stole their passports, visas, credit cards and cash — but left the camera.
The sisters and their assailants, who went to McDonalds and for a walk through the city together, had also exchanged addresses.
Kindness
Today the victims, about to begin the journey home, said they were ‘overwhelmed’ by the kindness of Ulster people since the robbery.
Kumi (22), said: ‘Many people have heard and read what happened and have offered us all kinds of help.
But I still don't know if I would want to return here.’
She said she and Maki (20), who are both students, were ‘alright’ after their ordeal.
Ronnie Cairns, a fluent Japanese speaker who acted as interpreter, said: ‘They met these boys in Botanic Gardens and were chatted up.
They took photos of the boys and, for aspiring professional criminals, they even gave them their addresses, which Kumi put them in her waist pouch — and that was snatched from her later.’
‘Expensive’
Mr Cairns, a former Ulster teacher now lecturing in Japan who is home on a study project, said: ‘They went for a meal to McDonalds and when the girls said they would take a taxi back to the Young Women's Christian Association the boys told them not to take a black taxi because they were too expensive.
‘They then took them across the pedestrian bridge over the Westlink and, to calm them down, told them they were in the university area.
That is when the robbery took place.’
A 24-year-old Belfast youth was due to appear at Belfast Magistrates Court today in connection with the robbery.
By Noel McAdam
Price of violence
LOYALIST TERROR: Damaging the unionist image
WHATEVER may be said to the contrary, there is a big difference between reactions to loyalist and republican paramilitary violence.
The agony of the victims' families, and the communities from which they come, is just as bad.
In the overall scheme of things, however, loyalist violence has a different effect — and it is quite the opposite to what is intended.
The horrific murders and woundings of the past week are an example of sheer terror — aimed not only at the Catholic community but at the prison authorities.
Because of their brutality and frequency, they have attracted more attention than any others for many months, both here in Northern Ireland and in Britain.
The intended effect, within the province, must be to so terrify the nationalist population that more will turn their backs on Sinn Fein and the IRA.
But what a misguided strategy, after all the experience of the past 20 years.
When under attack — as Protestants should know so well — a beleaguered community tends to retreat towards a harder line.
At worst, it may even believe that paramilitaries can be a means of defence.
Similarly, if anyone thinks that random killings are a way of weaning Catholics away from Sinn Fein and aspirations to Irish unity, a second's reflection would banish the idea.
No amount of bombing by the IRA or murder of security force personnel has weakened the resolve or beliefs of the unionist community.
It is in Britain, however, that loyalist violence is really damaging to the cause to which it is presumably dedicated.
The British people have absorbed everything that the IRA has thrown at them, but it is no secret that they are increasingly war-weary and exasperated by the lack of political progress.
So long as the enemy in their sights is the IRA, they will not be moved — even by bombs directed at the government or the city of London.
But if they find themselves having to fight a war on two fronts, their sympathy could evaporate overnight.
If there was difficulty in Northern Ireland understanding the motives of those who murdered prison officer Jim Peacock, what did the sight of his flag-draped coffin convey to the people of Britain?
When so-called loyalists target members of the British prison service, the attitude across the water may well be: what is their loyalty worth?
The IRA has always known better than to attack the security forces of the Republic, since it would instantly lose whatever support it has and could provoke the Irish government to order internment, as it did in the distant past.
By their recent actions, loyalist paramilitaries are tempting the same fate — with far more damaging long-term political effects.
Unionist MPs have been quick to condemn those who would try to express their loyalty by attacks on defenceless fellow-citizens, but Mr John Taylor must be more careful with his language.
Even ‘in a perverse way’ there is no sense in which loyalist violence can ever be ‘helpful’, in letting Catholics know the fear Protestants have felt and perhaps increasing pressure for a political settlement.
The whole community has been living in fear for far too long, menaced equally by both sets of paramilitaries.
The sooner politicians on both sides accept their responsibility to find a compromise way forward — and stick at it until they succeed — the sooner that threat will be lifted.
40.0
Airport probes illness claims over plane fumes
OFFICIALS at Belfast City Airport have been in contact with another city-based UK airport after more than 100 people claimed fumes from a plane made them ill.
Staff at the Sydenham site have also had talks with the manufacturer and operator of the Whispering Jet 146 and with environmental health officers.
Ulster Unionist councillor Jim Rodgers, who said around 130 people had contacted him complaining of nausea and headaches, has described the airport's response as ‘exemplary’.
He said: ‘They have told me about these steps they have taken to check this out and I'm really delighted with their attitude.
‘They have also invited me to visit the airport.
Although I regularly travel through it, this will be in a professional capacity.
Hopefully the meeting will be next week.’
The airport has denied suggestions that fumes from the Whispering Jet could cause illness.
A spokesman pointed out the jet had been in use for five years and there had been no complaints until recently.
By Gail Walker
Time Major stood up to Dublin, says Paisley
DUP leader Ian Paisley today launched a scathing attack on Prime Minister John Major over his ability to handle the Dublin Government.
Dr Paisley questioned whether Mr Major is brave enough for the job.
And in a hard-hitting letter to the Prime Minister he likened Taoiseach Albert Reynolds to a ‘little bully boy’.
The comments come on the eve of tomorrow's inter-governmental meeting in London, at which the recent spate of killings is expected to top the agenda.
The DUP leader wants Mr Major to insist at the conference that the Republic's Government drops its territorial claim to Northern Ireland.
But Mr Paisley is pessimistic.
Courage
He said today: ‘I don't see this Prime Minister standing up to Dublin.
Frankly, I don't think he has the moral power or courage to stand up to Dublin and take Dublin on.
In the two-page letter to Mr Major, the DUP leader says the inter-governmental conference comes at a dangerous time and should be called off.
Blackmail
A No 10 spokeswoman said: ‘We can confirm that the letter has arrived.’
On the merits of sending a US peace envoy to Northern Ireland, Mr Paisley said in the letter: ‘The vicious plan of blackmail which Albert Reynolds is now employing with his threat of getting the USA to appoint an envoy will be resisted by the majority unionist community.
‘As a little bully boy he calls in big brother to do the beating up for him.’
19 die in S Africa taxi-rank massacre
NINETEEN blacks were massacred at a taxi-rank near Johannesburg last night in an attack the African National Congress said was aimed at derailing the transition to majority rule.
The raid in Wadeville industrial zone was followed two hours later by an ambush about four miles away on a mini-bus taxi in which two black passengers were killed.
Stormed
Earlier, in Soweto township, south-west of Johannesburg, four people were killed when gunmen stormed into a taxi-association meeting.
The attack appeared to be the result of feuding between rival taxi-operators.
Police said about 10 men armed with AK-47 rifles carried out the ‘well-planned’ massacre in Wadeville.
Today, at least two people were killed and two wounded when gunmen opened fire on cars near Katlehong township east of Johnnesburg, police said.
On September 2, tens of thousands of South Africans of all races observed a minute's silence at noon in a demonstration of revulsion at the violence in which 17,000 people have died in eight years.
The Wadeville killing, the bloodiest in recent months, came a day after political leaders from the Government, the African National Congress and other groups agreed on terms for a transitional executive council (TEC) which will give the black opposition a powerful voice in Government decisions.
Farmer on forgery charge
COOKSTOWN Magistrates Court was told yesterday that a farmer forged his deceased mother-in-laws name on a cheque to pay his electricity bill.
Anthony Keith Ivan (54) of Carnteel Road, Aughnacloy admitted the forgery and the case was adjourned to October 6 pending a probation report.
A police inspector said Ivan went into the NIE office in Dungannon on March 8 last and paid a bill for £705 with a cheque drawn in the name of his late mother-in-law.
Taylor stands firm on remarks
ULSTER Unionist MP John Taylor today refused to apologise for controversial remarks he made about the murder of Roman Catholics by loyalists.
The Strangford MP was accused of ‘dancing on the graves of the dead’ by the SDLP after he said in a radio interview that increasing fear in nationalist areas could be helpful.
But he stood by his comments today and refused to withdraw them, accusing Sinn Fein and the SDLP of ‘deliberately misrepresenting’ what he said.
Mr Taylor said he had received dozens of phone calls supporting what he said and claimed that some people had asked to join the Ulster Unionists as a result.
Interview
The political row erupted over comments the MP made in an interview on Radio Ulster yesterday morning.
During the interview he said all killing was wrong, but added that there was now ‘increasing fear of paramilitary activities’ in the Catholic community.
‘And in a perverse way this is something which may be helpful because they are now beginning to appreciate more clearly the fear that has existed within the Protestant community for the past 20 years as they have been killed at random by the IRA,’ he added.
West Belfast MP Dr Joe Hendron condemned the comments as ‘outrageous’ and said they were ‘music to the ears of loyalist paramilitaries’.
He said Catholics had been living in fear of attack by the IRA and loyalists for over 20 years and called on Mr Taylor to withdraw his comments.
‘He is an experienced politician and what he said was totally reprehensible and inexcusable,’ he said.
‘Mr Taylor has completed ignored the fact that Catholics have been under the jackboot of the IRA and loyalists for over 20 years and it is ridiculous to say that they have not been living in fear.’
Sinn Fein 's northern chairman Mitchell McLaughlin labelled the remarks ‘deeply offensive’.
Accurate
But the Strangford MP was unrepentant and said his comments were ‘completely accurate’.
‘I will not withdraw them and will not apologise because they are accurate and were not meant to offend,’ he said.
‘The point I was making was that the parity of fear within the Catholic and Protestant communities might help in a perverse way to make them both recognise the importance of living beside each other and for the killings to stop.’
John Taylor: Unrepentant
Moss in iron bar mugging
BURLY rugby international Moss Keane was recovering in hospital in Dublin today from a vicious mugging attack.
The 6ft 5ins former Irish forward was attacked by two men wielding iron bars near Heuston railway station last night.
Snatch
He was struck on the back of the head by one attacker while another attempted to snatch money from his pockets.
Mr Keane (45) was stunned by the blow but managed to beat off his attackers who escaped on foot.
He staggered into the station where he was assisted by Irish Rail staff.
He was then taken to the nearby St James's Hospital for treatment.
Specialist
He was later transferred to Royal Victoria Eye and Ear Hospital for specialist treatment.
A spokesman at the hospital refused to give any information as to Mr Keane's condition.
A garda spokesman said that the attack on Mr Keane, who works for the Republic's Department of Agriculture, had not been reported to them.
It was expected that they would interview him later today.
Mr Keane is one of the few Ireland players to have won over 50 caps.
He made the last of his 51 appearances against Scotland in 1984.
In a brilliant career the Kerry-born second row was a member of the British and Ireland Lions party that toured New Zealand in 1977 and played one Test against the All Blacks.
Head blow: Moss Keane
Vandals wreck school windows
VANDALS in Strabane have smashed 13 windows at the rear of Our Lady of Mercy School, Newtownkennedy Street.
The damage was discovered on Tuesday morning.
Detectives are investigating the theft of 90 compact discs, worth around £1,000, stolen from a house in Ernest Street in the Rosemount area.
The house was broken into in the early hours of Friday morning and the intruders carried off the rock and pop CDs in a Head sports bag which they also stole from the house.
Detectives at Shantallow are anxious to hear from anyone who may be offered CDs in suspicious circumstances (Tel. 367337).
In the Templemore area, two Velux windows were stolen from a building site at College Glen at the weekend, while a substantial quantity of cigarettes were stolen from a variety store at Spencer Road in the Waterside on Thursday night/Friday morning.
Detectives believe the thieves made off in the direction of Barnwell Place and are eager to hear from anyone who might have seen them.
Photographic
Thieves also struck in Clarence Avenue earlier this week when they stole a boy's Emmelle leopard mountain bike from outside a house on Tuesday evening.
And a photographer whose photographic equipment was lost in the city centre last week has appealed for anyone with information on the missing items to contact the police.
The equipment included a black camera bag containing an AE1 Canon camera, an A1 Canon camera, three different lens and a battery pack.
Boy died after goal posts fell on him — inquest
A SCHOOLBOY injured after metal goal-posts fell on him knew he was going to die, one of his friends has said.
The teenage witness described to a Londonderry coroner how Gary McClay (13) was crushed when the posts collapsed near their Ballymagroarty homes.
Swinging
The witness said Gary had been swinging on the metal posts on May 11 when they collapsed on his chest.
In a statement read to the inquest he said Gary knew he would not survive his injuries.
Chest
He said: ‘Gary ended up on his back with the cross bar on his chest area.
His hands were by his side.
He tried to push the cross bar up.
‘Gary had his eyes closed and said he was going to die.’
His schoolmate ran to a nearby house for help.
A workman who put the goal posts up said they had only been temporarily secured.
Warned
He said children playing at the scene had been warned to stay away from the posts until they had been set in concrete.
When they returned to finish the work after a weekend break, they found parts of the posts missing and broken.
He added that securing the posts had not been completed before Gary was fatally injured the following day.
Coroner Ronald O'Doherty said the boy had died five hours after the insecure steel goal-posts fell on him at the Derry City Council ground.
Angola bid
THE United States yesterday threw its support behind what it said was a new effort by UN special Angola envoy Alioune Blondin Beye to revive Angolan peace talks.
It urged Angolan rebel leader Jonas Savimbi to accept Beye's invitation to a meeting in Libreville, Gabon, with African heads of state.
Watching the Iraqis
IRAQ and the United Nations wind up eight days of intensive arms talks today which envoys expect will produce substantial progress on long-term monitoring of Baghdad's weapons potential, and could eventually lead to a lifting of the Security Council's embargo on Iraqi oil sales.
Mid-East move
NORWAY is sending an official to PLO headquarters in Tunis today for last-minute negotiations over mutual recognition statements by the PLO and Israel, a Palestinian source said.
Beef ‘beefing’ hits headlines
THIS week, beef has certainly been making the headlines.
Complaints about six-year-old intervention beef dominated newspaper front pages, while shoppers in Northern Ireland flocked to take advantage of a supermarket price war which cut the price of beef.
At the same time, the Ulster Farmers' Union was in Brussels to seek answers about the Commission's decision to break its own rules by refusing meat-traders in the province the chance to submit an intervention tender in late August.
The common thread to these issues is Europe's enormous beef mountain, which has grown steadily while consumers in Ulster struggle to afford increasingly-expensive beef.
The mountain now stands at 1.2m tonnes — a mind-boggling figure, best be put in context if you think of the 450-mile-long queue of 40,000 lorries which would be needed to carry it away.
This vast stock overhangs the market, and is a source of major embarrassment for the Commission.
It is now determined to a degree it never was in the past to put an end to beef intervention being viewed, by the Republic of Ireland in particular, as a market it has a right to supply.
The most difficult question is what to do with the beef mountain, created, in the words of one senior Commission official, by a process which ‘takes the best beef, freezes it and so destroys it, with the result that it can only be sold to people who cannot afford it.’
An exaggerated view, but an indication of the cynicism with which the Commission now views the whole concept of beef intervention.
At an international meat conference in Australia, an Australian, with tongue in cheek, urged Europe to use up its beef mountain in a couple of vast barbecue nights, claiming every European consumer only needed to eat an extra 10lbs of beef and the mountain would be gone.
Twice
The traditional complaint of consumers — who in Belfast supermarkets this week demonstrated their enthusiasm for cheaper beef — is that they pay twice for the beef mountain.
As taxpayers, they pay the cost of buying in and storing the meat and then pay again when they shop, because intervention keeps prices well above real commercial levels.
However, the furore which surrounded the release of a few hundred tonnes of intervention beef in England — an amount equivalent to less than a tenth of one per cent of the mountain — suggests the idea of simply selling beef cheaply to the European consumers who paid for it would be a difficult option.
This leaves the Commission wondering what to do with a million tonnes of prime beef — and it is prime beef, because intervention accepts only the very best steer beef.
If the Commission sells it cheaply — for a few pence a kilo, with free transport thrown in — it is criticised for recklessness with public money.
If it sells it to the Third World, it destroys local economies.
In any event, if European consumers have scruples about eating six-year-old beef, they must question whether it is morally right to sell it elsewhere.
The simple option would be simply to destroy the beef mountain, which overhangs and damages the entire world market.
However, the view is widespread that the destruction of food is politically unacceptable.
By Richard Wright
Mrs Scargill arrested
THE wife of miners' leader Arthur Scargill was among six women arrested outside the Conservative Central Office in central London yesterday.
Anne Scargill and the others were held at Rochester Row police station for obstruction and other public order offences, said a Scotland yard spokesman.
No charges had been brought.
The women, supporters of Women Against Pit Closures, had set up a heavily-smoking brazier outside the office's main entrance.
Robinson abroad
The Republic's President Mary Robinson is to make state visits to New Zealand and India this month.
In between the trips, Mrs Robinson, who will be accompanied by her husband Nick will go on a private visit to Hong Kong.
LONDON
Bid to catch City terrorists on video
POLICE have unveiled a scheme to use private security cameras in an effort to combat bomb outrages in the City of London, a move decided after the April 1992 IRA bombing of the Baltic Exchange, which killed three and injured 80.
The scheme will co-ordinate the gathering of information by police from a number of monitoring points.
Drug seizures this year include:
January 30: Cannabis worth £100,000 uncovered on a fruit lorry stopped coming off a ferry at Larne.
March 6: Four people arrested and £1,000-worth of drugs seized after a bus is stopped on the Holywood Road in Belfast.
May 15: ‘Significant’ quantity of cannabis resin, LSD, ecstasy and cocaine seized from a house in Belfast.
June 5/6: 550kg of cannabis worth IR£5m recovered near Skibbereen, Co Cork.
June 11: 110kg of cannabis with a street value of IR£1.2m seized in Skibbereen.
June 15: Newtownbutler man Alan Johnson jailed for 14 years at the Old Bailey for possession of £3m-worth of heroin.
June 28: Ecstasy worth £4,000 discovered on a bus at the Culmore Road checkpoint in Londonderry.
18-year-old Glengormley man arrested.
July 3: Cannabis resin with a street value of £2,000 discovered in a car stopped in Bessbrook.
July 4: 300 kilos of cannabis resin and herbal cannabis worth up to £3m seized from a Northern Ireland-registered lorry in Dover.
August 3: Cannabis worth £7,500 and £1,000 in cash seized at a house in Wellington Park, Belfast.
August 8: ‘Substantial’ quantity of Ecstasy, LSD and amphetamines taken from a car at Culmore, outside Londonderry.
August 20: Cannabis plants worth £2,500 seized by drugs squad officers at a house in the Waterside area of Londonderry.
August 24: Cannabis plants discovered at a house in Rugby Avenue, Bangor.
Concern over missing teenager
CONCERN was growing today for a 13-year-old schoolgirl who has been missing from her home in Limerick for six days.
Gardai have stepped up their search for Kathleen Connolly, who was last seen by her mother, Greta, when she came home from school at 2.45pm last Wednesday.
Her mother went to a nearby shop and when she returned 15 minutes later, Kathleen was nowhere to be found.
Worried
A distraught Mrs Connolly said she was very worried about the safety of her daughter and appealed to her to contact her father.
‘I would just say please come home or ring us and let us know you are alright,’ she added.
There have been a number of reported sightings of Kathleen in Co Limerick, in the midlands and in Dublin.
She is 5ft 7in tall, with long hair.
She was wearing a school uniform with white blouse and black shoes when she disappeared.
Parties call for political action
THE lack of political talks in Northern Ireland is ‘immoral and diabolical’, an SDLP MP said today.
Dr Joe Hendron said the parties should return to the talks table without delay — and he made this point to Stormont Minister Sir John Wheeler yesterday.
The West Belfast MP led a five-strong delegation to Stormont Castle for an emergency meeting on security, but he also widened the topic of discussion.
Dr Hendron said: ‘I and my colleagues made it very clear to the Minister that we should start talking immediately without pre-conditions.’
Alliance leader Dr John Alderdice has also called for political developments to help stem the wave of violence.
He said people in Northern Ireland need ‘confidence and strength of leadership’.
Dr Alderdice said: ‘What is really needed is political leadership from the Government.’
MP and police in security row — page 9.
KILLYLEAGH
Offerings theft
POLICE in Co Down are searching for a thief who locked a safe after stealing its church collection contents from a parochial house.
The thief made off with the week-end offerings from St. Mary's Star of the Sea Roman Catholic Church in Killyleagh.
The theft from the adjoining parochial house is believed to have happened on Sunday, but was only discovered yesterday when church officers prepared to make a lodgment.
LISBURN Library go-ahead
OUTLINE planning permission has been granted to build a library on the corner of Smithfield Street and Hillsborough in Lisburn.
Even though the site is only a second option, Councillor William Bleakes urged the council's planning committee not to allow the matter to rest, and Alderman Samuel Semple pointed out the site had been under consideration since 1976.
BUNDORAN Towns facelifted
THE town centres of Bundoran and Donegal Town have undergone facelifts with the help of the International Fund for Ireland and the local councils.
Almost £1m has been spent on Donegal Town, where the Diamond has been transformed from a car park to a landscaped public area.
In Bundoran, a major draw for tourists from Northern Ireland and the Republic, Main Street has been improved with new paving and street furniture.
DOWNPATRICK
Firemen's gift
A CHEQUE for £890 has been handed over to the National Fire Service Benevolent Fund by firemen in Downpatrick.
The money, which was raised at a golf classic organised by sub-officer Tony Oakes and his crew at Downpatrick Fire Station, was presented to assistant divisional officer Ken Spence.
NEWRY
No road plan
THE Department of the Environment has told Newry and Mourne Council there are has no plans to upgrade its section of the Newry-to-Dundalk road.
The DoE said it considered the road to be ‘capable of carrying the existing and projected traffic volumes for the foreseeable future’.
ARMAGH
Tribute to brothers
ARMAGH councillors paid tribute last night to local newspaper photographer Winston McConville (53) and his brother William (52), who drowned during a fishing trip to Co Mayo a week ago.
The chairman of the Finance Committee, Councillor Jim Speers (Ulster Unionist), described the cameraman as a ‘professional to his fingertips and a gentleman’.
US troops in gunfight
ELITE United States troops backed up by a dozen helicopters stormed a building in south Mogadishu today and arrested 17 Somali militiamen after a brief gunfight, a United Nations military spokesman said.
‘We believe two Somalis were wounded but they fled and two US Army Rangers were slightly wounded,’ Major David Stockwell said.
They had been released from hospital.
Stockwell said the building was a ‘suspected command and control facility’ of fugitive warlord Mohamed Farah Aideed who is wanted by the UN for the killing of 24 Pakistani peacekeepers in June.
Stockwell said some 50 Rangers, from the 400-strong elite unit that flew into the anarchic city two weeks ago, moved on the building during the night.
The helicopters hovered overhead in formation.
It was the second such operation by the Rangers, believed to have the anti-terrorist Delta force amongst their ranks, and who were apparently sent into the war-torn town to capture Aideed.
In an operation last week, the Rangers mistakenly attacked an aid compound and arrested eight UN staff.
Marcos' body is brought home to tearful welcome
THE body of former President Ferdinand Marcos returned to the Philippines today to a lavish welcome by thousands of supporters — four years after his death in exile.
As a chartered Continental Airlines jet touched down, women in the crowd at the airport wept and a horn was sounded in a wailing tone as part of a ritual announcing death.
Marcos was overthrown in 1986 after a popular uprising.
He died of a heart attack in 1989, while in Hawaii.
Corazon Aquino, his successor, had refused to allow the body to be returned for burial and it was stored in Hawaii in an air-conditioned crypt.
The crowd, jubilant at President Fidel Ramos' decision to allow the body's return, pushed and shouted as the 727 jet, which bore an image of Marcos and the words ‘I am a Filipino,’ taxied to the terminal.
Retired generals dressed in white carried the flag-draped coffin from the plane.
Marcos's widow Imelda broke down in tears but her daughters Imee and Irene maintained their composure.
Mrs Marcos, dressed in a black native dress and veil, mounted the reviewing stand with her daughters to kiss the closed coffin.
A band played the Philippine national anthem.
The funeral cortege, began moving solemnly down the country road to Laoag's 17th Century cathedral.
He will be buried on Friday in his hometown of Batac.
Older workers face prejudice in EC, says report
OLDER workers face widespread and increasing discrimination in European Community countries, a report said today.
Discrimination against employing people started with those in their 40s, while over-50s were being pressed to take early retirement regardless of their individual ability or health, said the report, by Eurolink Age.
Individual Governments and the EC itself were also guilty.
People working for the EC — which outlaws discrimination — faced an upper age-limit of 35 for starting work in many posts in Community institutions, said the report, drawn up as part of the European Year of Older People.
Age discrimination — which was not new but was worsening because of the current economic recession — existed in all EC countries, but had yet to be recognised as a problem, the report said.
Action at EC and national level to tackle the issue should include the removal of any obligation to take early retirement, the abolition of age limits on training or employment-promotion measures, and a ban on age limits in recruitment advertisements, it said.
Once over-50s lost their jobs it was virtually impossible for them to find other permanent work, and victims of age discrimination faced reduced pension rights and enforced inactivity for the rest of their lives, the report said.
No EC country except France provided targeted assistance to help older unemployed people find new work, and France was also alone in banning the practice of putting age limits in job advertisements, it said.
PANAMA
Soldiers cleared
VIOLENCE erupted in Panama's main cities after a court cleared seven former soldiers of the grisly 1985 torture and killing of an outspoken opponent of former dictator Manuel Noriega.
Thousands of protesters were expected to take to the streets again today, angered by the jury's verdict in the killing of physician and former guerrilla leader Hugo Spadafora.
The worst violence yesterday was in the western city of David where the trial had been taking place since July 6.
Protesters shouting ‘justice for Hugo’ and ‘murderers’started street fires and hurled rocks at the courtroom, with the seven jury members trapped inside.
Riot police ringed the building and fired tear gas at the crowd.
CAMBODIA
Mine death
A UNITED NATIONS peace-keeper from Cameroon was killed today when his vehicle ran over a mine near the Angkor temples in north-western Cambodia, a UN spokesman said.
He was on patrol with two other UN military observers when the mine exploded as they were driving around a small bridge a few miles north of the temples in Siem Reap province.
KENYA
Eating out
AN ostrich gate-crashed breakfast at a bush cafe in eastern Kenya, sending diners fleeing.
‘Later, local residents killed it and distributed its meat among themselves,’ the Daily Nation said in a report from Makueni.
PERU
Massacre
MAOIST ‘Shining Path’ guerrillas attacked a hamlet in the central Peruvian jungle, killing eight people and wounding seven in the second raid in the zone in less than a month, Panamericana Television said.
School fear made Nicola flee
THE PARENTS of runaway schoolgirl Nicola Rogers said today their daughter told them she fled home because of worries about starting a new school.
As they hugged the 13-year-old outside a Blackpool hospital mother Audrey Rogers (38), said: ‘She is only young and she realises what she has done has been silly.
We hope and pray she has learned a lesson.
‘The last week has been a total nightmare.
It has been like that, something that wasn't happening to us.’
A massive hunt for Nicola, who vanished from home near Biddulph, Staffordshire, last Thursday leaving her bike in a ditch, ended on Sunday night when she rang 999 from a seafront call box in Blackpool, where she had spent three nights in a guest house.
Check
Her father Alan (43), a garage owner, said: ‘She was due to start a new school today and it had upset her that much just thinking about it.’
Nicola, dressed in jeans and a white polo-neck sweater, left Blackpool's Victoria Hospital where she has been undergoing tests this morning to be driven by an ambulance car with her parents to North Staffordshire Hospital in Stoke-on-Trent.
She will have a final check before being allowed home, possibly later today.
Her mother spoke emotionally of the moment when they were reunited with her at the hospital on Sunday.
Brilliant
‘When we walked down that ward I can't tell you how it felt,’ said Mrs Rogers.
‘That little face was there and it was Nicky and it was brilliant.
‘She said she was sorry and that she loved us and she just didn't realise what she had put all the people through.
She had no idea.
‘She is back home now and she is still very upset.
But she just didn't realise all the publicity that was going on.’
The schoolgirl told her parents she had stopped three nights in a bed and breakfast, spending the day on the beaches and on the piers, before her money ran out.
Her parents did not know which guest house among the thousands in the resort Nicola had stayed in.
But they criticised the owners for allowing a young looking 13-year-old to stay without making any checks.
Family reunion: A relieved Mr and Mrs Rodgers with daughter Nicola.
Unionist replies to Sinn Fein criticism
ULSTER Unionist councillor Nelson McCausland today claimed Sinn Fein 's criticism of council trips aimed to divert attention from IRA bombings.
‘Sinn Fein councillors claim to be concerned about council spending, but in fact bomb attacks carried out by their IRA associates against council property are a major burden on Belfast ratepayers,’ he said.
‘In recent years IRA bombs have caused extensive damage to the City Hall, Ulster Hall and Maysfield Leisure Centre.
And a recent bomb attack on a council building in Gloucester Street caused around £100,000 worth of damage.’
Defending
The north Belfast councillor said Sinn Fein portrayed themselves as defending the council's leisure and community services but their IRA associates were actually taking money away those services.
A little community gets back its pride
The fighting talk in Garrison village
In its pubs — all two of them — the locals now have more to talk about along the bar counter than the weather and the fishing.
THROUGH no fault of its own, the most westerly village in Northern Ireland has suffered a demoralising 20 years of decline.
But now, with the help of a £1 million cash injection from the International Fund for Ireland and the Department of the Environment, Garrison is fighting back.
And in its pubs — all two of them — the locals have more to talk about along the bar counter than the weather and the fishing.
For a new and welcome sound is being heard in the little Fermanagh community on the eastern shore of lovely Lough Melvin, the jewel in its many splendoured crown.
It is the sound of men at work on the future.
And once again there is a mood of optimism in the village which takes its name from the troop garrison established there by King William in 1681.
For many years, Garrison's position at the centre of a region of outstanding natural beauty made it a mecca for visitors from home and abroad.
People came year after year to stay in the two local hotels, the Lake and the Melvin, and to enjoy the fishing and the scenery.
But then came the ‘troubles’ and a series of body blows from which the village is now only beginning to recover.
In 1972, the Melvin Hotel was destroyed by a terrorist bomb.
Seven years later, it lost its second main tourist accommodation when the Lake was burned down in an accidental fire.
This loss to the local economy was bad enough — but there was another even more damaging factor.
‘Without a doubt,’ says local SDLP councillor Gerry Gallagher, who also owns a grocer's shop on Main Street, ‘the most devastating effect on the village was the catering and closing of the cross-border roads.
‘This cut us off completely from our natural hinterland in north Leitrim and Donegal from which at least 40 per cent of our business came.
‘What was once a one mile journey into Garrison for someone living just on the other side of the border became a 26 mile round trip.
‘People just stopped coming to shop here, and, because we no longer had our two hotels, the number of visitors dropped as well.
‘The village is physically isolated anyway, and the cumulative effect of all these things left us even more cut off than before.
‘What was once a vibrant community changed practically overnight.
Unemployment rose, young people began to leave, and the place simply went into a spiral of decline.
The late 70's and early 80's, I can tell you, were very depressing times round here for there was not much to look forward to.
We had been left with nothing to offer.’
THE first upturn in Garrison's fortunes came in 1987 when, on the site of the former Lake
Hotel, Fermanagh District Council opened its fine new 50 bed residential hostel and caravan park, the Lough Melvin Centre.
This provided accommodation and restaurant facilities for anglers, caravanners, backpackers and water sport enthusiasts.
It has proved to be a great success — and it marked the start of the Garrison revival.
There remained, however, the boarded up remains of the Melvin Hotel, which had stood derelict and unwanted since the day it was bombed in 1972.
This was the ugly eye sore confronting visitors as they drove into the centre of the village across the bridge over the Roogagh river.
Not only was it unsightly, but it was also a constant and unhappy reminder of Garrison's misfortunes as a result of the troubles.
It had to go, and now it has.
And on its site, work has started on a new multi purpose complex which is the latest phase in the revitalisation of the village.
It is to be called Gillaroo Court, an inspired choice of name since that is the species of red coloured trout unique to Lough Melvin.
The centre, due for completion in the spring of next year, will comprise shop units, a licensed restaurant, a pottery, day care facilities for the elderly, office space and a 400 seater auditorium where concerts, drama and other cultural events can be staged.
Jointly funded by the IFI and the DoE, it has come about as a result of the efforts of the Garrison and Melvin Community Development Association which was set up three years ago as a ‘self help’ group for the region.
‘We have found tenants for all these units,’ says Gerry Gallagher, who is the project manager, ‘and we have other plans for improvements to the village which will make it more attractive to visitors.
‘These include a fishing boat haven at the lough, woodland walks and the general sprucing up of the look of the place, such as taking away all overhead electricity wires and putting them underground and getting a new street lighting system.
‘Maybe some day we'll get a new hotel as well, but that's a longer term possibility.
In the meantime, we've got a lot going for us here, and it's up to us to make the most of it.
‘The past is the past, and you can do nothing about it, but you can do something about the future, and I am very optimistic.
‘After the dark days of 70's and 80's, I think we have turned the corner and have shown what can be done when, even in a remote community like  ours , people get together and work for their mutual benefit.’
In Casey's pub, now over 100 years old and a popular haunt for fishermen and folk musicians, the proprietors, sisters Joan and Anne Casey, recalled the happier days when visitors packed the Lake Hotel, which was run by their parents, and the Melvin.
‘WE WERE world famous,’ said Joan.
‘They came from all over to stay with us, and when they came once, they'd always come back, the same families year after year.
We made friends then who have been our friends for life.
‘Sadly, the troubles ended all that.
But now it's gradually starting to improve again, and we're hoping that this will continue.’
As Gerry and his fellow villagers talked of the better days to come, a carload of American tourists pulled up in the street beside him and asked for directions to ‘Dannygal’.
Not wishing to drop them in a crater, he obligingly pointed them towards the road to Belleek.
But, if all goes to plan, it will not be long before many more well filled wallets like these will be stopping — and getting thinner — in Garrison.
The village founded by King Billy has come through the bad times and it has not surrendered.
New hope: With the help of a £1 million cash injection there is a new optimism in the little Fermanagh community on the eastern shore of lovely Lough Melvin.
Picture by Mervyn Dowling.
By Neil Johnston
DUNGANNON
Tyre theft
DETECTIVES in Dungannon are investigating the theft of £7,500 worth of tyres from a depot on Dungannon's Gortnaglush Road.
Anyone offered cheap tyres or know of their whereabouts are asked to contact the detectives at Dunganon 52525.
School's opening
THE Auxiliary Bishop of Down and Connor, Anthony Farquhar was today opening a new extension to St Mary's High School, Downpatrick.
The extension was completed at a cost of more than £3m to cope with school enrolment of 540 pupils.
It is the first major development at the school since it first opened in 1957.
Outlook:
Further showers or longer spells of rain likely, some heavy, especially during the evening.
Becoming misty overnight with fog over the hills.
Windy but mild with lowest temperature 12C.
The Moon** — Last quarter Thursday.
Sunset** — 7.58pm.
Sunrise** — 6.45am.
High Tides Tomorrow**
— 4.36am and 5.12pm at Belfast.
Listening for a concerned voice
WHAT a terrible week.
Five people shot dead by loyalists, other targets on both sides of the divide lucky to survive, and the IRA's scorched earth bombing campaign continuing.
Violence again propelled Northern Ireland into the national news headlines, but it did not seem to make the same impact at Stormont Castle, RUC headquarters at Brooklyn or Army headquarters in Lisburn.
Where were all those people in charge of security policy here.
Secretary of State, Sir Patrick Mayhew, yesterday made his first utterance on the renewed cycle of violence.
The Chief Constable, Sir Hugh Annesley and the GOC Lt Gen Sir John Wilsey have still to pronounce?
About the only other comment came from Security Minister Sir John Wheeler who argued unconvincingly that the IRA was defeated.
Heaven help us if they ever get on a winning streak.
Words of condemnation from our political or security leaders will not solve anything, but they will reassure the public that someone, somewhere is concerned about the attacks on them.
A community which feels that no-one cares naturally turns into itself for reassurance.
That is what is happening in Catholic and Protestant areas of Northern Ireland.
Ordinary people have lost a considerable amount of confidence in the authorities.
The end result is that some believe that retaliation against ‘the other side’ is the only protection they have.
Look at the emergence of vigilantes in Britain.
Misguidedly they are taking the law into their own hands because they believe the police are not doing their job properly for whatever reason.
The Government and the forces of law and order have to be seen to be concerned and to be effective.
In our case concern would be a starting point.
IN OUR household as in many others recently there were a few worrying days before the GCSE examination results were published.
It was only then that I properly realised how much pressure there is on children today to succeed academically.
Is it justified?
A 16-year-old English girl committed suicide after failing to get the required grade to guarantee her a place at art college.
The coroner, quite rightly, pointed out that schools do not teach children that in a competitive world some are bound to fail.
The pressure to succeed will increase as schools compete on the exam league tables.
Children will be cannon fodder to boost a school's image.
Surely that is not why we send children to be educated.
Scotland's safer roads
THE number of people killed on roads in Scotland last year 460 was the lowest since records began in 1938, the Scottish Office said today.
Statistics also showed that 40 children were killed on Scotland's roads last year three fewer than in 1991.
Aircraft drama
THREE people were treated in hospital today after passengers and crew had to swiftly leave an aircraft by emergency chutes when smoke appeared in the cockpit.
A total of 63 passengers including five babies slid to safety after the captain of the British Airways turbo-prop bound for Jersey in the Channel Islands ordered the evacuation at Manchester Airport.
Legal Aid warning
People on legal aid will only be able to get the most inexperienced lawyers to work for them if a plan to set fixed hourly rates goes ahead, the Law Society warns.
The Lord Chancellor Lord Mackay of Clashfern wants the rate for civil legal aid work set at £65-an-hour.
The Society said this was 25pc below the average now allowed by district judges and in many cases would not even cover solicitors' overheads.
Scotland victorious
Scotland has won a bitter battle to house a new multi-million pound military centre creating 700 jobs, it was disclosed tonight.
The Ministry of Defence will announce shortly that the Army's new personnel centre will be located in Glasgow.
The announcement will end months of acrimony after it appeared that a guarantee to base the centre in the city would be snatched away at the 11th hour.
Mast row
Further talks are to be held in a bid to settle a row over the siting of a radio mast near a Stone Age burial ground.
Plans by Hutchison Microtel to erect the 50ft mast at Cairnpapple, near Bathgate, West Lothian, provoked the ire of conservationists.
Cairnpapple is one of the most important archaeological sites in Scotland and was where prehistoric man worshipped and buried his dead for 3000 years.
Monkey business
A Swedish newspaper gave 10,000 kronor (£830) to five stock exchange experts and a chimpanzee with a brief to go away and make money on the market, AP reported.
The monkey won after the experts buried themselves in their portfolios while the chimp, called Ola, threw darts at names of companies listed on the Stockholm exchange.
After one month Ola saw his stocks rise by more than £120.
The best the top performing expert could manage was just over £80.
Helicopter B-52 scare
A civilian helicopter narrowly avoided being hit by two giant American B-52 bombers taking part in the Nato maritime exercise yesterday.
The Bristow Helicopters S-61 was descending through cloud into Aberdeen when the pilot spotted the huge warplanes below him.
He quickly levelled off at 1500ft and one of the B-52s passed ahead of the helicopter and the other behind.
Steaming ahead
The seven-strong squadron of Nato warships enforcing the arms embargo off the coast of former Yugoslavia is to be commanded by Britain's Commodore Alastair Ross from tomorrow.
He succeeds Italy's Rear Admiral Martinotti as Commander Standing Naval Force Mediterranean.
Commodore Ross, 52, of Ilminster, Somerset, joined the Navy in 1965.
Caribbean tour plan
THE Queen and Duke of Edinburgh to make a major visit to the Caribbean next February and March touring eight countries.
The Royal Yacht Britannia will be used for part of the tour and also to host a number of ‘sea days’, used by the Government and trade associations to drum up business for Britain, before and after the tour.
Clinton's choice
THE US Senate has voted by 65–43 to confirm President Clinton's controversial nominee, Dr Joycelyn Elders, to be surgeon general.
She has been criticised over her outspoken statements on sex and abortion, advocating contraception for sexually active teenagers.
BELFAST
Booby-trap terror case
Judgment has been reserved in the case of a Castlederg man accused of a series of terrorist crimes including murder.
Patrick Anthony Gallen (20), of Scraghey Road, is charged with murdering Protestant father of two Andrew Bogle (43) outside the village in August 1990.
Mr Bogle, who suffered from leukaemia, died when a bomb exploded under a booby-trapped piece of wood at a building yard, Belfast Crown Court heard earlier.
The Crown claims that Gallen picked up the bombers in Donegal, drove them to the yard and returned an hour later to pick them up.
Gallen denies the charges.
MAGHERAFELT
Wife attacked
A SOUTH Londonderry man who was alleged to have attacked his wife with his fists and a poker, was fined £200 at Magherafelt Magistrate's Court yesterday.
Charles Nicholas (38), Sperrin View, Magherafelt, admitted assaulting his wife, Marian, in their home on September 26 last year.
Defence solicitor Mrs Sinead Maxwell said that while Nicholas admitted having used his fists, he strongly denied attacking his wife with a weapon.
ARMAGH
Painter fined
AN apprentice painter who shouted ‘Brit bastards, up the Provos’ at a joint police-military patrol was fined £25 in Armagh Magistrate's Court yesterday.
Shane Gerard John Paul Hughes (18), of St Matthews Estate, in Keady, admitted disorderly behaviour in the town on January 15.
ARIES: Mar 21 to Apr 20
You'll quickly find ways to solve problems as you'll be feeling most enterprising.
Excitement surrounds your love life if you are fancy free.
You may find yourself away from home having fun.
Starline number 0891 332 765
TAURUS: Apr 21 to May 21
You'll find it hard to turn off and work colleagues will not be any help.
You could find yourself socialising with them later on.
Evening is the best time for visiting.
Starline number 766
GEMINI: Jun 22 to Jul 22
A good day for travelling long or short distances, but you should take care where finances are concerned.
You could find yourself spending more than your allowance for the day's entertainments.
Starline number 767
CANCER: Jun 22 to July 22
You are in an optimistic and generous mood and other people will be flocking around you.
Try not to splash out too much in a bid to spoil those around you.
Romance is well starred.
Starline number 768
LEO: Jul 23 to Aug 22
A new relationship formed will be very important to you now and in the future.
This is a great day for weddings and engagements.
If attending a wedding or party of close friends, you should have the time of your life.
Starline number 769
VIRGO: Aug 23 to Sep 23
Try not to draw attention to yourself — you are not in the best of moods and arguments could ensue.
Care should be taken when dealing with loved ones as a rift could form if you are too argumentative.
Forgive and forget if possible.
Starline number 770
LIBRA: Sep 24 to Oct 23
Time to come out from under a cloud and enjoy yourself.
If you can mix business with pleasure, so much better.
There are some good opportunities for advancement if only you can grab them quickly.
Starline number 771
SCORPIO: Oct 24 to Nov 21
You could be hoping to receive a favour or two from those around you.
But do not push your luck too far.
Those who give can also take — so be careful.
Evening is a good time for friendships and romance, but do not be too intense.
Starline number 772
SAGITTARIUS: Nov 22 to Dec 21
An ideal day for any sort of travel, but especially good for short trips and visits.
Keep on the move wherever possible as there is much to be gained from flitting here and there.
The opposite sex will figure in the evening's entertainments.
Starline number 773
CAPRICORN: Dec 22 to Jan 20
There could be a call from someone you haven't heard from in some time.
Try to make time to see them if they come calling later in the day.
You could learn something to your advantage.
Starline number 774
AQUARIUS: Jan 21 to Feb 19
You are feeling pretty good about yourself and this could result in your forming a new friendship with someone attracted to you.
Do not try to go it alone — everything you do will be enhanced by the company of another.
Starline number 775
PISCES: Feb 20 to Mar 20
As a romantic you will be glad to hear that today is a great time for making moves in this area.
Try to get out and about whenever possible, making new friends and contacts.
Evening is a time for partying and meeting new people away from your home base.
Starline number 776
Hospital cleared at inquest
HOSPITAL staff were not in any way to blame for the tragic death of a nine-day-old baby boy from west Belfast, an inquest has been told.
Stephen Martin Phillips, of Glenalina Park, died from a very rare infection of the umbilical cord.
Belfast Coroner's Court heard the baby was re-admitted to hospital six days after his mother gave birth by caesarian section on January 18 last.
Witness
Anne Marie Phillips fought back tears as she told how she had repeatedly warned staff at the Royal Maternity Hospital that she ‘did not like the look of the baby's belly button’, which was swollen and discoloured.
Witness said she was told not to worry and that her son would be fine.
Mrs Phillips said the baby did not settle when they were allowed to go home and she expressed continuing concern to a community midwife.
After being taken into the Royal Belfast Hospital for Sick Children on January 24, the infection had spread and Stephen was put on a course of antibiotics.
Died
When doctors told her early on January 26 that the baby was seriously ill and was being taken to theatre for an operation, she asked them: ‘How come you left it so late?’
Stephen died in his mother's arms early the following day.
Mrs Phillips' sister Bernadette Morrow, told the inquest that the death had left her and her family feeling that Stephen had been neglected.
She said her own two children were delivered at the Royal Maternity Hospital, but she would be afraid to entrust any other children to the hospital's care.
Consultant paediatrician Dr Mark Reid, who carried out a report on the baby's death, said he felt all the doctors involved had given consistent and correct advice.
While he could understand the ‘natural anger and grief’ of the child's parents, he did not believe that medical negligence was a factor in Stephen's death.
Dr Reid added that it would have been difficult to suggest any change in the administration of antibiotics.
Deputy State Pathologist Dr Derek Carson said the death was due to an infection of the abdominal wall which had spread from the stump of the umbilical cord.
Sympathy
Dr Carson described it as a ‘very rare’ cause of death and said that neither he nor his colleagues had ever seen cases with such severity of infection of the umbilical cord.
Coroner John Leckey, extending his sympathy to the Phillips family, said many of the questions that had sprung to his mind about the case had been answered.
He believed there was nothing that medical science could have done to have changed the tragic outcome.
By Oliver McGuckin
LISBURN
Media attack
LISBURN councillor Gary McMichael has criticised the media for using the term ‘leading loyalist’ in their descriptions of terrorist victims.
Mr McMichael — whose father was murdered by the IRA — said that it ‘came close to attempting to justify such attacks’.
‘Terrorism is to be condemned from whatever quarter and in an effort to do so the same rules of descriptive terminology should be applied to all victims,’ Mr McMichael added.
LEEDS
999 interruptions
AMERICAN pianist Jon Nakamatsu, performing in the Leeds International Piano Competition, had to stop three times — when 999 alerts interrupted the proceedings.
Firemen appeared twice at the city's university, but both cases were false alarms.
then an ambulance was called to reach someone who had collapsed.
Bombed town's message of support
THE Foyle Civic Trust has sent a message of support to members of the Armagh Civic Trust after the town centre bomb attack destroyed historic buildings.
Londonderry-based Trust members recently visited Armagh to discover the work being carried out in the city centre area.
And the members said they hoped the widespread devastation caused to buildings in the city would never be repeated.
They said they hoped ‘the bombings of old buildings, which are part of our heritage and which have enormous potential for tourism, will cease’.
MOIRA Barriers damaged
EMERGENCY telephones have been vandalised and automatic barriers damaged at a level crossing at Moira railway station, police said today.
A police spokesman warned that the vandalism could result in a tragedy on the main line between Belfast and Dublin.
Northern Ireland Railways has replaced the telephones, and the police, telephone Moira 611222, have appealed for information.
MAGHERAFELT
Firework fine
A YOUNG Co Derry man who set off fireworks in his backyard was fined £20 at Magherafelt Magistrate's Court yesterday.
Amos Peden (18), lawnmower mechanic, of Tobermore Road, Maghera, admitted the unlawful use of fireworks.
Defence solicitor James Burnside said Pedan bought the fireworks at Nutt's Corner market for his own use at Hallowe'en.
CRAIGAVON
Security call
A FORMER mayor of Craigavon has said that security in Northern Ireland needs to be stepped up.
Councillor Fred Crowe (UU) was joining in tributes paid to the RUC and Army at a Craigavon Council meeting after the security forces detected a bomb in transit.
BELFAST
Ladder fall
A 60-year-old south Armagh man who died in the Royal Victoria Hospital in Belfast two days after falling from a ladder in the yard at his home was buried yesterday.
He was Joseph Smyth, married with a grown-up children, of Madden Road, in Keady.
The accident happened while he was working at an extension to a silo.
RUC plea
DETECTIVES in Armagh investigating a Red Hand Commando fire-bomb attack on four houses at Legar Hill Park, on Sunday night, have renewed their appeal for information about the incident.
Ex-UDR man gets seven years after arms find
A 37-YEAR-OLD ex-UDR man who admitted to Belfast Crown Court he kept guns and bomb-making equipment for a ‘Doomsday situation’ has been jailed for seven years.
John Murray pleaded guilty to having a .38 revolver, assorted ammunition, improvised timer, copper sheeting, metal pipe and ammonium nitrate, as well as documents useful to terrorists, in his home in Stuart Park, Ballymoney, on January 12 last year.
William Craig (27) of Shandon Park, also Ballymoney, admitted having a VZ58P assault rifle, three revolvers, three magazines and other assorted ammunition on January 12, 1992.
He too was jailed for seven years.
Alan Murray (29), of Garryduff Road, Ballymoney, who pleaded guilty to being in the UVF, received a three-year jail sentence, suspended for three years.
Rusted
But a detective constable said the men were ‘certainly not prime movers’ in any terrorist organisation and the revolver found in John Murray's home was ‘old and rusted’.
Crown counsel said police received a complaint from a man on January 12, 1992, saying John Murray had held a gun to his head and threatened to kill him.
On searching Murray's home, they found three legally held guns as well as the illegal weapons and bomb components.
The lawyer said after questioning John Murray, detectives searched Craig's house where they found an imitation sub-machine gun, three revolvers and two assault rifles and a search of Alan Murray's home revealed an air pistol and fertilizer.
He said John Murray initially denied everything and then claimed the items were to be used in a ‘Doomsday situation’.
Crown counsel said Alan Murray also denied everything at first and then admitted joining the UVF, while Craig said he was put under pressure to keep various items but denied he was a member of any illegal organisation.
Evidence
Defence counsel said John Murray, a UDR member for 10 years until 1987, kept information on people from that time but there was no evidence that he had planned to harm anyone.
Passing sentence, Lord Justice MacDermott described the case as unusual, saying there was no record of any of the weapons having been used in terrorism, and they were not ready to use immediately.
The judge said that Alan Murray claimed he had been in the welfare section of the UVF but he said: ‘Membership of any proscribed organisation is a most serious matter.’
However, he believed Alan Murray had ‘stupidly’ become involved ‘very much on the fringe’.
By Rosie Cowan
Royal mail order firm to target American market
ROYAL goods are to be sold by mail order to millions of Americans, it emerged today.
The products, made by holders of Royal Warrants, are to be sold under the trade name the House of Windsor Collection, and the company behind the venture hopes to have an annual turnover of £70m by 1998.
According to reports the scheme is being allowed by Buckingham Palace and actively supported by Prince Michael of Kent, said to have been appointed unpaid chairman of the firm's advisory board.
It follows the opening to the public of Buckingham Palace and massive sales at a new souvenir shop.
Cheapest items are said to be £32 wine goblets etched by the Queen's engraver Andrew Lawson Johnston with Ovid's motto: Wine gives courage and makes men apt for passion.
Profit
The Royal Family will not profit from the business, though one report said that the campaign by Anglo-American firm the Eclectic American Catalogue Company appears designed to give customers the impression that what they are buying is backed by the Queen.
The scheme is said to have the backing of the Royal Warrant Holders' Association and not to need permission from the Palace.
Supporters insist it is a valuable way of boosting British exports.
The firm is initially offering 20 items in a mini-catalogue to be sent to 300,000 homes.
A much larger collection — 200 products — will be published and sent to five million homes next February.
Tory cash gloom deepens
PLUMMETING personal donations from grassroots supporters to Tory party funds are threatening a deeper financial crisis for the leadership, it was revealed today.
And the Westminster North constituency of Stormont Law and Order Minister Sir John Wheeler is among those which turned a deaf ear to the fund-raising targets set by party chiefs.
But a Conservative spokeswoman denied a Guardian claim that the party could not clear its estimated £14m deficit, and now faced bankruptcy.
She insisted: ‘It's simply not true.’
Given a quota of £3,790, Sir John's local party failed to raise a single penny in the first 48 weeks of the 1992–93 financial year, according to confidential figures.
Provisional details for other constituency parties up to March this year show that, while some have failed to meet highly-optimistic quotas, others have done much better.
The local party at Richmond and Barnes, held by ex-Northern Ireland minister Jeremy Hanley, paid £2,500 to party funds, against a £4,128 quota.
Wealthy
But in the wealthy City of London and Westminster South seat, held by former Northern Ireland Secretary Peter Brooke, the party raised £11,110 against a quota of £4,960.
The Guardian report claimed that the 1992–93 accounts, due to be revealed at the party conference, show personal donations have plunged.
Tour
The disclosures coincided with the start of a regional tour today by John Major, anxious to drum up greater financial support and bolster sagging party morale.
The Prime Minister, in a series of confidential meetings with party activists, will be appealing for more local donations to replace the gap.
By Desmond McCartan, Westminster Correspondent
LOYALIST terrorist groups have murdered four Roman Catholics and wounded another in the past nine days.
Monday, August 30: Mother of four Teresa Dowds de Mogollon (48) shot dead by UFF in front of her children at her Fortwilliam Park home.
Wednesday, September 1: Jim Bell (49) shot by UVF outside ice-cream factory in Riada Close, east Belfast.
Catholic workman and Protestant colleague injured in Red Hand Commando gun attack at York Crescent, north Belfast, five hours later.
Friday, September 3: Father-of-six Michael Edwards (39) shot dead by UFF as he slept in his Finaghy home.
Tuesday, September 7: UFF shoots Sean Hughes (40) at his west Belfast hairdressing salon.
Hopes high for talks to reopen
CONFIDENCE is growing in Dublin that next Friday's Anglo-Irish Conference meeting in
London will pave the way for a re-opening of political talks on Northern Ireland.
The Taoiseach, Albert Reynolds, has expressed optimism that the stalled three-stranded talks will resume between the British and Irish Governments and the constitutional parties in Northern Ireland.
Speaking in Dublin after meeting an Irish-American delegation led by former Congressman Bruce Morrison, he said that ‘optimistic signals’ had come from Britain indicating that the talks could be re-started.
Priority
Mr Reynolds stated that getting the talks underway again was now a priority and the search for peace should proceed without fear or the threat of violence from any side.
The Republic's Foreign Minister, Dick Spring, who will co-chair the conference meeting with the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, Sir Patrick Mayhew, confirmed that finding a basis for re-opening the talks would be high on the agenda on Friday.
He said the Irish side would be looking for progress on this issue.
He added that it was ‘vital in terms of the political dynamic on this island’ that the talks resume.
Government sources in Dublin indicated that the ‘optimistic signals’ mentioned by Mr Reynolds had come through ‘diplomatic contacts’which indicated that the British side felt there was ‘room for movement’.
By Michael Devine
Courier shock as big guns misfire
THE big guns came out firing blanks again at the US Open yesterday as the upset epidemic claimed world number one Jim Courier and three-times Wimbledon champion Boris Becker.
Frenchman Cedric Pioline, who has never won a professional title, pulled off the biggest shock by dumping top seed Courier 7–5 6–7 6–4 6–4 to open the day.
Then, eight hours later, Swede Magnus Larsson kept up the pattern of the last nine days by sending 1989 champion Becker packing 6–2 6–3 3–6 7–5.
Pioline's stunner ended Courier's quest to become the first man to reach all four Grand Slam finals in one year since the great Rod Laver won them all in 1969.
It also marked a record sixth consecutive year that the number one men's seed will not win the title.
Ivan Lendl was the last top-seeded US Open champion in 1987.
Larsson will play unseeded Wally Masur in the final eight.
Masur became the first Australian to reach the quarter-finals here since 1988 in a match that featured one of the greatest comebacks in US Open history.
Masur beat compatriot Jaime Morgan 3–6 4–6 6–3 6–4 7–5 after being two sets down and then 5–0 down in the final set.
The women's top seed, Steffi Graf, was made to struggle by Gabriela Sabatini before reaching the semi-finals of her fourth consecutive Grand Slam event.
Extended
Graf dropped the last four games of the second set after serving for the match at 5–3, but then powered past fifth-seeded Sabatini 6–2 5–7 6–1.
It was the first time in the tournament Graf had been extended to three sets, and the seven games Sabatini won in the second set were just one fewer than Graf had conceded in her four previous rounds.
Man sent to prison for killing bartender
A YOUNG Belfast man has been jailed for two years for the manslaughter of a Galway barman while on holiday in Salthill last summer.
Paul Hall (21), of Ballymurphy Drive, admitted at Belfast Crown Court that he threw a stone which hit Raymond Healy (25) on the head.
Mr Healy died later in a Dublin hospital from bleed of the brain and a fractured skull.
A defence lawyer described it as ‘a very tragic case’.
Act
The prosecution was brought under the 1975 Criminal Jurisdiction Act which allows a case to be heard in Northern Ireland.
A Crown lawyer said that Hall had gone to the Co Galway resort of Salthill with a group of friends where they had rented a house for a week last July.
On the first evening the young men got drunk and tried to get into a nightclub but were refused admission.
Hall later returned to the club where Mr Healy was also trying to gain admission.
Hall hurled the stone weighing about 4lbs, which he had lifted on the way from the beach, from a distance of about 30ft, which struck Mr Healy.
Defence lawyer Tony Cinnamond QC said Hall had thrown the stone at a window of the nightclub, but because he was drunk and due to the weight of the stone missed his target.
He said Hall had written to the dead man's mother expressing his sorrow.
Passing sentence Lord Justice MacDermott accepted Hall was remorseful, but throwing the stone at an area were there were people was a ‘reckless act’ which deserved to be punished.
By Marie Foy
Sports boost for disabled
A NEW sports club geared towards the interests and needs of disabled adults, is to open in Londonderry next week.
Facilities at the Templemore Sports Complex are being adapted to allow people with disabilities to take part in a range of activities including swimming, horse riding, shooting and table tennis.
Staff at the complex will shortly embark on training in disability awareness and Derry City Council is to carry out extensive renovations to the complex to improve access and comfort for people with disabilities.
Hoist
It is also intended to provide a hoist in the swimming pool for wheelchair users.
Helen Glackin of Sports Ability, one of the main organisers together, said up to 90 people were expected to make use of the new facilities.
The club will open next Monday at 9pm.
The cost of sessions for disabled people is 50p.
By Suzanne Rodgers
New body to look at special education
A NEW independent tribunal to ensure children needing special educational provisions get a fair deal is to be set up in Northern Ireland.
It will follow the appeals system in England and Wales, allowing parents to challenge education board decisions on where their child should go.
The proposals mean that, for the first time, parents can name their preference for a school, including ordinary ones — and backed up by a new appeal system.
Legally
The plans are aimed for pupils with learning difficulties, including disabilities hindering them from using standard school facilities.
A Department of Education consultative paper, ‘Meeting the Needs’, said that in 1992 there were 6,626 pupils receiving some form of special provision.
More than 1,000 pupils go to ordinary schools, after assessments from the five area boards.
In future, a Special Educational Needs Tribunal would be set up.
It would hear appeals involving assessments, chaired by a lawyer, and decisions would be legally binding.
It replaces the present system, where appeals are dealt with by the Department, with less than 10 made each year.
Concern
Time limits would be set for appeals, with a right to representation and eligibility for legal aid to get advise in bringing a case.
The document said the Government was aware of concern about the time taken to complete assessments and that admitted unnecessary delays caused ‘undue anxiety’ to parents.
By David Watson
CHESTERFIELD
New bishop appointed
THE Rev Martyn Jarrett (48), Vicar of All Saints, Chesterfield, becomes suffragan bishop of Burnley next month, succeeding the Rt Rev Ronald Milner.
Halt killings with more patrols: call
WEST Belfast MP Dr Joe Hendron has called on the security forces to step up their patrols in loyalist areas of Belfast in a bid to halt sectarian killings.
Dr Hendron, speaking after the murder of Sean Hughes (40) at his Falls Road hairdressing salon yesterday afternoon, Dr Hendron said the Catholic community was ‘very, very frightened’.
‘How many more deaths have to take place before we see the security forces acting?’, he added.
Increase
The SDLP MP urged police chiefs to increase the number of patrols and roadblocks in the Shankill and other loyalist areas from which the murder gangs were operating.
Commenting on the recent spiral of killings, Secretary of State Sir Patrick Mayhew said he shared decent people's feelings of disgust for the criminals and pity for the victims.
He added: ‘I know the RUC rightly go after all killers with equal determination to bring them to justice, regardless of any circumstance, and they never give up.
‘Help’
‘They have my confidence, my admiration and my full support.
But they need specific help from us all here in Northern Ireland.
‘For every killing there is likely to be at least one person with relevant knowledge or suspicion.
I call on such people to give it to the police in confidence.
‘Failure to do so is failing to try to help save a future victim from this scourge of wanton killing.’
Sir Patrick said he wanted to make it clear to the public that the Government was backing the police to the full.
‘To those who murder and those who direct them, I say that your crimes in the end will only yield you more long, long years in prison.
‘In this country political objectives are gained by constitutional means alone.
They will never be gained by violence.’
Father's sorrow: The father of Sean Hughes is comforted by friends after learning of his death.
By Oliver McGuckin
Teacher dies in fume filled car
Teacher found dead
A PRIMARY school's deputy head teacher was found dead in her fume filled car, it was disclosed today.
Patricia Cochrane, the vice-principal of Lisburn Central Primary School, was found slumped in the car parked at her Banbridge home by her 20-year-old daughter Claire.
Now an inquest is to be held into the tragic woman's death.
The 55-year-old teacher died after a report criticised the standard of education at her school.
Routine
Her devastated husband Robin, an engineer, said: ‘If her work was a factor, it was only one among others.
I don't want to point the finger at anyone.’
The report by Education Department inspectors, based on a routine inspection carried out in May last year, criticised the school, highlighting ‘major deficiencies requiring urgent attention’.
Among the weaknesses revealed in the report was the lack of planning in the school's curriculum for children between Primary One and Primary Three — for which Mrs Cochrane was responsible.
The inspectors said that there was poor provision in certain aspects of teaching children with reading difficulties.
Central principal John Dornan said details of the report were known to school management months before it became public — and a recent re-inspection is expected to show the school has made ‘significant improvements’.
Depressed
Mrs Cochrane's husband added: ‘My wife had a depressive illness over a long period.
I can really offer no explanation.
‘She had been depressed during the last 18 months but I thought she was getting better.
‘If her work was a factor it was only one among many.
Two years ago her mother died — they were very attached.
She had had a car accident.
We had moved house and there was a lot of work to be done.
It just all got on top of her.
‘But I never had any inkling that something like this would happen.’
Church chiefs' crisis talks on terror scourge
NORTHERN Ireland's main Church leaders are to hold urgent talks on tackling the growing scourge of sectarianism.
Details of the crisis debate emerged just hours after loyalist gunmen claimed their fifth Catholic victim in a week when they murdered Sean Hughes in his hairdresser's shop on the Falls Road, west Belfast.
Northern Ireland's leading clergymen will discuss a special inter-church report on sectarianism.
The clerics, including Church of Ireland Primate Archbishop Robin Eames and Catholic Primate Cardinal Cahal Daly, will meet next month to debate deepening divisions in the province and decide on ways forward.
Senior
The two-day gathering.
which will also include senior Presbyterian and Methodist figures, is being organised by the Irish Council of Churches.
Archbishop Eames said today he hoped the meeting would examine ways of reducing sectarianism and look at drawing up an ‘agenda for peace’.
And veteran peace campaigner, retired Methodist minister Rev Eric Gallagher said: ‘At the present time the meeting could not be any more important.
The situation has become so serious.’
Archbishop Eames said: ‘I have believed for a long time there is a crying need for the Churches to examine the problem of sectarianism in depth.
‘I brought it to the Church leaders and was supported by Cardinal O'Fiaich.
I think the Churches have a strong contribution to make.
Fears
‘I believe we are at the stage now where the fears and uncertainty in the community are such that no one can any longer pass by on the other side, and there is something which everybody can do to alleviate the problem.’
Rev Gallagher added today: ‘I feel very strongly that sectarianism is a problem which exists both inside and outside the Churches and there are those involved in sectarian activity who are almost beyond the influence of the Churches.
‘Each Church will have to look at its own organisation and how it faces up to the problem but the element of mutual trust enables people to look at each other also.’
By Noel McAdam
He deserved it — TD
DONEGAL TD
Jim McDaid today welcomed the three-month sentence handed out to his teenage son for making hoax bomb telephone calls in London.
But the Fianna Fail Deputy, who is no stranger to controversy, said the scandal could have serious repercussions on his political career.
Mr McDaid's 19-year-old son, Jason, was given a three-month sentence at Camberwell Magistrate's Court yesterday when he pleaded guilty to making two hoax calls warning of a bomb in Oxford Street from a kiosk.
Drinking
The court heard that he made the calls after a drinking spree celebrating his 19th birthday three weeks ago.
He was arrested within minutes of making the calls.
He has been in custody since.
Mr McDaid, a medical doctor in Letterkenny, who is TD for Donegal North-East, said: ‘He deserves the punishment he has been given.
The whole family must suffer the consequences of an absurd and stupid act.’
‘It was an outlandish, absurd and unbelievable thing for an intelligent young man to do,’ he added.
Mr McDaid said he fully accepted the seriousness of what had happened but was standing by his son.
He added: ‘I just hope that all the publicity will be a warning to other youngsters against doing something as foolish.’
Adverse
Deputy McDaid has conceded that the incident could have an adverse affect on his political career.
‘I quite accept that being in public life, the publicity about this will have repercussions on my political life.
I don't know what they will be.
This unfortunate incident was beyond my control and I hope that people will understand.’
Mr McDaid was at the centre of another controversy in November 1991 when he was appointed Minister of Defence by the then Taoiseach, Charles Haughey.
But he withdrew his own nomination less than 12 hours later when his involvement with Maze escaper James Clarke became public.
Deputy McDaid had given alibi evidence at Clarke's successful challenge to an extradition order and was photographed with him at his homecoming celebrations in Letterkenny.
By Suzanne Rodgers
£80 fine not in motorist's stars
A WOMAN motorist was spotted by the police reading her ‘stars’ in a magazine while travelling along the Glenshane Pass, a court heard yesterday.
Carmel O'Neill (47), Rannyglass, Dungiven, who was said to have the magazine opened out on the steering wheel as she drove towards Dungiven in the crawler lane on April 25 last, was fined £80 for reckless driving.
Defence solicitor Mr Liam McNally, told Magherafelt Magistrate's Court that, unfortunately the stars did not tell her that there were four policemen in a car following her and she would be appearing in court in September.
He explained that O'Neill's daughter, who was with her, had observed something interesting in her mother's stars and she had passed the magazine over to her.
Looking in
AT a time when sectarian murder gangs are running rampant, it seems churlish to decline any offer of political assistance from abroad.
The members of the visiting Irish-American group led by former Congressman, Mr Bruce Morrison, must understand that while they are very welcome to study the background to our problems, premature suggestions that they favour the appointment of a ‘peace envoy’ are unhelpful.
There has never been any difficulty finding the facts in Northern Ireland — the news media comb through them relentlessly and university libraries are crammed full of academic literature on the troubles.
The question is how they are to be interpreted, in order to produce a political formula that will be acceptable to the two communities — and will work.
That is first and foremost the business of the political representatives here, who are elected by and responsible to the people.
They have tried, and so far failed, to find such a difficult formula — which also must be acceptable to the British Government.
Although they have reached an impasse, lasting either a year or 22 years, according to one's point of view, they must keep trying.
To suggest that there is an interested and informed big brother, on whom one side could lean, to give it some advantage over the other, is only to prolong the agony.
It would be a buck-passing exercise, at a time when it becoming more and more obvious that difficult political decisions are necessary.
America can already call on a vast network of information on Northern Ireland affairs, provided by its consular service here and embassies in London and Dublin.
Its contributions to the International Fund have earned it the right to find out how the money is spent and what the prospects are, in political and economic terms.
Mr Morrison and his group can play their part by learning for themselves the full complexity of the problem and trying to convey it to Irish-Americans who see Irish unity as the only answer.
If they do recommend an envoy, and if President Clinton were to appoint someone like former President Jimmy Carter, the effect would be only to make the problem worse.
He and his entourage would become a focus for discontent, of all kinds, further polarising the community and adding to investment woes.
The problem is here, between two divided communities, trying to find a means of reconciling their divided allegiances.
To add an American dimension to the British and Irish elements would only compound the difficulty.
Old and beautiful
Only when part of our heritage is under immediate threat or already lost is its importance truly realised.
Fortunately the alarm has been sounded in time for many of the province's historic buildings.
The Ulster Architectural Heritage Society has compiled a register of 286 properties, with more to be added, which could face demolition.
Now that the problem has been identified, the race is on to preserve the buildings.
There are many obstacles to be overcome.
Some of the vacant buildings may have deteriorated to such a condition that restoration costs would be prohibitive.
A balance has to be struck between cost and necessity.
There is also the need to find a viable alternative use for the buildings.
Yet many can be saved.
The private and public sectors can both play a part.
The UAHS is trying to identify buildings which could be used by private businesses.
Grant aid may be available to help restore them.
In that way the buildings would be saved and continue to play a useful role.
Many of the buildings have several practical advantages.
They are spacious, soundly built, visually attractive and often accompanied by car-parking facilities.
Not only would purchasers be preserving the province's heritage, they would be gaining a worthwhile investment.
These old properties represent an age when craftsmanship in building reached an art form.
Compare them to today's concrete and glass edifices.
To lose them through apathy is sinful.
Bomb trail: judgment is reserved
JUDGMENT was reserved in the case of Belfast actress and mother of seven Rosena Brown, accused of plotting a murder.
Along with Brown (48), of Bunbeg Park, and facing the same charge are Paul McCullough (48), of Glenalina Road, and Stephen Canning (21), of Doon Road.
They trio were allegedly caught with a booby-trap bomb when police stopped their car at a checkpoint at Upper Cairncaslte Road, Larne on April 18 last year.
The Crown claim that all three were on their way to plant the bomb under a car.
The accused also deny charges of conspiring to cause an explosion, having the bomb with intent and possessing it in suspicious circumstances.
The three all refused to give evidence on their own behalf at their trial which ended yesterday at Belfast Crown Court.
Lord Justice MacDermott said he would give judgement as soon as possible.
COALISLAND
Opening Attraxion brings 40 new jobs
COALISLAND in Co Tyrone is to get 40 new jobs as a result of the opening of a clothing factory in the town.
Attraxion Fashions, which manufactures women's jackets, skirts and trousers, has started production in Coalisland with 15 employees, but plans to treble the workforce by Christmas.
The firm, which also has a branch in Draperstown, will supply wholesalers servicing chainstore boutiques.
OMAGH
Casualty closure denied
THE Western Health Board has denied that it plans to close the accident and emergency unit at the Tyrone County Hospital.
The Board's area general manager, Tom Frawley, commented: ‘There never has been any intention to close accident and emergency and I feel the rumours have been damaging to the public's confidence in the hospital and to the morale of staff’
BELFAST
Visit from Fair City
THE new Lord Mayor of Dublin, Tomas MacGiolla of the Workers' Party, arrived in Northern Ireland today for his first visit since taking up office.
The Dublin councillor met Lisburn Mayor Seamus Close, of the Alliance Party, before attending an education conference in the area.
Mr MacGiolla was later due to meet party colleagues in west Belfast.
CASTLEBLAYNEY
Hit and run driver jailed
A HIT-AND-RUN driver who knocked down a Gaelic footballer and left him dying on a border road has been jailed for six months.
Gerard Smyth (22), with an address at Main Street, Darkley, Co Armagh, was convicted of driving without insurance at Castleblaney District Court.
He was banned from driving for 20 years.
He was also given three-month sentences for failing to keep his vehicle at the scene of a crash and for failing to give information concerning the accident to the gardai.
Smyth pleaded guilty to four charges arising from the hit-and-run accident in which 22-year-old Declan Byrne, of Drumcrew, Castleblaney, was killed near his home on the main Dublin-Derry road on February 21 last.
ARMAGH
Startling record
A CO.
Tyrone's motor mechanic's criminal record amazed an RM yesterday.
‘I don't think I have ever seen anything like that anywhere even when I was a solicitor,’ Mr Gerry Harty told Armagh Magistrate's Court.
The record of Patrick Noel Fox (28), of Creenagh Road, Coalisland, ran to 12 pages of which three and a half related to a single court appearance in Dungannon.
And not included were 40 charges which he had asked to be taken into consideration on that occasion.
Fox admitted driving with excess alcohol on his breath — he was 19 microgrammes over the limit — driving while disqualified and not being covered by insurance last November.
He was jailed for six months, fined £500 and banned from driving for 25 years.
CAMLOUGH
Woman tricks OAP
A woman tricked her way into an elderly woman's Co Down home and stole money, police revealed today.
The woman thief arrived with an accomplice at the house at Camlough and told the elderly woman she was thirsty.
After she left old woman discovered a substantial amount of cash had been stolen.
LURGAN
Abduction bid on child
DETECTIVES in Lurgan are investigating the attempted abduction of a 10-year-old girl near Lurgan.
The girl was offered a lift by a motorist at Old Portadown Road around 6.30pm on September 1.
The RUC have now issued a description of the man who had black hair, balding at the front and sides, and was wearing glasses.
The man's car is described as a small silver or grey coloured hatchback.
Anyone with information should phone police on Lurgan 325144.
Murder victim tried to save girl, court told
A BELFAST man was trying to rescue his three year old niece when he was blasted by UVF gunmen, Belfast Crown Court has heard.
Self-confessed UVF man Robert Henry (24), from Rathmore Drive, Rathcoole, went on trial yesterday for the murder of Peter McTasney (24).
The Crown said that Mr McTasney was at his Bawnmore Park home with his father, sister and niece when the attack happened in February 1991.
Bullets
The dead man's father spotted a car pull up and two masked men getting out.
Shouting a warning he ran out the back door with Peter and his daughter following.
But Peter turned back, concerned for the little girl and was gunned down.
Mr McTasney died later at the Mater Hospital.
A post mortem showed he had been hit by five bullets and had also been struck by a number of shotgun pellets.
The Crown claim that Henry ferried the gunmen from the murder scene.
Revolver
The court heard that Henry was arrested eight months later when police stopped a car he was in at Ballyduff Road, Newtownabbey.
A Ruger revolver found in a hedgerow near the car had been used in Mr McTasney's murder, the court heard.
Henry has already admitted two charges of conspiracy to murder, possessing guns, hijacking and UVF membership, but denies Mr McTasney's murder.
He is contesting statements allegedly made to detectives during interviews.
A second man William Lindsay (29), of Mountvernon Park, Belfast, has admitted the murder, UVF membership and other terrorist crimes.
He will be sentenced after Henry's trial.
By Marie Foy
Liberal Democrats unveil flexible retirement package
MEN and women should have a statutory choice of retirement at any stage between the ages of 60 and 70, the Liberal Democrats proposed today.
In a policy blueprint, Retirement with Dignity, the party also argued that more generous provision in state pensions was politically and financially feasible.
They said that, by changing the present statutory pensions age — 65 for men, 60 for women — both would have the prospect of a ‘flexible decade of retirement’.
They argued that the scheme could be phased in over 15 years.
Based on actuarial calculations, such a step would not have a long-term impact on the provision for pensions, they claimed.
Choice
The Liberal Democrats said people should have the choice of putting off retirement until 70, if that was their choice.
But the paper added: ‘It is also right that people should not be forced to work into old age in jobs that may, on the one hand, impose physical or mental demands which are beyond their capacity or, on the other, be boring and repetitive.’
The document, being unveiled this afternoon, challenged the Government's view that the present level of spending on pensions is unsustainable.
With the total elderly population continuing to rise, women face having to stay on at work until 65 under Tory plans to equalise the retirement age.
Link
The Liberal Democrat plan would link pension increases to the rise in average earnings, which is usually higher, rather than the inflation index as at present.
It would also guarantee basic state pension for all permanent UK residents, whether or not their spouse had made sufficient contributions.
The party said that would save around £1 billion — the cost of maintaining contributions records.
By Desmond McCartan Westminster Correspondent
Two die in Ulster crashes
ULSTER'S roads have claimed two more victims.
Two men have been killed and seven people injured in crashes in Co Derry.
One man died and seven were hurt — one seriously — in a three-car pile-up at Drumrane Road, near Limavady.
The dead man was named as Martin Donnelly, married, with one child, of Dumalise Road, Limavady.
Overtake
Mr Donnelly's Talbot Horizon was in collision with a Toyota Camry.
The Toyota's driver was described as ‘serious but stable’ in Londonderry's Altnagelvin hospital after the crash, which happened half-a-mile from the Barnault Road junction at 9pm yesterday.
Minor
The dead man's brother, who was in the front seat, was ‘comfortable’, and another passenger in the Toyota and four men in the Rover were treated for minor injuries.
A man was killed when his Volkswagen Polo was in collision with a Golf.
He was Joseph McKeown (76), a retired builder, from Temple Road, Garvagh.
The crash happened at the junction of Plantation Road and Ballyrogan Road in Garvagh, shortly after 7pm.
Speed
The driver of the other car was uninjured.
Automobile Association spokesman Terry McAllister warned motorists to reduce speed in the wet and windy weather.
He said a film of dirt and oil had built up on roads during the long, dry spell.
‘Slippery’
‘The heavy rain after the dry weather we've been having makes the roads more slippery, and drivers should slow down accordingly.
‘Also, the high winds make it more dangerous when passing high-sided vehicles.
‘My advice is: slow down and arrive safely.’
Toll
The latest deaths bring the toll on the province's roads so far this year to 87.
Ten days ago, a 28-year-old Bushmills man died after he was struck by a Ford Orion at Whitepark Road in the Co Antrim village.
By Martin Hill and Maureen Coleman
Watching out for vigilantes
IN Norfolk the village vigilantes, Duncan Bond and Mark Chapman, have returned home from prison as local heroes.
The pair you may recall, kidnapped and threatened a youth whom they believed to be involved in a series of thefts.
The 17-year-old has not been charged with the crime.
But the small detail of his innocence has not been allowed to dampen the current tabloid acclaim of Bond and Chapman as people's champions.
Personally I am all for the guilty being run to ground.
But I still think I'd prefer to see justice in the hands of what the Americans call the law enforcement agencies.
Rather than those who regard threats of castration and being burnt at the stake as a legitimate means of encouraging suspects to help with their enquiries.
Town hall secrecy claim
A NEWTOWNABBEY councillor today claimed ratepayers were being kept in the dark about the detail of controversial council plans for a £4.5m town hall.
A public enquiry into the council application to build a new headquarters at Hazelbank is being heard in Ballyclare this week.
‘Disturbed’
However, local Alliance councillor John Blair said he was ‘very disturbed’ to discover the council had planned to erect gates and security cameras around the park.
‘Ratepayers were told nothing about this before, yet they will be having to foot the bill.
I specifically asked a question about gates some months ago and was assured there were no such plans.
‘Now I go along to the enquiry and find a public display of drawings of these non-existent gates and discover the council is offering to withdraw them to meet DoE objections.
Objections
‘I am very unhappy that public representatives and ratepayers are not being given a true picture.’
Two thousand eight hundred objections were received after the council announced its plans to site its new town hall at the Hazelbank park.
The council argues that Hazelbank was the original site of the old town hall destroyed by an IRA bomb 20 years ago, and it is the best location in the borough.
‘Waste’
However, objectors say the move is a ‘scandalous waste’ of ratepayers' money which will destroy the popular public park, which is a designated open space.
QCs Desmond Boal and Robert McCartney are representing the council and objectors respectively at the hearing, which is expected to end tomorrow afternoon.
John Blair: ‘Ratepayers told nothing.’
By Mary Kelly
Row blows up on ferry claim
A WAR of words erupted today after Stena Sealink claimed victory in the three-way battle of the waves over the critical summer peak period.
Representatives from SeaCat and P and O issued blunt replies after Sealink claimed to have left its rivals trailing in its wake over the summer.
Sealink released figures for their performance from June 27 to August 28, claiming that it carried 38,493 more passengers and 10,818 more cars between Larne and Stranraer than last year.
That represented 12 per cent more passengers and 17 per cent more cars, increasing their overall market share to 55.6 per cent in both.
Fallen
But a spokesman for P and O accused Sealink of being selective in their choice of dates, saying: ‘Two months don't make a year.
We have carried 25 per cent more passengers and 34 per cent more cars in the year from January 1 to the end of August — that is what counts.’
And a SeaCat spokesman said: ‘Our market share is a very satisfactory 24 per cent.
‘But for SeaCat the Northern Ireland public would still be travelling in mundane vessels and having to pay a hefty price for the privilege.’
But Sealink did admit that their numbers had fallen over the nine months from January 1 to Monday of this week, by 20,755 passengers and 9,644 cars.
Market
Sealink estimates that the market as a whole grew by 16.2 per cent in terms of passengers and by 16.5 per cent in cars between January 1 and Monday.
‘Whilst we did lose volume slightly at the start of the year, we have outperformed our competitors during the vital summer peak period,’ a Sealink spokesman said.
‘Our losses were mainly due to promotional activity from our rivals, but we decided to fight back and it has paid dividends.
‘The arrival of another SeaCat vessel in May certainly has not hit us the way some people expected.
‘The market is a dynamic one and it seems to prove that there was a latent demand for sea travel, but the prices or perhaps the product were not right.’
By Darwin Templeton Stena Sealink: Claimed victory.
SeaCat: ‘Satisfactory’.
P and O: Accused Sealink.
Last call for talks bus: Initiative 92
THE British and Irish Governments were today urged to give Ulster's politicians a last chance to resume the inter-party talks and bypass them if they fail to do so.
The call came from Initiative 92, the citizens' body which established the Opsahl Commission.
Co-chairmen Robin Wilson and Professor Simon Lee appealed to the two Governments to break the political deadlock and help end the violence by promoting new talks based on the findings of the Opsahl Commission.
They said the group hoped its recommendations would be considered when ministers meet at the Anglo-Irish Conference meeting in London on Friday.
Future
If new talks without preconditions failed, it suggested that an ‘official’ Opsahl Commission should be established to make recommendations about the province's future.
At a press conference in Belfast today the group also called for immediate action on measures which the Opsahl report had shown enjoyed widespread support, such as the immediate introduction of a Bill of Rights.
And the group appealed to Secretary of State Sir Patrick Mayhew to follow the example of the Republic's Government and give a formal response to the Opsahl report.
Action
But the most direct call for action by the Governments came from Robin Wilson after the conference ended.
In response to questions he said politicians should not be able to have a veto on political progress and suggested that the Governments could act ‘over their heads’ if they failed to resume talks.
‘The Governments should simply say ‘the talks bus is starting and we are taking on board everyone who wants to be involved, if you want to be left behind you do so at your peril’.
‘We do not want to bypass the elected representatives, but they cannot be allowed to hold up progress.
We have to have some kind of fall back so that if the politicians won't talk something will be put in place over their heads,’ he explained.
Formal appeal: Sir Patrick Mayhew
By Vincent Kearney, Political Correspondent
Warning of benefits not being claimed
THE Citizens' Advice Bureaux today said that not enough people were getting social-security benefits they were entitled to, worsening poverty in the province.
Regional director Derek Alcorn said that about 35pc of inquiries to CAB offices were about benefits.
‘Queries’
This figure rose to 45pc in some areas such as west Belfast, he said.
‘We deal with more than 1,000 queries each week on social security.
People don't take up what they are entitled to, which comes down to the way the government presents the information.
‘We would like to see as much money spent on advertising benefits like Family Credit as is spent by the Government on advertising the privatisation of British Gas, for example.’
‘Impact’
Mr Alcorn said that hundreds of millions of pounds lay unclaimed in the UK.
‘That makes a big impact on poverty and people's basic incomes,’ he stressed.
Independent research in Great Britain by the Policy Studies Institute, out today, suggests that it is poorly-paid people, and not the very poorest, who are failing to get their due Family Credit.
According to the study, the means-tested benefit is reaching its targets more often and more effectively than many had feared.
Biggest
It also shows:
Some 64pc of those entitled to Family Credit receive it at any one time.
Families entitled to £10 a week or more are the biggest claimants.
Low-paid white-collar couples who are buying their own homes did not claim because they did not realise they were eligible.
Authors Alan Marsh and Stephen McKay believe Family Credit is still less effective at reaching its target than other social-security benefit.
However, despite some problems, the strengths of the benefit outweigh its weaknesses.
It plays an important part in targeting benefits at families with children, they say.
Derek Alcorn: Advertising plea.
By Marie Foy
NIO bid to placate blamed for terror
THE Government has been accused of trying to ‘slither out’ of responsibility for the recent upsurge in terror.
Ulster Unionist MP William Ross told a meeting of Young Unionists in Belfast that the ‘horrifying’ level of violence was a consequence of the Government's ‘appeasement policy’.
He said: ‘As usual, the Government and their fellow-travellers are trying hard to slither out of their own responsibility for it.
‘They are doing this by the usual process of blaming the Unionists for it all and insinuating that if only the Unionists would talk to the SDLP and through them to Dublin, then everything would calm down and peace and good would reign supreme.’
Mr Ross, the East Londonderry MP, is sceptical about the chances of political dialogue succeeding at present.
Alderdice's bid to restart talks
ALLIANCE leader Dr John Aderdice today met the Republic's Opposition leaders in an attempt to breathe new life into the talks stalemate.
The recent upsurge in violence was also due for discussion at the Dublin meeting, which involved Fine Gael leader John Bruton and Progressive Democrat leader Des O'Malley.
Speaking before leaving for Dublin, Dr Alderdice said: ‘The agenda will include the serious security situation, the talks stalemate and how to get political progress.’
Two days ago, the Alliance leader met Security Minister Sir John Wheeler at Stormont.
He told the Minister there was an urgent need for ‘political movement’.
Dr Alderdice said afterwards: ‘What is really needed is political leadership from the Government to give our people hope and a belief in democratic politics.’
Free local calls go on offer
A ‘PHONEY’ war broke out today when mobile telephones offering free off-peak local calls went on sale in High Street stores throughout the UK.
Mercury's One-2-One service offers the phones, costing £250-£300, in direct competition with British Telecom.
And it will provide free and unlimited local calls for an indefinite period.
The scheme represents a huge assault on the domestic phone business of market leader BT.
City analysts predict a price war in the telecommunications market.
The Mercury service has been launched by Cable & Wireless and US West, the American phone company.
Attacking
Cable & Wireless chairman Lord Young, the former Trade and Industry Secretary, said yesterday: ‘We're not attacking Vodafone and Cellnet, we're attacking British Telecom.’
And he insisted the new service was more than a temporary offer, declaring: ‘This isn't a promotion — it is for always.’
Mercury claimed its free local calls promise to consumers was ‘a world first’.
But BT was unimpressed, arguing that many of its prices were markedly cheaper than Mercury One-2-One's.
A BT spokesman said: ‘People will soon realise that there is no such thing as a free anything in the world, least of all telephone calls.’
The £12.50 monthly subscription charge for non-business users of Mercury One-2-One would buy nearly 1,100 minutes at BT local off-peak rates, or 35 minutes a day, he said.
A three-minute peak time call was 16.8p with BT, compared with 75p for private users of Mercury One-2-One, the spokesman added.
The threat of a price war led to plunging shares for all the major players in the market.
Cable & Wireless closed down 19p at 850p, BT shares fell 6p to 421p, Vodafone dropped 19p to 491p, and Securicor, which owns 40% of Cellnet, slid 29p to 710p.
City dealers believe Mercury's move could herald the most sweeping changes to the telecommunications industry since mobile phones were introduced in 1985.
Visitor defends SF talks
FORMER US Congressman Bruce Morrison today defended his plans to meet Sinn Fein during his fact-finding mission to Ireland.
Speaking at Stormont Castle before a meeting with Secretary of State Sir Patrick Mayhew, Mr Morrison said he was prepared to meet any group.
‘Barriers’
‘I believe there isn't anyone here that I would not meet with if they would be willing to meet with me.
I think that one of the barriers to progress in this community is too many preconditions rather than more communication,’ he said.
However, he refused to say whether he would be discussing the merits of a sending a special US peace envoy to the province with Sir Patrick.
Opposition
Later today, Mr Morrison and the three other members of the American delegation were told that the peace envoy plan was not supported by the majority of people in Northern Ireland.
The group got its first taste of the opposition to the plan when it met Ulster Unionist representatives in Belfast.
Mr Morrison backed calls for former US President Jimmy Carter to be sent to the province as a peace envoy while in Dublin yesterday.
‘Interference’
However, UUP general secretary Jim Wilson said the group would be left ‘in absolutely no doubt’ today about Unionist opposition to ‘outside interference’.
The party's Strangford MP, John Taylor, went further, criticising the motives of the delegation and describing them as ‘anti-Ulster’.
The American delegation, which also includes two businessmen and the editor of New York newspaper Irish Voice, arrived in Belfast after spending yesterday meeting political leaders in the Republic.
Taoiseach
While in Dublin, the group had discussions with Foreign Affairs Minister Dick Spring and paid courtesy visits to Taoiseach Albert Reynolds and President Mary Robinson.
Mr Taylor described the visitors as ‘meddlers’ and accused them of being ‘at the forefront of a campaign to get Northern Ireland out of the United Kingdom’.
Speaking in a radio interview, he said the group had a duty to dispel myths about the treatment of Roman Catholics in the province.
‘Laughable’
He said peace in Northern Ireland was a matter for the people of the province and the Government in London and described the suggestion that Jimmy Carter should be sent as an envoy as ‘laughable’.
The American group was due to meet Sinn Fein representatives tomorrow.
By Vincent Kearney, Political Correspondent
Anguish of gun widow
THE widow of murdered Belfast hairdresser Sean Hughes today told how she had chatted with her husband in his shop less than an hour before he was killed.
‘I called in to collect the car.
We talked for a few minutes and he was in great spirits.
I never thought I wouldn't ever see him alive again,’ said Marie Hughes.
Fifty minutes after she left, at about 3pm, two UFF gunmen walked into the Jon David salon in the west of the city and shot Mr Hughes (40) several times.
He died at the scene.
The couple, who had three children, David (19), Lisa (16), and John (10), lived at Windermere Avenue, off the Saintfield Road, near Carryduff.
Fighting back tears, Mrs Hughes said the entire family circle was ‘just completely devastated’.
Cope
‘How do you cope with this?
The two eldest kids are doing as well as they can and are bearing up as best as can be expected,’ she said ‘But my youngest boy hasn't left my side since it happened.
He just can't seem to take it in about his daddy.’
Mrs Hughes said her husband, who was treasurer of the Northern Ireland Hairdressers Association, had recently celebrated their daughters GCSE success.
‘She got nine exams and he was so proud of her.
I suppose it was because she was his only daughter.
He told everyone about it.’
She said Sean's funeral cortege would leave from his mother's house in west Belfast because he had hundreds of friends in the area.
‘Sean had his shop at the corner of the Donegall Road and the Falls Road for 18 years and he was so well-known.
Popular
‘People travelled from far away to come to him to have their hair cut.
He was such a popular man and had so many friends everywhere.
‘We will just have to rely on them and our relatives now to get through this.
It will take a lot of support to keep going now.’
Police today appealed to anyone who saw the killers' car, a black Vauxhall Carlton, registration XXI 7255, which was found later at the Shore Road, Greencastle.
It had been hijacked earlier at Snugville Street, in the Shankill area.
‘Someone must have seen this.
It is a large car and there were three men on board.
We want to hear from them,’ said an RUC spokesman.
The number to call is Belfast 650222.
The murder has been widely condemned.
Mr Hughes' funeral will take place on Friday.
Church leaders hold crisis talks on wave of sectarian murders — see page 6.
By Gail Walker
RUC deny bias charges
POLICE efforts to deal with loyalist terrorism were today vehemently defended by RUC Chief Constable, Sir Hugh Annesley.
Rejecting suggestions that police were less vigorous in their pursuit of loyalists than in the fight against the IRA, Sir Hugh said such a charge was ‘neither accurate nor fair’.
In a strong statement issued from RUC headquarters, he added: ‘The proof of our impartiality and professionalism lies in the facts: the arrests which have been made, the charges which have been preferred, and in our absolute determination to counter all terrorism without fear or favour.’
Operations
His remarks came after the sectarian murders of four Catholics in the past nine days.
The death of the latest victim — 40-year-old hairdresser Sean Hughes in west Belfast yesterday — led to calls by local MP Dr Joe Hendron for more high-profile operations by the security forces in loyalist areas.
Stressing that the threat from both loyalist and republican paramilitaries remained very serious, Sir Hugh called on the public to use its ‘eyes and ears’ to help save lives.
Targets
‘In both communities, there are terrorists meeting and plotting outrages, using cars and houses, moving about and acting suspiciously in various ways.
Be vigilant and tell us what you see and hear.’
Referring again to accusations of a one-sided approach by police, he declared: ‘From where we stand murder is murder.
There is no excuse, no nods and winks, no legitimate targets.
Murder is murder.’
The Chief Constable said 26 of the 45 deaths from violence so far this year were attributable to loyalists.
The total number killed was 16 fewer than at the same time last year.
Equipment
‘To date this year there have been 172 bomb incidents, 54 fewer than in the same period last year.
Republican terrorists were responsible for 142 (83pc) and loyalist terrorists for 30 incidents (17pc).’
The security forces had seized 130 firearms, some 10,000 rounds of ammunition and approximately 32,500 lbs of explosives and bomb-making equipment.
‘That is a substantial achievement which represents lives saved and massive destruction prevented.’
Arrests
Police had also charged 259 people with terrorist-type offences.
Of these, 166 were loyalists and 93 republicans.
‘Without going into detail, for legal reasons, I can say that in respect of both republican and loyalist terror groups, a series of significant arrests have been made and a considerable number of murder and bombing missions intercepted and prevented.
As a consequence, more lives were saved and intended devastation frustrated.’
Sir Hugh said he understood that the successes of the security forces were of little comfort to those who had suffered at the hands of terrorists.
Significant
‘But it is right, nonetheless, that the public should realise the scale of our efforts in protecting the community as a whole,’ he added.
In Belfast — where 19 murders have occurred this year (15 by loyalists and 4 by republicans)— some of the ‘most significant’ arrests had been made.
‘Every possible measure, both overt and covert, is being taken,’ the Chief Constable said.
Sir Hugh: ‘Every possible measure, both overt and covert, is being taken against terrorists.’
By Oliver McGuckin
Downing Streetphone bungle probe
DOWNING Street security officers today mounted an investigation after a telephone call by John Major inside Number 10 was overheard by a BBC journalist.
The call, apparently between Mr Major and his next-door neighbour, Chancellor Kenneth Clarke, was picked up by news reporter, Adam Mynott.
There were suggestions this afternoon that, as a result of a switchboard hitch, Mr Mynott's outside call had crossed with the internal link-up inside Downing Street.
The reporter did not disclose specific details of their chat, but the disclosure prompted concern that it might have been more confidential matters which could have been overheard.
But a spokesman said that all highly-secret conversations either took place face-to-face or on secure lines.
According to the BBC, Mr Mynott telephoned Number 10 at 8.30 this morning with a enquiry.
The number rang once and then he found himself listening to a conversation.
The reporter quickly realised the identity of both voices.
Routine
The content of the call between them was described as ‘routine matters’ and the conversation ended after a minute.
Mr Mynott said that, apparently, neither minister realised that they had been overheard.
He said: ‘I was absolutely flabbergasted, because here I was listening to a conversation between two of the most powerful men in the country.
I was astonished.’
Mr Mynott said a radio had been playing loudly in the office from which he made the call, but neither Mr Major nor Mr Clarke appeared to notice.
A Downing Street spokesman said he was grateful to the BBC for its prompt decision to draw attention to the lapse, and for respecting the confidentiality of the call.
By Desmond McCartan Westminster Correspondent
Four in dock on car scam charges
FOUR men have appeared in court charged in connection with a stolen plant and motor vehicle racket stretching from England to the Republic.
The men are accused of the ‘wholesale theft or handling of a vast amount of property’, which it is claimed they smuggled out of Britain, through Ulster, into the Republic.
The four appeared at Inner London Crown Court charged with the scam, which is said to have taken place between January 1989 and December 1991.
Prosecutor Dorian Lovell-Pank told the court: ‘A group of people, not all of whom are in the dock, were engaged in the wholesale theft or handling of a vast amount of property.
‘A lot of it found its way to the Irish Republic.’
Conspiracy
Unemployed JCB driver John Gallagher (22), from Tooting, south London, pleaded guilty to a charge of conspiracy to steal motor vehicles and industrial plant machinery.
The other three men, two with addresses in the Republic, denied the same charge.
They were jobless Eammon Mannion (19), with addresses in Southwark, south London, and Carna, Co Galway; self-employed driver Hubert Walsh (32) with addresses in Walworth, south London and Carna, Co Galway and John Mannion (19), of Tower Bridge Road, Bermondsey.
All four admitted a second charge of conspiracy to handle stolen motor vehicles, industrial plant and machinery.
A fifth defendant, William Gamble, of Eltham Road, Greenford, pleaded guilty to three separate offences of dishonestly receiving a stolen brick cutter, a high pressure washer and a pair of Kango hammers before April 1992.
Judge David Selwood adjourned the hearings to October 7 for pre-sentence reports.
Home front
UNDOUBTEDLY a further erosion of the statutory residential provision for the elderly will be the unwelcome outcome of the present consultative document initiated by the South and East Belfast Community Unit of Management.
Already throughout their area of influence, rumours of closures has brought distress to residents and despair to carers facing the loss of respite care.
‘Friends of Killynure’ fearing that, Killynure House will be closed despite claims that the present home subscribes fully to the criteria laid down in the consultative document for the provision of residential care for elderly people, now appeal to the fast growing community of Carryduff and surrounding areas to support the fight for the retention of the home by signing a petition against closure.
Members of Killynure House Committee are presently making house to house calls soliciting residents support for the petition.
It can also be signed in the Northern Bank's Carryduff branch, Killynure House and local churches.
SECRETARY Friends of Killynure.
Chinese on Ulster visit
AS PART of a week-long visit to Queen's University, a party of four academics from the South China Agricultural University visited the Agricultural Research Institute of Northern Ireland, Hillsborough.
Led by Professor Yu Yongten, chancellor of the university, they were shown the dairy-research unit, the recently-installed animal-metabolism unit, work on muscle conformation in sheep and research on flax-retting.
The objective of this visit and others made over the week was to develop research collaboration between Queen's and the Chinese University.
Links
Situated in Guangzhou (formerly Canton), the Chinese university already has strong links with the Silsoe Research Institute in Bedfordshire and a staff member of the university is studying for a postgraduate degree in the Department of Agricultural Chemistry at Queen's.
The Department of Agricultural and Food Economics also has an active research programme related to the Chinese agricultural and food sector.
With more than one fifth of the world's population living in China, the agricultural industry there is of considerable interest, and collaborative research on agriculture could be of benefit to all the partners involved.
Row over poacher netting
MORE than 600 illegal nets have been confiscated this year from poachers who are stealing thousands of pounds worth of salmon from the River Foyle.
The Foyle — which is one of the richest salmon fisheries in Europe — is being plundered by poachers who use large nets dragged behind boats to catch the fish.
Trap
The Foyle Fisheries Commission, which is in charge of the river, has recently been criticised by Donegal Senator Paddy McGowan, who believes not enough is being done to trap the poachers.
He claims the problem is at an all-time high and that confiscated nets are finding their way back into the hands of poachers.
‘The Fisheries Commission has made a big deal of the fact that hundreds of nets have been seized.
‘Victory’
‘They are trying to show this as a victory against the poachers.
‘In fact this is not the case.
I know for a fact that these nets were back in the river, in the hands of poachers, a very short time after they have been captured by the commission.’
He said.
Gerald Crawford, spokesman for the FCC, rejected the criticism, saying procedures had been changed three years ago to make sure confiscated nets were not passed back to poachers.
‘We have had that problem in the past, but the members of the commission who were involved have been dismissed.
‘We have tightened up procedures now and all the fish and nets which are confiscated are tagged.
‘The confiscated fish are sold on to defray the costs of the commission,’ he said.
Mr Crawford added more than 600 illegal nets had been seized this year.
‘Our perception of the problem is that it comes and goes, according to the availability of the salmon and a lot of them have been trapped in the system because of the lack of rainfall recently.
‘Concentrating’
‘There is a high level of poaching activity and we are concentrating resources to combat that and seize equipment,’ he said.
Mr Crawford added that poaching and pollution were the two main hurdles standing in the way of the Foyle being the best salmon fishery in Europe.
‘The Foyle has the potential to be the best salmon river in Europe.
‘Poaching and pollution are the main problems which we have to face.
‘However we have had our best year in cutting down agricultural pollution to date,’ he said.
By Ian McTear
IN Norfolk the village vigilantes, Duncan Bond and Mark Chapman, have returned home from prison as local heroes.
The pair you may recall, kidnapped and threatened a youth whom they believed to be involved in a series of thefts.
The 17-year-old has not been charged with the crime.
But the small detail of his innocence has not been allowed to dampen the current tabloid acclaim of Bond and Chapman as people's champions.
I still think I'd prefer to see justice in the hands of what the Americans call the law enforcement agencies.
Rather than those who regard threats of castration and being burnt at the stake as a legitimate means of encouraging suspects to help with their enquiries.
SO, how do you like your steak, then?
One foot in the gravy?
In that case you'll just love Eurobeef.
Eurobeef has spent up to six whole years in some remote EC freezer.
Which if nothing else, qualifies it as more mature than those Ministry of Agriculture officials who pronounced themselves this week to be ‘absolutely happy’ that it should now be on sale.
And infer that you also should be ‘absolutely happy’ about a joint which was actually on the hoof when Maggie Thatcher was in power and the Beastie Boys were in the charts.
Pies
If this stuff was a car it would now require an MOT.
If it could be taught, it would be in Primary Two.
Instead it is being flogged throughout the land in pies, soups and other processed dishes as wholesome, flavourful and nutritious.
When the reality is that a cottage pie housing a six-year-old ingredient could probably qualify as a listed dwelling.
What won't be listed, of course, is Eurobeef's correct age.
No food producer who actually wants to sell his product is going to be daft enough to admit on the label that the meat contained therein predates the Gulf War, Princess Beatrice and the fall of the Berlin Wall.
And all of this, in a nutshell, is why I worry about our leaders.
Not because they try to sell us Maastricht as economic salvation, privatisation as good for the NHS and John Selwyn Gummer as a vibrant personality.
But because they now genuinely appear to believe that we will swallow absolutely anything.
Jobs axed as abattoir loses fight for survival
COLERAINE'S economy was hit today with the announcement that the town's abattoir is to close.
Eleven people will lose their jobs when the slaughter house closes its doors for the last time on November 26.
The abattoir had been fighting closure for years after increased European competition began to hit.
Four years ago the Borough Council sold the plant to private investors.
Cecil Thompson, the manager of the plant, said the company had to face the inevitable.
Threatened
‘We have been threatened for the past three or four years.
The main problem has been we haven't been able to come up to EC standards.
‘We still have the public health standards but for us to meet EC requirements we would really have to start afresh.
It would require a £2m extension.’
Wholesalers who use the Coleraine plant will be forced to move their cattle and sheep to Ballymena or Dungannon if no buyer steps in.
Mr Thompson said butchers would be unhappy if their meat had to travel long distances.
He said: ‘The EC meat doesn't keep very well, especially as it often comes quite a distance.
Quality
‘Butchers say EC meat is of a poorer standard because of the travelling.
Local produce is more tender and better quality.’
The Department of Agriculture said it had no comment to make because the closure was a private decision by the abattoir owners.
In recent years both Belfast and Bangor abattoirs have also closed.
By David Walmsley
Chocolate bars ‘five years old’
CHOCOLATE Flake bars up to five years old were on sale in a rural Co Down shop, it was disclosed today.
A public health official said it was an ‘extraordinary’ case, and a spokeswoman for Cadbury's, which makes Flakes in Dublin, called it ‘bizarre’.
Normally Flake bars have a shelf life of just nine months.
But Newry and Mourne Council has written a letter of censure to the owner of the shop, believed to be in the Kilkeel area.
Warning
Chief Environmental Health Officer Hugh O'Neill, who refused to reveal the location of the shop, defended the decision to issue a simple warning.
‘In the first place the complainant wished to remain anonymous and did not want formal proceedings to be taken against the shop,’ he said.
‘But there were also special circumstances.
The shop had recently been taken over and the existing stock had been brought in by the previous owner.
Fat content
‘We removed the chocolate Flake bars and when we opened them they looked perfect.
But in terms of the globules of fat content they would obviously start to lose quality.’
The Cadbury's spokeswoman said: ‘We are obviously concerned about any incident where our products are removed because they are unfit.’
By Noel McAdam
Man arrested over tourist killing
FLORIDA Police last night announced they had arrested a man in connection with the killing of a German tourist shot dead on a Miami highway less than 24 hours earlier.
Police chief Calvin Ross said a person was being questioned about the killing of Uwe-Wilhelm Rakebrand, the eighth foreign tourist and the fourth German killed in Florida in the past year.
Mr Rakebrand (33) an agriculture engineer from Adendorf, Germany, was shot soon after he and his wife arrived from Germany for a holiday.
They were driving a rented car toward a Miami Beach hotel early Wednesday, when the car was rammed twice from behind by a van.
Rakebrand's pregnant 27-year-old wife, Kathrin, told him to keep going, police said.
But when he did, a single shot fired from the van shattered the driver's window and hit him in the back, killing him.
The van sped away.
Ricondall Wiggins (19) was arrested on charges of murder and attempted robbery.
Remarried after all these decades
A DIVORCED couple married for the second time today…53 years after their first wedding.
Flying officer Dougan Elliott and his bride Ilene Noyes first walked down the aisle in Wokingham, Berkshire, in wartime Britain of 1940.
They had a son but divorced eight years later, and did not see each other for the next 45 years, until January when they met at an 80th birthday party of Dougan's sister Gwendoline.
They are both 74.
Investigation nails DHSS fraudsters
SOCIAL security fraud investigators have saved the province's taxpayers more than £ million after uncovering over 6, bogus claims from local benefit cheats.
Figures released this week show that in the year to April 1, people here were prosecuted for attempting to dupe the Social Security Agency — a seven per cent increase over the previous year.
And seventeen employers were also prosecuted for colluding in the offences.
The vast majority of those prosecuted were found guilty and received sentences which included imprisonment or heavy fines.
The province's Health and Social Services Minister Lord Arran this week paid tribute to the work of the Social Security Agency in uncovering the swindlers.
And he vowed to keep up the fight against the benefit cheats.
‘The agency is committed to protecting the public purse from fraudsters who are determined to steal from the taxpayer for their own selfish aims,’ the minister said.
‘The vast majority of social security customers are honest, with genuine entitlement to benefit, and as such they have nothing to fear from the agency's anti-fraud efforts.
‘But people intent on stealing from the public purse at the expense of others in need will be actively pursued to stamp out this type of theft.’
Alderdice goes south
ALLIANCE Party leader John Alderdice was in Dublin yesterday for talks with opposition leaders John Burton (Fine Gael) and Des O'Malley (Progressive Democrats).
Dr Alderdice said: ‘The agenda will include the serious security situation, the talks stalemate and how to get political progress.’
DUP man rebuffs West Belfast MP ‘LOYALIST AREAS ARE POLICED’
A ROW has erupted over calls from West Belfast MP Joe Hendron for a greater security presence in loyalist areas.
Dr Hendron made his appeal following the murder of south Belfast man Sean Hughes on the Falls Road on Tuesday.
‘There is no point in saturating nationalist areas.
The killers at this point are the UVF and UFF and that is who they (the security forces) should be dealing with,’ the MP said.
But South Belfast councillor John Parkes objected to the call by Dr Hendron to have more checkpoints to monitor traffic in and out of loyalist areas of the city.
The DUP councillor said yesterday that there was always a heavy police presence in the more run-down areas of south Belfast like the Donegall Road and Taughmonagh.
‘There have been a number of instances of disruption in these areas in the past couple of months directly due to the number of police on the streets,’ he said.
‘Disgust’
‘It is a nonsense to suggest that there are not enough police on the ground in these areas.’
Secretary of State Sir Patrick Mayhew said the RUC still had his full support and he believed they pursued all killers with equal determination.
‘The horrible and evil killings of recent days fill decent people with disgust for the criminal and pain for the victim and their families.
‘I share those feelings to the utmost and I know the RUC rightly go after all killers with equal determination to bring them to justice regardless of any circumstances and they never give up.’
Sir Patrick reiterated his call for everyone to give the RUC their full co-operation and for anyone with details of the latest murder to come forward.
‘For every killing there is likely to be at least one person with relevant knowledge or suspicion,’ he said.
‘I call on such people to give it to the police in confidence.
Failure to do so is failing to try to help save a future victim from the scourge of a wanton killing.’
Dr Hendron's remarks came in the wake of the murder of Cairnshill Road man Sean Hughes as he worked in Jon David's hairdressing salon on the corner of the Falls and the Donegall Road at 3.50pm on Tuesday.
The UFF claimed responsibility for the murder of the 40-year-old, the fifth Catholic to die at the hands of loyalist terrorists within a week.
Two gunmen went to the first floor and opened fire on two men in the salon, fatally injuring Mr Hughes.
Children
The men used a black Vauxhall Carlton estate, registration XXI 7255, hijacked from Snugville Street in the Shankill.
The men escaped along the loyalist section of the Donegall Road and the car was later recovered in the Greencastle area of the Shore Road.
As they entered the salon, the two gunmen ran past a group of children on their way home from school.
Eyewitnesses said the terrorists were wearing baseball caps and one had a scarf covering his face.
One girl said later she thought the men looked ‘dodgy’ and wrote down the registration number of the car.
Mr Hughes was married with three children, aged 19, and 10.
He is the third man to be murdered on the corner of the Donegall Road and the Falls Road in the past two years.
In August 33-year-old newsagent John Carson was shot while at the counter of his shop approximately yards from the scene of Tuesday's murder.
And two months later, another newsagent, 63-year-old Larry Murchan, was killed in similar circumstances.
Alliance chairman Philip McGarry yesterday called on both nationalist and unionist leaders to show solidarity in denouncing the killers.
‘I would urge the RUC to take every appropriate step to ensure the maximum degree of protection for every citizen of Belfast,’ the south Belfast councillor added.
Detectives have asked anyone with any information about the killing to contact them on Belfast 650222.
Report by Peter Hutcheon
New scheme for disabled drivers
SOME disabled people may qualify for a new parking facility which means they could always reserve a space outside their home.
The Department of Environment will give the green light to parking bays for certain disabled people.
A box shape of broken white lines is painted on the road outside their home with the word ‘Disabled’ marked in large letters.
The bays should ensure other motorists visiting the street will avoid the most convenient parking space for a disabled resident.
Some of the new bays have already appeared in Belfast, mainly in side streets near busy shopping areas, where residents face the ongoing problem of shoppers parking outside their homes.
DUP block mayor's Hong Kong trip
THE long-running junkets row at the City Hall took an unusual twist last week when the DUP threw its weight behind a proposal to stop the Lord Mayor attending a conference in Hong Kong later this month.
But the party changed its position when supporting a move to send the mayor and his deputy to Thiepval to pay tribute to the members of the Orange Order who died during the two world wars.
DUP councillor Sammy Wilson said at last week's monthly meeting of the council it was unnecessary for the Lord Mayor to attend the Hong Kong trip as Belfast would be well represented by Laganisde board members, amongst others.
But he worded his amendment to include a condemnation of IRA violence to preclude support from Sinn Fein councillors.
Ironically their votes would have made sure Lord Mayor Reg Empey did not make the trip, but as it was the proposal was defeated anyway by votes to 15.
Sinn Fein 's Mairtin O'Muilleoir then presented his own version which the DUP opposed.
It was defeated by votes to 17.
Payment
South Belfast SDLP councillor Dorita Field then objected to the Policy and Resources Committee decision for Mr Empey and his deputy, Eric Smyth, to attend the Thiepval ceremony, due to take place on Sunday.
The committee also approved payment towards a monument.
‘It is a matter for the members of the Orange Order if they wish to build a monument but I am not so sure if the ratepayers of Belfast should be asked to foot the bill,’ she said.
Mrs Field's amendment was narrowly defeated by votes to 21.
Mr O'Muilleoir had a further chance to criticise unionists for going on ‘junkets’ with a notice of motion calling for spending on council trips to be limited to £30,000.
‘With the decision to promote unionist politics with the trip to France it would seem the council holiday club is as active as ever,’ he said.
A lengthy amendment condemning the IRA and Sinn Fein proposed by Ulster Unionist Nelson McCausland was adopted by the council by votes to 17.
Beware: bogus collector
A MAN posing as a worker for the charity War on Want has been taking money from unsuspecting people in the Balmoral area.
The charity has warned anyone approached by the imposter to contact police immediately.
A spokeswoman said the man had been making door to door calls, asking for donations.
‘But we have never made door to door collections, so we know this man has nothing to do with us,’ she said.
‘We were contacted last Friday by a woman who had been asked by this man to make a donation to War on Want.
‘He had some of our headed notepaper with a photograph of himself and was asking for money from people in Balmoral Avenue.
‘We are asking anyone who is approached by this man to get in touch with the RUC.’
The matter has been passed on to detectives at Lisburn Road.
The man making the bogus collections was described as middle aged.
Anyone in doubt about the identity of someone collecting for charity should check with the organisation they claim to be with.
Just for the kids re:vision
NOW that the dreaded NHS frames are part of school folklore, youngsters are no longer afraid to be seen in specs.
Jam-jar lenses are a thing of the past as lightweight, plastic lenses, like mum and dad wear, are available for kids too.
And with the new school term in full swing, parents should take advantage of free eye-testing for children up to the age of 16.
Youngsters are unable to compare their sight with others and are unlikely to complain of poor vision, which is why it is essential to get their eyes tested every year.
A new voucher system enables kids to choose attractive and colourful frames, which reflect the brightness of mountain bikes and skateboards.
Lightweight British-made frames are also available for tots from 18-months upwards from good opticians.
Eye, eye…the Garfield collection of frames is available from most good opticians.
Designed for four to 16-year-olds, the resilient frames are available in bright colours.
Travelling litter louts better watch out!
PEOPLE who drop litter from their cars are being targeted through a new campaign by Tidy Northern Ireland.
Beginning on Monday Tidy Travel Week, which incorporates ‘The Great Car Park Clean Up’ aims to stop the travelling litter lout.
Local councils have joined forces with Tidy Northern Ireland, the Department of Environment and a number of other organisations to promote the week.
‘The councils and other bodies already know their responsibility to keep our transport system clean, but it is the travelling members of the public who drop litter we want to reach,’ said Tidy Northern Ireland director Peter McGaffin.
‘During Tidy Travel Week car parks with 31, spaces are being targeted for a special clean up to help raise awareness of the litter problem in the transport network.’
As well as the car park clean up, car litter bags and stickers will be handed out to motorists.
The whole thing gets underway on Monday with a cavalcade of Belfast City Council cleansing vehicles around the city centre,
Council is asked to fight against re-zoning of ‘Hill’
NEWTOWNABBEY Council is to be asked to throw its weight behind a campaign to save one of the borough's best-loved beauty spots from the threat of being turned into a site for housing.
A controversial attempt to have part of Carnmoney Hill re-zoned to allow homes to be built has provoked a storm of protest from local people.
Residents are angry over a developer's bid to challenge a DoE proposal — contained in the Newtownabbey Area Plan
— to develop the area as a country park.
Over have so far signed a petition in an attempt to save the hill from further housing.
The developers at the centre of the row claim they want to save the hill from stagnation rather than destroy it.
But local people this week vowed to step up their campaign after details of the area of land the developers are seeking to have re-zoned were made public.
Linda Swindles, who initiated the petition against further development, said she was ‘absolutely amazed’ at the extent of the proposed housing zone.
Strip
‘I have inspected the developer's objections to the Newtownabbey Area Plan and would emphatically state that my fears were not groundless,’ she said.
‘The developer is seeking the release for housing of a one field width strip parallel to the Glebe Road which had previously been turned down by planners.
‘They are also seeking further lands at a higher level on both the western and northern slopes.
The area proposed for housing on the western slope rises to over 190m above sea level.’
A spokesman for the DoE's Planning Office confirmed that the proposed housing would rise to an average of between and 180m on the western slope.
‘The area which the developer wants re-zoned represents a significant proportion of the land area of the hill,’ he added.
Mrs Swindles said the development would be seen over a wide area of Co Antrim, Newtownabbey, Belfast and Co Down.
‘Carnmoney Hill is a special hill but this would completely destroy it,’ she added.
Local Alliance councillor Jim Rooney is to call for council support for the residents at the next full meeting of the borough council later this month.
‘I'm very hopeful that I'll be supported on this motion,’ Mr Rooney said.
‘We don't want any more development in this area.
Future generations will never forgive us if we let Carnmoney Hill go.’
But John Smyth, the owner of acres of farmland on the hill, said if the development failed then the area would further deteriorate.
‘The council already had the opportunity to buy this land and wouldn't.
If nothing is done soon this hill will just stagnate.’
Access requirements: regulations outlined
THE issue of access for disabled people was highlighted in a Herald and Post article two weeks ago when a wheelchair-bound man experienced difficulty getting into a recently refurbished Comber bookies shop.
Mr George McMillan, from east Belfast, claimed the law was on his side and premises such as the bookies, a Stanley Racing shop, are required to have both access and toilet facilities for disabled people.
The story has now prompted a response from Mr John Dumigan, acting chief officer for the South Eastern Group of Councils for Building Regulation Control, who has outlined the exact situation faced by buildings open to the public.
Mr Dumigan also explained why a relaxation order of the legal requirements was applicable at the Comber shop.
He said the regulations did not apply to the whole building, only to the alterations carried out.
Aspects
The architect at Stanley Racing was advised that the shop was infringing the regulations, and he requested a relaxation.
A Building Control Officer, in considering the relaxation, pointed out the following aspects of the property: The building fronts the pavement and therefore an external ramp to the entrance door could not be provided.
An internal ramp of the maximum permitted gradient would take up too much floor space in the small shop.
Access was already frustrated by an existing step and the additional minor increase in height made no real significant decrease in accessibility.
The Building Control Officer then recommended the local council should grant a relaxation.
There is no Building Control requirement to provide toilets for the public, but if they are provided, then at least one must be suitable for use by the disabled.
An original toilet did exist at Stanley Racing which was not suitable for disabled people.
A partition was moved, and it was deemed to meet the regulations.
The chief officer pointed out: ‘In circumstances where it would prove uneconomic to apply the full rigours of building regulations, it is reasonable for the council to grant relaxations.’
‘That is the main purpose of the relaxation facility being incorporated in building regulations,’ he added.
Mr Dumigan explained that building regulations are administered by district councils through their Building Control Departments.
Part R of the Building Regulations (Northern Ireland) contains the requirements related to facilities for disabled people.
It applies to shops, offices, factories, universities, schools, colleges of education, colleges of further education and buildings to which the public are admitted.
The regulations also apply to new buildings and alterations and extensions of existing buildings.
Generally, provisions must be made for access to and within any storey, the floor of which is at, or about, ground level.
Access to and within upper storeys of some shops and offices must also be provided — where facilities for disabled people exist, or a floor area of over square metres.
Sanitary facilities for disabled people must also be provided where these currently exist for able-bodied people, on either ground or upper storeys.
Wheelchair spaces are required in a hall, auditorium or a sports stadium, where seating is fixed or arranged in tiers.
The minimum number is six or one in 100, whichever is the greater.
If the building is designed and constructed according to the recommendations of BS 5810, the requirements of Part R are deemed to have been met.
In the case of educational establishments the relevant recommendations are contained in Department of Education and Science Design Note
(1984), Access for Disabled People to Educational Buildings.
Peter Hutcheon meets an organisation re-establishing its identity in the 90s
A new lesson in peace
WITH the latest appalling upsurge in violence, both loyalist and republican, thoughts of peace or even a breakthrough in the political stalemate seem far removed from the grim reality.
But sadly, as ‘middle-of-the-road’ politicians have found, no matter what the outrage, peace as an issue does not seem to spark enthusiasm.
In 1976, there were over killings.
That August the three Maguire children died when they and their mother, Anne, were run down by a terrorist who had been shot by soldiers during an incident.
Their deaths prompted Betty Williams and Anne's sister Mairead Corrigan to begin a campaign for peace — a campaign capturing headlines around the world, a campaign that drew upwards of 3, people to mass rallies and marches in Belfast.
Ultimately, their efforts brought those ‘Peace People’ the Nobel Peace Prize in December 1977, but controversy over that award added to the movement's inability to sustain its momentum and it faded from the newspaper front pages.
But still the Peace People, or The Community of the Peace People, to give it its full title, continues its work from a base on the Lisburn Road in south Belfast.
Rallies
‘A lot of people don't realise the movement still exists; there is a notion that it folded after the rallies of 1976,’ says Patrick Corrigan, development co-ordinator with the group.
‘The rallies were a spontaneous reaction to the troubles of the time and it was the first time there had been any movement like it in Northern Ireland.
‘I dread to think what levels the violence would have reached, given the huge amounts of weapons and explosives available to the terrorists now, if those rallies hadn't happened.
They showed there was a limit to what people could tolerate and were very important at the time.’
The Peace House at
Lisburn Road is also used by the Peace Train Organisation, Women Together for Peace and the Fellowship of Reconciliation.
Although all separate entities, they do co-operate with each other as, naturally, they are all working towards the same ideal.
The Peace People group, though, has its own views on how to go about promoting harmony between people from different backgrounds in Northern Ireland.
Peace
‘There are a number of strands in the path towards peace,’ explains Patrick.
‘Political progress is going to be very difficult to achieve as the electorate is not at present united enough to force the politicians to compromise.
‘People have to come together at community level, to begin to talk and break down barriers.
Only then can we begin to see changes in attitudes and, ultimately, an end to the violence.
‘There are always going to be people who enjoy violence, however, these people cannot operate unless they receive support, if only tacit, from the community.
‘Whenever all sides of our community decide to reject violence, wholeheartedly, these paramilitaries will no longer be able to function.’
The Peace People now have a much lower profile than in the early days, and despite a flurry of newspaper articles at its 10-year anniversary in 1986, it is still fairly anonymous.
Now, though, the group is seeking to, if not make a return to its fame of the 70s, then at least heighten public awareness of its work.
Next week a new residential block opens at its organic farm, Kilcranny House, just outside Coleraine.
Resource
Established in 1986, the farm serves as a residential, educational and resource centre used as a meeting place for people from all backgrounds.
Ever since the Peace People organisation was formed it has run a number of services which still continue today.
Youth For Peace, another branch of the Peace People, is also run from the organisation's base at the Peace House, or ‘Fredheim’(Norweigan for peace).
Established in 1977, its principal work is the organisation of summer camps for young people, held mainly in Norway and Holland.
A monthly magazine, Peace Is Peace, is printed with articles, debates and discussions on issues, such as Orange marches, the rising level of violence and miscarriages of justice.
The Peace People's work has always included a prison visiting service.
Prisoners' families often end up relying on paramilitary organisations for transport to jails.
But the Peace People are there for prisoners' wives who want to break all connections with the gunmen.
Employed
Around people are employed full-time at the organisation's headquarters and the staff is complemented by volunteers, often from other countries.
Currently two Americans and one German are working at Fredheim.
‘We have a much higher profile abroad than we do in this country,’ said Patrick.
‘We have maintained the low profile here because the level of publicity we received at the start would actually hamper the work we do at a community level.
‘Our work is community-based, things that are not going to excite the press.
Then there is the work with prisoners' wives who naturally shy away from publicity.
‘At the moment we want to re-establish our identity with the type of work we do now — not the protests of the past.’
Peace People development co-ordinator Patrick Corrigan looks back on the mass rallies of 1976.
DHSS branded as ‘uncaring’
AGE Concern has attacked as ‘uncaring’ the attitude of the Department of Health and Social Services over the closure of State Homes.
Chris Common, the charity's director, said he felt his organisation had been ‘whistling in the wind’ as the statutory authorities in their policy making had paid little attention to the voice of older people and their carers.
Despite the consultation process, Mr Common said the Department had already instructed local social services to reduce occupancy levels for over 75s at residential homes to per cent.
‘Some residents who were moved after the last round of home closures are now faced with losing their homes a second time,’ said Mr Common.
Age Concern is also anxious that resources freed by the closures are no longer being re-invested in community care initiatives in the Eastern Board area.
UVF admit killing
THE UVF has admitted murdering the 49-year-old Roman Catholic man shot on the Newtownards Road yesterday morning.
Named locally as Jim Bell, the victim was delivering to Desano's Ice Cream Parlour around 8.30am, when two men approached on foot.
Neighbours reported hearing up to eight shots before the gunmen made off on foot.
Police say the attack was ‘nakedly sectarian’.
Mr Bell, from the Short Strand area, died on the way to the Royal Victoria Hospital.
Alliance Party Leader John Alderdice has condemned the murder.
‘The community is not only again in mourning but is increasingly terrorised by the spiralling deterioration through bombings and killings, and feels impatient with a government which seems almost paralysed.’
Dr Alderdice added: ‘Our sympathies are now with yet another family in east Belfast.’
Community group slams MP's ‘tolerance’ remarks
A LOWER Ormeau community group has hit out at South Belfast MP Martin Smyth's recent statement that it should learn a lesson in tolerance from a Belfast cross-community campaigner.
Mr Smyth's comments appeared in a Belfast newspaper last week, calling for the Lower Ormeau community to accept the recent Black and Orange parades passing through the area in the same spirit as Belfast taxi driver Brian Mitchell who is regularly involved in local cross-community work.
Mr Mitchell also visits both sides of the community at Christmas dressed as Santa.
A spokesman for the Lower Ormeau Concerned Community rubbished Mr Smyth's comments as ‘a pathetic attempt to justify the offensive and sectarian parades of the Orange Order and Black Preceptory’.
‘For Martin Smyth to trot out this so-called ‘summer Santa Claus’ as justification for the insensitive and offensive parades of the Orange Order and Black Preceptory demonstrates the poverty of the Orange Order's case,’he said.
The group spokesman said its members didn't need any lessons in either cross community co-operation, tolerance or good neighbourliness from what he described as ‘the bigots of the Orange and Black Orders’.
‘While not wishing to denigrate the activities of Brian Mitchell, we would question the use to which his work has been put,’ he added.
The spokesman also claimed that if Mr Smyth was really interested in improving community relations he would re-route all Orange and Black parades away from the Lower Ormeau.
‘That simple act would do far more to ease cross-community tensions than all the community holidays since 1969,’ he claimed.
Protest at parade
LOWER Ormeau residents staged a demonstration on Saturday to protest at a Royal Black Preceptory march past the bookies shop where five Catholics were murdered by loyalist terrorists last year.
Around a dozen people stood in protest as the parade passed on Saturday morning but there was no trouble between them and the marchers.
The Blackmen made their way down Lower Ormeau to the city centre, where they connected with buses to take them to Last Saturday marches elsewhere in the province.
A spokesman for the Lower Ormeau Concerned Community, calling last week for the march to be re-routed, said the parade demonstrated the ‘contempt’ the Orange Order and the Royal Black Preceptory showed towards the Lower Ormeau community.
This week, the same spokesman said: ‘Despite the apparent softening of attitudes within the Orange Order and the re-routing of the Mini-Twelfth parade, we were again faced with a major sectarian parade through our community.
‘This is a totally unacceptable response to the wishes of this community.’
The marchers avoided the Lower Ormeau on their way back home in the afternoon.
Home-Start seeks help
EAST Belfast Home-Start is appealing for volunteers to visit families in their own homes once or twice a week.
The voluntary organisation offers support, friendship and practical help to young families under stress or experiencing difficulties.
Home-Start is available to any family with at least one child under five-years-old.
Volunteers must be parents, or have parenting experience, and be available to visit families throughout east Belfast once or twice a week.
Qualifications are not necessary; sympathy and understanding are more important qualities.
And a volunteer preparation course will start at the end of this month.
If you have a few hours to spare each week and would like more information, contact the scheme manager, Liz Hare, at the Purdy Centre,
Cheviot Avenue, Holywood Road, Belfast, or telephone Belfast 653920.
On the move
DENE garages have recently appointed Sean Clarke as their local business development specialist.
His role will be to promote among local businesses the resources and facilities of the dealership.
These include the major new and used car facility, parts operation, 12-bay service workshop, a Ford Daily Rental Fleet at Upper Newtownards Road and the Ford-approved accident repair centre and rapid-fit tyrefitting facility at Knockdene's Castlereagh Road site.
Sean Clarke has several years' experience with Knockdene where he was formerly an after sales service advisor.
Warehouse robbed as family held hostage
A YOUNG family in west Belfast was held hostage while an armed gang robbed a warehouse in the south of the city on Monday evening.
The assistant manager of the Holmes Cash and Carry on Boucher Crescent was taken by robbers to the warehouse in his Hyundai Pony car while his wife and child were kept hostage at home.
He was told to unlock the premises and his assailants then helped themselves to a large quantity of cigarettes and cash.
Police say three men were involved and all wore baseball caps with dark glasses.
One of the them was armed with a handgun.
An off-white Renault van was used by the gang to escape.
It had been hijacked from the Glen Road area and was later found abandoned in the same area.
The family's car was found abandoned at Andersonstown Crescent.
Anyone with information on the robbery should contact police at the Lisburn Road station; telephone 650222.
IRA slammed after attack on hotel ‘THEY DON'T CARE WHO THEY KILL’
TERRORISTS who planted a 400lb bomb at a Glengormley hotel didn't care how many people they killed, local councillors have said.
Scores of lives were narrowly saved after the IRA car-bomb at the Chimney Corner Inn only partially exploded in the early hours of yesterday morning.
Police were still evacuating hotel guests and residents, including many pensioners, from nearby homes to safety when the detonator went off.
The RUC say it was only because the bomb failed to function properly that lives were not lost and widespread damage caused to homes and businesses.
The evacuation followed a warning to a local radio station at 12.50am.
Police were still clearing the hotel and nearby homes when the bomb, abandoned in a Volvo car, partly exploded at 1.20am.
‘Inadequate’
There were no injuries and damage was confined to the car, which had been hijacked the previous night in west Belfast.
The device, which was found to contain between and 400lbs of home-made explosive, was later made safe by army bomb disposal experts.
The IRA attack has been slammed by local councillors who accused the terrorists of showing a ‘complete disregard’ for life.
Independent Unionist Arthur Templeton said the warning given was totally inadequate and praised the prompt reaction of the police and army.
‘If this had worked out as the terrorists had wanted then many lives would have been lost.
These people just don't care who or how many they kill,’ Mr Templeton said.
‘This is just another demonstration that they aren't fighting for any cause.
All they are, no matter which side of the divide they come from, are hoods and gangsters.’
Alliance councillor Jim Rooney pointed out that the Chimney Corner's grill-bar had been destroyed in a fire-bomb attack two years ago.
He said the terrorists were intent on ensuring that ordinary people would have nowhere to go to enjoy themselves.
‘These people deliberately target places where people only go for a bit of entertainment.
That's why they blow up places like the Opera House and hotels,’ he said.
But he vowed that people in Glengormley would not be scared into becoming prisoners in their own homes.
‘The terrorists won't stop people here getting on with their lives.’
In a separate incident in Glengormley, houses were evacuated for over three hours after a suspect car was abandoned at Willowtree Park shortly after 1am yesterday.
The army carried out a controlled explosion on the car but it was found to contain no explosives.
Residents were allowed to return to their homes at 4am.
Report by Michael Walsh
Appeal for information
POLICE are appealing for witnesses to an incident on the Albertbridge Road on Sunday night in which a man was attacked in his car by a gang of youths.
The man, who was driving a Vauxhall Corsa car, was at the junction of the Albertbridge Road with the Newtownards Road when he was surrounded by up to youths.
Some of the gang members got into the car while others sat on the vehicle's bonnet.
When the man attempted to leave he was assaulted and suffered face and leg injuries.
During the incident the windscreen of the victim's car was broken and the bodywork was also damaged.
10.
Anyone with information about the gang attack should contact Mountpottinger CID at Belfast 650222.
House fire
A MAN narrowly escaped death when a fire broke out in his Newtownards home on Sunday morning.
The first floor blaze, in the house at Abbot Gardens, off the Movilla Road, was spotted shortly before 10am.
The man, in his mid-forties, was rescued by fire fighters and taken to hospital, where he was treated for smoke inhalation.
Accidents cause havoc
POLICE are investigating the causes of two separate accidents which took place within minutes of each other on the M motorway on Monday.
Seven people were injured in the crashes which happened during the rush hour on the northbound carriageway at the Fortwilliam junction.
The first took place at 4.50pm when a car and motorbike collided.
Both drivers sustained minor injuries.
Ten minutes later six cars were involved in a pile-up near the slip road.
Five people were treated in hospital for cuts and whiplash but all were later released.
Energy loss: see it now for yourself
PICTURES go on show this week illustrating how much heat energy is being wasted in Belfast.
They are the result of a survey in the wake of statistics which revealed that a quarter of a billion pounds goes up in smoke each year as part of Belfast's annual energy bill.
Concern over the size of the bill prompted Belfast City Council to join forces with the Department of Economic Development in a bid to reduce the waste.
They funded an aerial thermographic survey which involved a light aircraft taking infra red pictures of the city at night, to locate where heat was being lost.
The pictures go on display at leisure centres this week in a bid to encourage residents and businesses to reduce the city's annual heating bill.
The results of the thermographic survey can be seen at the following leisure centres: Maysfield Leisure Centre — September 1–
Olympia Leisure Centre — September 3–
Andersonstown Leisure Centre — September 6–
Shankill Leisure Centre — September 8–
In wake of attempted bomb attack…
Pub owner vows he will not give in to threats
THE owner of a Newtownards pub targeted by loyalist bombers because it hosted folk music sessions has vowed that he will not give in to terrorist threats.
Mr Eddie Philips, proprietor of the Jolly Judge, said neither his staff nor himself would be put off by any threats despite the attempted bombing at his premises last Wednesday.
A device, planted in the gents' toilets, was made safe by army technical officers, who carried out three controlled explosions.
The device was described by police as a ‘small pipe bomb of loyalist origin’.
No-one was injured in the incident at the bar and restaurant in Regent Street.
In claiming responsibility for planting the bomb, the outlawed Red Hand Commando (RHC) group issued a threat to all hotels and pubs which host Irish folk music.
The threat has since been withdrawn in a statement issued to the local Press.
The RHC described the attack on the Newtownards pub as a ‘token gesture’.
Messages
‘The attack was not a serious attempt to injure or destroy, but merely a statement.
There will be no attacks made simply because of folk music.
There is no threat from us,’ the statement said.
The pub owner said he was not prepared to comment on the loyalist group's withdrawal of threats on pubs, such as his own, which host Irish folk music sessions.
‘All I will say is that you could wake up one day and be told a threat had been lifted, and it could be enforced again the next day.
These boys and others like them will not put us off.
As far as we're concerned it's business as usual,’ he added.
Mr Philips further insisted: ‘We were overwhelmed by the number of messages of support we received from across the North of Ireland, and we even got a phonecall from as far away as Greece.’
‘Pubs are here to allow people to meet and enjoy themselves and really get away from outside pressures.
There is no involvement in politics, we merely want to serve the public,’ he added.
Local police are continuing their investigations into the incident.
Meanwhile, in the latest statement, the loyalist terror group reiterated an earlier threat to anyone working on GAA clubs.
The threat came in the wake of two recent attacks on St Patrick's GAA Club on Portaferry's Ballyfounder Road.
The loyalist terror group described the GAA as a ‘mere recruitment agent and arms store’ for the IRA.
‘We have decided to target the GAA clubs and it is our intention to extend our list of targets to incorporate other aspects of pan-nationalism,’ it said.
Helen Carson discovers how vulnerable will now be defended Law tightens around abusers
VICTIMS of domestic violence need not face an aggressive partner in court, thanks to a recent change in the law.
The Family Law Northern Ireland 1993, which came into effect last month, makes it clear that the breach of an Exclusion and Protection Order is a criminal offence.
Prior to this, when police arrested a man for assaulting his partner, the onus was on the woman to bring about a prosecution.
Belfast Women's Aid, and other pressure groups, have been lobbying for the clarification of the law since a judgement in 1991, by Mr Justice Petrie, recorded that a breach of an order was a civil matter.
The move was welcomed this week by Angela Courtney from Women's Aid.
‘This legislation should give a clear message to those who abuse and terrorise women and children in the home, that they will no longer get away with such behaviour,’ she said.
‘Domestic violence is wrong.
‘The police, the courts and policy makers, as well as Women's Aid, are all working to bring effective help to those who need protection,’ she pointed out.
Help
‘We urge women to reach out for that help.’
An RUC spokesman explained that now, following an arrest, a man can be taken to the criminal court, and unless there are further offences of which the police are aware, the women need not attend the court.
He also explained that as criminal courts meet more regularly than civil proceedings, the matter can be dealt with quicker, sparing the victim much anguish.
Women's Aid and the Domestic Violence Working Group — a body composed of those encountering the results of domestic violence — had been calling for clarification in the law since the decision.
Superintendent Cyril Donnan, a member of the group, said: ‘From a police point of view, this is good news.
‘The breach of an order is now clearly seen as a criminal offence and the police will be pursuing a policy of bringing offenders to justice with the full and unambiguous backing of the criminal justice system,’ he stressed.
Report by Caroline Cooper
New plans to ‘get tough’
ARDS Borough Council plans to get tough with growing numbers of street gangs terrorising local residents.
How to crack down on increasing levels of vandalism and the emergence of street gangs in the area will be decided today at a special meeting of the council's Police Liaison Committee.
The meeting included representatives from the RUC, Housing Executive and the DoE's Road Service.
The decision to take a firm stand comes after local councillors revealed the misery suffered by many of their constituents.
It is understood that gangs of up to young people have been roaming Newtownards, and surrounding areas, making local people's lives ‘a misery’, according to councillors.
The committee heard today that gangs regularly hurled abusive comments at local people, making an unacceptable level of noise and leaving litter behind them.
There has also been growing evidence, members were told, of underage drinking in certain areas of the town, coupled with joy-riding.
Health Unit slammed for ‘cutting corners’
NORTH Down and Ards Community Unit has been accused of ‘cutting corners’ in providing health care in the community.
Outraged by the local health unit's decision to withdraw home helps from preparing meals for hundreds of disabled and elderly people, Alliance's Siobhan Laird attacked the government's entire community care programme.
‘When the government first proposed moving people from institutional care into the community, a government committee appeared to investigate this matter and reported in 1988, warning that ‘care in the community is not a cheap option’,’ said Ms Laird.
And she insisted the government has done the reverse by ‘treating it as a cheap option’.
‘The government has consistently tried to sell us community care as a product which will enhance the quality of life and broaden the choices of those coping with physical or mental disability,’ she said.
Service
‘I believe in Bangor such conservative policies have resulted in elderly and disabled people being increasingly abandoned into the community.
These policies are stifling choice,’ added Ms Laird.
Attacking North Down and Ards Community Unit, the Alliance member said no-one would be fooled by assurances that a new meals-on-wheels service, which is replacing the meals service currently provided by home helps, would lead to quality enhancement.
‘The unit assures us that the decision to have frozen meals delivered to disabled and elderly people, instead of having them prepared in the person's house by a home help, is not a money saving measure,’ she said.
‘Do they think we are all stupid enough to swallow that one?
Of course this new policy is about cutting cost because it is about cutting corners in personal care.
As a community we must oppose it,’ concluded Ms Laird.
It is understood the North Down and Ards Unit may introduce the new meals-on-wheels system within the next few months.
However it is believed a small number may still be provided with a home help at meal times and will not be part of the new scheme.
Under the new system, clients will be issued with a menu card at the beginning of each week and will be asked to pick the meals they wish to eat.
These will then be collected by an outside catering firm and delivered by a female driver to individual homes.
The food will then be heated up by the elderly and disabled clients themselves.
Each meal will cost the individual £1.
Re-lining scheme is in the pipeline
AS sales of bottled water continue to rise in areas of Bangor, the Department of the Environment has announced it is to re-line pipes in one of the areas worst affected by poor quality mains water.
After almost two years of complaints of illness, discolouration and bugs, worms and other nasties in the drinking water supply along the town's Donaghadee Road and surrounding area, residents there are to get a new pipe system.
Welcoming the news, independent councillor Austen Lennon, who has also been refusing to drink the tap water in his Hazeldene Drive home, said it was ‘not before time’.
Mr Lennon discovered some of the aforementioned ‘nasties’ in his own water several weeks ago.
He sent them off to be analysed by the Department of Agriculture's Zoology Department.
As reported in last week's Herald and Post, results of the tests showed that the creatures present in the water sample were living, but were harmless to humans.
The Ballyholme councillor said he would be continuing to push for similar re-lining work to be carried out in other affected areas of the town.
‘This is good news for all those living in and around the Donaghadee Road who have had to revert to drinking bottled water, because the water was not fit to be drunk,’ said Mr Lennon.
Count down's on to D-Day
IT'S claimed that next to losing a spouse, moving house is one of the most stressful things you're likely to go through.
But good planning and advance preparation are the best way to ensure the move is as efficient and trouble-free as possible.
Try to avoid peak moving periods ie at the end of the month or week, particularly Saturdays, and during school holidays.
If you have no option but to move during these periods, make sure you plan well in advance.
Take the opportunity to clear out anything you no longer want or need.
A car boot sale can earn you extra cash and save you money by reducing the load your removers have to take to your new home.
Charity shops and jumble sales are grateful for spare clothing or household items, providing they are in reasonable condition.
If you can't move straight into your new home, or you find yourself with too many belongings, you may want to put some things into storage.
If you are moving some distance, it's worth having the car serviced before you embark on the journey.
Also, should you require overnight accommodation don't leave the booking until the last minute.
Wise
Organise your change of address cards (complete with post code) and start sending them out as soon as possible.
It's wise to get the post office to redirect your mail.
Ask your post office for Form P944.
Once the removal date is confirmed, make advance arrangements for the disconnection of domestic appliances — and don't forget to make similar arrangements at your new address.
If fitted carpets are to be moved, they will need to be prepared in advance.
A carpet fitter with the right tools can lift floor coverings quickly and inexpensively.
With the contents of the average household valued at more than £15,000, it's vital to insure your prized possessions for the journey to their new home.
Nearer the day, start parking.
If you are planning to do this yourself, start at least a fortnight before moving day.
Label boxes with details of their contents and the room in which they are to be placed at the new address.
Draw a simple floor plan of your new home showing where the furniture is to go.
Give a copy to your removal firm together with a description or map of your home's exact location.
Priority
Now's also the time to warn your remover about any parking restrictions at either end of the journey — he may need to liaise with the police.
If you're moving in or out of a multi-storey block, try to arrange priority at lifts and make sure there's a suitable place to load or unload the van.
Fix a day to do your last-minute washing and ironing before the machine is is unplumbed.
Don't forget to collect items from the laundry or dry cleaner's.
Ask the person from whom you are buying your new house to list the smaller fixtures and fittings that are to be left, such as curtain rails (major fixtures and fittings will be covered in the legal contract).
However, whatever arrangements have been made in advance, people often find their homes bereft of hooks, light bulbs and toilet rolls.
Therefore, it's a good idea to put together a box of essentials such as light bulbs, candles, matches, scissors, toilet rolls, cash and a note of important telephone numbers.
Take this with you in the car on the day and you shouldn't come unstuck.
It's well worth preparing a meal and a few snacks for the day of the move.
Try something easy to transport in a container, such as meatloaf with french bread and butter or egg and bacon flan with a tub of potato salad.
Tinned soups are always warm and welcoming too.
Explosive
When the big day finally arrives, remember there are some tasks which are your responsibility.
For instance, it's up to you to dismantle self assembly furniture and take down curtains, fixtures and fittings.
You will need to pack foodstuffs and keep them to one side.
It's also your responsibility to strip beds and arrange for the disposal of inflammable or explosive materials.
Your removal men will dismantle bedsteads and take down pictures and wall decorations.
They will also take up and re-lay loose floor coverings and pack and unpack fragile items such as glass and china.
Make sure items you want to take with you personally are clearly marked ‘Do Not Remove’ and put to one side.
It's also a good idea to pack a ‘load last/ unload first’ box containing items you will need immediately on arrival — such as the kettle and teapot!
If you're moving in the winter you will need to protect your houseplants from the cold.
It's better to take them with you in the car rather than consign them to the chilly furniture van.
Wrap your plants in newspaper to protect them from draughts and to stop leaves bruising.
On arrival at your new home, stand them in a warm place and do not unwrap them until all the doors are shut once and for all.
In the summer months don't shut your plants in a hot car or leave them in the sun while they are waiting to be loaded.
Place them in similar positions in your new home so that the growing conditions remain as consistent as possible.
Traumatic
Moving day can be particularly traumatic for your children.
It's usually a good idea to arrange for grandparents or a good friend to look after them until you're fairly organised in your new home.
Moving trauma can be lessened for pets if you keep them away from the hustle and bustle.
Put your cat somewhere it feels safe, away from the removals scene, or arrange for a neighbour, friend or relative to look after it.
Pets are not allowed to travel in the removal van so make sure you have proper provision for them in your own vehicle.
Finally, if you will be arriving ahead of the removal lorry, use the opportunity to give your new home a thorough clean.
It's worth taking your vacuum cleaner, dusters, disinfectant, dishcloths and drawer-liners with you in the car.
A plan of action will save time and trouble and make the whole event a less wearing experience.
Committee to have local representative
NORTHERN Ireland will be represented on a committee set up to look at the handling of complaints from National Health Service patients and their families.
The Review Committee was established in June 1993, by the Department of Health, as part of the government's drive to improve public services and ensure there are clear procedures for making complaints.
Northern Ireland's representative is Pat Killen, managing director of Tyrone Crystal and chairman of the Northern Ireland Citizens' Charter Advisory Panel.
The committee met for the first time on August 12, to define its aims and draw up a policy programme for the future.
The committee is now inviting written evidence by the end of September from interested organisations and individuals.
The evidence will be used to help form recommendations to Virginia Bottomley, Secretary of State for Health.
Mrs Bottomley has asked the committee to make recommendations to her by the beginning of 1994.
Time for a change of scene?
Guarding against unemployment
A FEW years ago, unemployment and sickness insurance for a mortgage was regarded in the same light as private health insurance is now: fine if you could afford it, but not essential.
But the long recession, together with high unemployment figures and a stagnant housing market, has changed homeowners' perceptions.
According to a recent survey, one in four new borrowers takes out unemployment insurance, double the number of three years ago.
Even now, with the numbers of unemployed having fallen by 2. per cent in the first six months of 1993, and signs of recovery in the housing market, it remains as much in demand.
With the fear of unemployment at the forefront of many people's minds, insurance that safeguards a mortgage and other related payments gives security and peace of mind.
Worry
While most people worry about paying the mortgage in the event of unemployment, a serious accident or illness prevents more than 2. million people working at any one time, contributing to around million days of work lost per year.
Of course, employers' sick pay does not go on indefinitely.
Self-employed people are only entitled to State Sick Benefit, which pays just £42. per week for up to weeks.
There is a wide range of accident, sickness and unemployment packages available from lenders, covering both secured and unsecured loans.
The most common policy offers combined accident, sickness and unemployment cover for periods ranging between months and three years.
The maximum claim period for both unemployment and accident and sickness is generally months.
Heartless thieves take wedding rings
A BRIDE-TO-BE had two wedding rings and cash stolen from her Sandy Row home last Saturday — just a day after she had bought the rings.
And this week, the woman, who did not wish to be named, appealed to the burglars to return the two gold wedding bands stolen from her Matilda Street home.
Five hundred and thirty pounds in cash and a gold buckle ring of sentimental value were also taken by the heartless thieves, but it is the wedding rings that are most important to the woman and her fiance.
‘We know we have no chance of getting the money back, but we would love the rings back,’ she said.
‘We could replace the rings, but it's just not the same.’
The couple are due to wed in Great Victoria Street Presbyterian Church on Saturday, October 16, and have vowed to go ahead with the ceremony.
‘We are carrying on with the wedding as planned.’
The woman, who is originally from Scotland, has lived in the province for years and at her current address for a year.
‘I have lived here for years, and I have never had anything like this happen in my home,’ she said.
Donegall Pass CID are investigating the incident but so far no witnesses have come forward.
‘This is a quiet cul-de-sac and I'm surprised that no-one saw anything,’ the woman added.
Anyone with information about the incident can contact Donegall Pass RUC on Belfast 650222.
Centre lives in ‘fear’ of vandals Report by Michael Walsh
TEENAGE vandals are targeting one of the few leisure facilities in north Belfast.
Ballysillan Leisure Centre has had to spend over £2, out of a budget already pared to the bone repairing windows smashed in a spate of weekend attacks over the past month.
And centre staff say the local community is being forced to suffer because of the actions of a few ‘hoodlums’.
The attacks started after building work began on the biggest improvement scheme carried out at the centre since it first opened in 1982.
Over £65, is being spent on a new reception area and function room, designed to accommodate a creche, a senior citizens' club and arts and crafts activities.
The building programme, however, has necessitated moving the security presence from the front of the building to the back, from where it is harder to spot the vandals.
‘Vandalism used to be a rare occurrence but now it's every weekend,’ Ballysillan manager Bob Given explained.
Fear
‘Ever since work started on the re-design of the front area we have been living in fear that we will come back on Monday morning and they will have put bricks through the windows again.’
Mr Given said the facility was widely used throughout the local community.
‘Last month we had 16, customers, and from April this year we have had over 75, through our doors,’ he pointed out.
‘We have a deliberate policy to involve people of all ages and this is shown in the new function room which will benefit everyone from the youngest to the oldest members of the community.’
But Mr Given said staff could no longer ensure users received the best service possible.
‘Like everywhere else we have tightened our belt so much that every pound has to be accounted for,’ he explained.
‘If we have to spend money replacing windows we cannot spend as much on new equipment.
In effect this means that local people are financing these vandals.
‘What we are saying to those responsible is, ‘stop’.
All you are doing is hurting your own community.’
Popular aviator dies in crash
THE funeral was taking place today of Comber businessman Ken McWhinney who died in a tragic flying accident at an air rally in the Republic on Sunday.
The 55-year-old family man who ran a butcher's shop in Bridge Street, died in the Pulsar plane he had built.
Horrified spectators watched as the single-engined craft plunged to the ground at the annual rally of the Spanish Point Flying Club in Co Clare.
A doctor at the scene was unable to save Mr McWhinney who had been flying alone.
There were no other injuries.
The Comber butcher was a popular member of the Ulster flying fraternity and regularly used facilities at the Ulster Flying Club in Newtownards.
Gardai investigating the crash took statements from spectators at the gala.
Mr McWhinney is survived by his wife Shirley, sons David and Barrie and daughter Donna.
Attempted murder: information sought
POLICE investigating an attempted murder bid on a leading Shankill Road loyalist have appealed for information from anyone who witnessed the attack.
The man, in his early 30s, was wounded in the stomach after two gunmen opened fire as he stood outside his Hazelfield Street home yesterday afternoon.
The victim, who lost a leg in an IRA car bomb attack two years ago, was able to get inside the house and shut the front door.
The gang continued to fire through the terrace's windows.
He was later brought to the Mater Hospital and underwent emergency surgery.
His condition was yesterday described as ‘stable’.
In a statement to a local radio station the INLA said its members carried out the attack.
The car used in the murder bid — a blue Vauxhall Belmont, registration EBZ
— was later found burnt out at Etna Drive in the nearby Ardoyne area.
Police at Tennent Street are appealing for help from anyone who may have seen the car, which had been hijacked in west Belfast, between 11.30am and 4.15pm yesterday.
Some silver celebrations
QUEEN'S ladies' boat club will be celebrating its 25th anniversary from the start of the new season.
To launch proceedings a party for new members is being held in the boathouse at Lockview Road on October 6, and most present members and coaches will be present.
accused of grudge case: Robinson
A CASTLEREAGH councillor believes the Fair Employment Commission pursued a case against the council because it had disputed figures.
Ratepayers face a £40, bill for the case brought against the council — and which it won.
East Belfast MP Peter Robinson revealed the costs at last Thursday night's monthly meeting, costs amounting to £41,
— two thirds of a penny on the rate.
A former employee brought the case against the council on grounds of both sex and religion.
But Mr Robinson claimed the ratepayers had the to blame for the additional financial burden.
He said the decided to pursue the case, even though the individual involved conceded, in the early stages, that the person who got the job was better qualified.
‘The decided to fight her case for her so she could make a good job of it,’ Mr Robinson claimed.
‘There is no doubt in my mind the took that decision because Castlereagh Borough Council took it to task over its figures,’ he said.
An report on the religious breakdown of the council, due out three years ago, has still not been published.
The MP also accused the of ‘forcing the council into the ring’.
‘It got legal counsel, so we were forced to get legal representation on our side,’ Mr Robinson pointed out.
Town clerk Jim White said the council would be seeking further legal advice.
UVF admit trying to kill Protestant
AN east Belfast man injured in a gun attack at his Palmerston Park home on Monday night remains ‘seriously ill but stable’.
Police have ruled out any sectarian or political motive behind the murder bid.
The UVF admitted trying to kill the 43-year-old Protestant man.
A lone masked gunman called to the house around 9.40pm on Monday and shot the man twice in the chest.
He was rushed to the Royal Victoria Hospital where emergency surgery was carried out.
Police have issued a description of the gunman, who is said to be aged between 29–30, around six feet tall, of slim build with a thin face, dark eyebrows, narrow eyes and a long narrow nose.
He is also thought to have a short pony-tail and was wearing a black leather jacket and dark denim trousers.
Anyone with information should contact the RUC at Belfast 650222.
Local estate strategy to be revealed
TULLYCARNET residents are invited to an information evening at the local primary school on Tuesday (September 14) between 6–9pm.
The evening is based on the findings of an estate strategy, which was carried out to find ways of encouraging community development in Tullycarnet.
Representatives from statutory bodies will be present to answer residents' queries on issues such as housing and community services.
There will also be stalls manned by staff from the Housing Executive, Castlereagh Borough Council, Citizens' Advice Bureau, DHSS and the Outer Belfast Action Team.
10.
LOCAL MP UNMASKS THREAT TO RIR
Report by Helen Carson
INCREASING terrorist sophistication could threaten the viability of the Royal Irish Regiment's part-time section, a former Northern Ireland Minister has claimed.
And fewer people in Northern Ireland want to join the RIR as part-timers because of the increasing terrorist threat.
Minister of State for the Armed Forces Jeremy Hanley said drops in the RIR's part-time membership were ‘unavoidable’.
He made the claim in a letter to East Belfast MP Peter Robinson, passed on to the Herald and Post this week.
The local MP had initially written to Mr Hanley demanding to know why there was a continuing reduction in the numbers of part-time soldiers.
Since July 1991, statistics show there has been around a per cent drop in part-timers.
However, a spokeswoman for the RIR said these figures included some who had transferred to full-time duties.
But the province's former Education Minister said the increased sophistication of the terrorist threat required a higher level of expertise on the part of the army.
Commitment
The result, he said, was the need for ‘increased training commitment’ from part-timers and more full-timers who, he said, could achieve a ‘higher level of professionalism’.
Mr Hanley also partly blamed a lack of support among the employers of part-timers for the drop in their numbers.
Mr Robinson initially approached the minister to discuss the closure of a local Royal Irish Regiment base and the movement of its members to Palace Barracks in Holywood.
But the minister pointed out: ‘The basic fact would seem to be that, the longer the campaign has gone on, fewer people have been prepared to take on the commitments and risks of being part-time soldiers.’
Mr Hanley added that as part-time soldiers were also members of the local community with civilian jobs, their daily movements were predictable, making them vulnerable to terrorist attack.
‘They are very difficult to protect and are at high risk of terrorist attack when off-duty,’ added the minister.
Of a total of
UDR/RIR soldiers who have been murdered, were part-timers, and of those were off-duty.
Deterrent
‘I suspect these high risks are a significant deterrent to new recruits,’ said Mr Hanley.
He also dismissed Mr Robinson's claim that excessive delay in the security screenings of recruits was a major factor in the decline of the part-time force.
The minister said that employers were also to blame for the fall-off in recruits, describing them as ‘much less supportive’ of part-time soldiers than they were in the past.
And although Mr Hanley admitted part-time patrols had prevented two recent bomb attacks in the city, he added the continuing reduction in strength was ‘unavoidable’.
In the last year, since the RIR was formed, recruits have joined part-time.
And there are currently
Home Service part-time applications in the process system.
In July 1991, there were 3, part-time members; the following year 2, and this year 2,638.
The minister also claimed that, following a recent high profile advertising campaign, enquiries to join the regiment stood at a month.
Mr Robinson, however, refuted Mr Hanley's claims as ‘red herrings’.
‘The real motive is Dublin pressure through the Anglo-Irish Agreement to wipe out the UDR and now its successor, the RIR.’