

High-tech help for deaf people
ACTIONS will be speaking louder than words at a high-tech exhibition for the deaf and hard of hearing in Belfast.
The Royal National Institute for Deaf People Roadshow will feature the revolutionary ‘Typetalk’ communications system, which allows deaf and hard of hearing people to use the telephone for the first time.
There will also be a display of the latest technological breakthroughs, including a video caption decoder, fire alarms and a vibrating alarm clock.
Doug Alker, RNID's director of quality and research, who will be speaking at the event, said its aim was to give the deaf and hard of hearing better access to banks, shops, offices and local councils.
‘We've made a positive start, but there is a long way to go.
There is still a great deal that can be done by organisations and companies in Belfast,’ he said.
The meeting will be held at 7.30pm this Friday, at the Ulster Institute for Deaf People, College Square North, Belfast.
Motoring well on a pushbike green machine
WHEN Jonathan Bamford takes his bike out for a run, he's glad it's fitted with a windscreen wiper motor.
For, after switching on power, it carries him along at a leisurely 10mph.
And with no need to pedal.
Jonathan designed the power-assisted pushbike over the last year as a pupil at Ballyclare High School.
And, apart from the project gaining him top grade in his A-levels, it also won two national science awards.
Pollution
‘It's aimed at providing the type of transport which is environmentally friendly and will cut out the hustle and bustle of inner city traffic jams,’ he said.
‘I wanted to create something a commuter could go to work on, while cutting down on pollution.’
The cycle was bought secondhand for £20, and cleaned up with six coats of paint.
A Ballymena firm donated a car battery, while the wiper motor which drives the strange vehicle came from a Glengormley car dismantlers.
A drive wheel was attached above the cycle's rear wheel and, after a day's use, the battery is repowered overnight, using a standard home charger.
running costs
Electric running costs amount to about the price of a bus ticket.
‘It can be ridden like a normal bicycle,’ said Jonathan.
‘But, when it's switched on, the motor will go at a good jogging speed, though you need to pedal a bit to get the pace up.
It carries on by itself after that and is good on hills.’
The two-wheeler, restored beyond its original call of duty, took two major awards this year.
It won the environmental prize in the Young Engineers for Britain contest, as well as the Crest Gold award from the British Association for the Advancement of Science.
Top grade
But the biggest prize was top grade in Jonathan's A-levels.
Jonathan won't use too much power up for his next venture — a four-year course in engineering at the University of Ulster.
‘I live about five minutes from the Jordanstown campus and will be cycling there, of course,’ he said.
BRING your old plastic bags to the supermarket — cut down on packaging!
Use your milkman instead of buying cartons of milk.
The bottles used for milk are recycled, the milk-van is powered by electric and the delivery person is kept in employment.
Use local bottle-banks, aluminium can re-cycling schemes and paper re-cycling depots — local addresses for re-cycling etc., from No 2,000, Armagh House, Belfast or telephone (0232) 238532.
Excess vegetable matter can be usefully kept in a separate waste-bin to form a compost which will keep garden and flowers in a good healthy condition — help and information on making your own compost from Friends of the Earth, Bradbury Buildings, Bradbury Place, Belfast 7 or telephone (0232) 311555.
Volunteering is an easy way to get involved in practical conservation — for information telephone (0232) 645169 during the week or at weekends.
Walk or cycle instead of driving, when possible.
Buy products that are ‘green’ and have packaging that is re-cyclable — read food labels.
Visit your library for information on ‘green’ foodstuffs and household products.
BELFAST
Jet set turn to pedal power
A TEN-STRONG squad of Belfast firemen are pumping pedals today to raise £20,000 for vital breast cancer equipment.
The crew from Bankmore Street station set off in fighting form this morning on a 200-mile sponsored cycle ride to Dublin, returning tomorrow.
The new equipment will be used along with the province's only magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) unit used in diagnosis at the Royal Victoria Hospital.
The team, led by sub-officer Harry Dawson, aim to ride in 25 mile stages and reach Dublin within eight hours.
Legend of motor world
THE Ulster-made De Lorean is one of the legends of the motor industry.
With its stainless steel body and gull-winged doors, it is one of the most instantly recognisable cars ever built.
It achieved cult status throughout the world when Steven Spielberg used one of the cars as the time machine in his ‘Back to the Future’ film trilogy.
The car has also become a huge hit with millions of visitors to the world-famous Universal Studios in Florida, where it now features as a popular ride based on the Spielberg films.
It also featured in a number of high-profile advertising campaigns and American Express even had two 24-carat-gold-plated De Loreans specially made to launch its Gold Card — one of them is now kept in a glass case in a Texas bank.
Only 9,000 were produced in the short history of the Dunmurry factory and there are only 15 on the roads of Northern Ireland — worth £13,000–£20,000 each.
Demand is high and dealers in the United States regularly receive inquiries from interested buyers all over the world.
Most of the cars are based in the US, where there is a thriving fan club, and others can also be found in Australia and throughout Europe.
Off duty: John De Lorean at home (Picture courtesy of De Lorean World magazine).
Export cargo: The first consignment of De Loreans awaits shipment at Belfast docks in 1981.
‘Bionauts’ to leave their test tube home
EIGHT ‘bionauts’ who have spent two years living in the world's largest test tube will emerge from their ‘Biosphere 2’on September 26, exactly two years after entering it, a spokesman said today
Biosphere 2, a huge glass and steel structure set in the Arizona desert outside Tucson, consists of a series of seven domes and spires, some five storeys tall.
It is intended as a model for a possible future colony on Mars or the Moon.
It is also an ambitious experiment to discover if humans, by living in a ‘mini-Earth’ under strictly controlled conditions, can discover ways in which mankind can live in harmony with the ecology of the real Earth, which is described the project as ‘Biosphere 1.’
Crew co-captain Mark Van Thillo, from Antwerp, Belgium, said the experiment was an outstanding success.
‘No one knew how a closed system of this size would behave.
We had to close the door to find out and the results have been phenomenal.
We've had no major breakdowns and relatively few problems, considering the tremendous complexity the undertaking,’ he said.
Space Biospheres Ventures, the private firm that built and runs Biosphere 2, said the bionauts set a new world record for living in a closed system.
During the 24-month experiment the crew produced 80% of its own food, the other 20% coming from seed stock and crops grown and stored in the biosphere before its closure.
Astras recalled
VAUXHALL is recalling more than 7,000 Astra turbo diesel cars because of a possible electrical fault.
There have been 47 cases of the cable chafing on the power steering pump pulley on the right-hand drive vehicles manufactured from May 1992 up to chassis number p818990, but no reported accidents, the company said.
Ready to explode
EXPERTS are preparing for an event billed as the biggest controlled explosion in Europe since the Second World War — the demolition today of two multi-storey blocks of flats in Glasgow's Gorbals.
About 750 kilogrammes of explosives have been packed into position in the flats at Queen Elizabeth Square, once home to 400 families.
Prevent blood problems
THE National Kidney Research Fund and the Kidney Foundation, sister medical charities, have published a very informative booklet on high blood pressure.
This explains hypertension, its treatment, what can now be done to prevent the problems it causes, and what sufferers can do to help themselves.
The booklet has ben produced as part of the NKRF/Kidney Foundation Gift of Life initiative, a campaign to prevent kidney disease, and to encourage more people to carry organ donor cards.
Kidney problems can cause hypertension, and conversely, hypertension can damage kidneys.
The booklet can be obtained from the address below by sending a 9 x 6 SAE and a minimum donation of £1.
Cheques should be made payable to NKRF/ Kidney Foundation.
Leslie Rout Director General NKRF/Kidney Foundation Hypertension Booklet 3 Archers Court
Huntingdon Cambs PE18 6XG
They help to conquer disease
ANIMAL TESTS ARE ESSENTIAL
THOSE involved in animal research care just as much about animals as anyone else.
For this reason, and because there are very strict controls, animals are only used in research when absolutely necessary.
Your reader Kevin Daws, BUAV (Letters 29 August) seems to think that because there are some rare infringements of the Act, then we should abolish animal research altogether.
The so-called investigations of laboratories carried out by BUAV always make exaggerated claims.
On serious analysis, very few of these claims are upheld.
A rational and constructive debate on animal research will only be possible if animal rights groups such as BUAV stop using misleading propaganda.
They could start by recognising, as 95 percent of doctors do, the crucial role of animals in medical research.
If they read a few textbooks they would find out that more major medical advances have depended on animal studies.
Vaccines, antibiotics, insulin for diabetes and kidney transplants are just a few examples.
We still face many unsolved medical problems such as cancer, AIDS, Alzheimer's disease, multiple sclerosis and cystic fibrosis.
For the sake of patients, medical research must use all appropriate methods, including a small proportion of animal experiments, in the struggle to conquer these diseases.
I would like to emphasise the point I made in my previous letter, that a recent BMA survey showed that 85 percent of doctors believe a ban on animal research would damage medical progress.
Yours sincerely,
Barbara Davies, Public Relations Manger, R.D.S., 58 Great Marlborough Street, London W1V 1DD.
Best foot forward
I AM writing on behalf of the British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection (BUAV) to ask your readers to support the Walk For Laboratory Animals which is happening on
Sunday 26th September at 31 venues around Britain.
Or if there's not a walk nearby, you can organise your own!
The sponsored walk combines a fun day out for all of the family (especially the four-legged members!) with the important business of raising funds to help the millions of animals who suffer each year in laboratory tests.
Contact the BUAV today for your free Walk Pack which includes details of your nearest walk, the special design walk t-shirt and of course a sponsor form.
Happy Walking, Joanne Smith Fund raiser, BUAV, 16a Crane Grove, London, M7.
Tel: 071 700 4888.
Secrets of Chinese medicine men
Herbal remedies hospital is set up in Ulster
LEFT: Mr Sherwani's Natural Chinese Medical centre at Ballyward opens tomorrow week.
ABOVE: The medical centre is set in an idyllic location overlooking the Mournes.
IRELAND'S first Chinese Hospital will open its doors tomorrow week — in the rolling foothills of the Mourne Mountains.
An eminent Bejing doctor with clinics in London, Poland and Mongolia will introduce the ancient secrets of Chinese herbal medicine to the Ulster public at a converted farmhouse near Katesbridge.
The 22-bedroomed clinic will be the only one of its kind on the island, and the only centre outside of London where such treatment is available.
The Natural Chinese Medical Centre at Ballyward is the brainchild of Indian entrepreneur and property developer Nari Sherwani, who has lived in Northern Ireland for the past 10 years.
Mystery
Chinese herbal medicine — for 4,000 years a mystery to the west — has become phenomenally popular in the USA and is now beginning to establish a foothold in Europe.
Within the past two years four Chinese medical practitioners have opened clinics in London, all based in the Chinatown area around Soho.
‘There has been a tremendous surge of interest in Chinese medicine and acupuncture in western Europe over the past five years,’ he said.
‘The four Chinese medical centres in London are treating patients referred by local GPs on the national health service.’
A recent BBC documentary on the subject showed the dramatic results achieved by Chinese herbal remedies on troublesome skin conditions such as eczema psoriasis and herpes.
Eczema
He got the idea after a Korean friend flew his baby from Lisburn to London for treatment at a Chinese clinic for chronic eczema.
Within a few months, the child had made a full recovery and the condition has not returned.
‘I realised then there was nowhere in Ireland offering this sort of treatment and decided to do something about it,’ said the businessman who commutes between Northern Ireland and Hong Kong.
‘I contacted a Chinese professor at Birmingham University who recommended Dr Hao Ri-Fang and I invited her to open a clinic here.’
Ingredients
A specialist herbalist from China will join Dr Hao at the Ballyward centre to mix the ingredients for her treatments.
‘I have got them four-year work permits and visas because this is a long-term venture which I hope to expand,’ Mr Sherwani said.
Local GPs, he said, had been ‘very supportive’ and had already met Dr Hao on her recent visit to the area.
‘Dr Hao is a fully qualified doctor in the western sense, but has been practising Chinese medicine around the world for the past 20 years,’ he explained.
The clinic is situated between Katesbridge and Castlewellan, at a former farmhouse on the Closkelt Road, in an idyllic location overlooking the Mournes.
A complex of outhouses and stables has been converted into a series of self-contained flats, with a total of 21 bedrooms, four halls, 12 bathrooms and six kitchens.
At least five local people will be employed at the clinic, and the Chinese herbalist will train one person to grow, process and mix the compounds used in treatment.
‘I realise I'm taking a chance, but I believe the people of Northern Ireland are now ready for this,’ said Mr Sherwani.