

Tony does trick
TONY Cottee's 32nd minute strike helped Everton end a run of three defeats to leave out-of-touch Oldham still seeking their first home win of the season.
The Oldham defence was caught napping when Paul Rideout's cross was flicked on by John Ebbrell and the unmarked Cottee lost no time blazing a first time shot past Paul Gerrard from six yards.
Oldham battled hard but were left cursing missed chances from Andy Ritchie, Neil McDonald, Richard Jobson, Craig Fleming and Nick Henry.
They also had former Everton player McDonald to thank in the 28th minute when he booted a Matthew Jackson header off the line.
It wasn't until three minutes into the second half that Mark Brennan forced Everton keeper Neville Southall into his first serious save of the game.
Everton always looked the more competent side and were unlucky not to increase their lead in the 50th minute.
A powerful 25 yard free kick from Peter Beagrie hit the underside of the bar before Oldham gratefully scrambled the ball to safety.
England under 21 keeper Gerrard saved from Cottee and Beagrie as the home side struggled and even the introduction of second half substitutes former Evertonians Neil Adams and Graeme Sharp failed to unsettle the visitors confident stride.
Result — Oldham 0 Everton 1.
Linfield 0 Cliftonville 1
TREVOR Anderson picked a good day to be in Copenhagen.
When the Linfield manager gets a telephone call from Windsor Park tonight it will provide details of the Blues' first domestic defeat in the season — and their worst performance to date.
The cat may have been away but the mice certainly did not play in this TNT Gold Cup game at sunny Windsor.
A goal from Cliftonville striker Ron Manley in the first half was enough to settle this most disappointing affair; the only consolation for Linfield is that they're already through to the quarter-finals.
Cliftonville, with a defence well marshalled by Marty Tabb, a strong running mid-field and dangerous strikers just about deserved to win this one and top the group.
The lethargic Blues, however, deserved what they got today — nothing!
Both sides struggled to find their rhythm during that opening 45 minutes, perhaps a legacy of the fact that they were already through to the quarter-final stages.
the game didn't liven up until midway through the half when the Blues finally put Cliftonville's defence under a period of sustained pressure.
On 23 minutes Gary Peebles' cross from the right was dropped by goalkeeper Nicky Brujos; the ball dropped to Ritchie Johnston but his goalbound effort was cleared off the line by Kieran Loughran.
Seconds later Blues' midfielder Lee Doherty headed the ball just over the Reds' crossbar from Stephen Beatty's left wing cross.
And a couple of minutes later, after Garry Haylock released Alan Dornan down the right, the latter's cross was met by Johnston at the near post.
But the ball could only find the side netting.
At this stage Cliftonville had shown little menace in the last third of the pitch, but they rocked the Blues by taking the lead two minutes before half-time.
It followed a lovely move; Shaun Strang sent Loughran galloping down the right, his cross appeared to be handled by Blues' defender John McConnell but before anyone could make a protest about it Manley drove the ball into the corner of the net past Wesley Lamont.
Linfield nearly got on level terms before the half-time whistle but Dornan's diving header, from a Dessie Gorman cross, was well saved by Brujos.
Half-time — Linfield 0 Cliftonville 1 More pressure from Linfield at the start of the second half.
Haylock latched on to a glorious through-ball from Peebles and finished the move with a fierce 20 yard drive — but the ball passed the wrong side of the post.
Moments later the injured Doherty was replaced by Philip Knell, and the substitute almost made an instant, spectacular contribution.
A fabulous drive from Knell cannoned back off the Cliftonville upright from fully 25 yards — and the visitors breathed again.
The majority of Linfield's moves were easily broken down, with the Blues contributing to their own problems through sloppy passing and half-hearted tackles.
The Blues should have equalised midway through the second half when Gorman, bursting down the right, played a lovely ball into Haylock's path but the big striker, however, lost control with the goal at his mercy.
Dungannon 15 Instonians 16
DUNGANNON opened the scoring when Instonians were caught offside, following a short free and McGarry kicked a difficult penalty.
Andrew Gallagher started uncertainly and two poor passes under pressure to McGarry led to the Instonians try, the only one in a somewhat disappointing game.
Collegians, McCluskey was once again on hand to finish a blind side move and score in the corner.
Laing converted with a superb effort from the touch line but Dungannon narrowed the lead with another McGarry penalty.
Lang restored Instonians lead to four points before McGarry replied with a fine penalty on the stroke of half time.
When Tyrone Howe was unfairly tackled Dungannon took the lead with McGarry's fourth penalty.
After Peter Russell had slotted over a neat dropped goal on the Dungannon 22, McGarry, before going off with a nose injury swung the game again in Dungannon's favour with his final penalty of the match.
Dungannon three quarters were caught offside in front of the posts and Laing kicked the easiest of penalties to give Instonians a narrow but deserved victory.
Dungannon — S. McDowell, B. Smith, A. Redpath, M. Pinkerton, T. Howe, K. McGarry, A. Gallagher, D. Millar, H. McCaughey (Cpt), G. Leslie, P. Johns, J. Davidson, Johnny Hastings, Jeremy Hastings, J. Patterson.
Instonians — S. Laing, G. McCluskey, M. Wylie, S. Burrows, K. Crossan, P. Russell, N. Robson, B. Barrett, A. Adair, G. Bell (Cpt), C. Hamilton, J. McKibben, K. McKee, J. Kernaghan, D. Croft.
Referee — Mr. M. Orr (North).
Chelsea end Reds run of success
BRIDGE TOO FAR
CHELSEA brought Manchester United crashing to their first defeat in 16 league games with a 1–0 victory at Stamford Bridge today.
United had 11 players on World Cup duty in midweek and their travels looked to have knocked the stuffing out of them.
They were pale Reds who did not wake up until the second half.
By then it was too late because Chelsea had gained their confidence and emerged deserved winners.
The Londoners grabbed the lead in the 18th minute with the help of a rare mistake from goalkeeper Peter Schmeichel.
The Danish star failed to hang on to a shot from Steve Clarke and the ball ran away from him for Gavin Peacock to sweep it home and stun the United fans.
United supporters have been backing their team to stay unbeaten all season.
They have laid so many bets that the odds have tumbled from 2000 to one pre season to 12 to one.
But it hardly looked a bet as the Reds struggled in the first half in face of fluent football, much of which was inspired by Chelsea player manager Glenn Hoddle.
Eric Cantona went as close as anyone when he tried a 40 yard lob which sailed over the goalkeeper's head only to hit the bar and bounce into the grateful arms of Dmitri Kharine.
United certainly made a fight of it in the second half but their finishing was poor.
Cantona and Ryan Giggs both put the home defence under pressure but their shooting was wayward.
United's last defeat was way-back in March last season when they lost at Oldham.
It's been a good run and they are still top of the Premiership table but they hardly looked champions today.
Result: Chelsea 1, Manchester Utd 1.
East Antrim 0 Civil Service 0
THE playing conditions at third-choice venue Doagh Road were poor and this had an adverse effect on the standard of hockey in the first game of the Kirk Cup.
Civil Service had most of the play throughout but were unable to convert their territorial advantage and possession into goals.
Tom Anderson was always in evidence on the right but his good stick work came to nothing.
Credit must be given to the home keeper Alan Godden who had to pull off a few good saves.
It's six-hit Bangor Ballyclare Com 0, Bangor 6
BANGOR are back on song!
The expected backlash arrived this afternoon at Dixon Park when a brilliant display of attacking football against hapless Ballyclare Comrades produced six goals — four of them from David McCallan — enough to see them safely through to the last eight of the TNT Gold Cup.
Still stinging from last week's 6–1 crushing by Glenavon, seemed intent from the start on putting their recent loss of form behind them.
And they almost went in front on eight minutes, Michael Surgeon beating the Comrades' off-side trap only to see his well struck 20-yard drive brilliantly tipped over by 'keeper George Cathcart.
Comrades were unlucky not to score in the 11th minute, Colin Crawford picking out Eddie Patterson whose snap shot was turned for a corner by Mark Gillespie, in for the dropped Stephen Eachus.
Comrades' Stephen Fettis, returning after a one match suspension, was shown the yellow card for kicking the ball away after 13 minutes.
The visitors deservedly took the lead on 16 minutes when a fine move involving Gary McCartney and Mark Glendinning on the left ended with Jonathan Magee crashing the ball into the net.
Barely a minute later they were two up, this time David McCallam picking his spot in the bottom left-hand corner following a pin-point centre from Magee.
Crawford, who needed treatment twice in the early stages after picking up an injury was eventually replaced by Ronnie McCullough in the 26th minute.
Comrades struggled to get to grips with Bangor's cavalier attacking play but they had a chance to pull one back on 31 minutes, Paul McGurnaghan threading the ball through the defence only for Davy Armstrong to screw his shot past the post.
The seasiders increased their lead on 37 minutes when Glendinning again provided the cross from the left which was turned into the net by McCallan at the back post.
Half-time — B'clare 0, Bangor 3.
It didn't take long for Bangor to increase their lead at the start of the second half, McCartney rifling a shot home after 48 minutes following an excellent build up involving McCallan and Surgeon.
And less than 60 seconds later with the Ballyclare defence at sixes and sevens, McCallan got his hat-trick scoring from close range after Cathcart fumbled a McCartney cross.
Armstrong was denied a consolation goal for Comrades when Gillespie saved from him at point blank range in the 50th minute.
In the 85th minute however Bangor made it six.
Comrades however had the last say when Dean Gordon grabbed a consolation goal for them on the stroke of full time.
Man of the Match — David McCallan (Bangor)
Murdoch tames Rangers
AN inspired performance from Partick Thistle goal keeper Andy Murdoch earned his team a point at Ibrox today as Rangers turned in yet another sloppy performance.
A defensive mix-up presented Thistle with a glorious chance in seven minutes when Allie Maxwell was forced to sprint from his line to stop Gerry Britton in his tracks.
The ball broke to Albert Craig but his shot, from a tight angle, rebounded from the post.
Rangers responded with John Morrow and Trevor Steven linking up to set up a shooting chance for Gary Stevens but the fullback's 20 yard effort flew over the top.
Thistle stunned Ibrox a minute later when they snatched the lead.
David Byrne fired in a cross from the right and Grant shrugged off Richard Gough to shoot home from close range.
Rangers stepped up the pace towards half time with McPherson firing a shot just wide of goal and Duncan Ferguson sending an overhead kick past the post.
Seven minutes before the interval Duncan Ferguson smashed a header against the crossbar as the home side piled on the pressure, then it took a diving header from Grant Tierney to take a David Robertson cross off Mark Hateley's toe.
But Rangers finally drew level just on the half time whistle when Hateley side-footed a free kick from the edge of the box into the corner of the net.
In 51 minutes Ian Ferguson crashed in a fierce 20 yarder which flew wide and Rangers missed a great chance to go ahead when Murdoch saved a Hateley penalty kick, after the keeper had been penalised for bringing down the big attacker.
And Murdoch was again Thistle's hero when he blocked a close range shot from Trevor Steven.
Six minutes from the end Murdoch again came to the visitors' rescue when he dived to block a shot from Hateley.
Rangers 1 Partick Thistle 1
Glenn grabs four in Crues' Euro warm-up Coleraine 1 Crusaders 4
GLENN Hunter fired a warning to UEFA Cup opponents Servette of Geneva today, helping himself to four goals against Coleraine.
The 24-year-old turned on the style to stretch the Crues' unbeaten run and book a Gold Cup quarter-final spot.
Seaview boss Roy Walker, toying with the idea of including the suspended Kirk Hunter against the Swiss at Seaview on Tuesday — Kirk's ban does not include European games — was delighted with this result and namesake Glenn Hunter's performance.
At the end a section of the Coleraine fans called for the resignation of manager Billy Sinclair.
Coleraine started brightly with Cook and Brian Donaghy both going close in the opening three minutes, but the Crues settled quickly and were presented with a golden opportunity to go ahead in the 12th minute.
Defender Dermot McCaul sent Syd Burrows sprawling inside the box, and Burrows took the resulting penalty kick…but keeper David O'Hare anticipated well and dived to get a hand to steer the ball away.
The visitors didn't have long to wait for the opening goal.
It arrived five minutes later when Glenn Hunter superbly headed in a Burrows' corner.
Coleraine, out of touch in midfield, stepped up a gear and created several good chances.
Crues keeper Kevin McKeown denied Gary McVie and then Davy Nicholls shot over.
Half time — Coleraine 0 Crusaders 1.
Coleraine hit back early in the second half with a splendid strike from Cook.
Nicholls put him in after 51 minutes and he brilliantly chested the ball down before sweeping a shot past McKeown.
The red-haired striker then saw the keeper make two good saves from him soon after as Coleraine threatened.
However, Crues went back in front thanks to that Burrows/Hunter combination.
In 63 minutes Burrows floated over a free and Hunter was there to nod the ball home at the near post.
Hunter completed his hat-trick in 74 minutes when O'Hare failed to hold a Burrows cross and the ball fell invitingly for him.
Hunter got his fourth six minutes from the end when he intercepted a stray pass from Coleraine midfielder Allan Morrison and steered the ball past O'Hare.
Result — Coleraine 1 Crusaders 4.
COLERAINE — O'Hare, Nutt, Mclaughlin, Cummings, McLean, Morrison, Donaghy, Cook, McVie, Nicholls, McCaul.
Subs: Gaston, Philson.
CRUSADERS — McKeown, Kenny, Cash, Lawlor, Duffy, Murray, Livingstone, Carroll, Collins, Hunter, Burrows.
Subs: Walker, Lynch.
Referee — S Jardine (Omagh).
Inst goal bonanza
Instonians 9 Down 0
IRISH International midfielder, Neil Cooke, grabbed a hat-trick at Olympia this afternoon as Instonians opened their Kirk Cup account with a 9–0 demolition job on Section Two side, Downpatrick.
In fact, the Old Boys should have won by an even bigger margin as they missed almost as many chances as they converted.
To be fair, Down were fielding a scratch squad and goalkeeper Ashley Gibson was blameless as he denied Instonians at least half a dozen more goals with an outstanding display.
Neil Cooke started the rout in the 15th minute with a penalty corner conversion and, five minutes later, John Atkins capitalised on a Mark McCullough pass to increase his team's advantage.
Veteran defender Alistair Fitzsimmons foiled two goalbound efforts but in the 28th minute conceded a penalty stroke which Cooke converted and then Davy Wilson made it 4–0 on the stroke of half-time.
Seven minutes into the second period Gavin Currie got his name on the score sheet with Atkins the provider and in the 47th minute Mervyn Cooke scored from the edge of the circle.
Four minutes later Mervyn grabbed his second when he met a cross from his brother, Neil, at the far post.
Mark Irwin converted a McCullough cross for goal No 8 on the hour and, within 60 seconds, Neil Cooke, with a penalty corner conversion, completed the scoring and his hat-trick.
INSTONIANS — Hogg, Rutherford, Taylor, N Cooke, Hollway, Atkins, McCullough, Currie, M Cooke, Wilson, McBride.
Subs — Irwin, Guiler.
DOWN — Gibson, Crompton, Straney, Fitzsimmons, Lennon, Love, Walker, Murray, Burgon, Jackson, Neill.
Sub — Patterson.
Umpires — B Moore, M Jackson.
Newry 1 RUC 0
BOTH Newry and RUC produced several new faces from the wardrobes in the opening match of the Kirk Cup at Newry this afternoon — all for various reasons.
Newry were without the services of Erroll Lutton as he sweats out a three match suspension, but the return of Stephen Garvey and the addition of Ritchie Nummy to Newry's back line-up certainly seemed to work well.
RUC have to thank their custodian Kenny Cairns for keeping the scoreline to just a single goal.
In the opening minute of the second half a good pass from Johnny Gregg to Ritchie Moffett inside the visiting circle opened the score for Newry.
Moffett continued to haunt the RUC defence in the goal-searching exercise for the remainder of play, but was denied several chances by keeper Cairns.
RUC were reduced to 10 men after Murray was sent to the sideline for persistent defending.
Newry could not capitalise any further on this advantage.
NEWRY: Blythe, McGuffin, Garvey, R Nummy, W Nummy, McMinn, Moffett, Evans, McVicker, Morrow, Steen, Gregg, Eames.
RUC: Cairns, Cox, Campos, Mulholland, Brown, Strange, Nye, Murray, McCandless, McMullan, Thompson.
Umpires: K Glass, R Davey.
Coleraine 1 Banbridge 0
COLERAINE opened their league campaign with a one-nil victory over Banbridge at Lodge Road.
Coleraine took the lead as centre forward Shauna Seawright ran through the middle to slip the ball left to Liz White who rounded the keeper and calmly slotted home.
With ten minutes remaining Lynda Brown brought off a fine save from Coleraine keeper Wendy Campbell.
Grosvenor 0 Mid Antrim 0
GROSVENOR had to settle for a point from a Section II encounter with Mid Antrim despite dominating for most of the 70 minutes.
Grosvenor went on to win the short corner count 12–2.
Wright turns on the style
IAN Wright, the Arsenal striker, who is a scoring flop for England, was bang on target again for the Gunners against Ipswich at Highbury this afternoon.
His dazzling skills lifted them to a four-goal victory as he scored one and set up two of his striking partner Kevin Campbell's three goals.
After an opening 25 minutes of tedious football, Wright got to work with a magnificent solo display.
Twice he set up striking partner Kevin Campbell for chances that were well saved by Ipswich's Canadian goalkeeper Craig Forrest.
Then, exactly on the half hour, Wright pounced on Campbell's glancing header and swerved past the challenge of full-back Mick Stockwell before slipping an inch-perfect shot into the far corner of the net.
Eight minutes later, Wright, who has managed just one goal in the 15 international appearances but an astonishing 58 in 87 Arsenal games, was on the rampage again.
This time he left both Stockwell and Phil Whelan gasping in his wake before executing a marvellous chip-shot which came back off the underside of the Ipswich crossbar.
Campbell was on the spot to gratefully ram home the rebound.
Arsenal could also have had a penalty when Campbell went crashing down as Forrest challenged him in the box for a Wright through-pass, but the referee dismissed their claims.
Ipswich were neat and tidy but did not trouble Arsenal's goalkeeper David Seaman until the closing seconds of the half when Steve Palmer's shot from 20 yards following a corner flashed just wide.
Half-time: Arsenal 2, Ipswich 0.
Wright continued to dazzle Ipswich in the second half but it was Campbell who completed a brilliant hat-trick.
His 51st minute header was brilliantly saved by Forrest and Paul Merson had a shot cleared off the line by Phil Whelan before Campbell made it 3–0 with a powerful header from Nigel Winterburn's cross.
Ipswich wasted a chance to reply on the hour when John Wark shot wide with only keeper Seaman to beat and four minutes later Wright slipped Campbell through to complete his hat-trick with a firm shot which left Forrest completely helpless.
Result: Arsenal 4, Ipswich 0.
Ballymena Utd Res 2 Newry Town Res 1
UNITED opened the scoring after only seven minutes when Robert Ritchie shot home at the back post after good work by new boy Keith Shields.
The home side increased their lead when teenager Eamonn McLaughlin fired an unstoppable shot from 25 yards into the visitors' net.
Moments after the restart Newry's Duggan took advantage of a mistake by Rea to head past the stranded Huxley and reduce the deficit.
Tobermore United 1 RUC 1
THE RUC were given a let-off in the eighth minute when the home side were awarded a penalty, but player manager Jim Scott's kick was saved by keeper Matthews.
At the other end the police, who had the wind at their backs, went close in the 14th minute when Young received from Coyle, but his kick went just wide.
A minute later a low shot from RUC top scorer Love was saved by the keeper White at the expense of a corner.
Half-time: Scoreless.
In the 66th minute Coyle connected with a corner kick and headed past two home defenders into the Tobermore net.
Tobermore came back 11 minutes later to level the score with a brilliant kick by Mark Patterson from the edge of the box to the right corner of the net.
Two minutes from time the Police were robbed of victory when another Coyle header hit the Tobermore upright and was cleared.
TOBERMORE UNITED: 1, White, Livingstone, Moore, Robinson, McLeister, Scott, McKeane, Smith, Pattison, M Patterson, B Patterson.
Sub: Caulfield RUC: Matthews, Mulligan, Taggart, Donald, Wilson, Coyle, Love, Magill, Aiken, Young, Millen.
Subs: Spratt and Hunter.
Referee: Mervyn Adair (Tandragee).
Ballymena —only just
Both teams were somewhat weakened for this visit of Lansdowne to Eaton Park but Ballymena just about deserved their narrow 3–0 win, the only score of the game, a penalty by Derek McAleese coming midway through the second half.
Ballymena did most of the pressing in the first period with their pack driving well in the loose and set scrums.
In the lineouts however Lansdowne's Paul O'Connor and John Hanlon reigned supreme in the absence of Ballymena stalwart Davy Tweed.
Behind the scrum neither backline really created many scoring chances but for Ballymena recent acquisitions Terry McMaster and Jonathan Bell had impressive home debuts.
Encamped for long spells in the Lansdowne territory Ballymena should have had a comfortable interval lead but McAleese uncharacteristically missed a penalty at either end of the first half.
Half time — Ballymena 0, Lansdowne 0.
Lansdowne enjoyed territorial advantage in the third quarter without threatening the home line but Ballymena gradually regained the ascendancy with McAleese the speedy Bell and Nicky Rainey spearheading a number of promising attacks.
Lansdowne had a brief sortie back into the home ‘22’ where Eric Elwood saw a penalty attempt drift wide, but the final stages of the game belonged to Ballymena whose late incessant pressure however failed to add to the loan McAleese penalty.
Result — Ballymena 3, Lansdowne 0.
Ballymena — T McMaster, P Davidson, M Rainey, J Bell, B Buckley, D McAleese (Capt), A Matchett, N McKernan, J Caskey, P Millar, P McBride, S Lusk, B Logan, B Robinson, W Pollock.
Lansdowne — C O'Shea, J Sexton (Capt), B Glennan, K Hoffmann, C Whelan, E Elwood, J Woods, R Cole, M Brady, C O'Brien, P O'Connor, J Hanlon, L McHale, P Ward, A Doyle.
Referee — A Watson,(Collegians).
Queens University 0 Dundela 1
WITH manager coach Johnny Black back from cricket skippering duties with Instonians, Queen's were in determined mood to get a good result, but at the end of the first half the students were trailing by a goal.
The Dundela score came in the 25th minute when Mark Snodden latched onto a brilliant cross sent over from the right-wing by Lawrence Fyffe to head the ball high into the roof of the net.
Queen's went near to counting with good bids made by Bonnar, Clarke and Mickey McCoy.
Keeper Andy McClean brought off a couple of brilliant saves with goalbound efforts smacked by Hanvey and Dowey.
Half-time: Queen's Univ 0, Dundela 1.
This was a half of missed opportunities, especially by Dundela, with appeals by managers Mervyn Bell and Johnnie Black to ‘get the ball into the net’ getting no response.
Keepers Andy McClean, of Queen's, and Tony Miskelly, for Dundela, both deserve a pat on the back for a job well done.
QUEEN'S UNIVERSITY: McClean, Browne, Burrows, Crawford, McCoy, Mitchell, Bell, Connolly, Clarke, McCourt, Atkinson.
Subs: Hume and Harty DUNDELA: Miskelly, Fyffe, Whiteside, Simpson, Goddard, Snodden, McCarroll, Dowey, Hanvey, Wilson, Parker.
Subs: Irwin, Coey.
Referee: Herbie Barr (Bangor).
Ballynahinch 12 Collegians 21
COLLEGIANS won an evenly contested game thanks to their alert back row.
Captain Ally McKay grabbed a try in the first half and in the second half a brace of tries from his wing forward partner Watson secured the winning margin.
Ballynahinch took the lead after three minutes with a Gregg penalty.
Aldred equalised soon afterwards Gregg regained the lead with a massive wind-assisted penalty kicked from 52 metres out.
Then came McKay's unconverted try, an opportunist effort from a top penalty near the B'hinch line.
Gregg gave Ballynahinch a 9–8 half time lead with his third penalty.
He stretched the lead two minutes into the second half with his fourth kick.
Aldred narrowed the gap with his second penalty before Watson scored his two tries, both from close range.
Portrush 1 Ballynahinch 1
PORTRUSH drew one-all with Ballynahinch at Seaview Park this afternoon.
Despite having the majority of play for three quarters of the game the home side squandered numerous chances.
The Ballynahinch keeper made a fine save from a Nigel Taggart flick on the right.
Then Mervyn McKeeman put captain Ronnie Smith through only to be denied by visiting sweeper Chris Mulholland.
Three Portrush penalty corners went unconverted in the first half.
But Ballynahinch's superior fitness showed late in the game when Mark Lucas opened the scoring with a fly-hit after umpire Brown had blown for a free.
A minute earlier Ronnie Smith had missed the best opportunity of the game.
Then McCaughan saved well from Mulholland before McKeeman flicked Portrush's equaliser over the keeper at the second attempt.
Holywood make English stars struggle
E Grinstead 2 Holywood 1
TOP English side East Grinstead struggled to beat Ulster champions Holywood 2–1 at Jordanstown this morning…even though Holywood coach Norman Crawford had just six of last season's regular side available.
With players like Stephen Martin, Kenny Morris, Billy McConnell, Alan Roper, Geoff Clarke, Stephen Smyrl and Martin Deery all sidelined for various reasons, it seemed that Holywood wouldn't seriously test the visitors in the first of their three weekend games against leading Ulster opposition.
But the inexperienced side, with four youths on board, measured up well and only were edged out by the winning goal four minutes from the end.
East Grinstead got off to a great start with an 11th minute goal, but in spite of their pressure — they won ten penalty corners to Holywood's none — they seldom troubled goalkeeper Kyle Thompson.
That was largely due to John McKee who started off as sweeper but ended up playing in front of teenage centre back Mark Molloy and cut out many threatening moves.
East Grinstead's first goal, though, was a disaster for the Holywood defence, Great Britain Olympic gold medallist Richard Leman scoring from close in following a penalty corner.
The Englishmen's winning goal also came from a penalty corner, Will Champness pouncing on a rebound off Thompson.
But their other eight awards were squandered as a result of a badly worked routine.
Holywood's best period came just before the interval, with Carl Anderson getting in behind the defence but just failing to pick out Colin Irwin.
Then six minutes from the break Mark Burns won possession superbly and released young Keith Alexander who dispatched the ball past Great Britain goalkeeper David Luckes.
It was mostly East Grinstead in the second half with Leman being denied by Thompson twice and new England sensation Mahmood Bhatti shooting wide twice when well placed.
The pressure finally told when Champness converted East Grinstead's tenth penalty corner, but it was a spirited performance from the young Holywood team and a not so impressive display from the visitors who were due to face Lisnagarvey this afternoon and Banbridge tomorrow at Blaris.
HOLYWOOD — K Thompson, J McKee, P Dorrian, M Molloy, J McMeekin, C Mockford, M Burns, P Johnston, C Anderson, K Alexander, C Irwin, P Campton.
EAST GRINSTEAD — D Luckes, R Organ, J Payne, M Bloxham, P Head, R Leman, J Lee, S Head, R Virdi, R Gibson, M Bhatti, P Wallis, J Westwood, B Barnes.
Umpires — A Carson, I Thompson.
Friends take six-a-sides
School Lisburn became first time winners of the Lisnagarvey Six-A-Side Invitation Tournament after beating Newry High School 2–0 in this afternoon's final at Blaris.
John Gray scored the opener in the eighth minute and his Garvey team mate Brian Waring added a second goal two minutes from the end.
Friends had reached the final by beating holders RBAI 2–0 in a penalty shoot-out after the teams finished level on points and goal difference after the preliminary series of matches.
Results:
Friends 0 RBAI 0; Wallace 1 MCB 5; Cookstown 0 Banbridge 0; Newry 3 Bangor 2; Friends 1 Banbridge 1; Wallace 0 Bangor 1; Cookstown 1 RBAI 2; Newry 2 MCB 1; Friends 4 Cookstown 3; Wallace 0 Newry 5; RBAI 0 Banbridge 0; MCB 1 Bangor 5.
Final: Friends 2 (J Gray, B Waring); Newry 0.
Portadown 6
CIYMS 13 The visitors clearly demonstrated a greater determination in the opening stages and in particular their pack was decisively impressive forcing Portadown unto the defensive.
CI fullback Neil McDougall failed to convert a penalty in the opening minutes.
After a further mis-hit McDoughall's third attempt proved successful opening up a 3–0 lead on ten minutes.
C.I.
continued to hold the power balance up front attacking the loose ball with precision and on 25 minutes McDougall was on target again with a second penalty.
Outhalf Michael Barnes finally put Portadown on the scoreboard with a penalty which Barnes he converted with ease bringing the home side more into the picture.
C.I. 's response after the restart was again positive with scrum-half Gareth Hall forcing his way through a ruck of players to apply the touchdown and with wind assistance fullback McDougall converted causing obvious problems for the home side now trailing 13–3.
As the game progressed Portadown gradually regained a steady foothold in C.I.
territory but their only reward was another Barnes penalty.
Portadown — V. Doyle, B. Matchett, M. Daly, M. Hall, W. Bell, M. Barnes, B. Gribben, P. Ward, P. Stronge, D. Burnside, E. Liggett, D. Matthews, P. Logan, M. Ericson, S. Frazer.
CIYMS—N. McDougall, R. Beaumont, N. Johnstone, M. Hooper, R. McAuley, S. Irwin, G. Hall, T. Tennant, M. Chambers, P. Calvert, B. Gibson, C. Pedlow, G. Currie, T. Octave, P. Nelson.
Referee — Trevor Salmon (Holywood).
Annadale 3 Mossley 1
ANNADALE brought the smile back to coach Smyth Patterson's face after opening their Kirk Cup campaign with a comprehensive 3–1 win over Mossley at Olympia.
Patterson's opposite number Robert Nelson was, however, scratching his head afterwards, conscious that the current season promises to be a difficult one for his youthful charges.
Simon Sykes grabbed the opener after only five minutes after Andrew Smyth's cross had been deflected into his path by a team mate.
Craig Porter made a spectacular goal line clearance from Stephen Galway five minutes from the interval but it proved worthless when the same opponent flicked in number two from the resulting short corner after Andy McBride's shot had been saved.
In the 55th minute, following another penalty corner variation, Gavin Crooks put the issue beyond doubt with his team's third goal.
Andrew Patterson cut the deficit in the 60th minute as Annadale, with two points safely in the bag, allowed their concentration to slip, leaving the Mossley player unmarked following a Paul Bonar cross.
ANNADALE: D Larmour, C Jackson, P Pollock, S Wilson, D Smyth, J Todd, G Crooks, S Galway, A Smyth, A McBride, S Sykes.
Sub: G Kidd.
MOSSLEY: G Graham, C Porter, G Kidd, D Sleith, U Wallace, R Tyrrell, R Ireland, J McNeilly, P Bonar, N Campbell, G Weir.
Sub: A Patterson.
Umpires: R Davey; T Morrison.
South Antrim 2 Kilkeel 0 SOUTH Antrim opened the season with a deserved 2–0 win over Kilkeel in the Kirk Cup at Lisburn Recreation Centre.
In a fast moving first half the teams appeared to cancel each other out in mid-field and as a result neither keeper was called into action.
The first 20 minutes of the second half followed the same pattern before the deadlock was broken.
A simple free outside the circle gave Ian Murphy the chance to put the home side ahead.
Minutes later, at the other end, Roy Gordon failed to accept a chance in front of an open goal.
A Gordon drive into the circle was deflected just wide of the post by defender Johnny Taylor and from the corner Gordon shot just wide.
In a spell of Kilkeel pressure Beckett also saved well from Knox.
Beckett made another good save from Roy Gordon but South Antrim made sure of the points in the dying minutes when Iain Watson found Peter Crory and his cross was turned in by Gordon McCandless.
SOUTH ANTRIM: Beckett, Patterson, McCandless, Graham, Taylor, Murphy, Millar, Wallace, Watson, Crory, Douglas, Hamill.
KILKEEL: Edgar, Russell, A. Gordon, R. Gordon, McBride, Rodgers, Anderson, Knox, Cracknell, Glenny, Russell, Quinn.
Umpires: J. Waring, D. Gowdy.
Berger and Alesi in Italian crash
GERHARD Berger escaped unhurt from a high-speed crash today as Alain Prost completed the formalities of claiming pole position for Sunday's Italian Grand Prix.
The Williams' driver's excellent performance on a drying track at Monza was overshadowed by Berger's collision with Ferrari team-mate Jean Alesi.
The crash came after the chequered flag at the end of the session, when Berger came across a slowing Alesi, who was waving to the crowd.
Alesi, seeing Berger's car late, moved across at the Ascari bend and collided with his team-mate.
The Austrian's car flew out of control and spun across the chicane and sand trap before ramming the tyre-protected steel barriers.
The Austrian was lifted from the car, but was able to walk away.
Prost clocked a record qualifying lap time of one minute 21.179 seconds to eclipse the best efforts of team mate Damon Hill, and must now be a warm favourite to seal his fourth world drivers' title with victory tomorrow.
Hill, chasing his third successive Formula One victory, finished with a best time 1:21.491, to leave him sharing the front row of the grid with Prost, whose pole was the 32nd of his career.
Alesi, thrilling the sparse crowd with his aggressive style, was third fastest in a car specially equipped for the session with new Ferrari V12 engines.
Ayrton Senna, Prost's most serious contender for the title, was fourth fastest in his McLaren ahead of Michael Schumacher in a Benetton, while the luckless Berger was sixth quickest.
Marco Apicello, making his first appearance for the Jordan team, was 23rd fastest with team-mate Rubens Barrichello 19th.
Malone 17 Greystones 22
ALL-IRELAND Division 1 side Greystones proved too strong for an under-strength Malone team at Gibson Park.
The Belfast side were missing Stephen Cowan, Bill Harbinson and Richard Cullen and looked at times a little disorganised against their Dublin opponents.
Nonetheless, an improved second half performance will bolster their confidence for next week's Division 2 crunch game against Ballymena.
Malone started badly when new outhalf Simon Willis missed two penalties in the first ten minutes.
Greystones opened the scoring in the 17th minute with a try by outhalf Gerry Harvey set-up by a thrust through the centre of the midfield by No 8 Dave Barrett.
Harvey missed the conversion but made up for it ten minutes later with an angled penalty.
Half time — Malone 0 Greystones 8 Adrian Bush came on for Willis in the second half and made an immediate impact with a 40 second minute penalty and then a splendid forty metre touch clearance.
Greystones restored their authority ten minutes later with another spectacular try, this time from long-striding right wing Alan Keyes.
Harvey converted to make 15–3.
To their credit, Malone responded well and grabbed a deserved try from Colin Wilkinson when he made a typical burst into the back line and scored under the posts with aplomb.
Bush added the conversion to reduce the arrears to 15–10.
But the Malone revival was short lived.
Only minutes after they had pressed on the Greystones line, British Lion prop Nick Popplewell sealed his side's success with a galloping 30 metre run and score.
Harvey's conversion made it 22–10.
Malone finished strongly and were rewarded with a try by Stuart Hooks in the final minute which was converted by Bush, whose place kicking was impeccable.
Major search in Bogside
SECURITY forces were this afternoon carrying out a major search operation in the Bogside area of Londonderry.
Police and troops searched a large number of houses in the nationalist estate.
It was not immediately known if anything was found.
No arrests were made.
Cliftonville Olympic 2 Linfield Swifts 0
AFTER five minutes Loughlins missed a good opportunity for the Swifts.
The Swifts keeper, Patterson, saved well from Woods, who later missed a good opportunity to put the Olympic ahead.
He redeemed himself by sending over a good cross for P Reid to put the Olympic in front.
McGreevy saved well from McIlroy as Swifts pressed for an equaliser and on the stroke of half-time Patterson made a good save from McDonagh.
Half-time: Cliftonville Olympic 1, Linfield Swifts 0.
Early in the half Loughlins missed a good opportunity to level for the Swifts.
In the 70th minute a splendid move involving Smyth, Fields and Woods was finished off by S Reid to put the Olympic two up.
CLIFTONVILLE OLYMPIC: McGreevy, Smyth, Boyle, Donnelly, P Reid, Bell, McKenna, Woods, S Reid, McDonagh, Field.
Sub: Quinn.
LINFIELD SWIFTS: Patterson, Huston, Hyndeman, Allen, Spiers, McCoosh, Campbell, Loughlins, Livingstone, McIlroy, Andrews.
Subs: Rainey, Johnston.
Chavez still unbeaten
JULIO Cesar Chavez escaped the first defeat of his 88-bout career and Pernell Whitaker retained the WBC welterweight title when they battled to a 12-round draw in San Antonio, Texas last night.
Two of the judges, England's Mickey Vann and Franz Marti of Switzerland, scored the fight 115–115.
American Jack Woodruff favoured Whitaker 115–113, but with two judges calling it even, the fight finished a draw.
Chavez, the 31-year-old Mexican, also left the ring a champion since his WBC super lightweight title wasn't at stake.
The draw was the second on a bill which featured three world title bouts.
Azumah Nelson of Ghana had earlier retained his WBC featherweight title when he fought a draw with Texan Jesse James Leija, and Californian Terry Norris stopped Joe Gatti of Canada in the first round to retain the WBC super welterweight title.
Stricker leads
STEVE Stricker, the surprise first-round leader, was clinging to a two-shot lead when darkness halted his second round in the Canadian Open at Oakville, Ontario.
Stricker was eight under par with two holes left when play was stopped.
Fellow American Brad Bryant held the clubhouse lead at six-under 138 after a second-round 70.
Syed's woe
MATTHEW Syed, the 22-year-old Oxford University student, won both his table tennis games for England against France at Brentwood but it wasn't enough to prevent France from winning 3–2.
Three in final
MANCHESTER doctor Philippa Roberts and teenagers Nicola Huntridge and Corinna Williams all qualified for the women's jump final at the World Waterski championships in Singapore.
Huntridge from Doncaster and Williams from Wolverhampton also held the overnight lead in the slalom event but the top seeds including Roberts do not compete until today.
Bull faces FA
WOLVES striker Steve Bull will face an FA hearing at Shrewsbury on September 23 over allegations that he punched Wrexham defender Mel Pejic in a pre-season game.
Bull, who requested a personal hearing after being charged with misconduct, is likely to be represented by club officials at the hearing.
Jubilee game
SIX test-playing countries will compete in a limited overs tournament to mark the diamond jubilee of India's Cricket Association of Bengal.
Pakistan, South Africa, Sri Lanka, West Indies, Zimbabwe and India will take part in the tournament, between November 7–27, with the final in Calcutta.
Capt Thomas
JAILED soccer star Mickey Thomas skippers a prison XI side tomorrow at Kirkham, Lancashire, in a behind bars charity match against a team of ex-Liverpool and showbiz stars.
New record for Chinese
FOR the second time this week a Chinese woman has set a new world record.
Qu Yunxia ran a sensational 1,500 metres of three minutes 50.46 seconds at China's national games in Beijing today, beating the previous world mark by fully two seconds of 3:52.47 set by Tatiana Kazankina of the Soviet Union 13 years ago.
Lola leaves Scuderia
BRITISH racing car makers Lola announced today that they would end their association with the Scuderia Italia Formula One team at the end of the year.
The two parties reached the decision mutually and with regret, Lola said in a statement issued on the eve of the Italian Grand Prix at Monza.
Lola chairman Eric Broadley said in Formula One it was necessary for the team and its design department to be one operation and not separated.
Lola planned to prepare their own team for entry into the 1994 F1 world championship, he said.
It is widely believed that Scuderia Italia will merge with Minardi next year.
Don's patient wait
IF medals were to go on offer for patience then Don Kelly would certainly be entitled to collect one.
The Derry reserve goalkeeper concedes that he has become something of a fixture on the bench but is uncomplaining.
The Ballinascreen man, now 28, is among those who are only too delighted to lap up the build-up to tomorrow week's All Ireland final.
‘The buzz is tremendous’, enthuses Don, ‘It's great to be part of the squad — I'm enjoying every minute of it.’
Don has played second fiddle to Damien McCusker for some time now and his county pedigree stretches back to 1983 when he was first honoured as a Minor.
Tremndous
‘It seems like a lifetime ago,’ smiles Don, ‘I would love, of course, to be the first choice goalkeeper but Damien has been in tremendous form and he's the best around in my book’
Don, who works with Northern Telecom and resides in Belfast, is one of three Ballinascreen players in the Derry squad, Tony Scullion and Eamon Burns being the other two.
And he thinks nothing of the travelling to and from training.
‘No problem,’ he says, ‘Just as look as we keep winning!’
Ulster dates fixed
THEY are fixed at last!
Irish League secretary Harry Wallace today announced that the much delayed Ulster Cup finals will be staged on September 22.
Linfield meet Ballymena United while Bangor oppose Ballyclare Comrades.
Both have a 7.45pm kick-off and will be played to a finish.
The Crusaders-Portadown semi-final of the competition is scheduled for the Oval on Tuesday September 21.
It too will have extra time and kicks from the penalty spot if necessary.
The inclusion of Linfield and Bangor in the European competition preliminary rounds threw the Ulster Cup programme out of gear.
However, League officials have painstakingly worked out permutations and in the end there will not be too much disruption.
Next season however, these UEFA tournament preliminary dates must be taken into consideration when drawing up the fixture list.
Newry Town are to withdraw their team from the Irish Youth League.
Their match with Glenavon III had to be postponed last week and Glenavon are now claiming the points.
ARMAGH
Accolade for Judith
FORMER A level student at Armagh College of Further Education, Judith Colbert, has had her sociology project ‘Alienation in the Workplace’ shortlisted by the Collins Educational Awards Panel.
Judith, from Dungannon, receives a certificate of commendation and a dictionary of sociology.
The college wins £100 worth of education books.
‘Midas touch’ hope for Derry
THE man who masterminded Glasgow city's transformation to a major European centre of culture has been called upon to use his Midas touch in Londonderry.
Derry-born Professor Eddie Friel, who helped encourage Glasgow's designation in 1990 as European City of Culture, has now been invited by Derry City Council to employ his award-winning strategy in his native city.
Headlines
With a string of achievements already to his credit, including the development of such diverse destinations as Dallan in China and Rostov-on-Don in Russia, the former chief executive of the Greater Glasgow Tourist Board hopes to see Derry move forward as a ‘unified community capable of competing with the best in Europe’.
Prof Friel first hit the headlines in December 1991 when he resigned as chief executive of the Northern Ireland Tourist Board after only three months in the post.
His shock resignation was shrouded in mystery, although at the time his reasons were given as being ‘personal and due to family matters.’
He had taken up the post with the NITB after spending eight years in Glasgow.
Following his resignation he returned to Scotland to develop his own consultancy business.
His involvement with Derry council came about as a result of last year's highly successful cultural festival Impact 92, which he believes laid the foundations for the city's redevelopment.
He said: ‘During that year it was decided that there was life beyond Impact 92 and that it was time to look at a total economic development strategy for the city rather than just a one year one.’
Given his record of past achievements Prof Friel was the ideal person to be called in to assist the council with Derry's promotion as a major European city.
The Friel report was drawn up earlier this year and was unanimously adopted by the council last week.
Public
It identifies a number of key areas which Prof Friel believes need to be looked at including an integrated development plan, improved hotel accommodation, the development of the waterfront, the creation of jobs and a marketing and tourism strategy for the city.
The wheels are already in motion and a special projects team, consisting of Prof Friel, council representatives and agencies from the private and public sector, has been set up.
But Prof Friel is keen to stress that substantial progress was already being made in Derry before his intervention.
‘A considerable degree of work has been done in putting the city first and giving it back to its citizens,’ he said.
‘The tourism infrastructure is there, with the new Tower Museum, the craft village and the new interpretive centre, as well as all the events and festivals which have been going on.
Years
‘But before Derry can be made a major European city it's important that the people of that place are proud of themselves and their city and know what they want for the city.’
According to Prof Friel, who left home in 1968 to work in England, self-confidence among Derry people has only emerged in the last few years.
‘There is absolutely no reason to apologise for Derry,’ he said.
‘It's a fantastic place, with a wealth of history and culture, and it's the diversity of that history and culture which makes it such an interesting place.
‘Derry was established as a European city long before any other city in Ireland.’
Prof Friel believes Derry has become a ‘can do’ city and that this new-found self-confidence, especially among young people, is essential if Derry is to be recognised as a European city.
‘First of all we need to get rid of unemployment and emigration and keep our young talent at home.
‘If we can create the right environment and atmosphere in Derry, the young people won't want to leave.’
In his report Prof Friel outlines development plans for the waterfront along the River Foyle, a beautiful natural asset which he claims the people of Derry have turned their backs on.
Potential
‘There's so many wonderful things we could do here,’ he said.
‘Like building a Celtic Studies museum along the waterfront, a marina, hotel and museum complex.
‘The potential is unquestionably there.
Derry was, is and will become a great European city.’
The strategy which was adopted to transform Glasgow into a major tourist destination, culminating in its designation as European City of Culture will be entirely different to that employed in Derry.
Prof Friel says there is no one magic formula available and that each city requires its own personal development plan for regeneration.
‘I'm not going to do a ‘Glasgow’ in Derry,’he said.
‘I'm not here to fix the city, rather to take the work that has already been done onto the next stage.
‘But at the end of the day it's up to the 100,000 citizens of Derry to act as sales people for their city.’
Coaching hit list
WANTED — A part-time or voluntary coach who, over the last year, has made an outstanding contribution to the success achieved by a team or individual performer(s) in your sport or in your area.
If you know such a coach then nominate him/her now because the search is on to find the 1993 Coach of the Year.
Last year, boxing coach Harry Robinson, who guided Wayne McCullough to Commonwealth, Olympic and World successes, qualified as a Northern Ireland Regional Winner, and went on to scoop one of the UK National Awards.
No doubt 1993 will provide entrants of similar quality that will continue to establish Northern Ireland coaches amongst the best in the Home Countries.
Grounds for complaint?
I'M writing to express my disagreement with the Irish League-IFA on the allocation of venues for cup semi-finals and finals.
Is it not about time we started using different grounds for finals instead of Windsor or the Oval?
The Co Antrim Shield final was a good example last season, with both sections of support wouldn't be able to fill the top of the North Stand together.
Talking as a fan myself I prefer the Oval to Windsor as a venue for atmosphere and pitch quality.
So come on and start making these ‘Mickey Mouse’ cups a bit of a spectacle instead of the atmosphere void of Windsor Park.
Plenty of other grounds could host a final adequately, Seaview, Solitude, Mourneview and even New Grosvenor Statium.
Maybe it's a case of all these important people getting free drinks in the George Best Suite after the match.
Masonic final
THE final of the Masonic Charities bowling competition will be played between Willowfield and Mossley at Ewarts Bowling Green next Saturday (2p.m.).
Willowfield to use blue discs and Mossley red discs.
War aces meet high flyers
IT WAS a unique night down at Newtownards Flying Club, when the new boys met the Battle Of Britain aces.
The occasion was a joint one, the presentation of ‘wings’ to 12 flyers who have just qualified, in the presence of five surviving Second World War pilots.
Terry Bunce, from the Flying Club, tells me that they have a wings night every year for the new people, and as it was also the 25th anniversary of the Ulster Aviation Society they decided to invite the veterans along.
Queen's
These were Wing Commander Ken Mackenzie, Squadron Leader Winder McConnell, Flight Lieutenant Harry Clarke, Squadron Leader Noel Corry, and Flight Lieutenant Matt Cameron.
Remarkably, four out of these five had not spoken to each other since 1939.
‘They knew each other all right,’ John Hewitt from the Ulster Aviation Society told me, ‘as they were members of the Queen's University Air Squadron, and had trained together.
Then they were separated when war broke out.’
Nostalgia
A feature of the night was the reading of a letter from the Queen Mother, patron of the Battle of Britain Association.
She had been told of the event and sent back ‘a really beautiful letter,’ says John.
There were too, representatives of this newspaper at the dinner.
In Battle of Britain nostalgia everyone remembers the famous Belfast Telegraph Spitfire fund which raised money to buy the famous fighters.
The Few: Veteran pilots (from left), Flt Lt Matthew Cameron, Sqd Ldr Noel Curry DFC, Sqd Ldr Winder McConnell and Wing Cdr Kenneth Mackenzie at the Ulster Flying Club's Wings night in Newtownards looking through a Battle of Britain anniversary brochure.
Touchline antics spoiled day
ON SATURDAY I attended Castlereagh Park to watch my team play Linfield, a match which I had looked forward to seeing.
What I did expect to see was an improvement from a somewhat disappointing Ards and a Linfield team which did the Irish League proud with an excellent performance against Dinamo Tbilisi the previous Wednesday evening.
Alas John, my day was spoilt, not by two teams who provided a reasonably good game but by people who should have known better.
Firstly, try our own manager Paul Malone who without doubt should have been removed from the dug-out and whose actions caused a clash which involved the Linfield bench — who in return did not help the situation by their actions.
Indeed the Ards and Linfield contingents should have been, at least, spoken to by referee Herbie Barr, whom I thought had a below average game.
Indeed he gave 50–50 decisions to Linfield all the time.
Also the language used by a Linfield player to Malone at the time of the incident was nothing short of a disgrace.
Had it been out on the public streets he would have been arrested for a breach of the peace.
All this went on in front of Mr Barr and linesman David Magill, which let me say, was the result of an over-acted injury by another Linfield player.
Isn't it time some players, who should know better, stopped trying to get their fellow sports players sent off by over-reacting after tackles?
In closing, I see Trevor Anderson was quoted as saying: ‘We were tired after our European match in midweek and that showed.
But we still deserved to win.’
Trevor was so tired he must have been sleeping, because all sports reporters and TV rightly said Ards deserved a better result.
Best behaviour?
BANGOR manager Nigel Best won the ‘Manager of the Year’ award last season.
This season, with only a few weeks gone, I confidently nominate him for another award — worst piece of man-management this season!
The reason?
His inexcusable public blame of goalkeeper Eachus for the narrow defeat against Nicosia, when interviewed for television on arrival at Aldergrove.
Sir Alf Ramsey wasn't popular with many (it isn't a manager's job to be popular) but every player who played for him had enormous respect and liking for him.
Why?
He never singled out individuals and always publicly stood by his team.
Mr Best should think hard about the result of his folly.
Eachus on Saturday gave a panic-stricken display against Glenavon, eventual winners by 6–1.
This is the most he has conceded in some 250 outings for Bangor, an appearance record that tops any Seasider goalkeeper in the last 30 years.
This loyal player, who turned down a contract with Ipswich Town to stay in the Province, deserves better treatment.
One mistake, after all, for a keeper and it's behind you in the net!
Disgusted Seagull Our best managers also happen to go by the rule that you're only as good as your last game.
Nigel Best: critical of goalkeeper.
Stephen Eachus: blamed for defeat.
PIPE BANDS
Cool FM in clean sweep
LONDONERS gathered in their thousands at Hyde Park, last Saturday to welcome bandsmen from all over Scotland and Ireland to the British Piping Championships.
And the fact that this was the final competition of the season was evident from the somewhat weary standard of playing.
Nevertheless, Field Marshal Montgomery clinched to top prize to ensure that their name will go down in piping history as the only band to finish a season victorious in every contest.
There list of successes speaks for itself — undefeated Scottish, Irish, European, World, Cowal and British champions and overall Supreme Champion of Champions.
The final victory, though, belonged to the band's drummers and drum sergeant Gordan Parkes with took first place in Grade 1, drumming on Antante DTS 4 Drums.
The Pipes and Drums of the RUC finished in fifth place, to complete one of their most successful seasons.
Ravara Pipe Band was the only Ulster band competing in Grade 2 and they ended up with a commendable third place.
Drum Major Alan McBride pushed World Champion John Noble all the way to the winning line and snatched victory on M & D preference.
Lisa Spence was unfortunate not to get first prize in the Juvenile Drum Majors section, but happily secured second place.
This must help to make up for her disappointment in the Cowal Championships when, due to an error in the markings, she missed out on a fourth place medal.
There was a unique double victory for Ballycoan Pipe Band when they were awarded the Champion of Champions in Grade 3 in both piping and drumming.
David Russell (13) from Ravara Pipe Band was the only successful piper from Ulster to take a prize in the recent Cowal Piobaireachd Open Championships.
He was sixth and received the Cowal Bronze Medal.
Grade 1: Field Marshal Montgomery 1; Boghall and Bathgate 2; Scottish Power 3; Shotts and Dykehead 4; RUC 5; Strathclyde Police 6.
Best Drums: Field Marshall Montgomery.
Champion of Champions Drumming: Shotts and Dykehead.
Adjudicators: W Pollock, G Summors, H McNulty, J Hutton.
Money isn't everything!
I AM referring to the letter in last week's ISN from the enlightened Glenman (ha ha).
Raymond Campbell wants to join Linfield not just for money!
He knows that the Irish League champions — who of course are Linfield — are the Premier Club in the whole of Ireland.
It is only natural that the player relishes the idea of playing for them.
The Glenman was right in saying that the days are gone when players are just happy pulling on the Glentoran shirt.
Knowing Raymond he will be happy pulling on the blue jersey.
True Blue Funny, Campbell didn't show any interest in joining the ‘number one team’ this time last year — when Glentoran were champions.
Coyle signs up another Scot
DERRY City manager, Roy Coyle, made another bold move into the transfer market for the third time in 10 days to gain the services of yet another Scottish player.
Ian McConnell, a 19-years-old striker, formerly with Dundee, arrived in Derry today and he's expected to be part of the panel which takes the field against Dundalk tomorrow afternoon.
(Kick-off: 3.30pm).
‘I'm always on the lookout for players who will benefit Derry City and Ian has agreed to come over for a month initially,’ said Coyle.
The striker joins recent recruits Paul Lemon and Michael Smith and all three have been signed on short-term contracts.
Derry, of course, received a significant boost following their League Cup second round victory over Monaghan on Thursday night last and Coyle is hopeful that that victory will signal a return to winning ways.
‘We lost two league matches in succession before the Monaghan game but we showed enough on Thursday night to suggest that we will be a force to be reckoned with this year.’
Coyle also praised the attendance of over 3,000 which watched the midweek in dismal weather conditions.
‘The fans are a credit to the club.
They came out in great numbers to support us despite our poor early season form, and I'm confident we'll get it right against Dundalk on Sunday.’
Dundalk, who have also experienced a poor start to the season, have made significant changes in personnel this year.
Seasoned campaigners Alan O'Neill, Terry Evison and Ronnie Murphy have all left Oriel Park while newcomers Greg O'Dowd, Tom O'Sullivan and Mick Doohan appear to have settled in well.
Despite the poor results, manager Turlough O'Connor, has been happy with the way his side were playing.
‘We've been playing well but can't seem to find the net,’ he said.
‘What pleases me is the fact that we have been creating chances and I personally feel it will only be a matter of time before we get it right.’
Dundalk were shocked last week when newly promoted Cobh Ramblers left the Co.
Louth venue with three points, after they scored twice without reply.
‘We enjoyed long periods of possession, but if you can't put the ball in the net that doesn't count,’ he added.
The Dundalk boss believes the pressure will be totally on Derry on Sunday.
‘Like us, they have also experienced a bad start and I'm sure they will want to get it right on Sunday.
The pressure, therefore, will be totally on them.’
Derry (from)— O'Neill, Hutton, McLaughlin, Lennox, Curran, Gauld, Lemon, Carlyle, Coyle, Ennis, Smith, McConnell, Murray, McGarvey.
Roy Coyle: Back in the transfer market
Ulster riders off to Cavan
NORTHERN Ireland showjumpers have a busy month ahead with many dates on the calendar including the first ever Cavan Indoor Championships, organised by Pauline and Mervyn Clarke.
Due to recent grant aid from the EC, Cavan Indoor Riding Centre, one of the most up to date in the country, has been attracting Ulster riders in their droves.
The majestic indoor arena holds its premier four-day championship show from Thursday 23 to Sunday 26 September.
Each show day will have various qualifiers for all grades of horses and ponies, including amateurs, with the finals being held on Sunday including a Grand Prix for Grade A horses with a prize fund of £1,500 and a speed class worth £600.
Eight horses and ponies will qualify each day for their various finals on Sunday and course builder is the renowned Dubliner Paul Duffy.
A horse solarium will be the main prize of the show and will be presented to the leading rider.
Meanwhile the Northern Indoor Championships for showjumping take place at Eglinton Equestrian Centre in Derry from Friday 8 to Sunday 10 October featuring horse and pony championships.
The Eglinton show has excellent classes for Grade A and B horses including a speed competition, the Irish Masters with a prize fund of £1,500, and the Eglinton Grand Prix which has a prize fund of £3,000 and is a points event for the Heineken Showjumper of the Year League.
Super Sonia cashes in
IRELAND'S Sonia O'Sullivan crowned a magnificent season at Crystal Palace last night when she took her track earnings in just one week to a staggering 150,000 dollars.
The Cork girl won the 3,000 metres and 35 minutes later finished second in the metric mile.
Sonia clocked 8.38.12 in the ‘3,000’ and collected 30,000 dollars and her second place to Lyudov Kremlyova in the 1,500 metres landed her a further 20,000 dollars.
Sonia finished second in the overall European Grand Prix series to American hurdler Sandra Farmer Patrick and for that she was handed a cheque for 50,000 dollars.
Last night's rich pickings followed hot on the heels of her big night in Brussels last Friday when she won four gold bars for victories in Olso, Zurich, Berlin and of course Brussels…now she sets her sights on tomorrow's Princess Street Mile in Edinburgh where the winner receives a car.
But Sally Gunnell reflected on the costliest defeat of her career and insisted: ‘That race wasn't about money.’
Britain's golden girl missed out by a stride on an £86,000 jackpot when arch-rival Sandra Farmer-Patrick pipped her in the 400 metres hurdles at the IAAF Grand Prix final and also won the women's overall title.
Gunnell had to be satisfied with £23,000 but declared: ‘The world championship was the only thing that really mattered this season.
I wouldn't swop it for anything.’
A sell-out 23,000 gate also saw high hurdler Colin Jackson miss out narrowly on the overall men's title.
The Welshman was again in a class of his own, but a time of 13.14secs was not fast enough to prevent pole vaulter Sergey Bubka landing the big prize.
Jackson, who earned a total of £40,000, said: ‘I was pedestrian away from the blocks and that cost me vital hundredths of a second.
I can't complain, though.
It was the biggest pay-day of my career.’
David Grindley's splendid 400 metres comeback victory earned him £20,000, and six other Britons will be banking handsome cheques from the £1.5m spectacular athletics' richest-ever following top three placings in their individual events.
They are John Regis, Tony Jarrett and Yvonne Murray (£13,000 each), Alison Wyeth (£12,000) and Matthew Yates and Mick Hill (£9000 each).
Better late than never
THE cricket season it would appear is back to front with the excellent weather coming late in the summer and the two principal magazines which cover the sport, only hitting the newsstands in the last couple of weeks.
The bi-annual Ulster Cricketer(£2), jointly edited as usual by Clarence Hiles and Colin Berkley and the Irish Cricket Annual (£4) edited by John Elder, are nevertheless interesting reads despite the lateness.
Both maintain their high quality of articles, comments and statistics, with a host of special contributors.
Let's take the Irish Cricket Annual first.
It is invaluable as a record source and has been enhanced with some excellent photographs from the likes of Billy McLeod and Harold Ford who also contribute to the Ulster Cricketer.
The last article written by the late Sean Pender for the Irish Times, looking at the career of ICU President Alfie Linehan, is reproduced in full.
It traces Alfie's career on the field with Downpatrick and Ireland and his rise to the top of officialdom's tree, highlighting the impact he made for essential change in promoting the game and in the need for better communication.
In his foreword to this the fourth edition, John rightly describes Sean as ‘a friend of Irish cricket and cricketers.’
Never was a truer word spoken and Sean's absence has been noticeable in the dearth of cricket coverage in the south since his death.
Clarence Hiles in the Ulster Cricketer, reiterates the esteem in which Sean was held by describing him as the doyen of Irish cricket writers ‘who tackled all the main issues, in the caring thoughtful manner which made him so popular with both players and officials alike.’
The Irish annual covers every aspect of the game throughout Ireland and provides an in-depth look at the ICC Trophy in Kenya next February.
Ireland have just named their panel of 16 and a study of the 20 nations who will be in Nairobi, bidding for three places in the World Cup proper the following year, emphatically illustrates the mountainous task confronting the Irish.
The Ulster Cricketer obviously, concentrates mostly on affairs within the NCU and North-West Unions, and manages to maintain the high standard which accompanied its initial launch.
Never afraid to speak its mind and dish out criticism, it contains an article by North-West's Billy Anderson who vents his feelings about the lack of North-West representation at international level.
He suggests that this has come about by the make-up of the international selectors, two of them coming from Belfast, two from Dublin and only one from the North-West and Munster.
During the last 30 years, he claims, too few North-West boys have been one-cap wonders to ‘keep the natives happy.’
Billy names the players he believes have suffered and urges a change in the selection committee currently made up of one representative from the six teams in the inter-pro championships.
An off-beat piece by Holywood's Simon Burrowes will appeal to cricket romantics.
An aficionado of cricket literature, Simon retraces the days of writer supreme Neville Cardus when secretary of Shrewsbury School.
So taken by the Cardus pictures in words, Simon took it upon himself to visit the famous school and ‘the most beautiful playing fields in the world.’
For Simon, it was like stepping back in time to the turn of the century.
A piece on Brigade's Roy Torrens who this season became an international selector and Bill Frindall's analysis of Irish-born England Test players, are other stories certain to hold the attention of cricket followers.
The Ulster Cricketer is published by Universities Press, Alanbrooke Road, Belfast BT6 9HF while the Irish Cricket Annual is done by Belfast Litho Printers, Holywood, Co.
Down.
BOWLS Steady Eddie wins
ULSTER is well represented in the semi-finals of the Dun Laoghaire 31st annual tournament.
Eddie McNally has won through in the men's singles Section A with wins over G Byrne 21–15 and Richard Neilson whom he beat 21–14 to face the experienced Tommy Hopper.
Wally Taylor and Noel Harford had a good win over Eddie and Nancy McNally in the Section A quarter-final of the mixed pairs when advancing 21–17 but Maureen Fearon and Fran Brady, who were fancied in Section B, fell to Harry Pedreschi and Pat Day 14–17.
However, Fearon had consolation when reaching the semi-final in the women's singles, beating Phyllis Brett 21–17.
Kirk's waiting game
KIRK Hunter's appearances at Seaview on match nights have been lonely ones this season.
But that could change if the rugged midfielder, suspended from domestic football, is called into action for Crusaders' UEFA Cup first round first leg match against Swiss aces Servette on Tuesday night.
So far, all manager Roy Walker will say is that the big man will be in the big game panel.
Whether he starts or not we'll just have to wait and see.
‘I'm as fit as I've ever been but I'm lacking match practice,’ says Kirk.
‘There's no substitute for playing games so it may be I'll be on the bench.
‘It's up to the boss.
Obviously I want to play in such a big game.’
Hunter has been training with his team-mates but on match nights has had to go it alone.
‘I would do a work-out on the pitch before the match but when the games starts I'm on the sidelines,’ he says.
So far seven games of his marathon 16-match suspension have passed by.
Crusaders have done well in the opening two cup competitions and that's good news for Kirk.
‘The more rounds the lads play the sooner my suspension will be eaten up.
I hope they go all the way in both.’
Crusaders know only too well they're up against a class outfit.
‘Our chairman saw them beat Marseilles in a pre-season friendly,’ says manager Roy Walker.
‘Three of their team were playing for Switzerland against Scotland in the World Cup on Wednesday and Anderson de Silva, who plays up front, is a highly-rated Brazilian.
‘There's no point in setting targets.
We just have to play to the best of our ability and if that's good enough we may get something out of it.’
De Silva certainly is the star of the Servette show.
The fact that he scored 20 of his team's 48 league goals last season underlines that fact.
He has come under the microscope of German giants Bayern Munich and is clearly a man the Crues will have to watch carefully as well.
Servette qualified for the UEFA Cup by finishing fourth in the Swiss League but last November it looked like they would be in the Champions' Cup.
They led the title race by five points but it all went wrong in the spring championship — Servette lost their championship chance and manager Michel Renquin lost his job.
Under new boss Kaj Petkovic, Servette just about squeezed into a UEFA slot.
Crusaders, of course, had hopes of playing the European Cup but agonizingly lost out on goal difference to Linfield.
Clearly, the Crues will be up against it.
If they can go to the 30,000-capacity Charmilles Stadium in Geneva still in contention the Belfast side will have every reason to be satisfied.
Servette have played in Europe 20 times, including a 4–3 aggregate win against Linfield in the 1985 European Cup.
Yellow man: Kirk Hunter gets the card treatment from referee George Keatley, one of the bookings which contributed to his long early-season suspension.
Mansell slips down to third
NIGEL Mansell had to be content with third place after the opening qualifying session for tomorrow's Pioneer Electronics 200 IndyCar race at Lexington, Ohio.
Mansell, the championship leader, finished behind Canadian Paul Tracy and Emerson Fittipaldi of Brazil, with Tracy claiming a new lap record.
Early in yesterday's session Mansell slid through the first turn, hit a curb and soared through the air before landing hard on his wheels.
He was able to continue, but eventually came in with an oil leak and a loose tail pipe.
‘I learned the Lola chassis goes airborne real good and doesn't land real well,’ Mansell joked afterwards.
‘Actually, I'm just happy to be where I am because after that early problem we only had 14 minutes of running, so it was a short session.’
Mansell leads the championship on 168 points, with Fittipaldi on 135 and Tracy on 122, but he said: ‘I certainly don't feel comfortable with my lead.
One bad performance by me combined with a win by Emerson or Paul and…
Well, it's not over yet, is it?’
The fastest lap of 118.085mph by Tracy in his Chevrolet-powered Penske easily beat the 117.790 mark set last year by Michael Andretti.
Fittipaldi came up with a solid lap of 117.617 to edge out the Ford Cosworth-powered Lola of Mansell, who produced a lap of 117.443 despite his off-course excursion.
Tracy, in his first full season of IndyCar racing, remains hopeful that he can challenge his two elders, both former Formula One world champions, for the IndyCar title.
‘For Emerson and myself, we both have to win races and see how Nigel does,’ Tracy said.
‘Nigel has to falter and have some bad luck and I feel I have to go out and get maximum points every time.’
DOUBLE TROUBLE!
Brothers plan ‘twin piques’ for Linfield
LINFIELD fans should prepare themselves for a bout of double vision at Windsor Park next week.
FC Copenhagen will have identical twins hoping to bring home the bacon when the Danes come to town for Thursday's European Cup encounter.
Michael Johannsen plays in midfield, his brother Morton up front, and manager Benny Johannsen (no relation) regards them as the jewels in his crown.
‘I have high hopes for those two,’ said the manager today.
‘Both of them play have represented Denmark at under-21 level while Morton has been called up for the senior squad.
‘They are very skilful boys and I believe they will cause lots of problems at Windsor Park.’
Don't count on it, Benny!
Okay, it might be fun watching John McConnell chasing after Michael when he's meant to be marking Morton and Gary Peebles putting the shackles on Morton while Michael runs free…
I'm even getting confused writing about it.
But the Blues are prepared for such eventualities.
After all, it wasn't so long ago they had the THREE Arvedladze brothers bearing down on them in Dinamo Tbilisi shirts.
And look what happened to them…
Seriously though, what a fillip it is to have the stylish Danes here for what is, after all, the proper start to the European Cup.
Linfield have been given a lifeline courtesy of Tbilisi's shameful dismissal from the tournament and let's hope they grasp it with both hands.
The preliminary round was an experience in more ways than one but a successful result in this tie could see the Blues avoiding such a scenario in future.
Remember, they only missed out on meeting Copenhagen in the first round proper by 0.3 of a point.
Instead, they were sent to Georgia to play a side which was ‘invited’ to take part in the competition by UEFA; I think serious vetting is the order of the day from now on!
But it's all water under the bridge for this season and Linfield must now concentrate on bridging the gap between themselves and their Danish visitors.
There are interesting similarities between the two clubs.
Both play in their country's national stadium, the grounds subjected to substantial renovations in recent years.
And both of course climaxed a return to form by winning their respective championships last season.
Both have made encouraging starts to the new campaign with Linfield, up until today, unbeaten in domestic soccer and Copenhagen winning four and drawing one of their first six games.
Blues manager Trevor Anderson is in the Danish capital today, running the rule over his opponents.
Apart from the Johannsen twins, he will be interested in striker Peter Mueller who was on the bench when Denmark defeated Albania in Tirana earlier this week.
Diego Tur is a highly rated young defender while Morton Falch does an excellent holding job in the middle of the park.
Copenhagen's manager does not need to watch Linfield; he was in Tbilisi as part of the Blues' party and had the home match videoed.
He said: ‘Linfield showed a lot of character in Tbilisi.
They were up against a side encouraged by a large, partisan crowd but kept their discipline and got a good result.
‘I wasn't in Belfast for the second leg but from what I saw on television they gave Tbilisi a lot of problems and that's what we are expecting next week.
‘Obviously we would like to win the game in Belfast but I would not be too disappointed with a draw.’
Johannsen was impressed with goalkeeper Wesley Lamont in Tbilisi — who wasn't?— and midfielder Peebles.
He also thought sweeper Noel Bailie showed up well under pressure.
He has a tactical plan for Belfast but won't be drawn on it.
‘You'll have to wait and see,’ he said.
Linfield chairman David Campbell meanwhile would like to see a decent crowd at Windsor Park next Thursday.
The game has been put back 24 hours so as to avoid a clash with live television transmission of Honved v Manchester United and Rangers v Levski Sofia — so there's no excuse.
‘I was a little bit disappointed with the turn-out for our home match with Tbilisi,’ he said.
‘The team had put on a marvellous display out in Georgia and I thought we'd get a few more than 6,000.
‘The fans who did turn up gave us tremendous support and I know they'll be back but it would be nice to have an even bigger crowd roaring us on.’
Linfield certainly need all the help they can get to overcome a side with an average age of 22.
It will be a difficult task but as recent events have shown, anything is possible in Europe.
One thing is certain…no-one at Windsor Park will go within a mile of the match officials' kit-bags.
And anyone seen at the ground with an envelope containing 5,000 dollars will be promptly expelled.
A Wright move?
TOMMY Wright returns to the Newcastle United team on Monday night.
The Northern Ireland goalkeeper replaces the suspended Pavel Srnecek for the visit of Sheffield Wednesday, a game which will be screened live on Sky.
It will certainly be the biggest ‘live’ audience Wright has played in front of— and it could well be his last game for the Magpies.
Nottingham Forest are planning a £500,000 bid for the big Ballyclare man; expect it to be tabled some time next week.
And Monday's game will go a long way towards determining Wright's future.
Should he mirror his international form at St James' Park, manager Kevin Keegan may be tempted to restore him to first choice goalkeeper.
If not, he'll be on his way.
Keegan knows that Tommy will not settle for second best indefinitely and if he has decided that Srnecek is his favourite then £500,000 would represent good business.
It's Wright's ambition to establish himself at Newcastle but if the future, in terms of first team football, looks bleak he will have to consider the Forest interest.
Wright, who kept another clean sheet against Latvia on Wednesday is well aware of Forest manager Frank Clark's interest but is keeping his cards close to his chest.
‘Let's see what happens next week,’ he said.
‘All I'm concerned about at the moment is seizing my chance with Newcastle.
‘It's a big night for me…my first appearance in the Premiership.’
Tommy Wright: Monday night's match could be his first — and last — Premiership appearance for Newcastle
GOLF
English take title
ENGLAND edged to their first men's home international title for four years when they snatched a dramatic 7–7 tie with Wales in the final match of the round-robin series at Hoylake yesterday.
Wales, who needed to beat England to take the crown for the first time, led 3–2 after the morning foursomes and at one point were in front in seven of the 10 singles.
But as the afternoon progressed the tide gradually turned in England's favour, and former British Youth champion Warren Bennett secured their crucial point when he defeated Richard Dinsdale by two holes.
Ireland beat Scotland 8–6 to take third spot ahead of the Scots, who were left with the wooden spoon.
They led 3–2 after the morning foursomes, and Anderson, Higgins, Murphy, and Fanagan all had wins while McGimpsey, Morrow and Morris all had halves.
The ‘Master’ returns to take classes
I EXPECT there won't be too many vacant places at Wellington College, Annadale Avenue, Belfast, next Tuesday evening when one of the best fly-tyers in the business makes a welcome return to the evening class scene.
It has been a couple of years since master fly-tyer Pat Mulholland held court on the Wellington College campus, but I can tell you that if fly-tying is what you want to learn, then this will be the best £26 you ever invested.
Of course, you will need a few bits and bobs to get started, but Pat can provide a list.
Alternatively any of the tackle shops can kit you with the vice and enough thread and feathers to get you started.
Pat's fly-tying classes will run right through the autumn till Christmas and resume with a new run early in the New Year.
Classes
The classes are on Tuesday evenings from 7.15 to 9.15 pm, a two-hour session which seems to be over almost before it has started, such is the enjoyment.
Enrolment was last Tuesday, but I expect there will be some places still vacant when the classes start this Tuesday, September 14.
But turn up early for I'm sure they'll go quickly!
Congratulations to the Causeway Coast Sea Angling Club, and especially to secretary Noel Kinnear, for organising last weekend's 29th International Causeway Coast International Sea Angling Festival out of Portrush.
The four-day festival attracted more than 360 anglers — just over 100 for the two-day shore event and 260 over the two days of boat fishing from 25 charter boats.
The shore event was poor, principally because a commercial fisherman from Portstewart thoughtfully trawled up and down the shallow waters of the East Strand the day of the first competition.
However, plaice to over 2 lbs were taken during the event.
There were fears, too, that the boat event would be poor.
Donegal trawlers were seen at the back of the Skerries, Donegore and The Humps the day before the festival started.
Can't somebody do something about these people?
Anyway, the boat fishing turned out to be surprisingly good.
Pollack, ling and conger were the main species.
There were a number of specimen pollack and one specimen ling of 20 lbs.
The festival attracted 43 members from the Nissan car plant on Tyneside and a further 17 visiting competitors from Scotland.
A competing event at Downings kept the Donegal visitors to a minimum.
There were several specimen fish taken including a pollack of 12 lbs 8 oz by Norman Reid of the Causeway Coast and another of 12 lbs 7 oz by Derek McLister of the AVX club.
The best local angler was George Creighton of the Causeway Coast Club.
The winner of the boat section was Billy Gay of the Surfmasters Club; runner-up was George Creighton and third was David Bailey of the East Belfast Club.
Sean Black of the Causeway Coast Club won the shore event.
Scottish visitors did well with Willie Sloan from Irvine taking the award for the best overseas angler.
Helen Falconer of Irvine was the best Lady Angler and Lee Moland, also from Irvine, was the best junior.
The best ling at 8.2 kilos was caught by Trevor Hylands of the Causeway Coast Club; the best turbot at 4.45 kilos went to Carson Campbell of the AVX Club.
Sea angling off the Donegal coast continues to be good as well.
Jim Ewing and members of the Raughley SAC in Sligo were out on Saturday with charter skipper, Malcolm Bowden from Rathmullan.
Malcolm brought the party to the wreck of the Empire Heritage, north of Fanad Head, and later in the day to two other smaller wrecks.
Fishing was very good with the group taking 75 ling to 18 lbs, 30 pollack to 11 lbs and numbers of coalfish to 8 lbs.
On Sunday, a party of anglers from Carrickfergus SAC led by Ian Eaglen and Angela Crerard from Lough Swilly SAC fished on the same three wrecks.
Small wreck
Early in the day, the party took 90 ling to 15 lbs, 50 pollack to 11 lbs and quantities of coalfish.
On the way back, the party tried a small wreck for pollack and Angela took two pollack over 12 lbs on her first two drops with a redgill.
When the fish were weighed ashore, one fish had lost some precious ounces but the other fish weighed in at 12 lbs 3 oz on certified scales.
Parties of Irish, French, German and Northern Ireland anglers fished with charter skipper Enda O'Callaghan all week from Killybegs.
Fishing was excellent over rough ground for a wide range of species including pollack to 10 lbs, coalfish to 8 lbs, ling to 12 lbs, conger to 19 lbs, cod to 10 lbs, dabs, turbot, brill, plaice, red and grey gurnard, pouting, poor cod, dogfish, ballan and cuckoo wrasse and thornback ray.
Meetings bottleneck leads to reduced entries and complaints Dates clash dilemma
DOWNPATRICK and Down Royal executives will be keeping their fingers crossed next week that there will be strong declarations for their meetings on Wednesday and Saturday respectively.
Because of an appalling clash of dates, the fixtures are within three days of each other and to make matters worse, Dundalk is scheduled for Thursday.
However, I wish to stress that the racecourses have nothing to do with this idiotic piece of planning.
In fact they are dead against it and Iain Duff, manager at both courses, is optimistic that sanity will reign next year.
‘Already we have met the Turf Club who decide these matters,’ Iain said, ‘and we have objected in the strongest possible terms to these dates being so close.
They have listened and I am hopeful that we can sort the matter out.
‘You know, the public feel it is our fault that the clash has occurred but this just isn't so.
We are just as much annoyed as the ordinary racegoer because our entries are well down on what we would normally expect.’
Forceful
I agree with Iain and I know that he is a forceful enough personality to get the Turf Club fixtures committee to see things his way.
Meanwhile the two Ulster courses and Dundalk have to suffer through poor entries for their jumping races.
Of course, the Flat parts of the cards don't suffer, but then who's interested in Flat racing at Down Royal and Downpatrick.
Let's take the Wednesday card first of all.
The novice chase received an entry of 12 and it looks as though a handful of runners will go to post.
Even the two hurdle races were light on entries with 21 for the maiden and 24 for the handicap.
This meeting is sponsored entirely by the Sean Graham organisation and deserves better treatment from the Turf Club.
Jim Nicholson, the chairman of Down Royal, could also be said to have a grievance for he has sponsored three of the National Hunt races on the Saturday card and in fact has put his money where his mouth is.
But 11 entries for novice chase and 17 for the handicap chase don't augur well for big fields.
Jim is a hard hitting sort of individual who knows where he is going in racing and he has brought Down Royal, I feel, out of the 17th century into the 20th — not quite the 21st — in a matter of a couple of years.
This course is now going places, take it from me, and once the fixture log jam is solved I see happy days ahead.
Delighted
By the way, while on the subject of Down Royal let me point that I was delighted last week that the course received a Racecourse of the Year award from the Racegoers Club.
My point was that I was intrigued as to who was representing the racing Press on the panel of voters.
No reflection on the course.
They are doing a fine job but at least two of the five journalists on the panel have never been to Down Royal in their whole careers!
That's why I was puzzled.
Some bookmakers have not been entirely happy with their new placing in the Down Royal set-up and there had been grumblings about taking the matter to a higher authority.
However, I understand that the finishing line has been re-aligned and that being the case bookmakers on the rails next to the course will be moved nearer to the winning post, bringing them more into contact with punters.
Those who bet nearest to the stand will also be moved but only slightly in comparison.
Short aims to get back on course in chess battle
NIGEL Short was today aiming to set his world chess championship challenge back on course after losing his opening game to reigning champion Garry Kasparov.
The 28-year-old Briton knows a second defeat could leave him in desperate trouble against the man rated by many as the best player in the chess history.
The organisers of the match, which is sponsored by The Times newspaper, will also be anxious that he does not go two down as the public may start to write off his chances.
The bookmakers have already given their verdict, cutting the odds on Kasparov retaining the title he has held since 1985, from 9–2 on to 5–1 on.
Short lost the first game to the Russian on time after failing to make 40 moves in his allotted two hours.
Afterwards he dismissed the defeat as no more than ‘irritating’ and said he still had a good chance of winning the match.
Critics, however, said that he had ‘blown it’ and that his loss on time — unusual among top players — had exposed his inexperience at the very highest level.
BANBRIDGE Fish trouble
BANBRIDGE Council has been told that anglers have given up fishing at Loughbrickland Lake because the fish stock has been completely destroyed by cormorants.
The Department of Agriculture is to be contacted in a bid to have the problem resolved.
Top bike takes its place in museum
Cycle triumph: The bicycle voted Best Bike of 1993 at the Harrogate Cycle Fair has taken its place at the Ulster Folk and Transport Museum, Cultra, alongside some of its illustrious predecessors.
Raleigh Ireland have presented one of their new Activator II mountain bikes to the museum's transport gallery.
The bike is the first mass-produced bicycle to boast full front and rear suspension.
Getting to grips with the machinery are model Roger Sexton, from Bangor, and Mary McGonagle, the current Miss Northern Ireland.
Lisburn in ‘run-in’ to title bonus
DOWNPATRICK are well out of the running for championship honours this season but they can still play a significant role in the destination of the Lombard and Ulster Section I trophy.
They face the two title protagonists, leaders Lisburn and holders Waringstown, in the last two Saturdays of the season.
Lisburn, with a 13-point cushion, go to Strangford Road at the top of their form and if they can come away with a maximum haul of 22 points, will be very comfortably placed at home to North the following week, with the prospect of the trophy making its way back to Wallace Park for the first time since 1980.
However, despite the run-making of the likes of Uel Graham and Neil Doak who is approaching 600 for the season, they won't find Downpatrick in any mood for generosity.
The Strangford Road side have rediscovered something of their old form lately and will be keen to spike the guns of both Lisburn and Waringstown whom they play on Saturday week.
Waringstown first of all, must beat old rivals Lurgan at The Lawn this week-end to maintain the pressure on the leaders.
And they'll be keen to take revenge for a defeat at Pollock Park a fortnight ago, a grave setback to Waringstown's bid for a third successive crown.
Two other Section I matches see Schweppes Cup winners North Down entertaining North, with the aim of finishing third in the league to complete what for them has been a fine season.
Ballymena's stay in Section I ended after five years when Bangor landed a double victory last week-end and they'll merely be going through the motions at Ballygomartin Road against Woodvale.
Relaxed
Bangor now that they are safe, will be in a relaxed mood and are sure to make things very tough for North at Ormeau on Sunday.
Who comes up from Section II is still very much in the balance between Muckamore, Holywood and Cliftonville.
Incredibly, Muckamore lost out by one run to lowly Cregagh when seemingly in command while Holywood then lost to Carrick, being bowled out for 59.
Thus, Cliftonville have pushed themselves very much into the picture and can enhance their claim by taking care of RUC at Newforge.
Holywood travel to Armagh but the crunch comes on Sunday when Muckamore are at home to Carrick and Cliftonville face Holywood at Greenisland.
Lombard and Ulster Section I: Downpatrick v Lisburn; North Down v North; Waringstown v Lurgan; Woodvale v Ballymena.
Sunday: North v Bangor.
Section II:(Friday)— Laurelvale v Derriaghy.
Saturday: Armagh v Holywood; Derriaghy v Laurelvale; RUC v Cliftonville.
Sunday: Cliftonville v Holywood; Muckamore v Carrick.
Section III: CIYMS v Queen's.
Derry now opt to take ‘secret route’
A veil of secrecy has been thrown over Derry's final preparations for their All Ireland senior football championship decider against Cork.
Manager Eamon Coleman will whisk his squad away this week-end to an undisclosed destination for intense training, a practice match and in-depth tactical discussions.
Coleman is anxious that the entire exercise should be conducted in complete privacy and has mapped out a programme which, he feels, will have a direct bearing on the outcome of the match.
‘We have work to do and it is essential that there are no distractions,’ says Coleman, ‘I am happy the way our build-up has gone so far but the next ten days or so are obviously the most important in terms of morale and motivation.’
Clues
As part of their preparations for the semi-final against Dublin the Derry squad spent the week-end prior to the game at the Slieve Russell Hotel, Ballyconnell and travelled into neighbouring Fermanagh for a practice match.
Derry have no injury worries and manager Eamon Coleman plans to announce his team on Monday.
But he is giving no clues at present as to the composition of his full back line and forward division.
Danny Quinn was substituted against Dublin after twenty minutes and there must be a question mark over his participation in the final with Fergal McCusker and Karl Diamond both pressing for places.
Brian McGilligan and Anthony Tohill will, of course, be at midfield but Dermot McNicholl could come into consideration for a place in the half-forward line.
McNicholl looked sharp and positive when he made his entrance in the second half against Dublin and Damien Cassidy could find himself under a little pressure as a result.
Damien Barton will be on the ‘40’ with Dermot Heaney on his right while the full forward line looks certain to comprise Joe Brolly, Seamus Downey and Enda Gormley.
Surprise
There was surprise expressed when Downey was included in the semi-final line-up but he made an invaluable contribution in the second half through his positional sense and slick distribution.
Meanwhile, Derry county secretary Patsy Mulholland is preparing to coordinate the distribution of tickets to the various clubs.
His biggest problem, of course, is to cope with demand.
‘We reckon that there were about 14,500 Derry supporters at the semi-final and of course a lot more people want to see the final,’ points out Patsy, ‘However, we only receive 2,000 stand and 7,000 terrace tickets so you can see the extent of the problem we face.’
Joe Brolly: looks set for final place
Fergal McCusker: pressing his claims
Griffin's ‘eye’ for trouble
DUBLINER Paul Griffin faces the possibility of being eliminated from the European Championships without losing a contest.
The European featherweight champion may not be allowed to take his place in the quarter finals tonight after sustaining a second eye injury in his win over German's Siegmund Franke.
Griffin's first round victory had left him with an eye fully closed which eventually opened slightly before last night's win against Franke.
Griffin left the Turkish arena with his other eye beginning to swell after another fine performance which he won 9–7 but now faces his toughest test, a date with the championship doctor.
He remains the only Irish competitor in the championships after the shock defeat of Belfast's Damien Kelly in the flyweight division.
Ireland's World bronze medallist went down 8–7 in a titanic battle with Russia's Albert Pekov in their first round clash.
Loser Roxburgh set to carry on
ANDY Roxburgh is set to become Scotland's longest-serving international manager next month despite an unsuccessful mission to guide his side to a sixth successive World Cup.
The Scots boss showed no signs of throwing in the towel after last night's 1–1 draw with Switzerland at Pittodrie effectively ended a qualifying sequence which started 20 years ago.
‘When I started out eight years ago my sole aim was to contribute to the national team,’ said Roxburgh.
‘My attitude is still the same as it was at the beginning of the 1986–87 season and that is, if I can continue to contribute then I'm happy to do so.’
With two games remaining in Group One Scotland are out of contention to go the United States, but the Swiss look virtually certain to be one of the 24 nations involved in the finals.
Roxburgh meanwhile will surpass the all-time Scottish managerial record of 61 games he currently shares with the late Jock Stein when Scotland tackle Italy and Malta to wind up the campaign.
Whether he stays on beyond that point is open to conjecture, but for the moment Roxburgh is very much the man in charge of a Scottish team who produced one of their better performances at Aberdeen.
One moment of madness by Norwich goalkeeper Bryan Gunn resulted in the penalty which earned the Swiss the draw they craved, leaving the Scots to reflect on a missed opportunity to stay on the fringe of the qualifying race.
But in the final analysis, Switzerland took three points out of a possible four from Scotland and that fact was not lost on Roxburgh, who said: ‘I think these two games were significant.
‘At the end of the match in Berne last year they snatched victory and at the end of this game they snatched a point off us.
Like a club side whose name seems to be on a cup, they had their name on the ticket to the U.S.’
John Collins had put his side ahead in the 50th minute after a succession of chances were passed up, but Gunn's suicidal challenge on Ciri Sforza near the end led to Georges Bregy's penalty
Ireland take sad tumble
TITLE holders Ireland were toppled 8 6 by newly-crowned European champions Wales despite taking the foursomes 3–2 in the Home international amateur golf championships at Royal Liverpool, Hoylake, yesterday.
Ireland collapsed in the singles in which Shandon Park's Neil Anderson was one of only three Irish winners.
Gary Wolstenholme drew on his wealth of experience over the Hoylake course to give England the all-important point which keeps them on course for a fifth title in a decade.
Ireland v Wales (Ireland names first):
Foursomes: P Harrington & J Fanagan bt C Evans & R Johnson 4 & 3; G Murphy & E Power lost to N Ellis & H Roberts 1 hole; G McGimpsey & D Higgins bt B Dredge & C O'Carroll 1 hole; N Anderson & J Morris lost to R Dinsdale & M Macara 2 & 1; A Morrow & K Nolan bt G Houston & M Smith 6 & 5.
Singles: Power lost to Dredge 3 and 1; Harrington bt Evans 3 and 2; Anderson bt Ellis 2 and 1; McGimpsey lost to Macara 2 and 1; Fanagan lost to Johnson one hole; Murphy halved with Roberts; Higgins bt Houston one hole; Morris lost to O'Carroll two holes; Morrow lost to Dinsdale 2 and 1; Nolan lost to S Jones one hole.
Match result: Ireland 6 Wales 8.
Wide-awake Torrance
SAM Torrance returned to action in the GA European Open at East Sussex National today believing that his sleepwalking injury might have been a blessing in disguise.
‘I'm really keen to play again,’ said the 40-year-old Scot, whose Ryder Cup place was put in jeopardy by crashing into a flower pot three weeks ago and badly bruising his sternum.
‘The first two weeks off were difficult because I could have fallen out of an automatic cup spot, but last week was great.
I think I needed a break I have been pushing really hard and was more tired than I was prepared to admit,’ he says.
Irish edged out
AT the end of an exciting morning's play in which all three foursomes matches went to the final green, England established a one-point lead over Ireland on the second day of the Women's Home international golf championship's at Hermitage.
Ireland's top pair Eavan Higgins and Tracy Eakin, one down as early as the second hole, fought all the way against Nikki Buxton and Joanne Morley but were finally beaten by one hole.
Strabane's Lynn McCool had a 12 foot putt to give herself and Eileen Rose Power victory over Julie Hall and Kirsty Speak but it stopped on the lip and the match was halved.
Ireland seemed to be heading for a win in the bottom match when Mary McKenna and Aideen Rogers turned three up but Joanne Hockley and Sandy Lambert made one up.
Here Rogers pitched to six feet and McKenna's putt squared the match.
The final hole was halved in par, so Ireland had to settled for two half points.
In the other match Scotland led Wales 2–1.
On the wings of a legend
Three Ulster views of RAF's finest hour
THE recent late splash of summer must have brought back memories of September 1940, and the Battle of Britain, for many people in this province.
That was when Britain's junior service, The Royal Airforce, which had just come of age — it was formed in 1918 — had what was arguably its finest hour.
In this 75th anniversary year of the RAF, Max Arthur's history of the force from 1918, ‘There Shall Be Wings’(Hodder and Stoughton, £18.99), is a fitting tribute to the men and women of the service.
Arthur is not the author; he is the editor, leaving the narrative to the men and women involved in the incidents, such as Squadron Leader Chris Tingay, who was awarded the AFC for his daring Hercules flight into Sarajevo.
Of course, the Ulster contribution to Britain's fighting forces is legendary, and Arthur has chosen to feature accounts from three Ulstermen in three very different theatres of operations.
‘Horrible’
Flt Sgt Dave McCausland joined the RAF in 1943, and after training at Bishopscourt, was transferred to the South African Air Force.
McCausland has some profound thoughts on the meaning of war to him: ‘War is a horrible thing…
It debases people, but it also brings out the best in people.’
One has to bear in mind that at the age at which McCausland was wireless operator/air gunner in the hostile skies over Italy, young men of the present day will be worrying about A-level results or first year at university.
Sqd Ldr Jimmy Malley had a distinguished career with bomber command and flew in the legendary Wellington F for Freddie, featured in the film Target For Tonight.
He is still taking medication for injuries to his hand caused by the extreme cold blowing in through a hole in the fuselage during a ten-hour flight.
Flt Sgt David Russell ended up a prisoner of war in the Far East.
His account of life in the camps is harrowing.
At the camp in Bandoeng, he tells of being treated by Flt Lt Harold Knox, an Ulster physician who recited excerpts from the Rubaiyat of Omar Khayam.
Tomorrow these three will be at the Battle of Britain memorial service in St Anne's Cathedral, and will be spiritually linked to countless others as they cast their minds back to their youth, to friends from a generation which became a legend.
Max Arthur's book honours that legend.
Vulcan crew: An RAF crew with its Avro Vulcan delta bomber about to take part in a USAF Strategic Air Command competition in Florida
Thumbnail circuit of Ireland
ON the morning of May 31 1991, Paul Clements stood beside Belfast's Shore Road and raised a tentative thumb to the traffic.
Carrickfergus bound drivers sped past but eventually one of them answered his plea and stopped.
‘How far you goin?’
‘About 1,500 miles,’ said Paul.
He wasn't joking.
For this was the start of a journey which the Tyrone-born BBC journalist had long wanted to make.
His plan?
To hitch hike right round the coast of Ireland and to write a book about his experiences.
Footslogging
Starting from Belfast and moving in an anti-clockwise direction, he completed the trip in a month.
His account of it took rather longer but has now been published under the title ‘Irish Shores: A Journey Round The Rim of Ireland’(Greystone Books, £5.95).
This footslogging — and often freezing — circuit of Ireland, during which he relied entirely on motorists' charity, provided him with much diverting material.
Like the trio of drinkers he meets in a Co Waterford pub who call themselves the KGB — because their surnames are Kelly, Gallagher and Boland.
Or the forthright Mayo farmer — obviously a man of taste — who lays into Charlie Haughey for spending millions of pounds on ‘interpretation centres which none of the locals want’ when it would be better used in building factories.
How's this for rhetoric?
‘The whole thing is a load of bullshit,’ says the Mayo man.
‘They've been workin' and diggin' in those s…fields for years and do you know what it is?
I'll tell you what it is — it's only bogland and I should know for I've been lookin' at them fields for years.’
The author himself can be just as candid when the spirit moves him.
On Portrush, for example: ‘Full of the twin evils of lager louts and litter, the latter caused in most cases by the former’.
And on the Donegal resort, Bundoran: ‘It seems unable to shake off its image of seaside seediness’.
There is much more in that vein in this engaging travelogue, and Clements, with the reporter's eye for the telling detail, also provides useful little descriptions of the local history, the flora and fauna of the countryside he passed through on his coastal odyssey.
Splendidly illustrated by Barbara Allen, the book is informative, unashamedly opinionated and entertaining.
Paul Clements: A hike round the rim
Guide to the best buys — Myra Greer
ALTHOUGH classified as ‘New World,’ South Africa is far from au newcomer at wine making.
Dutch settlers planted the first vineyard when they arrived in 1652.
Since the lifting of sanctions the last couple of years has seen a flood of wines onto our shelves from the Cape — which has some of the most beautiful winelands in the world.
Marks and Spencer Cape Country; Sauvignon Blanc; Chenin Blanc also Colombard.
Typical of the modern technology which is turning out good commercial wines.
All on offer at £2.99.
Winemark and other Independents have the Bellingham range which includes Culemborg Chenin Blanc (or Steen as it is known in SA) Crisp, fresh slightly off dry with a definite style of its own, £3.99.
Cape Gold £4.99 in unique bottle — Steen again but with a touch of muscat to give a less dry, fuller flavour.
There's a spicy, peppery mature Shiraz £5.99 and my favourite, Classic Thirteen made from 13 different grapes — a la Chateau Neuf du Pape then matured in old barrels which gives a lovely smooth, rich, full, very fruity wine.
Stewarts keep an impressive range from several different producers.
There's the Sauvignon blanc based Goiya Kgeisje at £3.69.
A lovely aromatic creamy oaky Pinot Blanc from Van Loveren £4.99.
Try Kanonkop Pinotage £7.59, a cross between Pinot Noir and Cinsault which lends smoothness of red Burgundy to the body of a southern Rhone.
Then there's Danie De Wet, undoubtedly foremost Chardonnay producers in SA.
His powerful, concentrated, gently oaky Boteleur at £6.99 is a classic but needs a bit more time and his Green label Chardonnay also at £6.99 is a real winner, multi-layered, rich and toasty.
Finally there's De Wet's superb dessert Rhine Riesling £4.25 which has all the characteristics of a ripe, honeyed German Beerenauslese.
Doncaster 1.35 —
NICOLOTTE (10–11 Jt Fav) M Hills 1; Pencader (10–11 Jt Fav) 2. 2.05 — HAWAJISS (5–2 Jt Fav) W R Swinburn 1; Kissing Cousin (5–2 Jt Fav); News And Echo (11–2) 3.
Folkestone 1.45 — MAJHOLA (5–4 Fav) A Munro 1; Diplomatist (5–1) 2; Lailati (7–1) 3. 2.15 — ELEVATOR SHAFT (7–2) A Munro 1; Mandeville George (10–1) 2; Speedy Snaps Image (25–1) 3.
Belfast Division M2 northbound York Street to Sandyknowes road closed from 6pm tomorrow to 6am on Tuesday.
Westlink from Donegall Road to Grosvenor Road (both directions)— closed Sunday.
Middlepath Street, Belfast — lane restrictions.
Dunbar Link at junction York Street — lane restrictions.
Frederick Street — lane restrictions.
Ballycorr Road, junction Ballyeaston Road to junction Church Road, Ballynure — road closed.
Crosscollyer Street, Deacon Street, Mountcollyer Street — closed.
Doagh Road, Old Carrick Road, Manse Road, Glengormley — closed for widening and strengthening works.
Upper Crumlin Road, Ballyutoag Road, Horseshoe Bend, Lylehill Road Lowe — closed for resurfacing.
Flush Road, Ballyutoag Road, Boghill Road — closed for resurfacing.
Glenville Road, Shore Road, Glenville Parade — road closed from 8am tomorrow.
Knockbracken Road from junction with Ballygowan Road to junction with Ballymaconaghy Road — road closed.
Knockagh Road, junction Old Carrick Road to junction Slievetrue Road — road closed.
Upper Newtownards Road from junction with Cherryhill Road to junction Robbs Road, Dundonald — Lane restrictions, major delays expected.
Ballymena Division Warden Street, Ballymena — single lane traffic on existing one-way street.
A2 Bay Road, Carnlough — traffic control.
M2 from Dunsilly to Ballygrooby — fast lane closed in both directions.
A6 Chapel Corner, Antrim — changing junction from traffic lights to roundabout — delays expected.
Thomas Street, Ballymena — one-way traffic from Hill Street to Mount Street for three weeks.
Coleraine Division
Rascahan Bridge, one mile west of Limavady — temporary diversion around bridge.
C91 Macfin, north of Ballymoney — corner improvement — road closure from yesterday for four weeks.
Craigavon Division A27 between Poyntzpass and Newry — traffic control in operation.
A27 Tandragee to Newry Road at Aughlish — road closed.
A51 Tandragee near junior high school — temporary traffic control in operation.
A2 Newry Road, Warrenpoint (dual-carriageway)— contraflow in operation.
A2 two miles south of Loughbrickland for 1.25 miles — lane restrictions with possible delays.
Carnreagh Road, Hillsborough — Temporary traffic lights at times.
Delays likely.
A2 Belfast to Bangor Road, Tillysburn roundabout to Palace Barracks — lane restrictions on both carriageways with 40mph speed limit.
Fast lanes closed on each carriageway until further notice with two lanes open for traffic.
Irish Street, Downpatrick, environmental improvement scheme — one-way traffic in Irish Street for duration of works except Sundays and Mondays when road closures is in operation.
M1 guardrail contract between Sprucefield and Moira — one lane in operation (hard shoulder) for duration of works on each carriageway between Sprucefield and Moira roundabouts.
Motorway closed between Sprucefield and Moira roundabouts on Sunday from 8am to 8pm.
Omagh Division B72 Milltown Road, Strabane — road closed.
ROADWORKS A5 Derry Road, Omagh from Castle Street to Harmony Heights — Traffic advised to use an alternative route where possible.
A5 Dublin Road, Omagh at junction with Market Street — reduced width with severe delays expected.
A29 Chapel Street, Church Street, Cookstown — single lane traffic, traffic control, delays expected.
A5 Moyle Road, Newtownstewart — traffic control, delays expected.
Victoria Road, Bready — traffic control, delays expected.
This list is compiled by the DoE Roads Service.
Happy ending: Nicky, the first woman to walk to the North Pole, married Robert, the first man to walk to both Poles, three weeks ago in a Co.
Durham registry office.
It was a quiet ceremony with just two close friends.
Great adventure: Robert and Nicky on the North Pole trail.
‘If you're going to marry a madman you might as well find out what makes him tick’
Romance blossoms on ice walk to ‘hell’.
WITH the ice cracking and groaning underfoot and the wind etching their faces, Robert Swan stood at the North Pole and turned to the woman for whom he had just walked to the end of the earth.
‘Will you marry me?’ he asked Nicky Cole, with breath rasping.
Then he thought again.
‘Don't answer now — it's too damn cold.’
Three months later, Nicky leans back in her armchair in their Chelsea flat and grins.
‘I think I mumbled something, looked at my watch and wandered off.’
Nicky, the first woman to walk to the North Pole, married Robert, the first man to walk to both Poles, three weeks ago in a Co.
Durham registry office.
It was a quiet ceremony with just two close friends.
Convinced
‘We'd been talking about getting married for quite a while,’ said Nicky.
‘I wanted to experience what made the man.
After all, if you're going to marry a madman you might as well find out what makes him tick.
The couple sit close together in their plush home-cum-office.
It could be any other thirtysomethings' flat if it wasn't for the sled and cross-country skis on the balcony.
A year ago Nicky, Rob's girlfriend of about eight months convinced him to go back to the ice pack that nearly killed him.
‘I threatened never to walk anywhere again after reaching the North Pole in 1989,’ he said.
‘I'd fallen quite badly and had disc problems with my back.
I was frightened to go back to the place that had torn me apart.’
Agreed
Nicky rolled her eyes as Robert lit a cigarette.
‘I'd heard Robert and the Russian doctor he went to the Pole with in '89 discussing a short trek of the last 100 miles.
Robert was singularly underwhelmed by the whole thing, but I thought it was a great idea.
‘He'd never taken a woman on any of his expeditions before, so I nagged him for about a week and used all my female charm.
In the end Rob agreed to go.
‘He said, ‘You're going to have to get seriously fit, and if you commit to doing it, you must complete it’.’
Nicky spent eight months training intensively, walking through Cumbria, dragging herself around parks every day with a pack on her back and clutching heavy ski-poles.
She also spent a hellish week in a Swiss blizzard.
Robert, his 37-year-old face tanned from too long under harsh polar skies, is full of praise for his new bride.
‘I thought she'd have a rougher time than she did, unlike some team members who were like bulls at a gate.
They wanted to reach the pole in five minutes,’ he said.
‘Nicky paced herself and came through the ranks.
She found her place in the team, because you don't always have to lead from the front.
‘I adored her being there in a place I equate with hell.’
Hell indeed.
One team member nearly died on the seven-day trip.
Climbing pressure ridges formed by ancient blocks of ice the size of Yorkshire grinding together, he decided to ditch his skis.
‘It's like climbing a five-bar gate wearing skis,’ said Nicky, ‘but if the ice collapses under you the skis support your weight.
Incredible
‘This guy got fed up with it, threw his skis over one ridge and started to climb over when it collapsed.
He was stuck by his rucksack in the hole, up to his waist in the Arctic Ocean.
For the few minutes he was trapped there he could feel the pull of the ocean on his legs.
And it's a mile deep there.
‘We didn't take our skis off after that.
‘Reaching the Pole was incredible.
I thought, ‘Wow, I'm standing on the top of the world’.’
For Rob it was like going back to Piccadilly Circus after five years and finding all the buildings have been moved.
‘For me, I was in the place which I had seen on a globe as a girl — where the pin went through it!
The horizon actually curves, and you can literally walk around the world in five steps.’
Mum-of-one Nicky, a divorced 34-year-old commercial director, has known Robert for about 16 years.
‘We actually started working together about 18 months ago, before the Earth Summit in Rio.
That was when we realised we were terrifically compatible and started ‘going out’.’
Their relationship was kept a secret until after the polar trek.
‘We didn't want the papers saying things like ‘Iceman Rob marries his Snow Queen’,’ said Rob.
Caring
‘These have been the best two weeks of my life.
It's my greatest adventure.
On a personal level I can't go off and say ‘Bye darling’, I'll see you in a few years.
Now, if I go somewhere, I'll take Nicky.’
The couple do get serious when they talk about their work in their environmental consultancy, speaking to companies and giving lectures about caring for the planet.
Rob said: ‘We think there's all these pristine wildernesses left on Earth which we haven't affected yet.
But you go to the middle of nowhere and Nicky would look up to see a black cloud on the horizon and ask what it was.
And I would say, ‘It's pollution ‘.
‘It devastated her to find this last wilderness was marked.
‘I want to show companies that they can help the environment and save money.
We want to find people who can say, ‘I've saved £10,000 and helped the environment’.’
Children
His next project is to take seven mentally disabled people to Everest Base Camp and up a 22,000ft high peak.
‘It's about everyone having their own Everest to climb.
Then I may go to the Antarctic, maybe back to the South Pole again, hopefully with Nicky.’
Nicky, however, has other ideas: ‘THAT all depends on having children.’
Clearly there's another Everest to climb.
By Matt Horan.
Dungannon concerned over injury list Carey stays on sidelines
DUNGANNON'S international winger Ronnie Carey is still doubtful for next week's opening Insurance Corporation League clash with
Shannon because of an ankle injury.
He misses his second game in succession when Instonians are the visitors tomorrow at Stevenson Park.
Carey went over on the right ankle during a friendly game with Armagh a fortnight ago, and is still gingerly finding his way back to full fitness.
Another blow
With both scrum-half Ashley Blair and flanker Johnny Boyd out for a protracted period, Carey's absence would be a further blow to Ulster's lone Division One representatives.
Brian Smith fills the gap against Instonians who will present a stiff prelude for the League battles ahead.
Dungannon will be happy to have a ready-made replacement for Blair in Irish Under 21 pivot Andrew Gallagher and up front former Irish Schools' number 8 John Patterson gets his big chance to stake a claim for Boyd's open side berth.
Dungannon are also bolstered by the return of Ireland lock Patrick Johns.
There is a possibility that Alistair Redpath may get a run in the centre.
He is another one of the Ireland Schools' side that toured New Zealand the summer before last and was a member of the Coleraine AI Schools' Cup winning side in 1992.
Instonians have former international and vice-captain Keith Crossan back in the side after a successful visit to Donegal's Sheephaven Bay where the local junior club laid out the red carpet in spectacular fashion for an international select side.
Crossan now appears in a backline that looks very exciting, particularly with the arrival of Graeme McCluskey.
Instonians continue with Norman Robson at scrum-half, while big lock Colin Hamilton plays his first game of the season and flanker John Kernoghan gets a chance to show his prowess.
Greystones are expected to include internationals Brian Rigney and Nick Popplewell for their visit to Malone.
Rigney, after going through a difficult period with a knee injury, is back in action following a summer of hard graft and determined to regain his international berth.
Popplewell is now back in harness after the arduous Lions tour to New Zealand.
Ear operation
Malone will again go into action without scrum-half Stephen Cowan.
Cowan is recuperating after an ear operation and is unlikely to be back in action for a month.
The number 9 jersey will be contested between Stephen Brown and Stewart Hooks who has returned to Gibson Park after another short spell with North.
Young Stuart Duncan is back in action after his career was put on hold following a serious knee injury last Christmas and Malone are still hoping that former Irish Schools' star Scott Kirkpatrick remains at home rather than taking up an option to return to the States.
Ronnie Carey: nursing an ankle injury which may force him to sit out Dungannon's opening All-Ireland League fixture.
BELFAST Patrick Pearse GAC grand set dancing ceili, O'Neill Centre, York Lane, 8pm.
Party in the Park, Cycle Track, Orangefield Park, 1pm.
Lymphoma Support Service, Ulster Cancer Foundation, Eglantine Avenue, 10.30am.
Autumn Fair and Flower Show, Newtownbreda Presbyterian Church Halls, 2pm.
Car Boot Sale, St Dorothea's Church, Gilnahirk Road, 11am — 1pm.
Garden Fete, All Saints Church, Eglantine Road, 2pm.
Record Collectors' Fair, Maysfield Leisure Centre, 10am —4pm.
St Molua's Parish, Stormont, craft fair 10am — 4pm.
Belvoir Players, The Mating Season, Group Theatre, 8pm.
West Side Story, Klondyke Building, 7.30pm, Opera Northern Ireland.
COOKSTOWN
Friends of Mid-Ulster Hospital Car Boot Sale, Brookmount Bowling Centre Car Park, Dungannon Road, from noon.
Sperrin Symposium Weekend, Glenavon House Hotel.
ARDHOWEN
Belfast Operatic Society, Gilbert and Sullivan and their successors, 8pm.
BALLYCLARE
Ballyclare Historical Society Heritage Day, Heritage Trail, leaving the town hall at 2pm.
BESSBROOK
Noon — 5pm arts and crafts display, Millview Centre, displays and sale, noon — 5pm Town Hall, bonny baby competition, town hall green, 3pm.
Derramore House, open 1pm — 5pm.
JORDANSTOWN
Festival of Music and Singing, Jordanstown Christian Centre, 7pm.
BALLYGRAINEY
Ballygrainey Presbyterian Country Fayre, Mr D Hamilton's Field, 10.30am.
PORTADOWN
Little Shop of Horrors, by the Junior Phoenix Players, Town Hall Theatre, 8pm. £3.50.
NEWTOWNABBEY
Gala Fireworks Display, Valley Leisure Centre, 8.30pm.
RATHFRILAND
Bronte Homeland Centre, at the former Drumballyroney Church and School House.
COMBER
Comber and District Horticultural Society Autumn Show, Second Presbyterian Church Halls, 2pm.
DOWNPATRICK
Down County Museum, The Mall.
CASTLE WARD
Working demonstration at the cornmill, 2.30 — 5pm.
STRABANE
Printing demonstration, Gray's Printing Press, 2 — 4pm.
HILLSBOROUGH and District Horticultural Society Autumn Show, Downshire Hall, 2pm.
WARINGSTOWN
Waringstown and District Horticultural Society, annual show, Parochial Hall, 2 — 4.30pm.
BANGOR
Autumn fair and auction, St Gall's Parish Church Hall, Carnlea, noon — 2pm.
KILREA
Kilrea Local History Group, Back to the Stone Age, Town Hall, 10am.
BANBRIDGE
Flower, Fruit and Vegetable Show, Bannside Presbyterian Church Hall, Castlewellan Road, 2.30pm.
Taste of Time European Heritage Tour, starts 9.30am, Tourist Information Centre, £5.
ANTRIM
Sale, auction, bouncing castle and games, Methodist Church, Greysotne Road, 11am.
CRUMLIN
Langford Lodge Second World War exhibition, Gortnagallon Road, noon — 6pm.
CRAIGAVON
Lough Neagh Discovery Centre, Oxford Island, Lurgan exit off M1, junction 10, open 10am to 8pm.
Sundays, noon to 8pm.
Details for inclusion in this column must be received in writing three days before publication.
Please state clearly the date, time, and location of the event.
Lace up your old boots
Working Holiday, September 4–11, North Coast Sand Dunes, Co Antrim.
This unique system is under severe pressure and a valuable habitat will be lost if basic management is not carried out soon.
Management techniques will include brushwood fencing and thatching to capture windborne sand.
There will also be Marram grass collection and planting to strengthen the dunes.
Accommodation will be provided in the very comfortable Derganagh House in Ballycastle.
Total cost of week inclusive of food and accommodation is £37.00.
Pick up point is in front of Belfast Central Station at 5pm.
Further information and/or booking forms, telephone Conservation Volunteers (0232) 645169.
Working Holiday, September 25-October 2, Murlough Nature Reserve, Co Down.
The work includes constructing steps along the coastal path and several days pitching on the nearby Glen River path.
Accommodation will be in two cottages overlooking Dundrum Inner Bay.
Total cost is £35.00, and pick up point is at 5pm in front of Belfast Central Station.
Weekend Break, September 10–12, near Legananny Dolmen, South Down.
A chance to try your hand at the ancient art of Drystone Walling.
Total cost £10.00, booking and/or information from CVNI (0232) 645169.
Weekend Break, September 16–19, Falcarragh, Donegal Re-establishing paths that date back to the 1730s.
Total cost £12.00, booking and/or information from CVNI (0232) 645169.
Midweek Volunteering, Mon-Fri of any week excluding Bank Holidays, pick-up-point for Belfast at 9.15am in the city centre, Housing Executive Building, Adelaide Street.
Volunteers will be left back at pick-up-point at approx 4pm.
Enquiries about volunteering in the Belfast region to CVNI (0232) 645169, in the Derry region to CVNI (0504) 262664, Coleraine (0265) 55352, Bangor (0247) 852817, Enniskillen (03656) 28184 and Newry (0693) 66808.
If you cannot volunteer then become a member — information and details at the above telephone numbers.
Great outdoors: Volunteers enjoy fresh air and good craic in the Mournes.
BELFAST
Day of fun
A FIAT Fun Day is being held at Mervyn Stewart Ltd, Boucher Crescent, Belfast, tomorrow (10am to 4pm).
SAILING
Late season flurry
THERE is a burst of late season sailing activity with the Ruffian Class competing for their Northern Ireland title at Carrickfergus Sailing Club and the GP14 Class holding their Autumn Open at East Down Yacht Club.
Both events have racing tomorrow and Sunday, and on Sunday Carlingford Lough Yacht Club host a North Coast trophy meeting for the Optimist Class.
Sunday also marks the start of two Autumn Cruiser Series, hosted by Carrick Sailing Club and Royal Ulster Yacht Club.
Challenging times
YOUNGSTERS from all over Northern Ireland, including Londonderry, are to take part in a mass community challenge to help hospitals, community centres and charities.
Organised by the Post Office, 15 teams of young people will represent Government departments and agencies as well as leading businesses like Shorts Bombardier, the First Trust Bank and Royal Mail in the challenge.
Teams from the Scouts and Boys' Brigade will also take part.
Projects will be undertaken in Derry, Belfast, Fermanagh, Donaghadee and Comber, including the building of outdoor play areas, erection of a fence at a charity's headquarters and the conversion of an old barn into an educational room.
In Derry, representatives from the Western Health and Social Services Board will carry out improvements to Caw Voluntary Group's playground in the city.
The event resembles the BBC television programme ‘Challenge Anneka’ and the teams will be expected to complete their projects over two days on September 28 and 29.
Pleased
The Post Office-sponsored event is part of the Youth Challenge '93 Initiative, organised by the Industrial Society and is based broadly on Youth Challenge '91 which was part of the Belfast 1991 celebrations.
Northern Ireland Post Office Board chairman Danny Carty, said: ‘I am particularly pleased that we are again sponsoring the Community Challenge.
‘In 1991, £250,000 worth of work was carried out with the help of contributions from local businesses.’
RUGBY
Exiles make debuts
LONDON Irish have four men making Courage League debuts in tomorrow's opening Division One match at Harlequins.
Dan Dooley, who has joined the Exiles from Saracens, is at centre and Howard Lamb, recruited from Richmond towards the end of last season, plays at blindside flanker.
Nick Briers is at scrum-half in the absence of Irish international Rob Saunders, who is on a business course in New York, while Rob Kellam, a former Wasps Colt who has played for England Under-21s, is hooker.
Paul Collins, the new captain, moves over to number 8 in the absence of international Brian Robinson who has returned to his native Ballymena.
Rafferty (69) in fifth slot
RONAN Rafferty found himself with leeway to make up when the second round of the GA European Open began at East Sussex National today.
Rafferty returned a 69 to occupy fifth place going into today's action with Gordon Brand Jnr in the lead following a dazzling 65.
Philip Walton scored a 68, a figure also returned by Swede Olle Karlsson.
But Ian Woosnam, five behind Brand after an opening two under par 70, was fiercely critical of the way the course had been set up.
Of the pin placing at the 466-yard ninth, where the 144-strong field were a collective 114 over par, Woosnam said: ‘Whoever did it must have been born with a spanner in his head.’
Woosnam, a winner on his last appearance at the English Open, added: ‘This is hard work and it's going to get harder.’
He thought his opening effort was very respectable, but there was nobody who could touch Brand.
Swede Joakim Haeggman stumbled to a 79 and will need a massive improvement to survive the halfway cut.
Seve Ballesteros opened with a 70, his eighth successive sub-par round of a season that has been re-ignited by his runners-up finish in Switzerland on Sunday.
The man who beat him there, Ryder Cup debutant Barry Lane, had a 71 in his first-ever look at the course.
GOLF
Irish girls lose out
The second day of the women's Home Internationals at Hermitage — but Strabane's Lynn McCool was not at all down-hearted.
The 21-year-old Ulster girl is making her international debut in this tournament and in her first singles match she came up English star Joanne Morley, losing 3 and 2 in a game which saw eight birdies, five from Morley and three from McCool.
Earlier the Strabane girl and Eileen Rose Power had combined to halve their foursomes with the strong English pair Julie Hall and Kirsty Speak.
Trailing 2–1 after the foursomes Ireland never really threatened to take the four points they needed from the singles.
Aideen Rogers won her match 5 and 4 and Tracy Eakin got home 2 and 1 but defeat for Eavan Higgins, Power and McCool meant Mary McKenna's half in the last match could not affect the overall result.
GOLF
Men swept aside
ENGLAND swept aside defending champions Ireland at Hoylake yesterday to stay on course for their first men's amateur Home International title for four years.
They took the foursomes 3–1 with one halved and the singles 6–4 for an overall 9–5 success.
England were due to meet Wales in the final match of the round robin series today knowing that a share of the honours would give them the crown.
Wales halved 7–7 with Scotland yesterday and need to beat the English to record their first ever home international win.
TABLE TENNIS
Finlay is top seed
HARRY Finlay from Derryvolgie starts out as favourite to win the opening table tennis tournament of the season.
The popular Lisburn player is top seed in the Class Two singles at the Shankill Junior and Graded Open in Shankill Leisure Centre, but will have his eye on Limavady player Nathan Cook.
Cook, an English university student, is an unknown quantity, last competing in Shankill in September 1992 by taking the Class Three Singles.
The Limavady student is seeded to win Class Three ahead of the enthusiastic Keith Johnston from Ballymena.
Shankill Junior and Graded Open seeds — Class Two: 1, H Finlay; 2, N Cook; 3, R Coard; 4, K Johnston; Class Three: 1, N Cook; 2, K Johnston; 3, W Clarke; 4, J Cairns.
Tournament organiser Ussher Watson will take late entries for the junior events this evening at Belfast 647934.
Visas warning to Ulster fans
ULSTER football fans planning to travel to the United States for the World Cup finals next year have been warned they could face problems getting a visa.
US authorities are insisting that requests for short-term holiday visas are backed by proof that travellers have regular jobs and intend to return home.
‘Employment’
An American legal source said: ‘Fans are going to have to show they are going to the US only for the soccer matches and provide evidence of a steady history of employment, and that they can support themselves while in the States.’
Several hundred people from Northern Ireland are expected to cross the Atlantic to support the Republic's team, who are virtually assured of qualifying for the final stages after their 2–0 defeat of Lithuania in Dublin on Wednesday.
Flexible
Irish authorities are to urge the US to be as flexible as possible over visas in a bid to maximise support for the Republic's bid for World Cup glory.
However, official sources in Dublin have advised fans planning to make the trip to submit travel-document applications immediately.
Up to 20,000 Irish supporters are believed to be planning to go to the US.
Red tape
American authorities have hinted that they will ease red tape requirements for Irish fans, but those who are out of work could face difficulties.
By Oliver McGuckin
TENNIS
Unlikely semi-final clash in US Open
CEDRIC Pioline and Wally Masur produced another round of magic yesterday to conjure up an unlikely meeting in the semi-finals of the US Open.
Pioline, the 15th-seeded Frenchman who has never won a tournament, followed up on his fourth round demolition of world number one Jim Courier by beating Andrei Medvedev of Ukraine in the quarter-finals 6–3 6–1 3–6 6–2.
Earlier, the unseeded Masur of Australia made the most of a second life at the Open by mowing down Sweden's Magnus Larsson in straight sets.
The 30-year-old Masur, who miraculously survived a 0–5 fifth set deficit in the previous round, celebrated his reprieve by pounding the unseeded Swede 6–2 7–5 7–5.
Tomorrow's other men's semi-final is between Wimbledon champion Pete Sampras and Russian Alexander Volkov.
Terry's top rank display
TERRY Murphy, ranked 138th in the world, achieved a personal best in ranking snooker tournaments by earning a place in the 32-man final phase of the £224,000 Dubai Duty Free Classic with a 5–3 victory over former world champion Joe Johnson in Blackpool.
Murphy, a 22-year-old from Londonderry, is now assured of £2,075 the biggest cheque of his three-year pro career and a meeting with his hero Steve Davis.
Murphy knocked in a break of 136 and looked to be on target for the £1000 prize which goes to the highest break in the Blackpool stage of the tournament.
But shortly afterwards Ronnie O'Sullivan topped that with 142 in his 5–1 win over Mick Price.
Joe Swail also progressed to the televised stage of the tournament with a 5–2 win over Nick Terry.
He now faces Alan McManus, the Scot who defeated him in the Asian Open semi-finals last year.
Value for money on offer from Australia
WINEMARK maintains it stocks one of the most extensive ranges of Australian wine in Northern Ireland.
Some of these did particularly well at this year's Challenge, including the White Wine of the Year, Moondah Brook Chenin Blanc 1992, a crisp lively wine which broadens out nicely on the finish.
Although the Australians were late starters in the fine wine field today, they make great, exciting new wines which are famed for their upfront fruit character and good structure.
Acclaim
They not only taste good but are excellent value for money by any standards.
They are now receiving the acclaim they deserve.
As well as Winemark's specially selected own label wines, several of which were awarded medals, a broad range of wines was entered ranging from the humblest Vin de Pays to the grandest Grand Crus and the Red Wine of the Year — Albor Rioja Tinto 1991, a firm wine coated with black cherry aromas and flavours and lots of fruit echoing in the finish.
With more than 130 successful wines to choose from, it would be a very pleasant experience indeed just trying to find out what it is that makes a good wine a winner, observed one Winemark spokesman.
BOWLS
Loughrey misses out
PORTRUSH bowler Willie Loughrey met an in-form Fran Brady (CYM) in the third round of the Dun Laoghaire 31st annual tournament and was beaten 21–20.
Brady then partnered Dungannon's Maureen Fearon and saw off K and N McGrath 21–6 to reach the semi-final of Section B of the Mixed Pairs.
The Dungannon bowler also showed top form in the women's singles to beat Pat Day of Leinster 21–17 to win a place in the third round where she was due to meet Inter-Association player Enid Hilton.
Eddie and Nancy McNally of the Falls Club also advanced in the Mixed Pairs, beating P and R Doheny 23–13 for a Section A semi-final place where another Ulster bowler will be in opposition, Wally Taylor partnered by Nora Harford.
FOOTBALL
Lisburn youth boost
LISBURN Borough Council will match any offer made by Lisburn Sports Advisory Committee to help finance the new Lisburn Youth Football League.
The Committee's Leisure and Allied Services Committee confirmed the decision and league chairman, Tommy Whiteside, said the sports advisory committee now had the chance to get the new league off on a sound footing.
Meanwhile Dunmurry YM successfully completed the leasing of a football park with Lisburn Borough Council recently…but it is likely to be the last agreement of this nature in the area.
An inquiry from Hilden Rec for a leasing arrangement at Glenmore has been turned down, and the Leisure and Allied Services Committee said the present demand for public pitches in the Borough ruled out any thoughts of a leasing arrangement.
Coyle clinches last eight spot Derry City 1 Monaghan Utd 0
DERRY City recorded their first win in four competitive games when they defeated newly promoted Monaghan United at the Brandywell last night to qualify for a quarter-final League Cup clash with Waterford United.
Torrential rain throughout the 90 minutes destroyed the game as a spectacle but Derry boss, Roy Coyle, must still be worried by the failure of his midfield players to function as a cohesive unit.
Liam Coyle who has scored three of Derry's four competitive goals so far this season, booked City's last eight berth with a close range strike in the seventh minute, but thereafter, it was yet another case of Derry flattering to deceive as they quickly ran out of ideas against a United side which failed to test City goalkeeper Dermot O'Neill at any time during the game.
Coyle's early strike was the culmination of a superb move started by Paul Lemon in midfield.
The Brandywell debutant surged towards the United penalty area before flicking the ball to the overlapping Mark Ennis on the right.
A first time cross from Ennis caused panic among the United defenders and Michael Smith, playing in his first game since his signing earlier this week, pounced to hammer the ball goalwards.
United's goalkeeper Brian O'Shea reacted brilliantly to block the shot but the ball rolled straight into the path of Coyle who drilled a right foot volley into the back of the net.
O'Shea was at his best four minutes later, diving low to his right to save a Paul McLaughlin 30 yard volley which took a deflection off a United defender.
On the half-hour Derry came close to increasing their lead when Lemon hammered a Garry Lennox corner goalwards and although his shot beat O'Shea, right-back Ian Woods cleared the ball off the goal-line.
Lennox should have scored in the 75th minute when McLaughlin's long-range strike was pushed onto the post by O'Shea, but with an open goal in front of him, Lennox sliced his shot into the side netting.
The woodwork again came to Monaghan's rescue eight minutes from time when Coyle weaved his way into the United penalty area, only to see his shot flicked onto the upright by O'Shea.
Two minutes from time Coyle again broke through the United defense but his angled cross-range volley was blocked by the goalkeeper.
The rebound came straight back to Coyle who again drilled the ball against the post.
COOKSTOWN
Lough plunge
FOUR members of staff at Cookstown Leisure Centre are to swim across Lough Neagh to raise cash for the Fleming Fulton School.
Taking the plunge at Antrim and stroking out for Battery Point seven miles away on Sunday, September 19, will be Glen Lindsay, Tina Donnelly, Shawn Cavlin and Kieran O'Neill.
Swales ready to quit City
PETER Swales announced today that he was ready to stand down as chairman of trouble-torn Manchester City.
He said he would be happy to quit next week ‘if the right offer came and it was right for the club’.
The move paves the way for former England and City striker Francis Lee to take control at Maine Road.
Lee said earlier this week that a consortium he heads was ready to invest millions in City in return for a seat on the board.
Interviewed on BBC Radio Four's Today programme, Swales said: ‘I would love to keep going, but I realise it is probably time for someone else to have a go.
‘We have just said if we can get the right deal we will do it.
I am sure if we get the right deal it will suit the shareholders.
Time marches on, doesn't it?
‘The only thing that will delay some kind of a new regime is people causing disturbances and rioting, because that won't help proceedings.
It won't help us to come to a proper decision quickly.’
This was a reference to the demonstrations staged by City's success-starved supporters following the acrimonious dismissal of manager Peter Reid last month.
‘Bad luck’
Swales, chairman for 20 years, put a value of ‘about £15 million’ on the club and blamed ‘a bit of bad luck’for City's lean run during his time in charge.
His comments came a day after his partner Stephen Boler said he would consider selling his 30pc shareholding in the club — but not without Swales's permission.
Together Swales and Boler own around 68pc of City, with brewers Greenall Whitley holding 20pc.
It was a marked change of mood by the chairman following his statement earlier this week that he had ‘no intention of selling my shareholding’.
He has resisted attempts to remove him from the Maine Road board in the past, but it has become clear that Lee's intervention provided much greater pressure on him to step aside.
After leaving the game in 1975 Lee, 49, became a millionaire through developing a paper business.
He has since become involved in various other businesses and is also a racehorse trainer with a string of horses at Wilmslow, Cheshire.
Today Lee was in a board meeting and not available for comment.
Peter Swales: ‘waiting for the right  offer ’ to stand down at Maine Road
Francis Lee: ready to move in?
Linfield reap £35,000 ‘win’ bonus
LINFIELD are £35,000 richer today following their dramatic reinstatement to the European Cup.
UEFA's decision to overturn shamed opponents Dinamo Tbilisi's appeal against disqualification for bribery means the Georgian club will automatically lose their win bonus for defeating the Blues 3–2 in the preliminary round.
This money will now go to Linfield and the eventual pay-out could reach six figures in bonuses, gate receipts and television rights from their forthcoming first round encounter with FC Copenhagen.
The first leg will be played at Windsor Park next Thursday — thus avoiding a potentially damaging clash with live TV coverage of the Rangers and Manchester United matches.
Delight
Linfield are back in business in a big way following one of the most astonishing weeks in the club's history and the news was greeted with delight — and a tinge of relief.
‘To be honest, I'm just glad it's all over,’ said chairman David Campbell.
‘It has been a traumatic time, with nobody really knowing what was happening.
‘Now UEFA have made their decision and we can get on with preparing for next week's game.’
He added: ‘It's a major boost for us financially but what a sad, sorry business this has been.
‘Obviously we would like to have got through by playing football we did everything by the book while Tbilisi didn't.
‘Anyone who resorts to tactics such as attempting to bribe match officials has no place in European football.’
Blues manager Trevor Anderson is already on his way to Copenhagen to watch next week's opponents in action.
‘It's great news for us but now we have to concentrate on the football and try to achieve a good result,’ he said.
‘We have been given another chance and it's up to us to take it.’
FC Copenhagen coach Benny Johannsen has made arrangements for his side to fly into Belfast next Tuesday.
‘I'm pleased for Linfield; I have a lot of friends there from my time in Tbilisi with them,’ he said.
‘Having said that, my priority now is to try and beat them.
They did very well against Tbilisi both home and away.
‘I watched their home match on television and I know it will be tough for us in Belfast next week.’
UEFA's appeals committee took just over three hours to decide Tbilisi's fate last night.
They rejected the Georgians' argument that the 5,000 dollars given to match officials prior to the first leg game was legitimate expenses and reinforced the judgement that Tbilisi be expelled from this season's competition and the next one they qualify for.
A UEFA spokesman said: ‘Tbilisi argued that the only thing they were guilty of being naive but the rules are clearly stated.
Precedent
‘Had we let this one pass without action it would have set a precedent for others to follow and that cannot be allowed to happen.’
UEFA also agreed to put back the forthcoming tie 24 hours after a request from the Blues who were concerned about the damage live TV would inflict on gate receipts.
FC Copenhagen went along with the idea; Denmark will also have live matches on Wednesday so the new date suits them too.
‘I'd like to put on record how co-operative Copenhagen have been throughout this affair,’ said the Linfield chairman.
‘It can't have been easy for them either over the past week, not knowing who they'd be playing.’
Make it Armiger
ARMIGER can stop the knockers by running out an impressive winner of tomorrow's Coalite St Leger at Doncaster.
The oldest Classic has come in for its usual share of criticism in the past few weeks, largely due to the disappointing number of entries.
But size isn't everything and a quality performance from Henry Cecil's colt — or any other runner — would go a long way towards salvaging the historic event's ailing reputation.
Of all the contenders Armiger is certainly best placed to impress, as he is already a Group One winner and was among the favourites for the Derby until injury forced him out of the Epsom showpiece.
Cecil's colt's success at the highest level came on this very course in last season's Racing Post Trophy.
The son of Rainbow Quest was always up with the leaders that day, clearly enjoying himself on the easy ground and eventually racing three and a half lengths clear.
With similar underfoot conditions guaranteed again tomorrow — and with the news of Armiger's recent work being consistently good — he is napped to grab the bumper prize.
Inevitably, with approaching £200,000 on offer, there are others with sound claims to fame in the field.
Most notable amongst them are Mark Tompkins's Great Voltigeur winner Bob's Return and John Dunlop's Geoffrey Freer Stakes hero Azzilfi.
But Bob's Return may find this extended mile and three quarters beyond him and dour stayer Azzilfi could be beaten for speed near the finish.
In the circumstances, therefore, it may pay forecast backers to couple Armiger with John Gosden's Silverdale, who will get maximum assistance from the saddle thanks to in-form jockey Frankie Dettori.
The rest of the Doncaster card — especially with the going likely to ride hock deep — has a tricky look about it.
So punters beware.
However, nothing has a better chance in the Rous Conditions Stakes than Solar Wagon.
Roger Charlton's two-year-old was an easy winner of a Ripon maiden before finishing sixth in Deauville's Prix Morny last time out and should appreciate this switch back to easier company.
Bangor's Kenyans on the increase
THE Kenyan challenge for next Saturday's North Down Athletic Club's Festival of Running in Bangor has multiplied to three.
World Junior steeplechase champion Jimmy Muindi was snapped up at the beginning of the week and he will be joined in the Daily Mirror/Manx Airlines 10K road race by Josphat Ndeti and Zablon Miano.
Miano has happy memories of his last trip to Northern Ireland twelve months ago.
Just two weeks after winning a race in Barnsley, he romped to victory in the Belfast Classic 10K…and then he headed to Dublin and finished second in the BLE 5K road race championship.
Record
Last month Miano turned up trumps in the Stockholm Half Marathon in 16.48.
He had a 5K timing of 13.36 and at the 10K mark he was clocked at 28.18, so Gerry Curtis' Bangor record of 28.24 will be under threat.
Ndeti is also a more than useful athlete.
He won a silver medal for 5,000 metres at the World Junior track championships last year and a couple of months later he took fourth place — again at Junior level — in the World cross country championships in Boston.
Quantity
The class level is building up, but North Down stress that quantity is just as high on their agenda and they are keen to attract as many fun runners and joggers as possible.
Entry form can be obtained at sports shops and leisure centres and should be sent to Barry Scarth at 15 Windmill Road, Bangor, BT20 5RA.
Mills all set for ‘return’ to Glens
DAVY Mills is on his way ‘home’ to Glentoran, writes John Laverty.
The Portadown midfielder is expected to link up with the Glens following agreement on a fee between managers Ronnie McFall and Robert Strain.
Mills' move should be rubber-stamped on Monday when Glentoran's Board meet to discuss another item of business…the fee Linfield must pay for winger Raymond Campbell.
‘Davy feels a change of club will be in his best interests,’ said McFall.
‘The fee Glentoran are talking about is acceptable to us.’
Mills was originally signed by the Glens a decade ago when McFall was manager at the Oval.
He drifted into junior football but then linked up again with McFall at Portadown — where he won two championship medals.
Strain said today: ‘I think Davy still has a lot to offer and he would be a useful addition to the squad.’
Glentoran need to defeat Larne at Inver Park tomorrow (Group D) to be sure of a place in the TNT quarter-finals; they include Raymond Morrison for the first time this season.
Linfield and Cliftonville meet up at Windsor tomorrow but with both teams already through the normal ‘edge’ may be missing from this game.
Coach Lindsay McKeown will choose the Blues team in the absence of Trevor Anderson; Cliftonville hope to have Shaun Strang back.
Portadown, minus the suspended Tony Gorman, only need to avoid a heavy defeat at home to Ballymena to qualify from Group D and having won six games out of six they should be okay.
Back-in-form Glenavon are through from Group C; they play Carrick who will still have a chance of leapfrogging Bangor.
The Seasiders, away to Ballyclare, may use goalkeeper Mark Gillespie in place of Stephen Eachus.
Group B is tight with Crusaders and Distillery level on four points each at the top; Crues are away to Coleraine while the Whites visit Omagh knowing defeat will let in the Tyrone men.
Programme (3pm): Section A — Newry v Ards, Linfield v Cliftonville; B — Omagh v Distillery, Coleraine v Crusaders C — Carrick v Glenavon, Ballyclare v Bangor; D — Larne v Glentoran; Portadown v Ballymena.
Davy Mills: Glens want him back
Paul's pain ‘killer’
FEATHERWEIGHT Paul Griffin went through the pain barrier to courageously secure at least a bronze medal in the European Championships in Turkey.
Current holder of the European title, Griffin was only passed fit to box by the championship doctor a few hours before the action got under way.
He duly entered the ring with two black eyes to face Muldova's Ivan Gornei.
Pressure
Gornei piled on the pressure from the start and by the end of the contest Griffin's face was badly swollen.
However, the Irishman countered well and with the scores at eight each the Dubliner eventually won on a count back of 30–28.
Griffin, from the Mount Tallant club, still had problems with his vision in the contest though he led 8–6 going into the third round which saw Gornei put up a storming last stand to bring the fighters level.
Griffin eventually scraped through by the narrowest of margins and now faces a semi-final tomorrow.
Marseille climb down
MARSEILLE boss Bernard Tapie today climbed down from his confrontation with soccer's world rulers by withdrawing a bid to have the club reinstated in the European Cup.
Tapie withdrew his legal action against the European Football Union (UEFA), ending a crisis which had rocked the international authorities.
Marseille vice-president Jean-Louis Levreau said Tapie ‘had taken an important decision in the interests of French football’.
French league president Noel Le Graet had urged Tapie to withdraw his civil court action to reinstate Marseille in the competition after world soccer's governing body FIFA threatened to suspend France from international competition.
Tapie was due to give a news conference in Marseille this afternoon explaining his decision.
Club sources said he had sent a fax to FIFA in Zurich informing them of his move.
FIFA president Joao Havelange and general secretary Sepp Blatter were holding a crisis meeting at the time with UEFA officials and French federation president Jean Fournet-Fayard, who had been urgently summoned to Zurich.
At stake was a fundamental challenge to the soccer bodies' authority to administer the sport without intervention from civil courts.
UEFA expelled European champions Marseille from this season's competition because of a bribery scandal but Tapie obtained an order from a Berne court yesterday provisionally forcing them to reinstate the club.
But FIFA threatened that if he was not forced to back down, all five French clubs would be thrown out of next week's European competitions, the national team would be barred from the 1994 World Cup finals and that France would no longer be able to host the 1998 finals.
Officials at FIFA's Zurich headquarters gave journalists a copy of Tapie's letter withdrawing the legal action.
It read: ‘I ask you to consider that the effects of the legal action that I undertook in the Berne district court concerning my non-participation in the European Cup this year are null and void.
‘In fact, I have immediately asked my lawyers to proceed with the withdrawal of the action concerned to nullify all its consequences.’
Fournet-Fayard told French television: ‘Good sense has finally won the day…the pressure exerted by the international bodies was really becoming unsupportable.’
Rafferty slips
RONAN Rafferty, fifth overnight at three under par, slipped back in the European Open golf tournament at the East Sussex National course today with a one over par second round 73.
DREAM GOAL
‘Cork will be very difficult’— Brian McGilligan
BRIAN McGilligan could never be accused of being a dreamer.
The towering Dungiven club player has his feet firmly planted on the ground and eschews the quest for personal glory in deference to being a ‘team man’, whether that be for club or county.
But even the pragmatic McGilligan is forced to admit that Derry's emergence as a major footballing force is the stuff of which dreams are made.
After all, when you have laboured in the engine room for several years and are then suddenly confronted by some of the highest honours the sport can confer it is understandable that a player might believe he is living in another world.
In McGilligan's case, the fruits of his labour have come late in his career and for that reason are all the more welcome.
A National League medal, Ulster medals, an Allstar accolade — all have landed on his table and have been eagerly digested.
Inspiration
Yet the inspiration for a distinguished county career was not provided in Oak Leaf territory but from a rather ‘alien’ source.
It was former Dublin manager Kevin Heffernan who, McGilligan reckons, helped to put him on the road to success.
The Heffernan intervention occurred back in ‘86 when the then 22-year-old McGilligan found himself plucked from virtual obscurity and thrust into the international limelight — yes, international!
The player himself takes up the story.
Unknown
‘I was playing in a particular game and did not think I had done anything spectacular at all when I was approached by Heffernan who told me that he wanted me for the Ireland team to play Australia in the Compromise Rules series,’ recalls McGilligan.
‘I could hardly believe what I was hearing.
After all, I was an unknown and I was being asked to join up with players who were even then household names.
But I was delighted to be asked and I must say that I found Heffernan's style of management very much to my liking.’
McGilligan's subsequent achievements in the Ireland jersey have been well chronicled and since then the Dungiven joiner has been very much up with the big boys.
He has remained there through his solid consistency in Derry's midfield, rarely missing a game and forming productive alliances with a number of partners including Plunkett Murphy and Dermot Heaney in the recent past.
Today, both he and Anthony Tohill stand head and shoulders above every other midfield pairing in the country — in every sense.
They have yet to face their ‘passing out’ examination against Cork, of course, but McGilligan has his homework done.
Experience
‘Cork will be very, very difficult,’ he maintains, ‘They are a class footballing side with a lot of experience.
They have grown in confidence too and we will have to be at our best to win.’
Nevertheless, he is confident that Derry can come out on top.
‘It's every lad's dream to play in the All Ireland final and now that we have got this far we want to make sure and win.
We owe it to our supporters who have been magnificent all along the line,’ says McGilligan.
And if Derry succeed, he will murmur a silent but heartfelt ‘thank you’ to Kevin Heffernan, the man who gave him a new outlook and sense of purpose in the sport which has made him both a local and national hero.
Tough clash for floodlight hosts
WITH the two main floodlit tournaments in Junior Rugby just around the corner, many clubs are looking forward to the opportunity to sharpen their skills in preparation for the first batch of league matches.
The tournaments are very popular events and the organisation behind the scenes is always excellent.
In Portadown's Nutty Krust tournament, at Chambers Park, the host club start the ball rolling on Tuesday September 21 with a really tough preliminary round tie against RUC.
The winners of this game go on to meet Armagh II on October 12.
The other preliminary matches are Monaghan v Lurgan and Enniskillen v Lisburn.
The holders Banbridge start their defence of the trophy against Antrim on October 26.
RUC are also involved in the Halifax Property Services tournament at Holywood and, as holders, are very much the team to beat.
Host
Their opening tie is on Wednesday September 29 against Instonians II.
Once again the host side Holywood are involved in the first game, which takes place next Wednesday at Kerr Park with Ards II providing the opposition.
Holywood got through to the final last year so they will be hoping for another good run this year.
Don Wakeford, the Holywood coach, is able to call on most of last year's squad and although Ards should provide stiff opposition, Holywood should just edge through to meet the winners of the Carrick v Lisburn tie.
The full first round line-up is: Ards II v Holywood; Carrick v Lisburn; RUC v Instonians II; Cooke v Bangor II; Civil Service v North II; Donaghadee v Malone II; CIYMS II v Grosvenor and Ballyclare v Queen's II.
Promotion
Meanwhile, the Progressive Qualifying League gets underway next Saturday.
With performances over the next couple of seasons helping to decide which club gains promotion to the All-Ireland League set-up, it is vital that clubs get off to a good start.
Up at Lodge Road, Coleraine will be hoping to improve on last year's performances.
The team is still in a transitional phase but there are a number of very talented players in their line-up.
Kerry Faith has Richard Beggs, Johnny Kirkpatrick, John Stanbridge and Dick Jennings in the three-quarter line with several exciting young wingers also challenging for places.
Experience
The half-back pairing looks like being Andy Hunter and Paul Campbell.
Up front there is experience in abundance.
Alan Irwin captains the side and he will have Robert Glenn, Brian Faith, Taff Watson and George Neilly all fighting for the other two berths in the back row.
In the second row Geoff Love is back to his best form and has Owen Laverty as his partner while Ulster junior hooker Stephen O'Neill is also back to something like his best.
The opening Progressive Qualifying League ties in Section One are Ballynahinch v Holywood; Coleraine v Omagh and RUC v Rainey Old Boys.
In the Second 15 League Section A opening fixtures pit Ballymena II against Malone II and Dungannon II v North II.
Alan still on top
ALAN McCloskey, from the Rook's Nest, Armoy, has strung together some wonderful performances this year and as a fitting reward he has been re-elected secretary of the Ballymoney pool league.
Also elected at the league's AGM were chairman David Gray (Glynnis Bar), vice-chairman Chris Mulholland (N Irish Horse), treasurer Nigel Craig (Imperial) and senior referee Colin Cushnahan (Diamond Bar).
Meanwhile, the Northern Ireland Pool Association will be hosting this year's Four Nations championships in O'Neill's Causeway Coast Hotel, Portrush, beginning October 28.
Elected
Congratulations goes to Paddy Summers of the Sixmilewater league who has been elected assistant team manager to Russell Morrow, Ballymena.
Northern Ireland ladies will play a Belfast Telegraph select side on September 16 in the newspaper clubrooms.
Fire Side Inn, Knockloughrim, will be the venue on September 24 when Northern Ireland ladies play the province's men's team.
Competition
NIPA doubles competition will be held in the Imperial Bar, Ballymoney, on October 16 and 17, final entries close October 10.
The association's annual presentation night and disco will be held in the Ink Spot, Belfast Telegraph on Friday December 3.
There were plenty of thrills and spills as the first round of the East Senior knockout cup got underway.
Hero
Rosemount's Frankie Flynn was the hero on the night, beating Liverpool's Thomas Nicholl, to make the score 7–6.
Holders Oakley were in the driving seat in beating Hillfoot 7–4 while Parkview trounced Bunch of Grapes 7–2.
The Pigeon Club beat the Cock ‘N’ Hens 7–2 and Cosy Jolly Boys finished off the Blades with a 7–3 victory.
Longfellows captain Billy McKibben led by example as his team got home 7–2 against the Strikers.
Matches to play — Avenue v K Richard; Albert v Kosy; Byes — Moat Inn and Renegades.
‘Small’ comfort
WHERE have all the road racers gone?
That's a question which might be asked after last week's thoroughly enjoyable Carrowdore 100 which however saw only a handful of riders on the line in each race except the classic.
The nadir was reached when the Royal 600cc class went out with only 10 starters and although it developed into a tremendous race between Joey Dunlop and Ian King, there wasn't the strength in depth which we have come to take for granted.
One of my colleagues, John Savage, put it forcibly when he said in the programme that pure road racing — that is racing on public roads — was at the crossroads because of lack of numbers and I'm inclined to agree with him.
We have had a marvellous season with thankfully no major accidents and also the best of racing, particularly at the Ulster Grand Prix and the Tandragee 100, so perhaps we can be forgiven for forgetting that racing needs not only the top line competitors like Joey Dunlop and Brian Reid it needs the newcomers to help the sport thrive and we are just not getting enough of them.
Hopefully this lack of competitors will only be temporary for there is really no substitute for racing between the hedges.
Short circuits are fine but they just don't generate the same interest or the same type of nail biting racing, do they?
So let's encourage more riders to race on the roads.
New talent is certainly scarce.
Riders like Ronnie McAllister, Phil Reid, Dean Cooper, Bill Rice, Brian Gardiner and George Jeffers may not have their names on everyone's lips, but they are the boys who hold the future in their hands.
And while on the subject of last Saturday, why were the races so short?
Five laps for each of the normal races and four for the Classics was something like starvation diet for a club who used to hold 10 lappers every year at this meeting.
Were the Belfast and District Club just glad to get the whole thing over as quickly as possible?
That's the impression I got.
Well, let's be fair to them.
They did a fine job in keeping the racing going.
I wasn't aware of any huge gaps in the programme and that being the case perhaps we could stretch to seven lap races next year.
Friends As for our old friends the Classic riders,
I'm beginning to warm to them.
They are very much a part of the scene nowadays and they certainly deserve more than a derisory four laps.
After all, they appear to be the only pure enthusiasts left in the sport.
At the same time, though, they haven't conquered the attention barrier.
Last Saturday their race was on last and I was aware of spectators leaving or attempting to leave before the Classics went to the line.
They have got to find names and perhaps if Steven Cull decides to race with them that will do the trick.
There was no better road racer than Cull in his day and I was delighted to see him looking so well on Saturday.
Racing needs men like him around the place.
And I believe also that Steven needs racing.
One rider I feel sorry for at the moment is Robert Dunlop who appears to have lost his way this season.
At the beginning of the year he signed for the Oxford Products Ducati team but the link-up never quite worked out and Robert ended the association a few weeks ago.
Now he is confined to 125cc racing and this restriction was never more evident than at Carrowdore when he won the 125cc class which was the first race on the card and then spent the rest of the day on the sidelines talking to anyone who might listen to him — myself included.
I thought at the time ‘What a waste.
Here is one of the best riders in the province and he only has one ride at our final road race meeting.
It just doesn't make sense.’
I hope that Robert can sort out something for next year for we certainly need riders of his class.
MIS Fruit of the Loom champions
THE Grand Final of the Fruit of the Loom £1,000 quiz was played in the Lough Swilly Yacht Club in Fahan last Friday night.
In all sixteen teams had made it through to this stage and with a full house the scene was set for an evening of top quizzing.
The teams responded in magnificent fashion each having brought their own vocal support.
Campsie A and Buncrana team MIS 1 were the early leaders.
The top of the leader board remained the same after round two.
Fabric D, Buncrana Warehouse and Ballymacarry MIX all moved into challenging positions.
At the interval MIS 1 were just ahead of the posse by one point.
Tommy Donnelly's Campsie B moved into contention in the second half but their efforts were shortlived.
It was then the turn of Buncrana team Fabric D captained by Don McLaughlin to challenge the leaders and this challenge resulted in them finishing in third spot.
MIS 1 and Campsie B finished up as joint top scorers.
Quizmaster Colm Holmes then introduced tie-breakers which resulted in a one point victory for the well balanced MIS 1 team.
The winning team members: Noleen Doherty, Susan Porter, Karen Donaghey and Benny Diver received a perpetual cup presented by the Lough Swilly Yacht Club and pieces of Parian China each.
The second and third place teams also received prizes which were all presented by Mr Andy McCarter Managing Director of Fruit of the Loom.
Mr Reggie Ryan was presented with a cheque for £1,008.90 which is to help the Lough Swilly Lifeboat Association.
Colm Holmes was highly commended for his presentation of the quiz and he has been invited to chair a six week Christmas quiz at this venue in November/December.
He also will chair the 1994 Fruit of the Loom quiz.
River Inn
Although the new season is just under way a few weeks most teams appear to have shed the rustiness of the close season.
On Tuesday night last the ‘Dream Team’ were trying to make it three wins in a row.
After the opening photograph round eight teams were separated by just one point.
The Liverpool SC team have now changed their name to the Likely Lads.
With this name change the Likely Lads and the Dream Team shared the lead after two rounds.
Mickey Harkin's Chats team came through in the round leading up to the interval with a score of 12 points.
This high score took Chats to a joint leadership with the Likely Lads.
In the second half the all female No Hopers team stormed through to issue a strong challenge and this was mainly due to the answering of the Sibhion and Leona Stars.
One round to go and only two points separated the top four teams.
A great late run by Chats saw it fizzle as the winning post came too soon for them, victory went to the in form Likely Lads team of Patsy McGee, Kieran Ferry, Eamon Devlin, Frank Ferry, Daniel O'Connell and Brian Deehan.
Questions of the night winners were Stephen Deehan, Danny O'Connell, Dermot Harkin, Pat McGlinchey, Joe Harkin and Cairan McAllister.
Next week it is hoped Milanda and Ash e Pets will play.
Winning teams at this venue receive a cash prize.
Stables The Hit Men and Her returned to this venue on Monday night with William ‘Wazzle’ Forbes a new addition to their team.
They took an early lead in the opening round and with another high score in round two they just headed the Mix-ups.
After the interval the all-female Mix-ups team moved into top gear seeing off the challenges of Martin's Babes and Coshquin Exiles.
The winning Mix-ups team members were: Marion McKinney, Anne Ferguson and Margaret Ferguson.
Questions of the night winners were Reggie Hannigan, Margaret Ferguson, Patricia Slavin and Anne Ferguson.
Next Monday night Commitments and the Holy Family Teams will join the usual teams.
Village Inn The new season is up and running at this venue with packed houses every Thursday night.
Eilish Power and Mary McConnell are regular quiz goers at this venue.
Last week they were joined by their respective husbands both called Jackie.
The Power's played for Caroline and Co while the McConnells were on the Frazers Select team.
Frazers and the Bar Stools shared the lead after the opening photograph round.
The general knowledge of Jackie Power was keeping Caroline and Co in contention while Jackie McConnell was Frazers star in the entertainment round.
At the end of a high scoring quiz it was Frazers Select who finished in the top spot.
Other members of the winning team were: Marion Hutcheson, Geraldine Hamilton, Susan Kearney and Bridie Deeney.
Prize winners on the night were Eilish Power, Kevin Power, Walter Masterton and Caroline McGlinchey.
Thursday is charity quiz night at this venue.
Greenes Bar
With no competitive quiz played this week teams joined in a friendly table quiz.
On Monday September 13 John Burkes play Mickey Doherty's in what is definitely a competition game.
Voice Pop Quiz The Monico Bar is to be the venue for a pop quiz with proceeds going to the Voice Charity Group.
Entry fee is £1 per player or £5 per table.
There will be trophies for winners and runners-up.
For further information contact Ken Murphy on 271441.
Derry City Soccer Quiz Soccer pundits are invited along to the Oakgrove on Friday nights for this top soccer quiz.
The competition gets under way proper on Friday September 17.
Dick's idea is still going strong
THE Richard Minnis Trophy, the annual match between the Private Greens League and the Kenilworth Club in Dublin has reached it's 50th Anniversary.
Although the actual game has been going for over 65 years there was a slight change made in 1943 when the event became a charity match to raise funds for the specific purpose of the prevention of blindness.
The idea originated with the late Dick Minnis, a member of both Larne and Kenilworth, who for much of the previous year had himself feared blindness, but thanks to medical skill this was averted.
Minnis decided to do something for others who might similarly be afflicted which resulted in the Kenilworth Club and the PGL contributing annually to a fund.
Trophy
He decided to present a substantial trophy for this match and it is one of the most beautiful works of art in the game today.
The design was largely of his own specification and the trophy is in the form of an oblong casket resting on four miniature wooden bowls.
The sides of the casket are richly ornate in artistic enamel work and includes cameo paintings of the Kenilworth and Larne clubhouses.
The lid of the casket is made of silver and on the lid is a map of Ireland made of gold.
The trophy was handed over by Dick Minnis at a luncheon given by the donor in the Boardroom of the Great Northern Railway on Saturday, August 28, 1943.
So next Saturday at Larne it is the PGL's turn to host the 50th Anniversary game and I am sure there will be many people there from both clubs as they relive the memory of Dick Minnis who died on June 20, 1952.
School in UTV feature
Pupils from Steelestown PS, Bun Scoil Baile na Stil will be featured in the UTV programme ‘School Around the Corner’ on Tuesday next at 7.30pm.
Presenter Gerry Ryan will talk to the children about school activities, and a number of them will perform songs and poems.
Blackrock ‘rescued’ by Ulster
THERE can be no complaints about the running of last weekend's Irish National Championship in Dublin.
The Blackrock Club never put a foot wrong and the host association — the Bowling League of Ireland —‘also’ played their part in making it a worthwhile championship.
However, sadly to say, there was one cloud which marred an otherwise super weekend…the absence of support from the BLI bowlers.
If enthusiasts had not travelled from the Private Greens, the Provincial Bowling Association and especially, the Northern Ireland Bowling Association there would have been a sepulchral atmosphere about the whole thing.
While no one in bowls would deny the BLI from having their chance to hand over their green and facilities for the two day event which only comes once every eight years, why was there a full programme of league games listed on finals day?
This, I feel, was an insult to the governing body.
It should not have been allowed to happen.
The first weekend in September should be a closed date and I hope in future years the folly of playing games on national finals day will not be repeated.
The NIBA travelled with the biggest chance for the lion's share of the trophies with Noel Graham of Lisnagarvey going in pairs and fours and Martin McHugh of Carrickfergus being the one to beat in the Under 25 singles.
However it turned out a dismal championship for them with only Noel Weir of Rathfriland giving the association an interest in the open singles final.
For the rest, Friday turned out to be a bad day at Blackrock with Graham losing twice and McHugh and the Clarendon triple skipped by Mark Shannon all falling at the first hurdle.
But let's take nothing away from the winners.
Barry Moffett, Jeremy Henry and Ian McClure of Portrush, as expected, steamrollered the opposition to win the triples.
Then McClure turned in another sparking display, assisted by solid leading from Ronnie Oliver to lift the pairs title.
The fours was a fairytale finish for Brian Daly's Belmont rink which had earlier beaten Graham on an extra end in the semi-final, when they completely outbowled the Dunluce four skipped by Malcolm McMullen.
This was a game which, once again, produced a brilliant performance from 82 year-old George Mitchell.
But there was no fairytale ending for Rathfriland's Noel Weir who was always under the whip against Willowfield's Colin Best in the final of the open singles.
And the BLI also had something to celebrate when John Nolan of Blackrock took the Under 25 singles with a rather easy victory over Paul Daly of Belmont.
McKennas run riot
MCKENNAS have shown they have few equals in the Antrim District Darts League with a 10–0 whitewash Skeffington.
A 180 score and 19 dart checkout by R McLarnon plus wins by P McGleave, G McCormick and J Reynolds proved too much for the host side.
The top star in the league last week was Davy McCash with superb scores of 180, 100 and 171.
He just missed the bull for a fantastic 10 dart shoot-out.
Davy and W Young were in excellent form, helping Chimney Corner A to a 6–4 home win over Steeple Inn.
The best performance for the Inn came from B Gould with a 21 dart leg win.
Joining the 180 club last week were T Crane (Dunsilly Inn) and T Shanks (Ulster Bar) who also finished on 152.
Other big outshots were T Rooney (Enkalon) 146 and B Anderson (Rogues) 122.
Best dart leg wins were P Nelson (Chimney Corner Colts) 16, 21, T Boon (Bridge Inn) 16, H Cochrane (Enkalon) 16, T Harbinson, P Nelson (Pakenham) 19 20, S Chestnut, H Reid (Ulster Bar) 18 and 21 darts.
We know a winner!
DON'T say we in Northern Ireland don't know a future winner when we see one in the motor cycling game.
Cast your minds back to April, 1988.
The Lightweight club were hoping to bring over the new John Player Norton team to Kirkistown but because of problems with rules they weren't able to do so.
They were then left with a hole to fill but they came up with a rider who not only won at Kirkistown but also showed a lot of talent.
I remember Robert Hewitt who was racing secretary telling me before the meeting.
‘This rider is unknown but he's a future champion.’
I regarded this with the usual scepticism.
But of course Robert was right and the rider did go on to greater things.
Now he is a double British champion and his name is James Whitham.
Whitham has come a long way from April 16, 1988 when he won the Enkalon 1,000cc race and became one of the few English riders to score at Kirkistown at that time.
We had been used to seeing bigger names travel here but somehow or other they never showed top form.
In Whitham's case it was different and he certainly was what could be termed an inspired choice by the Lightweight club.
Now he is the biggest name in the road racing game in England and he'll be the No 1 attraction in the Hillsborough club's Sunflower Trophy meeting at Kirkistown on October 9.
As British title holder as well as winner of the British Supercup, Whitham has the ball at his toe you might say and he should be heading for a tilt at the world championships next year.
So perhaps his outing at Kirkistown next month will be the last time we'll see him.
The Irish road racing season is finally wrapped up at Killalane, Co Dublin tomorrow and the appearance of Phillip McCallen should ensure a record crowd.
McCallen is going for a treble in the 250cc and Open races and it is difficult opposing him.
Of the rest of the field tomorrow, Joey Dunlop of course will be there to perhaps add the 125cc and 600cc Irish Championship to the 250cc and Open titles he has already secured.
Admittedly the absence of Brian Reid gave him the 250 at Carrowdore and then Derek Young's injury at Kirkistown handed him the Open Road Racing Ireland award, but he has certainly had a year to remember and his performances in the 600cc series have all been high class.
In fact he was only beaten in this twice on Ulster roads.
That was in the Dundrod 150 where Johnnie Rea won and in the Temple 100 where Brian Reid scored.
He won at Cookstown, Tandragee, Mid-Antrim and Carrowdore and he also had a large slice of wins in the South.
So he's my man for this class even though Ian King has already won the Regal which is decided in Northern Ireland.
As for the 125cc, well Robert Dunlop leads Joey by 13 points and looks like holding on.
But you never know in this game.
Racing tomorrow starts at 11am.
Jamie Whitham: has come a long way since Kirkistown back in 1988.
E
A man of dignity and principle
GERRY Rafferty, one of the great characters of Northern Ireland journalism and a former Ireland Saturday Night columnist, died at his home in Lisburn this week.
He was 68.
His column ‘Listen Here Awhile’ was a regular and highly praised feature of this newspaper for years — a column which mirrored Ulster life as he wandered into the highways and byways of the province meeting what he called ‘the old worthies’.
Gerry, a member of the Belfast Telegraph staff for 25 years, and previously with the Irish News, underwent a quadruple heart by-pass operation in 1983 but within a week he had started writing his column again from his hospital bed — a column which was part of his life.
Gerry, white haired, soft spoken and unruffled, was a magnificent raconteur and, before entering journalism in which he was a master of the craft, performed many jobs — farm labourer, insurance salesman, bread delivery man and a psychiatric nurse.
He possessed a wonderful gift of story telling and could talk and write with authority on many aspects of life especially music and Irish folklore.
A man who enjoyed the simple things of life, a man of dignity and unbending principle.
For years he was a member of the Saturday sub editorial staff processing the comprehensive sports copy flowing in from all parts of the world for Ireland Saturday Night, a newspaper for which he had a deep affection.
Gerry, born in Armagh, retired in 1987 but continued to write for the Armagh Gazette, broadcast on BBC radio and wrote a book on rural tales entitled And the Band Played On.
To his wife Lena and family deep sympathy is extended.
Finale features a close -run race
THE last club race of the season was flown last Saturday with the Ulster Federation liberating at Skibbereen; the East Down at Fermoy and the NIPA at Tramore.
The Ulster Fed result is very close with W Rollins and son (Lionel) on the same yard as P O'Neill and son (Grosvenor).
Also highly placed are S O'Halloran (Divis), J Maguire (Grosvenor) and W G Wilson (South).
Jim Burgess (Bangor) has a clear lead in the East Down followed by C and D Smyth and sons (Carryduff), H Givan and son (N'Breda), Foulis bros (Dundonald), W G Clulow (Ballylesson) and S
Andrews (Hillfoot).
In the NIPA Section A J McKeown and son (Dungannon) are well clear of J McNeill (Coalisland) and D Abbott (Cookstown).
L Mairs (Kells) has the best two birds in Section B followed by N McKee (Antrim).
A Agnew (Ballyclare) has the best two birds in Section C followed by W McClelland (Doagh).
Section D result is very close.
S Adams and son (Derriaghy), Spence bros (Lisburn) and M Portis (Lisburn) are all on the same yard.
The highest velocity of the day was recorded by Mr and Mrs Delaney (Dromore) followed by D Mawhinney and son (Dollingstown) and Donnelly bros (Newry).
W Robinson and son (Comber) has the two best velocities in Section F.
Tony is tops
TONY Scullion has earned an enviable reputation as one of the best defenders in modern day gaelic football.
But that does not breed the slightest hint of complacency as the 31-year-old Ballinascreen clubman prepares for the All Ireland final.
The oldest man on the Derry side, he is also among the most highly regarded not just in Ulster but throughout the country as a whole.
He won an Allstar last year and is well on the way to repeating this achievement.
But modesty is still his overriding characteristic.
‘It's nice to get honours but as long as Derry bring the Sam Maguire Cup home that's all that matters — personal displays come second to the performance of the team,’ he maintains.
If Derry win the final, then Tony can expect to receive the freedom of Draperstown, headquarters of the Ballinascreen club.
And no one will deny him his success, that's for sure.
‘Don't panic’: Advice to fans is ‘wait for returns’
All-Ireland tickets go on sale
A FRANTIC pre-match ticket scramble was sparked today in Co Derry as thousands of anxious Gaelic football fans battled for places at next weekend's All-Ireland showdown at Croke Park.
The rush began in earnest this morning after 9,000 tickets — 2,000 for the stands and 7,000 for the terrace — were allocated to Derry's 40 GAA clubs last night for distribution.
Derry's rivals in the Croke Park clash — Cork — have been allocated 14,000 tickets and in keeping with All-Ireland tradition, every other county north and south of the border has also received a number of tickets.
The numbers of tickets allocated to each county board by GAA headquarters in Dublin depends on the number of clubs in the county.
At present Cork boasts 350 clubs, while Derry has 40.
Opportunity
As Derry club officials were being bombarded with ticket requests today, county board member Bernie Mullan urged supporters not to panic.
Advising fans to sit tight for an eleventh hour opportunity to snap up tickets, Mr Mullan said he was ‘reasonably confident’ that a few hundred tickets would be sent back to Derry from other county boards unable to use them.
‘Every year there's a problem with the distribution of tickets, and particularly this year, when absolutely everyone from Derry wants to travel to the match,’ he said.
‘But my advice is not to panic and to wait and see how many tickets can be picked up at the last  minute .’
Mr Mullen explained that the tickets allocated to the 40 GAA clubs in Derry would sell like hotcakes to club players and members, as well as family and friends, leaving few left for other eager punters.
Touts
He stressed that Derry's county board would be approaching other counties with the intentions of buying surplus tickets.
But he warned supporters to avoid the tickets touts outside Croke Park in Dublin next Sunday.
‘Last year Donegal was allocated 9,000 tickets for the final, but 18,000 supporters managed to get a place at the match,’ he said.
‘That's because they were able to pick up extra tickets unused by other county boards.’
Mr Mullan said he would discourage people from travelling to Dublin without tickets, but said there was a slight chance that some could be bought for the proper price outside Croke Park.
‘This is only the second time Derry has got through to the final in 35 years, so tickets this year are like gold dust,’ he said.
‘A lot of people are obviously going to be disappointed, but others who are willing to take a chance right up until the match may be lucky to get their hands on a ticket.’
Brand is firmly in control
GORDON Brand Jnr has a stranglehold on the GA European Open at East Sussex National but Seve Ballesteros set out today believing he can break it.
Brilliant rounds of 65 and 68 gave Brand, the 35-year-old Bristol-based Scot, an 11 under par halfway total of 133.
Welshman Philip Price, on six under, was the only player within five strokes of him.
Ballesteros starts today nine adrift in joint fifth place, but his first victory in America 15 years ago came after he trailed by ten at the same stage, and that in the 1986 Monte Carlo Open he was seven behind with only one round to go and still triumphed.
‘It all depends on how he (Brand) plays,’ said the Spanish star, delighted to be back in contention a week after finishing second in Switzerland and two weeks before he takes on the Americans in the Ryder Cup again.
Brand's absence from The Belfry is a major personal disappointment.
He was a member of the teams which won in Ohio in 1987 and then tied at the Sutton Coldfield course two years later, and commented: ‘Playing in the cup is the best thing ever.
‘When the race for places ended a fortnight ago and I hadn't made it I was upset.
Not because I thought I should have been picked there were at least 15 guys playing better than me but because I hadn't performed as I felt I should have done.
‘I was second in the Mediterranean Open in March and in the PGA Championship at Wentworth in May, but I didn't keep going.
‘Whether the form I've shown this week has anything to do with not qualifying for the Ryder Cup I don't know.
It could be coincidental or it could have a great deal to do with it.’
For the past two years Brand has seen the same sports psychologist, John Allsop, who helped Peter Baker earn a cup debut this month.
‘I've felt a lot more comfortable on the course since I started seeing him.
He has released a great deal of fear,’ added Brand.
Comfortable
‘I was not prepared to go for things and not sure of myself.
It was a lack of confidence basically.
‘I've not found it too difficult so far this week and hopefully I will feel comfortable in the last two rounds, but it's a big, nasty course out there and anything can happen.
‘Leading can be uncomfortable sometimes, but you have to deal with that to win.
I don't think I've ever led by so many before and it's a nice position to be in.’
Even though he is without a win for over four years, Brand could hardly be described as a struggler.
He won £144,000 in 1990, £179,000 in 1991, £301,000 last season and has collected £200,000 already this year.
Now another £100,000 beckons.
Seve Ballesteros: in determined mood
Hill's future in the balance
DAMON Hill is still unsure of his Williams' future even though he will be chasing a hat-trick of Formula One wins in tomorrow's Italian Grand Prix at Monza.
The 32-year-old Londoner has yet to secure a contract with the team for 1994, and after finishing second to fellow Williams' driver Alain Prost in yesterday's opening qualifying session, said: ‘I have had a fantastic opportunity with this team and I believe they will be the team to beat again next year.
Enjoy
‘But if it is not to be, it will not worry me.
It won't be the end of the world.
Hill's hope is to stay with Williams, but if not, to be in a competitive car.
‘Above all, I want to enjoy myself,’ Hill added.
‘I get such a kick out of driving a racing car.’
An oil leak wrecked his hopes of grabbing the overnight pole position, but he was only one-tenth of a second slower than champion-elect Prost.
Orders
Hill shrugged aside suggestions that he will be asked to obey team orders to help the Frenchman clinch his fourth world drivers' crown, with Prost needing to either win or finish two points clear of Ayrton Senna.
‘I don't know about that, but if you really want to know about team orders there is only man to ask Frank (Williams),’ was Hill's reply.
‘I am going to race to win unless told otherwise.’
Damon Hill: yet to secure new deal.
BOXING
Unbeaten Chavez held to draw in 88th bout
JULIO Cesar Chavez escaped the first defeat of his 88-bout career and Pernell Whitaker retained the WBC welterweight title when they battled to a 12-round draw in San Antonio, Texas, last night.
Two of the judges, England's Mickey Vann and Franz Marti of Switzerland, scored the fight 115–115.
American Jack Woodruff favoured Whitaker 115–113, but with two judges calling it even, the fight finished a draw.
Chavez, the 31-year-old Mexican, also left the ring a champion since his WBC super lightweight title wasn't at stake.
The draw was the second on a bill which featured three world title bouts.
Azumah Nelson of Ghana had earlier retained his WBC featherweight title when he fought a draw with Texan Jesse James Leija, and Californian Terry Norris stopped Joe Gatti of Canada in the first round to retain the WBC super welterweight title.
GOLF
Ladies see off Wales
ENGLAND'S women golfers duly added the Home International championship to their European Team title they had won in Holland earlier in the season when they defeated Scotland 5–3 at Hermitage yesterday.
It is the sixth time England has achieved this particular double.
Scotland led 2–1 after the foursomes but the target of three points from the singles was beyond them when their top two players, Catriona Lambert and the very talented 18-year-old Mhairi McKay, could only halve their matches.
Ireland comfortably avoided the wooden spoon, winning all three foursomes and four of the six singles against Wales.
An encouraging aspect was that each of the three new caps in the squad contributed to the victory.
Lynn McCool from Strabane did so when she and her partner Eileen Rose Power turned five up on Andrea Dunne and Julie Thomas and went on to win six and four.
McCool was omitted from the afternoon singles along with National champion Eavan Higgins so that Hazel Kavanagh of Grange could be given her first match in the tournament and Barbara Hackett from Castletroy her second outing.
Both justified their promotion, Kavanagh beating Julie Thomas three and two and Hackett getting the better of Lisa Dermott by two and one.
Slevin ranked 127 in world
COLM Slevin, competing today with Jonathan Cowan in the Peniel Five-Star Open table tennis championships in Brentwood, is disappointed with his new world ranking of 127.
The Dublin hero, presently playing in the top ranks of the professional German Bundasleague, is capable of holding a top 50 world ranking but his shoulder injury at the world championships in Sweden spoiled his chances of promoting up the ratings.
He sits on 1,299 points, only 300 behind his Russian rival Andrei Mazunov who is No 50.
Ulster's pair Hilton Meneely and Andrew Dennison are on each other 's heels, with 857 and 854 points respectively, with German-based Meneely moving up seven places to No 344.
Jennifer Thompson, the 1993 Forward Trust Grand Prix champion, has also improved, by nine places to No 252 in the women's list with 951 points.
Olympic champion Jan Ove Waldner from Sweden holds the world male leading spot, ahead of world champion Jean Philippe Gatien from France, with former Milk Irish Open champion Jean Michel Saive from Belgium competing the European domination in third place.
However, in the women's listing it is Otilia Badescu from Romania in 14th position who offers only a token European challenge to the Eastern supremacy with Deng Yaping from China in top place.
World table tennis rankings:
Graf shakes off setback
STEFFI GRAF shook off a sluggish start against Manuela Maleeva-Fragniere by winning 12 of the last 13 games to roar into the U.S. Open final at Flushing Meadow.
Her opponent in today's final will be Czech Helena Sukova, who defeated Arantxa Sanchez Vicario in the other semi-final.
Graf, unbeaten since the beginning of May, took her winning streak to 35 matches by posting a 4–6 6–1 6–0 victory over the 11th-seeded Swiss, who played an inspired first set before caving in under the German's familiar pressure.
Earlier yesterday the 28-year-old Sukova beat her friend and doubles partner Sanchez Vicario 6–7 7–5 6–2.
Graf, the French and Wimbledon champion, will be a firm favourite to collect her third U.S. Open crown as she has not lost to Sukova in 19 matches since losing in their first meeting as a 14-year-old in 1983.
The 12th-seeded Sukova, playing in her 44th Grand Slam singles event, is enjoying a revival as she became the lowest seed to reach the final since 16th-seed Pam Shriver 15 years ago.
‘I'm just really happy I was able to come back in the second and third sets,’ said Sukova, who held three set points in the first set, including two in the tie-break, before Sanchez took the decider 9–7.
Like Sukova, Graf found herself down a set before snapping to attention.
‘I was surprised I was really tight in the beginning, kind of not really ready for the match,’ said Graf.
‘The way I played the first set was not me, not my usual game.
I tried to remind myself who I am and how I play tennis.’
Maleeva-Fragniere captured the first set after holding off Graf in a marathon eighth game that went to 11 deuces.
But the tide turned in the second game of the second set when Graf finally broke serve on her fourth break point.
Sukova, who had lost all four previous hard court matches she had played against Sanchez, said her fourth-round Wimbledon victory over the Spaniard this summer had helped her to victory.
Steffi Graf: Lost first set before winning
RACING
Races start later
DOWNPATRICK races will start later than usual next Wednesday — at 4.00pm with the last race at 6.30pm.
Course manager Ian Duff has put the starting time back from 2.30pm in the hope of boosting the attendance and he pointed out: ‘With the televised football not starting until after 7.00pm there should be enough time for people to leave their offices, go racing and come home to watch the soccer.’
The meeting will be completely sponsored by Sean Graham Bookmakers and there will be six races on the card — the Maiden Hurdle, the Handicap Hurdle, two Maidens, the Flat Race and the Novice Chase.
Battle of Britain heroes honoured
THE five surviving Northern Ireland heroes of the Battle of Britain were honoured last night.
Wing Commander Ken McKenzie, Squadron leader Winder McConnell, Squadron leader Noel Corry, flight lieutenant Harry Clarke and flight lieutenant Matt Cameron are now in their seventies.
Next week sees the anniversary of the battle and it is the 75th anniversary of the Air Force.
Noel Lynch, of the Ulster Aviation Society, said: ‘It's the first time a reunion like this has taken place.
‘They are a fine bunch of men and it will be the last time they are together.’
Enemy
Mr McKenzie, originally from Enniskillen, flew in from Cyprus for the presentation ceremony at the Ulster Flying Club in Newtownards.
‘They all have incredible stories to tell.
McKenzie was out of ammunition, but followed an enemy aircraft down to sea level, stuck up a wing and chopped off its tail — he was lucky to be able to regain control of his own aircraft,’ Mr Lynch said.
Molby wants place back
JAN Molby will bid to shake off his tag as the ‘forgotten man’ of Denmark tomorrow — and put himself in line for a place against Northern Ireland next month.
Molby, 30, can move nearer his ambition of an international recall by impressing Denmark manager Richard Moeller Nielsen during Liverpool's televised Anfield clash with Blackburn Rovers.
‘I would love to play for my country again.
I definitely have ambitions in that direction,’ said Molby.
Liverpool believe Molby's great early season form has reawakened Nielsen's interest although he has not played for Denmark for almost three years.
Ironically there was a Molby in the team when Northern Ireland last played in Denmark — Jan's young cousin Johnny who helped his side to a 2–1 victory over Billy Bingham's men in November 1991.
The senior Molby fell out of favour when he was quoted as criticising Danish tactics in interviews published in Denmark.
He is expected to recover from groin trouble in time to play tomorrow.
‘I think I'll be fit ‘he said.
‘At the moment everything is going according to plan.
It's been good to play in the six games so far and you don't want to miss any at this stage of the season.’
Defender Neil Ruddock is also expected to play after having wisdom teeth removed in an operation this week.
Manager Graeme Souness is desperate to have Ruddock in his ranks to combat the threat of fit-again Alan Shearer, who is in the Blackburn squad.
‘Shearer is a player who's always impressed me,’ said Souness.
‘He's direct, brave and courageous and his inclusion would give them a lift.’
But Blackburn boss Kenny Dalglish was keeping his cards traditionally close to his chest about Shearer, who is expected to challenge for an England place against Holland in Rotterdam next month.
Shearer has been limited to five short appearances as substitute so far this season as he recovers from knee ligament trouble.
‘He has had his problems this season with a knee injury to overcome but it is great that he has got where he is at the moment,’ said Dalglish, who would not even confirm that he will give Paul Warhurst, his £2.7 million signing from Sheffield Wednesday, an Anfield debut.
Jan Molby: wants to play for Danes
Noel Bailie: one of the Linfield players who impressed Benny Johannsen during his spy mission
FOOTBALL
Gary's comeback goal
GARY Lineker scored his first goal today since being sidelined from the Japan League for three months with a broken foot but it was not enough to save Nagoya Grampus Eight from defeat in the opening match of the Nabisco Cup.
The former England striker scored after 76 minutes as Grampus Eight lost 2–1 to Shimizu S-Pulse.
It was Lineker's first goal since he scored the opening goal in Japan's first professional league on May 26.
Phil signs for team he loves so well
DERRY City Football Club has just closed the deal on its newest signing — Phil Coulter.
The international singer songwriter said he was ‘flattered and honoured’ at being appointed President of the club Board.
Phil said his earliest memories of life at the Brandywell would remain with him forever.
‘Long before I knew about Elvis Presley my hero was goalkeeper Charlie Hefferon.
When I was 11 or 12 I had aspirations to be a goalkeeper too.
‘My father would lift me over the turnstile at the Brandywell, with me decked out in a red and white scarf and hat.’
Links
The man promoted from Londonderry's Abercorn Terrace to entertaining US President Bill Clinton at the White House, said Derry City was a part of him.
He said: ‘I travel an awful lot with my career but I have always kept up my links with Derry and the football club has always been such a part of me.’
He said that his passion for football had come long before his interest in composing.
‘I have always been immensely proud of being from Derry and though I left Derry many years ago, Derry never quite left me.’
And Phil promised he would make as many trips as he could to see the lads in the red and white.
Tour
But he said he was unable to accept a permanent transfer from stage to the Brandywell turf.
‘I'm off to the US next week and then I am doing an extended tour of the US and Canada.
‘But I will try and get to as many home and away games as I can.’
Derry City's new boy conceded Roy Coyle's side had been going through a lean period but he said the lads would bounce back.
He said: ‘There is one thing about Derry and that is the spirit.
It is unquantifiable.
There is a spring in the step of people here.
‘I am very flattered and honoured at this appointment.
And it is the spirit which makes things happen.’
BILLS BENT ON REVENGE
IT'S the rematch of the decade — the Buffalo Bills against the side that made them look like schoolboys in Superbowl XXVII, the Dallas Cowboys.
Back in January Dallas performed what started off as the demolition and ended up in the annihilation of the Bills' hopes of making it third time lucky at Superbowl.
That 52–17 victory for Dallas will be sticking in the collective craws of a Buffalo side that has been so close, but never close enough.
However, this week Dallas are going into week two with one of their worst starts in four years.
Washington exposed complacency and over-confidence last week, and the injury to All Star running back Emmitt Smith has hit the offence hard.
Planning
The loss of defensive co-ordinator Dave Wannstedet, to become the new head coach at Chicago has yet to be fully assessed but it was his planning that neutralised the Bills' threat.
The Cowboys went down by 35 points in week one, but Buffalo, by contrast, opened on a high with four passing touchdowns, three caught by Andre Reed.
Revenge is said to be a dish best served cold, but in the heat of Texas the Bills could be savouring its taste tomorrow night.
Meanwhile the tale of Smokin' Joe goes on.
The ageing but enigmatic Joe Montana makes his second full start for Kansas City at Houston, but last week's three TD shooting match will be harder to repeat against the feared Dome Patrol defence.
His percentage short passing game will have to be at its sharpest to stop the Oilers' linebackers turning Smokin' Joe into smoked quarter back.
Rejuvenated
In other featured games this week, the rejuvenated Phil Simms will be attempting to keep his throwing arm limber after last week's 227 yard game against Chicago as the New York Giants host the dark horses Tampa Bay Buccaneers; meanwhile the Green Bay Packers, fancied by many as Superbowl contenders, will be looking forward to clipping the wings of the Philadelphia Eagles before they have a chance to soar.
Week two fixtures: Buffalo at Dallas; Chicago at Minnesota; Detroit at New England; Indianapolis at Cincinnati; Kansas City at Houston; New Orleans at Atlanta; NY Jets at Miami; Philadelphia at Green Bay; Phoenix at Washington; Pittsburgh at LA Rams; San Diego at Denver; Tampa Bay at NY Giants; LA Raiders at Seattle; SF 49ers at Cleveland (Monday).
Lang on look out for title
GINNY Leng looked well on course for a fourth European three-day event victory as she and Welton Houdini led the field going into today's cross-country section in Germany.
And the 38-year-old Avon rider could also pick up a fourth team medal, with the British quartet poised to win the title for the fifth time on the trot.
But heavy rain has produced quagmire conditions over the Achselschwang course and this vital part of the championships could be something of a lottery.
Officials, wary of the effects the soggy going could have on horses tackling a long hilly course, have taken the precaution of cutting the fences from 38 to 34 and have also slightly reduced the length of the course.
The optimum completion time has come down by one minute to 11 minutes and more time is being allowed on the roads and tracks section before the cross country.
Hugh Thomas, the technical delegate, stressed that the changes have been made because of the conditions and with the horses' safety in mind.
Leng began today's section with a 4.2 point advantage over her nearest rival, Germany's Peter Thomsen on White Girl, after emerging as the only rider among 67 to get under the 40 points dressage mark.
Tricky opener for champions
THE Smirnoff Irish League championship kicks off next Saturday with champions Linfield facing a tricky start away to Ards.
Linfield hope to have Raymond Campbell in their squad for the game; the winger's transfer from Glentoran is expected to be finalised early next week.
No fee has yet been agreed for the player but it is expected to be in the region of £35,000.
Campbell is unlikely to start the game however; he is short of match practice and the most he can hope for is a place on the bench.
Favourites Portadown are at home to Distillery while last year's runners-up Crusaders must travel to Ballyclare.
Bangor, the potential ‘dark horses’ this season have a difficult opening hurdle in Cliftonville at Solitude while Glenavon, hoping their enigmatic side can make a bigger impression this time round travel to neighbours Newry.
Glentoran have a home game against today's TNT Gold Cup opponents Larne.
DERRY City manager Roy Coyle has entered the transfer market for the third time in 10 days.
Ian McConnell, a 19-year old striker, formerly with Dundee, arrived in Derry today and he's expected to be part of the panel which takes the field against Dundalk tomorrow afternoon.
‘I'm always on the lookout for players who will benefit Derry City and Ian has agreed to come over for a month initially,’ said Coyle.
The striker joins recent recruits Paul Lemon and Michael Smith and all three have been signed on short-term contracts.
Derry, of course, received a significant boost following their League Cup second round victory over Monaghan on Thursday night last and Coyle is hopeful that that victory will signal a return to winning ways.
‘We lost two league matches in succession before the Monaghan game but we showed enough on Thursday night to suggest that we will be a force to be reckoned with this year,’ said Coyle who also praised the attendance of over 3,000 which watched the midweek in dismal weather conditions.
‘The fans are a credit to the club.
They came out in great numbers to support us despite our poor early season form, and I'm confident we'll get it right against Dundalk on Sunday.’
Dundalk, who have also experienced a poor start to the season, have made significant changes in personnel this year.
Seasoned campaigners Alan O'Neill, Terry Evison and Ronnie Murphy have all left Oriel Park while newcomers Greg O'Dowd, Tom O'Sullivan and Mick Doohan appear to have settled in well.
GAA tickets scramble
THOUSANDS of Gaelic football fans in Co Londonderry today scrambled for tickets to next weekend's All-Ireland Final at Croke Park in Dublin.
With only 9,000 tickets allocated to the county, many are faced with the prospect of watching the big match on television.
McKeever listed
KEVIN McKeever has been transfer-listed by Glentoran after less than a season at the Oval.
He joins Mark Caughey, Dean Smyth, Bobby Kincaid and Duncan Lowry on the list of players looking for new clubs.
Glentoran meanwhile hope to complete the transfer of David Mills from Portadown early next week.
‘I'll listen to any reasonable offer for our available players,’ said manager Robert Strain.
Everest climb show
THE Irish Everest Expedition is holding a public slide show of its recent Himalayan ascent.
Belfastman Dawson Stelfox led the four-man assault on Everest.
The show will be held at the David Keir Building, Stranmillis Road, Belfast next Wednesday and Thursday, September 15–16.
Tickets priced £5 are available from Surf Mountain, Brunswick Street and all proceeds go to the Irish Himalayan Trust.
SOUTHAMPTON
Royal sea celebration
PRINCE Edward celebrates 25 years of the International Boat Show when he officially opens the event in Southampton today.
There are more than 550 exhibitors at the show, one of the South Coast's major crowd-pullers and the biggest event of its kind in the world.
YORKSHIRE
Meeting reveals all
HUNDREDS of naturists were casting aside their clothing and inhibitions today to attend the annual meeting of the Central Council for British Naturism at the Ashdene Club near Brighouse, West Yorkshire.
No bite
CRICKET legend Ian Botham made his shark fishing debut — but returned to port without a bite and bemoaning the ones that got away.
He and British Lions rugby star Jeremy Guscott were taking part in the fourth annual British Shark Angling Festival off Looe, Cornwall, yesterday.
The winner, electrical contractor Ian Lamb, of Basingstoke, Hants, caught three sharks, weighing 99lb, 87lb and 75lb.
Birthdays today
Eddie George, Bank of England Governor, 55; Herbert Lom, actor, 76; Barry Sheene, motorcycle champion, 43; Jessica Mitford, author, 76; Richard Linley, jockey, 39; Michael Lambert, racehorse trainer, 48.
Birthdays tomorrow
Ian Holm, actor, 62; Wes Hall, cricketer, 56; Patrick Mower, actor, 53; Linda Gray, actress (Dallas), 52; Maria
Aitken, actress, 49; Kenneth Lo, cookery expert, 80.
Anglers' competition
MORE than 150 anglers from Ulster, Britain and the continent are to take part in the 1993 Co Monaghan Pairs International Course Angling Championships which opens at Lough Muckno, Co Monaghan tomorrow.
For the first time a team from the newly formed State of Slovenia will be taking part.
Quiet hero Wilson
NOTTS County 32-year-old Kevin Wilson is without doubt Northern Ireland manager Billy Bingham ‘pin up boy’ a player who he describes as a true professional.
‘What an amazing man and to have him in your team is a real bonus,’ he said.
‘I played him in many positions and he's never let us down.
He has been consistent in all his 33 appearances in which he has scored six goals.’
Wilson, born in Banbury and who qualified for Northern Ireland through his mother's Co Londonderry birth, has operated at right back for Notts County in recent matches.
‘I played at leftback, centre half, in midfield and as a striker,’ he said.
‘The position does not matter to me so long as I am playing.
I enjoy my football.’
Wilson, who made a quiet yet effective impact in the 2–0 midweek World Cup defeat of Latvia has been around in the game with spells at Derby County, Ipswich, Chelsea and his present club where he is happy but would consider a move to a higher grade of football if possible.
Wilson, like all other members of the Irish squad is confident about the future particularly the forthcoming European Championship which commences next September.
‘Our team has been gradually rebuilt since Mexico '86 — its a young one but there is experience too,’ he said.
Bingham, scheduled to retire in December will retain the Latvian squad for next month's trip to Copenhagen plus a fit Alan McDonald (QPR) and Stephen Morrow (Arsenal).
And he will again introduce youngsters on the periphery of recognition — a policy which he has adopted successfully for almost two seasons.
‘Now we have young players who know what the Irish set up is all about.
It's not foreign to them and they won't feel real strangers when eventually called up,’ said Bingham.
In fact, at one stage at rain drenched Windsor last season the comparatively unknown central defender Pat McGibbon (Manchester United) almost made his debut.
‘When Gary Fleming got injured I was considering putting Pat on and I wouldn't have been in the slightest bit worried,’ he stated.
McGibbon is one of a group of talented teenagers now waiting in the wings — Darren Patterson (Crystal Palace), Keith Gillespie (Mancheser United), Stephen Lomas (Manchester City), John Morrow (Rangers) and Barry Hunter (Wrexham) to name a few.
Bingham wants to hand over to his successor a highly competent squad capable of doing something in the European Championships and the basis of it is certainly there.
His successor?
No initiatives will be taken by the Irish FA international committee until early in the New Year after they have discussed all aspects of the post including the financial situation.
To make the appointment a full time one, perhaps encapsulating teams at all levels would require sponsorship to meet the necessary salary.
Who knows, that might be forthcoming.
Kevin Wilson: man for all occasions
Debatable decisions
I READ with interest the comments of our World Cup referee Alan Snoddy, in last week's Sunday Life.
It's great that our top official is at hand to give his knowledgeable opinions on the Tbilisi saga.
After all he has vast European experience — he changes sterling to punts every day — and great expertise in the technicalities of the game —‘Two more blades of grass to the right before you take that free kick, mate.’
Isn't it such a pity that when it comes to the playing of the game he either forgets the rules or makes up new ones.
I, like so many others, turned up at ‘Little Dublin’ last week expecting to see a good game between the Crues and the Super Whites, but there were groans all round when ‘Mister Carryduff’ran on to officiate.
‘Why us?’ we cried.
Why can't this man go off and play with his money elsewhere on a Saturday afternoon?
By two minutes to three the match had already been condemned to a dull spectacle, ruined by zealous over-officiousness and amazing decisions.
Three particular ‘Snoddyisms’ stand out:(1) Roy Allen was blatantly pulled back by the arm inside the penalty area as he ran to meet a corner —‘play on’was the decision.
(2) A Crues player was clearly fouled outside the area — this resulted in a free kick against the fouled player and a booking for a colleague who protested.
No wonder ‘Wallaby Walker’ was hopping up out of the dug-out onto the pitch again.
(3) Stephen Small raced away from a defender and was brought down from behind inside the area — an indirect free kick for obstruction instead of a penalty.
So there we are, three new rules in another ‘Snoddy ruined’ game.
However, my money was not wasted.
It was worth every penny of the admission fee just to hear all the colourful comments and words of advice that both sets of supporters shouted at him as he left the pitch at the end.
D Simpson Well, at least that proves he isn't biased…
Alan Snoddy: plenty of advice from the fans at Seaview.
Ards anguish
WE would like to outline how disgraced we are as Ards fans at our teams recent performances.
Paul Malone has built up on paper one of the strongest squads in the league, but on the pitch they seem to be destroyed by lesser sides such as Ballyclare and Cliftonville.
Malone's buys this summer looked like good ones but they have not lived up to expectations.
The side is full of skilful individuals but they do not seem to be able to function as a side.
We ask the question, who's fault is it?
We can no longer blame the board as they are producing the funds for new players, is it Paul Malone's fault, or the players?
We do not know the immediate solution but if it continues then Malone must go and we think that we could have an excellent player-manager in big Davy Jeffrey.
G. Megaw and K. Gilmore, Bangor Ards FC Supporters Club.
You don't seem to be sure whose fault it is but ‘let's blame Paul anyway.’
Peter Swales of Manchester City would be proud of you.
IT'S countdown time to Croke Park and Derry footballers are champing at the bit in their bid to make sure that ‘Sam’ remains in Ulster for yet another year.
They have been hard at training ever since their one point victory over the famous Dubs in the semi-final a few weeks ago.
And tomorrow week the men from the Oak Leaf county take on Cork in their moment of truth.
It will be a most welcome first for Derry should they win the Sam Maguire Cup and they have been preparing for their big day with rigorous training sessions under the watchful eye of manager Eamon Coleman who this weekend will outline his strategy in secret conclave with his players.
He will finalise his team during the next 24 hours and Derry's preparations will be completed at training sessions scheduled for Monday and Wednesday.
Five of the best Glenlola Collegiate School: Local ranking: 1, national: 9.
Headmaster Richard Finlay.
Founded in 1957. 930 girls, 60 staff.
Bloomfield Collegiate School: Local ranking: 2, national: 42.
Headteacher Miss Rosemary Weir.
Began early this century as a private school.
700 girls, 39 staff.
The Royal School, Dungannon: Local ranking: 3, national: 45.
Headteacher Paul Hewitt.
Founded in 1608.
Mixed grammar, 650 pupils, 40 staff.
Banbridge Academy: Local ranking: 4, national: 48.
Head teacher Charles Winston Breen, mixed grammar, 870 pupils, 54 staff.
Our Lady's Grammar School, Newry: Local ranking: 5, national: 50.
Headteacher Sister Mary Perpetua McArdle, girls' grammar, 829 pupils, 47 staff.
All rankings based on Sunday Times Good State Schools Guide published on August 15.
MOLBY'S TARGET
Early season form puts Dane in the Anfield spotlight tomorrow
JAN Molby will bid to shake off his tag as the ‘forgotten man’ of Denmark tomorrow — and put himself in line for a place against Northern Ireland next month.
Molby, 30, can move nearer his ambition of an international recall by impressing Denmark manager Richard Moeller Nielsen during Liverpool's televised Anfield clash with Blackburn Rovers.
‘I would love to play for my country again.
I definitely have ambitions in that direction,’ said Molby.
Liverpool believe Molby's great early season form has reawakened Nielsen's interest although he has not played for Denmark for almost three years.
Ironically there was a Molby in the team when Northern Ireland last played in Denmark — Jan's young cousin Johnny who helped his side to a 2–1 victory over Billy Bingham's men in November 1991.
The senior Molby fell out of favour when he was quoted as criticising Danish tactics in interviews published in Denmark.
He is expected to recover from groin trouble in time to play tomorrow.
‘I think I'll be fit,’ he said.
‘At the moment everything is going according to plan.
It's been good to play in the six games so far and you don't want to miss any at this stage of the season.’
Defender Neil Ruddock is also expected to play after having wisdom teeth removed in an operation this week.
Manager Graeme Souness is desperate to have Ruddock in his ranks to combat the threat of fit-again Alan Shearer, who is in the Blackburn squad.
Challenge
‘Shearer is a player who's always impressed me,’ said Souness.
‘He's direct, brave and courageous and his inclusion would give them a lift.’
But Blackburn boss Kenny Dalglish was keeping his cards traditionally close to his chest about Shearer, who is expected to challenge for an England place against Holland in Rotterdam next month.
Shearer has been limited to five short appearances as substitute so far this season as he recovers from knee ligament trouble.
‘He has had his problems this season with a knee injury to overcome but it is great that he has got where he is at the moment,’ said Dalglish, who would not even confirm that he will give Paul Warhurst, his £2.7 million signing from Sheffield Wednesday, an Anfield debut.
Kenny Dalglish: Keeping his old club Liverpool guessing regarding the fitness of striker Alan Shearer for Blackburn's visit to Anfield.
Why Glenlola Collegiate at Bangor is top of the form
In a different class
THESE are times of unprecedented change in education.
A national curriculum is being introduced, national classroom tests have begun, and league tables of school examination results are published annually.
In Northern Ireland, as in the rest of the UK, these tables have been met with some controversy and suspicion.
Amid the storm over the criteria used, a Bangor school, which by its own admission existed on a low profile in the past, came out top in Northern Ireland in a recent newspaper guide to choosing the best of education.
Success
Glenlola Collegiate was also the only school in the province to achieve 100pc GCSE passes with grades A — C in five or more subjects in the Department of Education's school performance information 1991/92.
Claire McGahan has been to visit Glenlola Collegiate in Bangor to try and uncover the secret of success that has put the Co Down girls' school into the spotlight.
What makes Glenlola so special?
We go through the ranks and ask the people who know the school best — its headmaster, teachers and pupils.
The Pupils
JANE IRWIN (13), second form: ‘The staff are always there to help if you are in any trouble.
The standard of pastoral care is really good.’
Fiona Houston (13), third form: ‘There's a feeling among girls in the school that it's actually trendy to study.
We don't have any trouble getting time to study because everyone wants the same thing — to do well.
‘I find we don't get masses and masses of homework.
Most of our work is completed in class time and we don't get over loaded.’
Caroline McClatchey (17), Upper Sixth, wants to study law or media: ‘Everyone is encouraged at Glenlola.
Because the teachers are so friendly there is a good atmosphere for getting on with your work.
There is no hostility between the staff and us and it makes school life so much easier.
We enjoy our days here — most of us don't want to leave.’
Heather Larmour (18), Upper Sixth, wants to be a teacher: ‘There are never any negative views put in our heads.
No-one feels they are being put down.
Whatever your strength may be it's encouraged.’
Rosie Stephens (18), Upper Sixth, wants to study law: ‘There are no elite groups here — everyone is encouraged to strive.
I think they get the best from you here whatever your capabilities.’
Dawn Niblock (17), Upper Sixth, wants to study politics with languages: ‘I have never approached a teacher to ask for help and been passed on to someone else.
Every pupil is known personally, we have our own identity with staff.
It goes beyond the academic — teachers are like older friends.
There are no elite groups’
New girl: Dawn Moore, a first year pupil at Glenlola Collegiate School, Bangor, takes down her homework in the geography class.
No freewheelers on this lethal trip
IAN KNOX of Ardglass has been telling me of the hazards of his favourite pastime, riding penny-farthing bicycles.
‘They are very dangerous, in fact they can be quite lethal,’ he says.
‘Some of them have 58-inch wheels and seeing one has been described as looking like a gothic cathedral coming towards you.’
One of the problems is that the rider, perched up there, is sitting almost directly over the centre of gravity of the thing, and there is little room to manoeuvre.
Not only that, but they have fixed wheels, so cannot be freewheeled along.
‘A friend of mine, Peter Matthews from Dublin, came off one in the Isle of Man in May and fell on his head and is just getting over it now.
It was the worst accident I have ever seen involving one of them,’ Ian added.
On Friday next, September 17, a group of the monsters will come off the Larne ferry and join a local group for a rally up the coast as far as Ballycastle.
They are all part of the Veteran-cycle Club, of which there are about eight members in Northern Ireland.
‘We put the hyphen between ‘veteran’ and ‘cycle’to indicate that it is the cycles which are old, though some of the members are almost as old as the machines,’Ian claimed.
All being well, the pennyfarthings and other old two-wheelers will travel along the coast at a brisk eight miles an hour.
‘That is if we get a tail wind,’ Ian explained.
‘If they get a head wind they barely move at all.’
Will the bicycles be kept under lock and key during the night stops I wanted to know, mindful of the problem of bike thieves.
‘They will be kept in sheds, though bicycle thieves don't usually bother with them.
They are too lethal for joyriders.’
High road: Two of the dare-devils who will be hoping for a following wind along the Antrim Coast road, John Pinkerton (left) from Birmingham, and Scotsman Alex Brown.
The Cruiser looks north
Reynolds doesn't want any part of the ungodly mess of trying to be joint administrator of Northern Ireland
CONOR Cruise O'Brien, a legendary sage in his lifetime in Irish politics, academic institutions and journalism, was not unduly surprised when the Unionists' historic visit to Dublin in July 1992 ended in failure.
‘Dublin has long been paralysed in relation to the Unionists, by an implicit veto of John Hume.
You can't afford to run across John Hume.
I did and it was one of the reasons I lost my seat in the Dail.’
As his eagle eye surveys the political scene here, from his bungalow above Howth lighthouse, he recognises the importance of the SDLP's commitment to joint authority in Northern Ireland.
First revealed in 1972, it took shape in the Council of Ireland at Sunningdale, the New Ireland Forum, the Anglo-Irish Agreement and Hume's proposal for six commissioners to run Northern Ireland.
‘As early as 1972 I said publicly that this was nonsense.
I described it as a recipe for throwing Northern Ireland into convulsion.
‘Garret FitzGerald advised me to shut up, saying you don't have to do everything the SDLP wants, but don't come out and say it stinks.
That's been the policy here ever since.’
In the negotiations leading up to the Anglo-Irish Agreement, O'Brien believes there was a recognition that joint administration was unobtainable.
So the Irish went for the next best thing, consultative status, getting a toe in the door.
‘It was smart thinking.’
he says.
O'Brien suspects northern influence was brought to bear on Dick Spring to make him change his tune.
Initially, he sounded reasonable enough to appeal to some Unionists, but then he started discussing joint administration as an option.
‘I heard on good authority that Albert Reynolds sent an emissary to the north to make sure it was understood that Spring was not speaking for the government.
Reynolds doesn't want any part of the ungodly mess of trying to be joint administrator of Northern Ireland, answering questions in parliament.’
O'BRIEN claims credit for being the only member of Dublin's coalition government team at Sunningdale in 1973 to warn about the destructive effect of the Council of Ireland — in which members of the Stormont executive and Dublin government were to meet.
‘If you want a power-sharing executive, you are likely to blow it with the council, I said.
The unionists may say OK, but they would desert and rebel if they thought it was the beginning of a united Ireland.’
Only two others spoke, both against.
Garret FitzGerald said O'Brien didn't understand ‘the modern Northern Ireland’, which was much more advanced in its thinking.
‘The pity was that Brian Faulkner didn't refuse to accept the Council of Ireland and stick to it.
If he had, they'd all have been round his door trying to stitch together an agreement and dropping the council.
‘The worst feature of Sunningdale was that the Unionists — and Faulkner in particular— were hypnotised by the British.
Ted Heath treated Dublin and the SDLP with spurious affability and effusiveness, while he reserved cold contempt for the Unionists.’
There was no attempt, O'Brien says, to bamboozle the Unionists at Sunningdale.
Although Faulkner wanted a guarantee that the agreement was constitutionally sound, he was told the Supreme Court would decide.
It was different, however, during the Anglo-Irish negotiations.
Garret FitzGerald gave Margaret Thatcher to understand, with the backing of Dublin's legal advisers, that Article 3 of the Irish constitution — suspending implementation of Article 2 — cancelled out the territorial claim.
‘This was blown out of the water by the Supreme Court in 1990, when it said Irish unity is a constitutional imperative.
I can't see how any consequential unionist can reach an agreement with Dublin, with those articles and that interpretation in force.’
He believes the Irish Government has no intention of doing anything about Articles 2 and 3.
The Labour party, when O'Brien was a TD, was committed to a change, but Dick Spring saw that as an obstacle to the Labour-Fianna Fail coalition he wanted.
‘Now he has it, nothing will be done.
Fianna Fail's formula is that once the Unionists get down to serious discussions they will be addressed.
That is to say that when the Unionists agree to a united Ireland, there won't be any need for Articles 2 and 3!’
HE laughs heartily, contemplating the cynicism — as he sees it — at the heart of Dublin's approach to the Northern Ireland problem.
He is no less critical of the British government.
‘London is not going to put serious pressure on Articles 2 and 3.
If they had wanted to, they had the opportunity to blow the whistle over the constitutional ruling.’
But the British weren't serious about the Union, so there was no reaction.
Similarly, there was a lack of reaction to the Hume-Adams joint declaration, which was significant.
‘They jointly commit themselves to Ireland's national right to self-determination on the whole island.
That blots the Unionists right out of the picture.
If it means anything else, Hume was making a fool of Adams.
Unionists should ask both partners to the declaration to say jointly what it means.’
The danger, as O'Brien sees it, is that there are some Machiavellian people in the Foreign Office and the NIO.
They advocated imposed joint authority, which would sound reasonable to international opinion, but would be attacked by loyalists and the IRA.
Having tried everything, the British could then exit with honour, leaving a civil war situation.
WAS this not scaremongering?
No, it was possible.
And there was a growing appreciation, helped by some writers for Irish Independent newspapers, of the dangers for the republic.
‘The SDLP has a name for us — the Indo-Unionists.
I'm very proud of it.
Basically the minority who think about northern politics saw the good guy with his arm around the bad guy, at a time when bombs were still going off.
All of a sudden, it was too much for them to take.’
O'Brien's solution bears a remarkable similarity to the Ulster Unionists' — even-handed selective internment, first in the North and then in the South, accompanied by a determination by London to drop its neutrality, accepting that direct rule is the best thing available, politically.
But he doubts if there is anyone, among the ‘jellyfish’ politicians in London and Dublin, with the will to take difficult decisions.
Short-termism dominates the Northern Ireland scene, he says — providing told-you-so critics like the Cruiser, nearly 76, with a regular source of ammunition.
O'Brien claims credit for being the only member of Dublin's coalition government team at Sunningdale in 1973 to warn about the destructive effect of the Council of Ireland
Free flights to mainland
FARE DEAL FOR AIR TRAVELLERS
By SUE CORBETT
ULSTER holidaymakers are being offered free flights to London in a new travel deal by British Airways.
The airline hopes to woo more local travellers in 1994 with its new policy of free domestic connections to all destinations featured in its Worldwide brochure.
And that means an end to the gripe of Northern Ireland people having to pay an ‘add on’ supplement to get to Heathrow or Gatwick for their intercontinental flight.
‘Now the price they see in the brochure is the price they pay,’ says Nick Wood, Head of BA's Outbound Products.
‘As part of the deal people from Northern Ireland will be flown to the mainland free-of-charge.’
The new policy has been introduced as a direct result of last year's upsurge in British Airways holiday bookings when the Belfast-London supplement was slashed to £25.
‘Now that we are scrapping the supplement completely, we expect even more interest.
Last year the number of bookings actually doubled,’ he added.
News of the free domestic connections coincides with this weekend's launch of the 1994 BA Worldwide Brochure.
Prices start from £339 for a week in Egypt.
Other destinations include the United States, Caribbean, Far East, Middle East and Indian Ocean.
Another special deal being offered is the chance of a one-way upgrade to the comfort of Club Class at a cost of from £299 on Caribbean routes, £349 for Florida and £359 for Indian Ocean destinations.
TOP 10 British Airways holiday destinations from Northern Ireland (1993): 1.
Los Angeles 2.
Orlando 3.
Paris (BA City Break brochure) 4.
San Francisco 5.
St Lucia 6.
Miami 7.
Hong Kong 8.
Bangkok 9.
Boston 10.
Jamaica and Barbados
Big break for Buddy Holly fan Glen
BUDDY Holly fan Glen Tweedie is about to realise a lifelong ambition.
The man who is more at home on the classical stage is getting to pay a tribute to his idol at the Ulster Hall.
His big chance comes on Thursday, September 23, when Stagestruck, the province's newest musical group, make their debut at the Bedford Street venue.
Their concert Show-stoppers features material from current West End shows and that's when Glen laid his claim on the Holly material.
He'll take to the stage, guitar, Holly-style glasses and all, for a five minute medley of songs from the show ‘Buddy’ arranged by musical director Mark Dougherty.
Up and coming
‘It's something I've always wanted to do’ said Glen who is better known as an up and coming tenor in the operetta and classical music fields.
‘But that is what Stagestruck is all about.
Director Leonard Anderson has brought together singers from all around the province to offer then and audiences something a little different.’
Glen will also feature in other material, including some songs not heard here before.
Tickets for the concert are available from Classical Tracks new shop at Ross's Court.
Final line-up
FINALISTS: Now & Then
FINALIST: Bronagh Brolly
The SEMI-finals were rounded off at the Woodlanders in Omagh.
The last opportunity for two more of our total of 314 entrants to gain a place in the grand final.
Thunderous applause and screams of delight echoed throughout the venue, when Bronagh Brolly, who had delivered an emotional ‘I Honestly Love you’, won her place, and the last act into the final was Now & Then — two guys who gave a faultless performance of ‘More Than Words’.
There's a great night in store.
Twenty of the best acts you could imagine.
The Grand Final is on November 4, in The Balmoral Suite, Kings Hall.
Don't miss it!
RTE bosses plan soccer block buster
TV BOSSES are planning to set Ireland alight with World Cup football fever.
As the Republic seems set to qualify for America, they are drawing up plans for the biggest television sports blockbuster ever.
One of the Republic's two TV channels, Network 2, will be completely turned over to football and fans for the Cup, showing an incredible 50 live matches.
There will be six major TV spectaculars in the run-up to the contest, and A special camera unit will be based with the Irish team to bring fans the inside stories.
The decision to turn the Cup into a huge entertainment event has been made because of the massive fan following which Jack Charlton and his Green Army have built up in their battle to qualify.
The man in charge of the RTE operation is sports broadcasting chief Tim O'Connor.
He revealed: ‘We are seriously looking at the possibility of taking over Network 2 for the World Cup.
Live
‘We plan to screen live 50 out of the 52 matches which will be played during the competition.
‘We will be able to do this because, for the first time in a World Cup, it seems there will be three different kick-off times each day with all three daily matches being staggered.
‘That's why it makes sense to turn Network 2 into Ireland's soccer channel.’
But RTE chiefs have ordered that TV coverage should also take in other topics.
‘There will be a special magazine programme on what's happening behind the scenes,’ said Tim.
‘And, in the six shows in the run-up to the Cup, we will be dealing with things such as security and personal safety for fans, as well as entertainment and what to do in America.’
The Republic faces its next World Cup qualifying hurdle in Dublin on Wednesday when it plays Lithuania.
Northern Ireland are all but out of the competition, needing a miracle to make it to the US, Scotland are already out and Wales are still in with a chance.
England are in danger of failing to qualify and begin a three-match trail of truth on Wednesday against Poland.
BY STEPHEN GORDON
STRANGE things were happening on an Ulster hillside last week.
For over a thousand years after they last struck terror into the hearts of Irishmen, the Vikings were back and ready to plunder.
Swords drawn and blond locks flowing from underneath silver helmets, the raiders staged their assault at ‘Lough Farm’ in Dromara, Co Down.
Farmer Robert Irwin and his family had a grandstand view of the invading Norsemen ruthlessly slaying Irish warriors on their land.
The dramatic display was staged by the BBC for a new series of schools programmes on the Vikings to be screened next year.
The ‘Ulster In Focus’ films feature local actor B.J. Hogg as Erik, a Viking leader who ingeniously arrives in the 1990s through the screen of a little girl's computer game.
Erik
The docu-drama then has Erik taking the girl, played by west Belfast actress Cheryl O'Dwyer, back to the eight and ninth centuries when the Vikings invaded and settled in Ireland.
The battles were carefully choreographed by English fight director Michael Michaelis.
‘Apart from BJ Hogg these guys are all film extras,’ said Michael.
‘Most of them have never held anything more dangerous than a knife and fork before but after just nine hours training they are doing really well,’ he said.
Now that's a gear change!
ABOVE: The TT race record holder in a more conventional pose burning up the rubber!
Relax Joey!
After a hard day at the office — in Joey Dunlop's case the Carrowdore 100 — our world motorcycle ace likes nothing better than unwinding with a cup of tea and a bite to eat.
Joey, a legend among motor-cycling fans in Ulster, has always been a man of the people.
And photographer Stephen Davison got this rather unusual shot of Joey in his ‘undies’ after the Carrowdore.
PRINCE Edward celebrated 25 years of the International Boat Show when he officially opens the event in Southampton.
There are more than 550 exhibitors at the show, one of the South Coast's major crowd-pullers and the biggest event of its kind in the world.
A VIDEO nasty, showing Falkland islanders clubbing beached whales to death will greet Paul McCartney fans tonight before his show at Earls Court Arena, London.
The big screen shocker is just part of ex-Beatle McCartney's up-front tactics campaign against whaling.
FOOTBALL hero Paul Gascoigne's dirty underwear has been snapped up at auction.
A fan paid £115 for an unwashed pair of Gazza's boxer shorts in Newcastle.
The ice cream van parked at the spot where Jim Bell (left) was shot.
Peter Robinson: concerned.
Football fan Andy's stag night surprise
FOOTBALL fan Andy Meek went to watch his team York City in action yesterday — and found himself the match sponsor.
Friends clubbed together to sponsor the game against Brighton in his name as a ‘stag night’ surprise.
His VIP treatment included a half-time buffet meal, a grandstand seat, the chance to meet players and manager afterwards and the presentation of a bottle of champagne to the man of the match.
Memorable
Andy, 28, formerly of Acomb, North Yorkshire, but who now lives in Huddersfield, is getting married next month.
Best man Paul White said: ‘I don't think he's missed a game all season.
He organised my stag weekend last year and made it into a memorable one.
‘We intended to sponsor the match ball but we found we could afford the whole match.’
The friends also took out a half-page advertisement in the programme to wish Andy good luck and were able to pick the man of the match.
HAIR-RAISING!
IT was the perfect chance for his customers to get their own back!
Gent's hairstylists Ted Johnston of Continental Hairdressers in Belfast put himself in the cutting chair last week.
He invited his clients to pay for the privilege of cutting his locks and raised £1,000 for the Chest Heart and Stroke Association.
Drinkers cheer time travel plan!
PUBLICAN Michael McConville decided to take his customers back in time as part of this week's Crossmaglen Festival!
He turned the clock back to 1926 in his south Armagh centre hostelry, and sold drinks at pre-war prices — pints fivepence, and shorts threepence — for a whole afternoon!
THANK YOU FOR LOOKING AFTER BRIAN'S GRAVE'
Mr and Mrs McDermott: ‘Thanks’
A COUPLE who know the heartache of losing a child have been looking after Brian McDermott's grave.
Mary and Noel Redpath from East Belfast lost their son Gary after a long illness one month before Brian's horrific murder in 1973.
Brian was buried opposite their son in Roselawn and after Mrs McDermott left for Scotland, the couple tended to Brian's grave when they visited their son.
Their kindness brought comfort to Mrs McDermott when she travelled to Belfast last week on the 20th anniversary of her son's disappearance.
Joan had not visited Brian's grave in five years and had expected to find it neglected and overgrown.
She was overcome with emotion when she discovered it had been well cared for.
Joan asked Sunday Life to thank the unknown person who had taken the time to care for her son's grave.
And this week Sunday Life tracked down the Good Samaritans involved — Noel and Mary Redpath.
‘When we hadn't seen her at the grave for a while we thought she must have gone away and so when we had any flowers left over we put them on Brian's grave,’ said Mary.
It is ‘something anybody would do’.
‘As long as we're able to go to the cemetery we will keep an eye on Brian's grave.’
Taste of the good life!
BELFAST restaurateurs Paul and Jeanne Rankin are set to find UK-wide fame with a new network TV series.
The duo, who own Roscoff on the city centre's Golden Mile, are already celebrities on the local culinary scene.
Their restaurant is the only one in Ireland to be awarded the much-prized Michelin star.
But although Paul has been a guest on television shows such as the Hot Chefs and Master Chef, ‘Gourmet Ireland’— a 15 part series due to be screened throughout the UK next year — offered the husband and wife team a new presenters' role.
And it was a challenge they eagerly accepted.
‘Our aim has been to show that food can be fun,’ said Paul who trained with Jeanne at the famed Roux brothers' Le Gavroche restaurant in London.
‘This was a marvellous opportunity to give our industry a new young and enthusiastic image.
It is also great to see Northern Ireland getting some good PR.’
As well as studio kitchen sequences, the Rankins are filmed on a scenic culinary circuit of Ireland.
‘The vegetables, herbs, meat and fish we have here look and taste better in season than any in the world,’ Paul added.
Ulster Cup farce
THE jinxed Ulster Cup competition descended further into farce last night with the news that Portadown will face Crusaders in the semi-final — 24 hours before the two remaining quarter-finals are played.
The Ports-Crues match will be played at The Oval on Tuesday, September 21, much to the annoyance of Glenavon who had hoped to host the tie at their upgraded ground.
The delayed Ulster Cup quarter-finals — Linfield v Ballymena and Bangor v Ballyclare — will be played the following night, Wednesday, September 22.
Why the nights could not have been alternated is anyone's guess but is symptomatic of the confusion that has dogged the competition — due in part to Linfield and Bangor's involvement in European preliminary rounds.
In sharp contrast, the TNT Gold Cup continues to run smoothly.
The quarter-final line-up after yesterday's deciding section games is: Cliftonville v Distillery, Crusaders v Linfield, Glenavon v Glentoran, Portadown v Bangor.
(Ties to be played on Tuesday/Wednesday
October 5/6).
MAGNIFICENT SEVEN PORTS
PORTADOWN 5 BALLYMENA 1
Jim Gracey reports
PORTADOWN blitzed Ballymena to make it seven wins in seven games — and didn't play particularly well.
That's a chilling indicator of what the rest of the Irish League are up against when the championship gets underway next Saturday.
Two goals in the last two minutes from Scottish supersub Joe McLeod put a convincing look on the scoreline as Portadown confirmed their TNT Gold Cup quarter-final place.
Ballymena had already beaten themselves by then by handing Portadown two bizarre own goals.
And Glentoran's win at Larne put the final nail in their faint qualifying hopes.
Scottish striker Trevor Smith scored his customary goal to make it seven goals in seven games for him — but it could have been eight.
In-form Smith, getting through a power of work, could have added to his tally in the final minute.
But he unselfishly slipped the ball to McLeod to give the sub a second goal.
McLeod, only on the field 15 minutes, had opened his Portadown account in the 88th minute with a fine individual goal.
Smith's was a well-taken goal as well, Peter Murray's perfectly timed pass springing the offside trap to send the striker through to put Portadown 2–1 up in 27 minutes.
Ballymena worked hard but it still wasn't enough against a low-key Portadown side who only clicked into gear at the finish.
And when they did, United were over-run.
The beating was made worse by two crazy own goals, Mark Carlisle putting the first past his own keeper in the fourth minute and Stephen Young looping a spectacular back header over Grant in the second half.
The bug spread briefly to Portadown as Strain misdirected a clearance to let David McCabe in for a Ballymena equaliser in the 21st minute.
The busy McCabe was Ballymena's best player, Smith and Stewart the two who stood out most for Portadown.
Smith has been a revelation since his arrival in the summer.
The brave Stewart, solid as ever at the back, played the entire second half with a bandaged head after a collision with an opponent.
Three players were booked, Portadown's Smith and Shepherd along with Ballymena's Burn, but apart from the usual rough and tumble it was never a dirty game.
PORTADOWN: Keenan, 7, Major 6, Murray 7, Shepherd 7, Strain 7, Stewart 8, Cunningham 6, Russell 7, Casey 6, Smith 8, Davidson 7.
Sub: McLeod 7.
BALLYMENA: Grant 7, Carlisle 6, Doherty 6, McConville 6, Heron 5, Young 6, Loughry 6, Burn 6, Speak 7, Kearney 6, McCabe 7.
Sub: Hardy 5.
Referee: G Keatley (Bangor) 7.
HEAD MASTERS…
Brian Strain and Stephen Young battle for possession
RED MENACE…
Portadown's Martin Russell is surrounded by three Ballymena opponents at Shamrock Park
Pictures: DARREN KIDD
GRAND PRIX DAMON Hill aims for a hat-trick of victories in today's Italian Grand Prix at Monza — and keep Williams team-mate Alain Prost waiting for the world championship crown.
After grabbing second place on the grid alongside Alain Prost — who can clinch the title with a win
— the 32-year-old Londoner said he did not plan to alter his style to help the Frenchman.
‘I want to win and that's my ambition.
I aim to give Alain a hard race and go for my hat-trick.
You don't get many chances to win three Grands Prix in a row.
‘But if I win it at least I will be stopping Ayrton Senna — and that is my way of helping Alain to win the title.’
Prost, who claimed his 12th pole in 13 races this year, admitted he did not expect any special team orders to help him to his 52nd career victory.
‘Damon still has a chance to win the championship and that is good for us,’ he said.
Hill was annoyed at not grabbing pole in the final qualifying session but said: ‘I lost out in the traffic by going out at the wrong time.
There is no-one else to blame for that but myself.
‘I had the chance to go out when there were only four cars on the track, but I made them change the car which meant I went out in the busy section.’
Lotus' Johnny Herbert finished seventh with an exceptional qualifying lap and Derek Warwick in his Footwork Mugen Honda took 11th place, one ahead of Martin Brundle (Ligier Renault) while Mark Blundell was 14th in the second Ligier.
Gerhard Berger escaped unhurt from a high-speed collision with Ferrari team-mate Jean Alesi.
The crash came after the chequered flag at the end of the session, when Berger came across a slowing Alesi, who was waving to the crowd.
Alesi, seeing Berger's car too late, moved across at the Ascari bend and collided.
CELTIC'S return to Kirkcaldy after a 23-year absence was a happy one, the visitors inflicting Raith's first league defeat at home for 18 months.
It also gave Celtic, inspired by two-goal Charlie Nicholas, the perfect boost for their midweek European trip to Berne.
Substitute Andy Payton also weighed in with a brace after the interval.
Celtic got the ball rolling with a goal from the impressive Nicholas after just 10 minutes.
Wdowczyk swung a free kick into the box where Nicholas was waiting to power a header high into the net past keeper Carson.
And it was Nicholas who grabbed Celtic's second goal after 27 minutes.
McAvennie nodded Grant's lob into Nicholas' path where the striker swept the ball low into the net from 15 yards.
Payton who had only been on the field for six minutes put Celtic further ahead in the 66th minute when he accepted a left wing pass from Collins to shoot low into the net from six yards.
Four minutes later Raith pulled a goal back when Crawford shot into the net from 14 yards after a lack of concentration in the Celtic defence.
Celtic should have been awarded a penalty in the 87th minute when Slater was tripped in the box but the referee waved away the appeals.
However the fourth goal was only delayed as one minute from time Payton shot the ball into the net after Nicholas pass had split the home defence.
Pegasus off to flying start
A SOLITARY goal from Irish international Jeanette Turner gave Pegasus both points in their opening game of the season against old rivals Portadown as the Renault Senior League got underway yesterday.
The game had all the hallmarks of being a classic with an array of current and former Irish internationals on show.
The match started at a fast and furious pace with much of the play contained in the middle of the park as both sides fought to gain control of the all-important midfield.
Violet McBride, who is probably playing her last season for Portadown, displayed some deft touches.
Pegasus were first to create any chances in front of goal but they overplayed the ball at the vital moment, making it easy for Portadown to clear.
In the 25th minute, Violet McBride tried one of her special lobs from the edge of the circle but luckily for Pegasus, it flew over the crossbar.
Four minutes later Lindsay McVicker let fly at a cross from Catherine Howard but the ball flew past the upright.
With three minutes of the first half remaining, Pegasus won their fourth short corner.
Claire Samways blasted the ball off Alison Vance, the Portadown keeper, but it fell to Jeanette Turner loitering at the post and she spun on the ball firing it in from an acute angle.
The pace relented in the second half with neither keeper being tested, and indeed Pegasus's Mary Bowden had a relatively easy game as her defence blotted out everything Portadown fired at them.
Adrian's sharp double
ADRIAN Littlejohn grabbed a brace of goals as Sheffield United salvaged a point at Bramall Lane.
The Blades lost talented youngster Dane Whitehouse — stretchered off in the first-half — and then Republic of Ireland goalkeeper Alan Kelly was led from the field with a face wound.
Whitehouse was injured in the 10th minute after a clash of heads and five minutes later Spurs, who were thrashed 6–0 in the corresponding fixture last season, took the lead when striker Teddy Sheringham hit his fifth of the season.
Darren Anderton slipped past Tom Cowan's lethargic tackle and his low cross from the right was slotted in by the England player.
Kelly saved United minutes before the interval stopping an Anderton shot and then foiling defender Colin Calderwood.
Littlejohn, playing his first game of the season, equalised in the 47th minute when he took advantage after Gary Mabbutt slipped, and slammed a fierce shot past Eric Thorstvedt.
Spurs regained the lead in the 51st minute after a mad scramble in the United area before Jason Dozzell slotted home.
But Littlejohn struck again 11 minutes later steering a Carl Bradshaw centre wide of Thorstvedt.
Cottee sinks Oldham
TONY Cottee's 32nd minute strike helped Everton end a run of three defeats to leave out-of-touch Oldham still seeking their first home win of the season.
The Oldham defence was caught napping when Paul Rideout's cross was flicked on by John Ebbrell — and the unmarked Cottee lost no time blazing a first time shot past Paul Gerrard from six yards.
Oldham battled hard but were left cursing missed chances from Andy Ritchie, Neil McDonald, Richard Jobson, Craig Fleming and Nick Henry.
They also had former Everton player McDonald to thank in the 28th minute when he booted a Matthew Jackson header off the line.
It wasn't until three minutes into the second half that Mark Brennan forced Everton keeper
Neville Southall into his first serious save of the game.
Everton always looked the more competent side and were unlucky not to increase their lead in the 50th minute.
A powerful 25 yard free kick from Peter Beagrie hit the underside of the bar before Oldham gratefully scrambled the ball to safety.
City slickers earn applause
MANCHESTER CITY'S players did their talking on the field while off it, the crowd again made their feelings clear over who should control the Maine Road Club.
Chairman Peter Swales was constantly booed and their chants of ‘Swales out,’ were loud and clear.
In contrast, former City favourite Francis Lee, who is trying to take over the club, was cheered before the match, at half-time, and when he left the ground 13 minutes before the end.
After the match, about 8,000 City fans stayed in the ground for 15 minutes.
The attendance was 24,445 — most of them City fans.
City were helped by a poor performance from Rangers.
Rebound
They took the lead in the 17th minute when Mike Sheron's shot from the edge of the Rangers box hit the post and Republic of Ireland international striker Niall Quinn fired home the rebound.
Sheron made it 2–0 after 37 minutes.
Rangers keeper Tony Roberts failed to hold on to a corner from Alfons Groenendijk.
Sheron's first shot was blocked but he tucked home the rebound from close range.
City completed the scoring with 20 minutes left when Garry Flitcroft scored with a deflected 25-yard drive.
Rangers should have had at least one goal.
City goalkeeper Tony Coton saved brilliantly from Maurice Doyle and Les Ferdinand, while Andrew Impey hit the City bar and Ferdinand hit the post.
City's new boss Brian Horton said: ‘The players did their talking on the field.
That is six goals and six points from two games.
It was a tremendous all round performance.’
Rangers manager Gerry Francis said: ‘Peter Swales was probably glad we turned up.
We got what we deserved — nothing.
I am very unhappy about our first half performances.’
Lawrie grounds Canaries
LAWRIE Sanchez gave Norwich City a European headache at Carrow Road.
Midfielder Sanchez blasted the only goal of a scrappy match leaving Norwich boss Mike Walker pondering his best line-up for the UEFA Cup clash with Vitesse Arnhem on Wednesday.
Walker dropped Mark Robins and brought in Efan Ekoku but Norwich looked woefully short of menace in attack.
Ekoku failed to stake his claim for a place against the Dutch.
The former Bournemouth player squandered three first-half chances and made little impact after the interval.
Facing party spoilers Wimbledon before a European tie would hardly be the choice of any club and Norwich often appeared distracted as Wimbledon turned the screw.
It was veteran Sanchez who ensured justice was done.
Barton beat Spencer Prior on the right and his 57th minute cross was stabbed in by Sanchez who made the vital connection just in front of Ian Culverhouse.
GREYHOUNDS
No Bally threat to Dunmore
THE Irish Coursing Club have scuppered any idea of interfering with Dunmore
Stadium racing on Monday nights once Ballyskeagh opens as planned in October.
Ballyskeagh have been granted Monday and Friday nights and there is a possibility that they will apply for Wednesday later on.
However, ICC secretary Jerry Desmond stressed: ‘There is no question of us interfering with the running of Dunmore Stadium.
‘We said we would grant Ballyskeagh two nights per week and this we have done.
‘There is nothing to stop them applying for other nights, but there is no guarantee that they will get them.
‘We have received no comment from Dunmore or Dungannon since the allocation of
Ballyskeagh's nights which were done after we were led to believe that Wednesday was Dungannon's best night of the week.
‘Hence, there is likely to be strong opposition to giving Ballyskeagh Wednesday as well.’
Meanwhile attempts are being made to keep National Sprint winner Ballyfolion Shy in Ireland after his sale to Yorkshire's Paul Stoner this week.
The blue dog who clocked a sensational 23.16 secs in the Dunmore final, could be back at the Antrim venue next month if a proposed major open ‘435’ goes ahead.
Current trainer John Hyland is keen on the dog taking his chance in the St Leger after Shy bowed out of the Irish
Derby when just run out of it for third place by Fly Smasher.
Ballyfolion was forced to check on the first bend and Hyland said the dog cramped in the closing stages.
Andre Fabre — French trainer in Curragh raid
Battle back to top starts here
TWO of the League of Ireland's top clubs, Derry City and Dundalk, clash in the Brandywell this afternoon — but with less lofty ambitions than usual.
Dundalk clinched the double with victory over Derry in the 1988 FAI Cup Final and the following season the Brandywell club took the first step towards a unique treble with a stunning 4–0 win in the League Cup final at Oriel Park.
Aspirations in both camps are for the moment, however, pretty modest following less than convincing starts to the season.
Derry are seventh and Dundalk eighth in the Bord Gais table, but of more significance perhaps is the points gap — both teams trail pacesetters Cork City by six points.
Neither side can afford to drop much further off the pace so early in the campaign.
In order to rekindle the title dream, the restoration of confidence and morale — so vital in the football dressing room — is the priority.
Hence the importance of today's shoot-out to both clubs.
Dundalk's plight appears to be the more acute.
They shipped a dreadful result a week ago, losing 2–0 at home to newly promoted Cobh Ramblers — and they've scored just once in four outings.
Hardly the form one expects from Turlough O'Connor's teams.
Pressure
Derry followed last Sunday's disappointing defeat by Shelbourne at Tolka Park by restoring a measure of self belief on Thursday night with a 1–0 victory over Monaghan United in the second round of the League Cup.
Manager Roy Coyle, without a win since the opening day of the championship, and accordingly under increasing pressure was clearly relieved to have chalked up a victory.
‘Hopefully it will give us confidence for the Dundalk match,’ he told me.
‘Three defeats on the trot would have been disturbing.
‘Dundalk are like ourselves.
They're going through a bad period and they'll be looking for a positive result as well.
‘The main thing is that we're bubbling again and the lads know we can do much better.’
Twenty-year-old left winger Michael Smith, once of Liverpool and Tranmere Rovers, made a quiet debut on Thursday night against Monaghan but he does appear to be a good crosser of the ball which might help alleviate Derry's pressing lack of balance on that side of play.
With everyone emerging from the League Cup tie unscathed Coyle will no doubt field the team that beat Monaghan.
Nevertheless he must be worried about an attack that apart from Liam Coyle appears totally toothless.
Derry have scored four goals in their last five games with three of those coming from the big striker.
Maybe the arrival of 19-year old loan signing Ian McConnell from Dundee will make a difference.
Against Monaghan on Thursday night, Derry spurned a hatful of chances.
It would be worse, however, if those chances weren't being created.
Dundalk's mean, well organised rearguard will certainly be a lot less generous this afternoon.
ATHLETICS
Speed queens can lift Lisburn
By GERRY CARSON
IRISH speed queens Stephanie McCann and Vivienne McGoldrick spearhead a determined bid by the Lisburn club to score a major cross channel victory today in the GRE Plate finals in Bedford.
The Irish outfit, fresh from their victory in the all-Ireland league championships at Tullamore, fairly bristles with talent.
Stephanie (27), a teacher at Dunmurry's Rathmore Grammar School, is Irish champion in the 400 metres flat and the 400 metres hurdles, and is also the Northern Ireland 400 metres title holder.
She has a best of 54.14 set back in 1990 — before the arrival of daughter Aoibhe, now 16 months old — and over the hurdles her best is 59.90.
‘The target for Games selection is 57.50 for the hurdles,’ Stephanie said.
‘I believe that is the performance I can achieve.’
Vivienne, a doctor at the Royal Victoria Hospital, also sports three speed titles — two sprint championships in the north and one in the south — and she too has the pace and experience to score major points for Lisburn.
Then there's the UK's No 1 discus thrower Jackie McKernan, and middle distance expert and hurdler Elaine Faulkner, all capable of scoring valuable points.
The entry list for next Saturday's Bangor classic 10k is really starting to sparkle with three of the Liverpool-based Kenyan international stars coming to the Co Down event.
The richest race in the province has now attracted Josphat Ndeti and Zabron Miano to join team-mate Jimmy Muindi.
Vivienne McGoldrick — can score points for Lisburn
GOLF: Ulster champions hope past experience will help them in Senior Cup
Clandeboye bank on Murphy's law
COLM MURPHY looks back to the future as Clandeboye's golfers prepare for an All-Ireland double assault in the national Cup and Shield finals at Woodbrook next weekend.
A national Senior Cup medal winner with the Conlig team in 1985 and 1986, 29-year-old Murphy is convinced past experience will help the Ulster champions through a Barton Shield Foursomes and Senior Cup minefield at the cliffside course, outside Bray.
‘I think we can draw on the experience of winning the Senior Cup on two occasions.
‘Players involved in all the finals might be a bit nervous, which is natural, but you must realise everybody is nervous.
‘You have to go for it.
We know how to win, and that should help,’ insists Murphy.
The main target, of course, is the Senior Cup, the premier tournament, with Murphy aiming for a hat-trick of medals.
Strange
The five-man team of Murphy, Davy Jackson, Colin Glasgow, Malcolm Thompson and Ian Smyth, open in a Friday morning semi-final against Connacht champions County Sligo.
But, before then, the happy warriors make a debut in the Barton Shield Foursomes, on Thursday morning against Portmarnock.
This is new territory for Murphy, who says: ‘Yes, it's a strange competition, shot-about.
It can be difficult to get it right.
‘But, I once played for Clandeboye as a 17-year-old in the All Ireland semi-finals of the Jimmy Bruen Foursomes, beaten in the semi-finals by Galway at Lahinch.
That was shot-about.
‘I agree it is a difficult format, but everyone in the Clandeboye squad is bursting to do well.
Players such as Davy Jackson want to complete the set of medals — Barton and
Senior Cup.
‘Winning the Ulster final of the Barton Shield against Warrenpoint was a bit of a fairytale, after defeating them in the final of the Senior Cup!
‘Ed Quiery, who won Senior Cup medals with the 1985 and 1986 teams, look over the mantle of non-playing team captain this year.
Ed is a tremendous motivator.
‘And we are ready for a few strong pep talks before the matches at Woodbrook!
‘Ed really had us pumped up before the Senior Cup final at Massereene.
‘After we defeated defending champions Castlerock in the semi-finals, he thumped a table with his two All-Ireland Senior Cup medals before the final saying…‘this is what it is all about’…and it got us going again against Warrenpoint.’
Murphy has recaptured the old form that earned him two honours with the Ulster senior team, winning one inter-provincial championship at Lahinch, in 1986.
Talented
After the glory days with Clandeboye and Ulster the enormously talented Murphy disappeared.
‘I went to London to work, staying there five years — living in High Wycombe, and occasionally going to watch the local football team now managed by Martin O'Neill.’
And he added: ‘I didn't lose contact with golf, preserving my Scratch handicap and playing in a combined Berks, Bucks and Oxford county team.
My club was Harewood Downs, at Chalfont.’
Bangor-born Murphy returned home 18 months ago, to take up a shop manager's appointment with the progressive Golf Spot, run by Jim Teggart.
‘But I really haven't played an awful lot of golf since coming home, because of work commitments.
Nonetheless, I keep my game in shape and hopefully it will work in the All-Ireland finals,’ added Colm.
ANGLING COLUMN
Irish anglers take Port by storm
A sterling performance by the Irish
Coarse Angling team saw them finish in fourth place, just 10 points away from a medal position, in the World Freshwater Angling Championships.
Nevertheless, it was a jubilant team which returned from the match venue on the River Sorria in Portugal with the highest ever placing for an Irish team in this event.
All five competing anglers finished in the top 50 in a 160-strong field from all over the world.
Ireland in fact were the top nation of the home countries with Scotland taking 8th place, England 9th and Wales 10th.
‘It was a tremendous team effort’ said delighted team manager, Dave Taylor.
‘We have now proved that we can match anyone at the highest level of the sport.
Bring on next year, we fear no-one.’
Italy landed the team title for the second year in succession with France second, Austria third and Ireland fourth.
Local knowledge paid off for Portugal's Mario Barroas who won the individual title with the best of the Irish being former World Champion Bobby Smithers, from Dublin, in 18th place.
The Irish team consisted of manager Taylor, Bobby Smithers, Damien Maddock, Alan Larkin, Wayne Fuller, Keith Chillingworth, Paul McBride and Jack Tisdall.
Deep sea trips
Charter skipper Oliver Finnegan who runs deep sea trips on board his new boat ‘Sharon Michele’ out of Warrenpoint is making quite a name for himself amongst local sea anglers.
Donacloney Pikers led by Jackie Gilliland recently enjoyed a trip fishing over a wreck 10 miles out from Kilkeel.
The Co.
Down party took conger to over 19lbs, ling to 10lbs, good pollack, coalies, whiting, pouting and wrasse.
The Sharon Michele is a purpose built Aquastar 33 with a 320 HP turbo charged engine, licensed to carry up to 12 anglers.
The boat is equipped with all the latest navigation, safety and fish finding gear and tackle is available for hire.
For bookings phone 0693 64906.
Jimmy Gillespie, from Richhill, took the best trout at the Straid this week with a nice rainbow of 7lb 12ozs.
Other big fish were landed by Noel Carson (Banbridge) 7lbs, Selbert McDonald (Randalstown) 7lbs, Jeffrey Patterson,(Lisburn) and David Rea (Doagh) 6lb 9ozs.
Best fish of the week at the Bridgewater was a nice rainbow of 7lb 1oz taken by Robert Milling (Dundonald) on a Buzzer.
Alan Warnock (Belfast) had one of 5lbs on a Montana.
Martin Campbell (Carryduff) had a great bag of 20 trout in two hours and the most successful flies included Muddlers, Montanas, Buzzers, Vivas and Daddy Long Legs.
Garryowen get Leslie
GARRYOWEN have pulled off a major coup with the appointment of former All Blacks captain Andy Leslie as coach for the next two seasons.
They wasted no time in coming up with a replacement for another New Zealander, Murray Kidd, who guided them to All Ireland League honours in 1992.
Initially Kidd had intended returning Down Under, but an attractive offer from Division Two side Sundays Well has prompted a change of heart.
Leslie, until recently the highly successful coach of top New Zealand side Wellington, is a man of great experience, balance and perspective.
And for a few fleeting months during our 1992 winter of discontent, he acted as guru to the IRFU on the way ahead for the sport.
Garryowen's ebullient chairman Frank Hogan insists there will be no change of policy.
He said: ‘We will still want to win every competition we enter.
‘We won the Munster Cup, but last season wasn't a good one by any stretch of the imagination.
Murray Kidd did a good job for us for three years, but he had obviously had a greater affinity for three quarter play than forwards.’
Leslie is an excellent communicator and commands universal respect.
His rugby CV is second to none and his appointment is proof that Garryowen are determined to regain their status as Ireland's premier club.
With three major sponsors on board, and a new pavilion just completed they will certainly take some stopping, despite last weekend's annihilation at the hands of Bath.
Young Munster, the defending league champions, will again be coached by Tony Grant, who first held the post 15 years ago.
Cricketer Smyth sidelined
CITY Of Derry are to lose the services of their star player Stephen Smyth — but only temporarily.
The talented all-round sportsman has been selected for the Ireland cricket side which travels to Kenya in February for a World Cup qualifying tournament.
Smyth will miss at least two All Ireland league games at a crucial stage of the season.
The top-order batsmen has cracked four centuries this season and his selection for the tour was expected.
But what Derry are worried about is any stipulation from the cricket authorities which would rule Smyth out of rugby for the month prior to the African trip.
Veteran scrum-half Gerald McCarter retired at the end of last season and 2nd XV pivot Tommy McBride has limited senior experience.
Derry are adopting a ‘wait-and-see’ policy on the Smyth issue, and focusing all attention on next week's crunch league division three opener against North in Belfast.
Early preparations have gone well.
Before yesterday's game against Bangor, the team had already piled up almost 100 points in its first two games of the season, against CIYMS and Coleraine.
Significantly, Smyth scored four tries in the latter game.
He is knocking on the door of the Ulster team and a good start to the season with Derry would do his representative prospects no harm.
Roy's legion of problems
ALEX Ferguson thinks he has problems juggling Manchester United's ‘foreign legion’ for Europe.
He should talk to Crusaders boss Roy Walker.
The Crues make their UEFA Cup debut against Swiss side Servette Geneva at Seaview on Tuesday with no fewer than five of their regulars classed as ‘foreigners’.
And under European rules, only three can play.
It means Walker faces the prospect of telling two of the men who helped Crusaders into Europe: ‘Sorry, but there's no place for you in the team.’
With Scottish keeper Kevin McKeown a cert to play, Walker must choose between his four southerners — Roddy Collins, Martin Murray, Rob Lawlor and Derek Carroll.
‘Don't ask me which three are going to play,’ said Walker.
‘It's going to be very hard on the ones left out.
‘They worked hard to get us into Europe and now there's no perk for them.
‘But those are the rules.
‘We've known from day one and we're resigned to it.’
With his latest southern signings, Harry Kenny and Ray Duffy, arriving after the deadline for Europe, Walker could be forced into a comeback himself to make up the numbers.
The 38-year-old former defender insisted: ‘I'm not joking.
I've been training and playing practice matches in case my experience is needed.’
Bonus
Walker added: ‘I can't field my strongest team and while that's tough on the lads who will miss out, I can't afford to spend my time worrying about people who aren't going to play.
‘I've got to concentrate on getting the best out of the players available.
‘The bonus for us is that Stephen Stewart is fit again after missing three matches with a groin injury.
‘He came through a 90 minute practice match behind closed doors in midweek and will help us at the back.
‘Kirk Hunter's Irish League suspension doesn't count in Europe.
He's been training hard and looks sharp.
That's another boost.’
Walker, ever the realist, is under no illusions about Crusaders' chances against the
Swiss, a class side by all accounts.
‘They had three players in the Switzerland team against Scotland the other night and they also have a Brazilian international,’ said Walker.
‘We may not be in the same league as Servette but where we score over most teams is with our spirit.
Everyone pulls together — no-one is aloof.
‘We've nothing to lose and everything to gain.
We'll have a go and see what happens.’
Stephen Stewart — back from injury
McFall's boys are frightening
PORTS LOOK JUST CHAMPION
MARTIN McGaughey has an apology for his old Linfield team-mates.
Sorry lads, you won't win the title again this season!
Goal king McGaughey bagged no fewer than seven League medals in his long Linfield reign as Ulster's No 1 striker before moving to Ards in the summer.
No-one knows better what it takes to make a championship-winning team.
And as another campaign gets underway next Saturday, McGaughey lists his top four finishers as Portadown, Linfield, Bangor and Crusaders — in that order.
McGaughey insists: ‘I would love to see Linfield win the League again.
Only Ards winning it would please me more — but we're not the finished article yet.’
Alas for Linfield and the others harbouring title hopes, McGaughey refuses to look past Portadown.
‘They carry so much power, it's frightening,’ he says.
‘Portadown have started the season in storming style — yet Ronnie McFall still isn't happy.
‘By all accounts he isn't over-impressed despite their convincing start.
‘I dread to think what they'll be like when Ronnie has a smile on his face — as he will when the Ports win the title back.’
Linfield clinched their first championship in four years last season on goal difference from Crusaders in a thrilling fight to the finish.
This time McGaughey reckons it won't even be close.
‘Portadown are head and shoulders above the others,’ he says.
‘They played Ards on the first day of the season and wiped the floor with us in a 3–0 win.
It was an exceptional performance.
‘You can't read too much into early season form but I'm convinced they will only get better.
‘Ronnie McFall has bought well again with his new Scots, especially Trevor Smith.
‘There is a solid look right through the Portadown team and they have good back-up as well if players are injured or suspended.’
The bookies make Portadown favourites too and rarely get it wrong.
But McGaughey bases his prediction on first-hand experience of the two main title challengers.
He said: ‘I saw the Blues play Wrexham in pre-season and although friendlies are never a good indicator, I was disappointed.
‘They weren't impressive either in their 2–0 win at Ards last week.
We were probably the better side for long spells whereas we played second fiddle to Portadown the entire match.
‘Linfield have a stronger squad than last season with all their new signings but they are also up against tougher opposition.
‘I put last season's success down to Trevor Anderson coming in and firing the team up after Eric Bowyer's departure.
‘It was the old Linfield spirit that carried them through because it wasn't a great Linfield team, compared to the sides Trevor and I played for in the 80s.
‘They will need a bit more this time with Portadown in such great shape.
From what I've seen so far, the Ports are the team with the title look.’
Martin McGaughey — no title this time for his old club
Armie's army on march
By PETER TAGGART
ARMIE BECKETT'S Moyola Park troops are on the march.
The Castledawson side, hitherto famed for being the first winners of the Irish Cup, are now making a modern day name for themselves in the B Division.
Five wins out of six, including a victory against champions, Limavady, put them joint top of the table and Beckett's boys intend to stay there, or thereabouts.
‘We struggled in our first season, were 11th last year and are hoping to continue our improvement with a top six finish this time,’ said secretary Raymond Loughrey.
One of the principal reasons for the success this season has been an influx of new players.
Former Irish League manager Beckett caused a sensation when he quit B Division aristocrats Dungannon for Moyola.
But he's acted swiftly to snap up ex-Dungannon players Bertie McMinn (yes, he's still going strong), goalkeeper Brian Hutchinson, striker Ricky Ruddock and sweeper Maurice Devine.
Left-sided utility man Donal O'Neill was brought in from Omagh, along with Derek Donaghy, ex-Ballyclare Comrades full back and Denis Rodgers, a centre back from the Welders.
Mid-Ulster junior football lost  its second stalwart this year with the death of Lurgan Institute clubman Gerald Kennedy last Monday.
An absolute gentleman and popular wherever he went, Gerald's departure sent shock waves through the Lurgan football fraternity, still not recovered from the death earlier this year of Gerald's mentor Dick Craig.
The pair were steeped in junior football in the area and are sadly missed.
That's some team they're building up there.
Bertie McMinn
Smith is ‘better than Cowan’
TREVOR Smith is better than Stevie Cowan!
That's the verdict on Portadown's new goal ace from the old master.
Arguments raged when Portadown replaced 47-goal Cowan with the unknown Smith.
Goal machine Martin McGaughey, even deadlier than Cowan at his Linfield peak, had a chance to decide for himself when he faced Smith for the first time last week.
And he insisted: ‘Portadown have signed a winner.
‘I rated Cowan highly but Smith is a different kind of player.
‘Portadown will get more out of him.
Cowan relied on the midfield putting the ball exactly where he wanted it.
‘Smith is more mobile and searches out more openings.
He looks to have superb ability and will increase Portadown's options up front.’
Trevor Smith —‘superb ability’
O'Dwyer stays on
MICK O'Dwyer will stay on as Kildare boss despite their Leinster final humiliation.
There had been suggestions that he would move on after problems with his choice of selectors.
But that has now been resolved and he will continue in the position for at least another year.
Tony Keogh remains as a selector, but John Crofton has opted out and is replaced by John Walsh.
The five man selection team is completed by county board chairman Jack Wall and secretary Seamus Aldrdige.
Meath manager Sean Boylan has also been returned for the coming season.
The decision was unanimous after Paul Kenny withdrew his nomination.
‘We can't afford any high faluting ideas’: Brian Robinson
The slide zone
By MICHEAL McGEARY
BRIAN Robinson last season successfully completed a masters degree at Loughborough College.
But back home his colleagues at Eaton Park failed miserably.
Decimated by an unprecedented injury crisis the Eaton Park squad suffered the ignominy of relegation to Division Two.
From his new home in England he had kept a close eye and ear as one disaster followed another.
Still, relegation came as quite a shock to the system.
He said: ‘It never crossed my mind when I moved to London that Ballymena would lose their Division One status.
‘But we lost nine or ten players through injury and the whole thing just snowballed from there.’
But on the eve of the All Ireland Leagues it isn't all gloom and doom, and the Irish international No 8 remains defiantly upbeat and optimistic.
He said: ‘Relegation was unfortunate, but it might yet be the making of the club depending on just how we respond.
‘We've all got to pull together.
It's all about consolidation and then hopefully making a push for promotion towards the end of the season.’
His return to Eaton Park could scarcely have come at a more opportune moment considering that Gordon Hamilton, Stuart Laing, Norman Robson and Davy Nicholl have all moved on during the close season.
Typically he relishes the challenge now facing him on his return to All Ireland League combat.
‘It's a fresh challenge from last season and is something completely different.
‘The initial priority must be to stop the slide.
We can no longer afford to have any high faluting ideas.
Reputations count for nothing in this game.’
Gaels have edge
TRADITION comes down firmly on Clan na Gael's side as they prepare to face Maghery in the Armagh senior championship final at the Athletic Grounds today (3.30).
They have appeared in 16 county, five Ulster club and one All Ireland final while their opponents are appearing in only their fourth county decider.
Clan na Gael won the only previous final meeting between the sides in 1976, when they were one of the top sides in the country.
Maghery's Dermot Forker is the only survivor from that game, and his vast experience should be vital as his colleagues bid for their first county championship.
Much will depend on top marksmen Damian and Jim Robinson, and midfielders Martin Toye and Kieran Rafferty.
Clans, captained by veteran Barry McCabe, have some outstanding young talent, most notably Diarmuid Marsden, John Campbell and the
O'Hagans, Barry and Kevin.
Chequered career of Cork full back
CORK full back Mark O'Connor began his sporting career as a goalie eight years ago.
Twelve months later he was full back on the Cork minor side beaten by Galway in the All Ireland decider, but three seasons later revenge was sweet when Cork overcame Galway in the U-21 decider.
But 1989 will always be remembered for a bizarre week that resulted in him playing for Munster without ever having worn the Cork senior colours.
A phone call to the army base at the Curragh from his father Matt in Bantry suggested something might be wrong, but the news was good.
He had been named on the Munster Railway Cup panel for the semi-final meeting with Leinster.
He travelled to Macroom for the match with tea and sandwiches.
Here was a substitute who knew his place.
But at the last minute, following a series of defections, O'Connor was drafted into the side at full back.
So well did he play that he was named man of the match.
Twenty four hours later, though, he had the misfortune to run into a rampant Eugene McKenna and Ulster duly won the Railway Cup.
McGURK POINTS DERRY'S WAY TO FINAL
DERRY defender John McGurk has an impeccable sense of timing.
Victory over Dublin in a pulsating All Ireland semi-final came the hard way, a brilliant lion-hearted second half comeback after trailing by five points at half-time.
And McGurk, the smallest man on the field at 5′ 7″, scored the winning point with just three minutes left of arguably the best championship game of the year.
Not only did it prove to be the winning point, but it was the Lavey's stalwart's first score in the present championship campaign.
Analysing his match-winning contribution he said: ‘Prior to the match I tried a few shots from that same position with my right foot and missed.
‘When Dermot McNicholl put the ball through to me it was running away from me.
At first I thought I had been pushed too wide.
‘Because of the angle I had no chance of getting it over the bar with my right foot so I simply hit it with the left and it went over.’
He's unlikely to ever score a more crucial point, but there's no danger of him being carried away in the general euphoria.
‘It will be a great score in years to come if we can go ahead and lift the Sam Maguire, but if we lose it will count for nothing.’
Like most players it was always McGurk's dream to play in an All Ireland senior final, but there was the danger it would remain simply that, a dream.
His earliest recollections of All Ireland semi-finals and finals was 1975 when his older brother Anthony played on the Derry side beaten by Dublin at the semi-final stage.
Eight years later John actually found himself playing on a winning Derry side in an All Ireland minor decider alongside Dermot McNicholl, Damian Cassidy and Don Kelly.
Prospects
Even in Derry's hour of glory he couldn't but be impressed with the sheer physical presence of the senior players from Dublin and Galway.
For him playing in an All Ireland senior final seemed further away than ever before.
But in 1987 Derry beat Armagh in the Ulster decider with McGurk being pressed into action during the game.
On his own admission he was too young then to appreciate that success.
Derry went to Croke Park for an All Ireland semi-final meeting with Meath and were well beaten.
Only when they captured last season's Royal Liver League crown did prospects of All Ireland glory come into the equation.
A year earlier McGurk had led Lavey to All Ireland club championship glory, his greatest day in football.
Now the 27-year-old accountant is hopeful of surpassing even that with victory over Cork next Sunday in Croke Park.
Against Dublin the defence, with points from Henry Downey (2), McGurk and Gary Coleman, offered the attack an abject lesson in scoring.
Now it's the turn of the attack to show it's made of the right stuff.
Derry defender Henry Downey (left) showed the attack the way to go with two points against Dublin 
MATCHWINNER…
John McGurk (right) was Derry's saviour against Dublin
Joe is star of show
BROLLY GOOD!
WHEN Derry announced their championship ambitions with a comprehensive victory over Down four months ago Joe Brolly didn't even make the squad.
But last month when the Ulster champions qualified for only their second All Ireland decider the 24-year-old barrister stole the show.
There was no comparison with the player who had struggled valiantly but with little success against Tyrone in both last season's league and championship.
Against Dublin Brolly was a revelation and though he had his critics in the past the Dungiven man came of age in Croke Park with one of the great individual performances.
Moran, O'Neill and Mick Deegan all attempted to curb the in-form Brolly with no success, and his blistering pace will give Cork manager Billy Morgan something to ponder over in the week ahead.
Traumatic
There was, though, a real danger that he was destined to be one of the game's nearly men.
He had all the skills, but there was also a huge question mark over his ability to produce the goods when it mattered most.
He came on as a substitute against Monaghan in the provincial semi-final and played well, but a place in the final starting line-up still eluded him.
It was a traumatic time for all concerned.
He said: ‘I assumed I would have been picked for the final.
It was a traumatic experience for myself and family.
‘I was deeply upset, but not in any rancorous way.
Once it was done, it was done and there were no hard feelings on my part.
‘I always fancied my chances of playing against Dublin and so it worked out, but I was taking nothing for granted.
‘I didn't deserve to be in the squad for the championship game with Down, but it's a long road and as you mature you realise that as the year progresses certain players will falter and others will come to prominence.’
The fact that Brolly began work as a barrister last March obviously meant a complete change in lifestyle, and that coincided with a loss in form.
As a student in Trinity College he had been used to doing six hours a week.
Suddenly he was into a totally new environment.
Reflecting on his day out against Dublin he said: ‘That day it seemed I could do no wrong.
I had acres of space.
A forward has a sixth sense and from an early stage I realised I had the corner back in my pocket.
Potential
‘He was terrified.
He had lost his confidence and was standing off and that made things so much easier for me on that occasion.’
But he's taking nothing for granted.
‘For the final against Cork there are no guarantees.
We could be dumped on our backsides.
‘But if we play to our full potential and we get the breaks we shouldn't be too far away at the finish.’
Joe Brolly has come with a late run into the Derry side
Hope for Carrick B
COMRADES 1 CARRICK RANGERS 3
CARRICK won a tale of two halves to stay in contention for a Gold Cup quarter-final place.
They must now get a result against free scoring Glenavon next Saturday and hope Bangor have an off day at Comrades.
Manager Kenny Shiels, watching his side win for the first time since the opening day of the season, feels that it's not an impossible dream.
‘I think we can beat Glenavon but will have to keep our fingers crossed that the other game goes our way,’ he said.
Sammy Smyth, who almost signed for Comrades after playing a number of pre-season friendlies, put Carrick ahead in the second minute before Brian Robson edged them further in front on the stroke of half-time.
Substitute Dean Gordon gave Comrades a tonic when he scored within a minute of coming on at the start of the second half, but David Montgomery got Carrick's third two minutes from the end, with Wesley Hanna sent off for protesting.
BALLYCLARE COMRADES: Cathcart 6, Johnston 6, Wilson 6, Muldoon 5, Hanna 5, Crawford 6, Leckey 5, Patterson 7, Braniff 6, Armstrong 5, Tomelty 6.
Sub: Gordon 7.
CARRICK RANGERS: Moore 6, Breslin 6, McAuley 7, Pyper 6, Stitt 7, Coulter 7, Smyth 6, McDermott 7,
Shiels 7, Robson 7, Montgomery 7.
Subs: Press 6, Martin 6.
Referee: Norman Loughins (Carry
Top ref blows the whistle on Dinamo appeal
RED CARD FOR TBILISI
By JIM GRACEY
TOP Northern Ireland referee Alan Snoddy last night cast doubt on Dinamo Tbilisi's grounds for appeal against their sensational dismissal from the European Cup.
Linfield's shamed opponents yesterday admitted making a 5,000 dollar payment to the Turkish referee before their 2–1 first leg win in Georgia on August 18.
They insisted that the money was to cover legitimate expenses, and not a bribe.
But ref Snoddy, with vast experience of World Cup and European football, insisted: ‘It has never been the custom for referees to be paid their expenses in cash — or for clubs to hand over the money.’
Snoddy, who will handle AC Milan's European Cup first round game in Switzerland this month, explained: ‘Referees travelling abroad are sent a cheque by UEFA before departure to cover daily living expenses.
‘Any additional out-of-pocket expenses are reimbursed by the home association on the referee's return — again by cheque.
Appeal
‘Money never changes hands.
‘I applaud the courage of the Turkish referee in bringing the matter to UEFA's attention.’
Tbilisi's appeal will be heard by UEFA next Saturday — but Linfield seem certain to take their place in a money-spinning first round tie against FC Copenhagen.
UEFA's appeals committee have a reputation for not only upholding decisions of the disciplinary committee, but in some cases increasing the punishment.
They could come down hard after Dinamo claimed yesterday that the money had been paid to ref Erman Torughu on UEFA orders.
Nukri Kakilashvili, a member of the Georgian soccer federation, said on national television: ‘We received a letter from UEFA instructing us to cover expenses for referees, so on the eve of the match a number of officials presented four envelopes to the referee and linesmen.
‘The envelopes contained a total of 5,000 dollars.
‘Suddenly we received a note, according to which these dollars had been interpreted as a bribe.
‘We have hired six lawyers from different countries and sent an appeal to UEFA.
God and the truth are on our side.’
Reports from Geneva, however, suggest that the match officials found the money stashed into a kitbag in their dressing room.
Mr Torughu promptly placed it in an envelope with his official report and sent it to UEFA.
The money is now back with the Georgian Federation.
Alan Snoddy
Ref was a ‘disgrace’ fumes Malone
ARDS 0 LINFIELD 2
FURIOUS Ards boss Paul Malone fined himself a week's wages after an angry clash with the Linfield bench as his team crashed out of the TNT Gold Cup yesterday.
But Malone could land in more hot water after publicly criticising ref Herbie Barr — an action frowned upon by the IFA.
Bangor ref Barr booked five players and made a number of decisions during the game that infuriated the home fans and caused puzzled looks in the press box.
‘I am disgusted at the referee,’ said Malone.
‘His performance was a disgrace.
‘We played Linfield off the pitch and deserved to win.
We just weren't treated fairly.’
Linfield boss Trevor Anderson disagreed however, saying: ‘We were very tired after our European match in midweek and that showed.
But we still deserved to win.
‘Ards just didn't do enough.
I don't think they deserved to beat us.’
Linfield booked their quarter-final place with second half goals from Dessie Gorman and John McConnell, both firsts of the season.
But the big talking point was the first half bust-up involving the rivals managers and team officials.
The row was sparked when Ards full back Tommy Leeman was booked for a late tackle on Linfield's Lee Doherty.
Malone rushed from his dug-out to protest and was joined by Linfield officials in a shouting match, with both factions having to be physically restrained by players.
ARDS: Vance 6, Millar 8, Leeman 7, Mitchell 7, Jeffrey 6, O'Hagan 7, McDonald 7, De Mange 8, Erskine 6, McGaughey 7, McCann 7.
Sub: Straney 5.
LINFIELD: Lamont 7, Dornan 7, Easton 7, Doherty 6, McConnell 7, Beatty 6, Gorman 7, Johnston 6, Haylock 6, Peebles 6, Bailie 7.
Sub: Knell 6.
Referee: Herbie Barr (Bangor) 5.
Paul Malone
Ards boss fines himself
ARDS manager Paul Malone fined himself a week's wages last night after a touchline bust-up with Linfield rival Trevor Anderson.
Team officials also clashed in the incident as Malone disputed an Ards booking in a 2–0 defeat for his side.
Malone said afterwards: ‘I shouldn't have got involved.
I wouldn't have expected it from my players and I'm supposed to set them an example.
‘I have fined myself a week's wages and will be giving the money to charity.’
Portadown midfielder
Tony Gorman was sent off after a brawl involving up to 12 players at The Oval.
Three more sendings-off yesterday brought the total this season to 11.
Glenavon's six appeal!
Erwin ultimatum
BALLYMENA UTD 2 LARNE 0
LARNE manager Gary Erwin issued an ultimatum to his players after yesterday's defeat at Ballymena —‘start giving 100pc or you're out’.
Ballymena man Erwin was furious about the lack of commitment — and was particularly critical of the defence.
He has signed ex-Portadown winger Vic Kasule and he is now looking south for defenders.
‘If that doesn't come off I will bring in players from junior football,’ he said.
‘Some players threw in the towel, and that is just not acceptable.’
Erwin is aiming to do his home-town club a favour by beating Glentoran at Inver Park next week — a result which could help smooth Ballymena's path into the Gold Cup quarter-finals.
Ballymena boss Jim Hagan was ‘happy enough’ with yesterday's performance, but not the scoreline.
Their goals came in the first half, Scot Sammy Johnston opening his account for the club and
Dessie Loughery finishing a brilliant move for the second.
They also missed a second half penalty, stand-in keeper Billy Drake saving from David McCabe after Graham McConnell had been sent off for bringing down Finty McConville.
BALLYMENA UNITED: Grant 8, Carlisle 7, Doherty 7, McConville 7, Heron 8, Young 7, Loughery 7,
Johnston 7, Speak 8, Burn 7, Kearney 8.
Subs: Hardy 6, McCabe 6.
LARNE: McConnell 8, McBride 6, Huston 6, McKinstry 6, McCullough 7, McNamee 6, Fay 6, Tully 7, McCourt 6, Drake 6, Curry 7.
Subs: Clements 6, McCrystal 6.
Referee: R Cunningham (Newry) 6.
Reds miss out cash bonanza
CLIFTONVILLE 4 NEWRY 0
GLENAVON may have snatched the sponsor's £1,000, but Cliftonville weren't too worried about that after clinching a Gold Cup quarter-final spot.
A hat-trick of top quality from Mark Gill, and an equally good contribution from Tim McCann, saw the Reds breeze past Newry with a scintillating second-half performance.
‘To be honest I'd forgotten about the money until Jim Boyce reminded me,’ said manager Frankie Parks after the 4–0 win.
‘Winning the game was my only concern.’
Gill, voted the supporters' player of the month before the game, settled the Reds with his first goal five minutes after the restart, knocking the ball in after Gerry Flynn's shot had only been partially cleared.
He then laid on a wonderful cross a minute later for McCann to blast past Brendan Keeley.
And on the hour Gill picked up a Hitchcock through ball, controlled it on his chest and fired in a memorable goal.
His hat-trick was completed seven minutes later when Donnelly found him from midfield, and he made no mistake beating the lonesome figure of Keeley.
CLIFTONVILLE: Brujos 7, Loughran 7, McCreadie 6, Tabb 6,
Donnelly 7, Hitchcock 8, McCann 8, Kerr 5, Manley 8, Flynn 8, Gill 9.
Subs: Shearer 6, Magee 5.
NEWRY: Keeley 6, Lavery 5, Loughran 5, Tate 6, Gray 5, Ralph 7, O'Neill 6, O'Kane 5, Staunton 6, McCabe 6, White 5.
Sub: Magee 6.
Referee: Norman Cowie (Carryduff) 6.
Swiss not fooled!
CRUSADERS 0 DISTILLERY 0
CRUSADERS deserve an Oscar if they were play-acting to confuse watching Swiss spy Michel Pont at Seaview.
The man from Servette Geneva saw nothing to worry him from his UEFA Cup opponents.
Crues manager Roy Walker was satisfied with the result, however, claiming: ‘I'd rather we miss chances now than throw them away against Servette on Tuesday week.’
Walker took off disappointing Dublin striker Roddy Collins late to unleash former goal star Glenn Hunter.
But Roy explained: ‘This was simply to give Hunter a chance to get match fit.
‘He hasn't done enough training yet to reach his peak.
‘I hope he gets there in our final game before Europe against Coleraine next Saturday.’
Distillery were missing striker Tom Cleland whose wife was ill.
But they still managed to put up a brave show and could have won had Crusaders goalkeeper Kevin McKeown not stopped a John Drake thunderbolt in 74 minutes.
Servette spy Pont said: ‘Crusaders struck me as a team full of spirit and fight.
‘They did miss chances, but I wouldn't place too much emphasis on that.
‘Maybe they were trying to put up a smoke-screen.
Servette though will not be taking the slightest chance.’
CRUSADERS: McKeown 8, Lawlor 6, Cash 7, Dunlop 7, Duffy 6, Murray 6, Livingstone 7, Gardiner 7, Collins 6, Lynch 6, Burrows 6.
Subs: Hunter 7, Carroll 7.
DISTILLERY: Collins 7, Drake 7, Calvin 6, Kennedy 7, Small 7, Allen 7, Totten 6, Irwin 6, Baxter 7, Mitchell 6, Dykes 6.
Sub:
McCartan 6.
Referee: Alan Snoddy (Carryduff) 7.
GLENAVON IN DREAM LAND
…but Eachus has another nightmare
BANGOR 1 GLENAVON 6
Jim Gracey reports
THE result that will send shockwaves through the Irish
League was a dream for Glenavon and an absolute nightmare for Bangor and their keeper Stephen Eachus.
Giant Eachus, blamed for the second goal in Cyprus which sent Bangor crashing out of Europe in midweek, gifted Glenavon two goals yesterday and is clearly suffering a crisis of confidence.
Not so Glenavon.
The early season jungle drums which had sounded so ominous for manager Alan Fraser after two dodgy defeats, now beat out a different message.
Glenavon are on the march again with a Gold Cup quarter-final place in the bag and a £1,000 jackpot as the first team to score ten goals in the tournament.
Add to that a £60 bonus for each away goal and Glenavon left Clandeboye £1,360 richer.
More important they signalled their re-emergence as a force again.
The Lurgan side won back their confidence and respect in front of a big travelling support with a clinical display that included three goals of sheer class.
Bangor handed them another three on a plate and the Seasiders may well have been leg-weary after their exertions in Cyprus on Wednesday.
No matter.
They were overwhelmed by a side in unstoppable form.
This was vintage Glenavon, recovering from a rocky start to take apart a team who had built up a fearsome reputation in a 26-match unbeaten run locally.
Ironically their last home defeat was by Glenavon in January this year.
Glenavon were mean at the back, bar one early slip which let in Johnny Magee, to give Bangor a ninth minute lead.
Striker Glenn Ferguson was drafted into an unusual midfield role and responded with two goals, a penalty and a brilliant 30-yard drive.
McCoy, McBride and Ferris tormented Bangor's usually solid defence and Glenavon were also rewarded with a sparkling first appearance of the season by young midfielder Peter Kennedy.
The first slip by Eachus was a turning point in the match, bringing Glenavon back into contention after they had fallen behind in a bright start by Bangor.
McBride rose to challenge the keeper for one of many McCoy crosses which had Bangor in a spin.
The keeper fumbled and defender Nigel Quigley leapt in to head home the equaliser.
A Ferguson penalty after Canning had fouled Ferris needlessly in the corner of the box made it two.
And Ferris added a stunning third before half-time, rushing in to head home an inch perfect McCoy cross.
Bangor had to abandon caution to rescue the match but they didn't reckon on another Eachus blunder putting it beyond their reach.
This time the keeper made a hash of a back pass from Brown.
Ferris stepped in and with Eachus stranded, floated over a cross for McBride to score with a diving header.
Ferguson blasted home a 30-yard drive with six minutes remaining, and there were only two minutes on the clock when substitute Trevor McMullan hit the jackpot from 20 yards.
Glenavon keeper Robbie Beck was a virtual spectator but earned his pay-packet with a brilliant one-handed save from sub Michael Surgeon.
The worry for Bangor is how they recover from two devastating defeats in a week.
The last time they came home from Europe two seasons ago, they went 13 matches without winning, ironically ending the run against Glenavon.
BANGOR: Eachus 5, Canning 6, Glendenning 6, McGuinness 6, Brown 6, O'Connor 6, Hill 6, Kenny 5, McCallen 5, Magee 6, McEvoy 5.
Subs: Surgeon 5, Slaney 5.
GLENAVON: Beck 7, Byrne 7, O'Hagan 7, Quigley 8, McKeown 8, Kennedy 8, Dennison 7, McCoy 9, Ferguson 8, McBride 8, Ferris 8.
Subs: Williamson 5, McMullan 6.
Referee: Tom Deegan (Ballynahinch) 7.
AT FULL STRETCH…
Glenavon's Davy Dennison denies Bangor opponent Ricky McEvoy Picture: FRED HOARE
Omagh off the mark
COLERAINE 0 OMAGH 3
DEREK Cook watched Coleraine go down to their fifth consecutive defeat — and prayed for a reprieve from manager Billy Sinclair.
Omagh Town ran in three goals in the first half hour, and out-of-favour striker Cook couldn't believe what he was watching.
‘I only hope I get the chance to come back against Crusaders next week,’ said the Scottish based goal ace.
Coleraine's assistant manager Eric Bowyer slammed his players for lack of effort.
‘The attitude was completely wrong,’ he said.
‘We didn't play as though we wanted to win.’
Barry Patton was Omagh's hero, returning from suspension to score two goal in 16 minutes to cement Omagh's first win this season.
Lee King floated home a simple free kick for the third on 29 minutes.
Right on the final whistle Coleraine's Scottish striker Mark McWalter was sent off.
COLERAINE: O'Hare 6, Philson 6, McLaughlin 6, Cummings 5, McLean 5, Morrison 6, Donaghy 7, McWalter 6, McVie 7, Nicholls 4, Reilly 5.
Subs: Cunningham 6, Gaston 6.
OMAGH TOWN: Devine 6, O'Neill 6, E Doherty 6, S Doherty 7, Donnelly 7, Dunnion 7, King 8, Patton 8, Lawless 6, Quigg 7, Kavanagh 7.
Subs: Beckett 6, O'Donnell 6.
Paatelainen heaps misery on sad Celts
DEADLY DONS
SUBSTITUTE Mix-up Paatelainen earned Aberdeen their first victory at Parkhead under manager Willie Miller as Celtic's lack of fire power again proved costly.
A delighted Miller declared: ‘Maybe the nearly men aren't nearly men any more.
We got one goal and could have had another.’
For Celtic, who have still to record their first home league win of the season, manager Liam Brady was disappointed, saying yesterday's performance ‘was not up to our recent standard.’
It was a deserved win for the Dons, whose threat was evident as early as the fifth minute when Scott Booth outpaced Mike Galloway on the right to send in a cross which narrowly evaded the outstretched Duncan Shearer.
And in the 15th minute, after Paatelainen had replaced the injured Lee Richardson, Alex McLeish headed a Robert Connor corner narrowly over.
Pat Bonner saved from both Shearer and Joe Miller, before Frank McAvennie ghosted past
Brian Irvine and McLeish in the 27th minute to shoot narrowly past Theo Snelders left hand post.
Celtic's whirlwind start to the second half saw Peter Grant and Charlie Nicholas go close, and a Pat McGinley effort from a narrow angle rebound off the post.
However, Aberdeen were rewarded for their pace on the counter-attack in the 55th minute when Connor's corner was badly cleared by McAvennie.
Shearer returned the ball into the six-yard box for Paatelainen to blast home.
There could have been further scoring but for the woodwork which firstly denied Joe Miller after he had beaten Dariusz Wdowczyk and John Collins.
Celtic substitute Andy Payton also hit the post in the 76th minute.
He turned well in the box before hitting the outside of the post, but Aberdeen held on to go level with Motherwell and Hearts at the top of the table.
BLANKETY BLANK…
Celtic striker Charlie Nicholas was blotted out at Parkhead yesterday as Aberdeen proved they are genuine title contenders
McClure at the double
IT WAS a good day at Blackrock yesterday for Ian McClure of Portrush, who lifted a super double in the
IBA National Championship finals.
The talented provincial player guided his triple of Barry Moffatt and Jeremy Henry to a 23–14 win over the Ballymena trio of Billy McCandless, Jack Robinson and Roy McCune.
And he then skipped Ronnie Oliver to a 27–7 success over Old
Bleach's James Talbot and Michael Nutt in the pairs final.
McClure played every shot in the book over the two days, and is quickly maturing into Ireland's finest young bowler.
But the star of the show had a tremendous supporting cast in Moffatt and Henry in the triples, and Oliver in the pairs.
While McClure basks in his double glory, spare a thought for Lisnagarvey's Noel Graham, who missed out at the semi-final stages in pairs and fours.
Colin Best recaptured the singles championship for the Willowfield club with a 21–13 win over Rathfriland's Noel Weir.
And the junior singles went to John Nolan of Blackrock with a 21–11 win over Belmont's Paul Daly.
But Paul didn't go home empty-handed, for earlier in the day he won the fours trophy when he led for his father Brian, who had a one-way ticket to next year's British Isles championships in Ayr with a 27–6 win over the Dunluce four skipped by Malcolm McMullan.
Mark saves Gers
A MARK Hateley goal five minutes from time prevented champions Rangers from crashing to a second successive embarrassing league defeat.
Last Saturday Kilmarnock humbled them at Ibrox, and basement boys Dundee looked like following up with another sensation at Dens Park yesterday.
But in a barnstorming finish the former England international striker pounced to give Rangers a deserved draw.
The Rangers defence failed to deal with cross balls all day, and it was inevitable the home side should use that route successfully in taking the lead after just 12 minutes.
Gary McKeown slanted over an inviting ball, but it was criminal negligence for the visitors to allow Gary Paterson the time and space to chest the ball down before burying it in the net.
Billy Dodds then had two gilt-edged chances to seal the points, but steered a header wide of the target, then another straight at Maxwell.
The visitors celebrated those let-offs in style.
They took command late in the game, and a heroic display by Paul Mathers was needed to give his side even a share of the points.
Dusan Vrto kicked off the line from Ian Ferguson's shot, while Mathers saved from Hateley and Trevor
Steven.
Mathers even got a hand to Duncan Ferguson's drive five minutes from time, but when the ball hit the post Hateley bundled in the rebound.
WORLD CUP GROUP THREE
No secret for our success: Doolin
PAUL Doolin last night revealed the secret behind this week's astonishing League of Ireland successes in Europe.
A extra day's training a week and a sharper competitive edge through playing in a League with promotion and relegation helped Shelbourne and Cork achieve Euro glory.
Former Portadown and
Derry City midfielder Doolin starred in Shelbourne's tremendous Cup Winners Cup victory over Karpaty Lvov from the Ukraine.
He said: ‘I gather there has been a lot of soul-searching up north over the defeats for Linfield and Bangor — though Linfield now have a lifeline.
‘Irish League fans shouldn't worry too much that their clubs have fallen behind those in the League of Ireland.
‘Linfield were drawn against a better team than the one we defeated — and I know from playing in Cyprus with Shamrock Rovers a few years back that Bangor were up against it, too.
‘The big difference in the League of Ireland is that we can train on Saturdays as well as two nights a week — because our matches are played on Sunday.
‘It wouldn't be fair to ask Irish League lads to train an extra night.
They are part-timers with work and family commitments.
‘But promotion and relegation coming in will help them develop a more competitive style of play.’
Paul Doolin
CYCLING
Tommy Evans (Banbridge CC) won the Ulster 10 mile championship beating Cormac McCann (Phoenix CC) by eight seconds in the Team Trainor Solicitors promotion at Nutts
Corner.
McCann started fast, and at the turn he was 10 seconds up on the Banbridge man.
Davy McCall of the promoting club was third at this stage in 9.54, while fourth fastest was Scott Hamilton (Banbridge) in 10.00, leading the juniors.
Evans' 100 inch fixed gear was too small for him on the way out, but he kept it turning on the harder return leg to edge ahead of the Phoenix rider repeating his eight second win over him at Newtownards last week.
David McCann (Phoenix CC), who had been sixth at the turn in 10.10 came back quicker to take the bronze in 22.39.
Hamilton faded somewhat finishing sixth fastest, but was an easy winner of the junior title in 23.07, ahead of Ryan Lyttle (Team Devlin) 24.46 and Paul McConaghie (Team Route) 26.01.
Irish under-16 10 miles TT champion John Grant took the under-age gold with 23.39.
Kirk Sloan (Ards CC) took silver, and new Irish under-15 champion Denis Cormican (Phoenix) the bronze.
Irish 25-mile ladies champion Claire Moore gave Trainor Solicitors a home win in the ladies championship after Aishling Baird (Phoenix CC) had led her to the turn, but lost over a minute on the run back.
Mary Stewart (Phoenix) was third.
Ulster 10 miles time trial 6 JT CYCLE 5 championship, Nutts Corner: 1, Tommy Evans (Banbridge CC) 21.32; 2, C McCann (Phoenix CC) 21.46; 3, D McCann (Phoenix CC) 22.39; 4, D McCall (Team Trainor) 22.55; 5, I Proctor (Belvoir CC) 23.01; 6, S Hamilton (Banbridge CC) 23.07; 7, I Chivers (Fuel Services) 23.10; 8, M Hutton (Phoenix CC) 23.16; 9, M Smyth (O'Rourkes) 23.27; 10 (equal), V Tubridy (O'Rourkes) and J Grant (Banbridge CC) 23.29.
Junior Championship: 1, Scott Hamilton (Banbridge CC) 23.07; 2, R Lyttle (Team Devlin) 24.46; 3, P McConaghie (Team Route) 26.01.
Ladies Championship: 1, Claire Moore (Team Trainor Solicitors) 25.37; 2, A Baird (Phoenix CC) 26.38; 3, M Stewart (Phoenix CC) 27.36.
Veterans: 1, Phil Holland (Maryland CC) 24.46; 2, T Burns (Donegal Whs) 25.16; 3, G McGrath (Ards CC) 25.29.
Bag man Derek goes for ton…
ONLY Billy Bingham has more international appearances to his credit of those gathering for Wednesday's international with Latvia than this man.
He'll be on duty for his country for the 86th time…and that's one more than Chelsea defender Mal Donaghy, of the current batch our highest capped player.
Step forward Northern Ireland kit man Derek McKinley, pictured here at his Dunmurry home with just some of the items he has responsibility for at each international.
Derek has been involved with the international side since the tragic death of Bobby McGregor, serving under two physios, Jim McGregor and the current occupant, John McVea.
‘I've thoroughly enjoyed every minute of it,’ said Derek, now hoping to hit the magical ‘ton’.
His first game was the 1–0 victory over Israel which earned qualification for the '82 World Cup in Spain, to date the highlight of Derek's international career.
AMERICAN FOOTBALL: Montana and Allen have point to prove in new season
REJECTS READY TO BITE BACK
By ALUN REES
THIS could be American football's year of the reject.
Joe Montana, cast off by the San Francisco 49ers, and Marcus Allen, surplus to requirements at the Los Angeles Raiders, could laugh all the way to Super
Bowl XXVIII.
And if they steer the Kansas City Chiefs to the great gridiron showdown in the Georgia Dome, Atlanta, next January, they could meet the symbol of Philadelphia Eagles foolishness, Reggie White.
The Eagles have infuriated their fans by letting top quality players join the free-agency merry-go-round.
This season White, the finest defensive end alive, pursues his destructive destiny with the Green Bay Packers.
Back in January 1967, the Chiefs and the Packers met in the very first Super Bowl of all.
And they head into the 1993 campaign looking good enough to make it a re-match.
Montana is the man they call Joe Cool, but beneath the calm exterior burns a fierce will to win — a fire stoked by the 49ers' decision to part with the quarterback who lit the flames at Candlestick Park.
He may be 37.
He may have had injury problems.
But he is the smartest play-caller in football, and Kansas City will switch from ground-control offence to let his read-and-react style inspire them.
Statistically, there is not a lot left for him to prove.
He has won four Super Bowls, a mark equalled among quarterbacks only by Pittsburgh's Terry Bradshaw.
He has been a most valuable player a record three times.
Stroll
But to Montana every game is a challenge, and he would dearly love to prove that San Francisco have made a terrible mistake.
Time after time he has shown that nice guys can finish first.
He can do it again.
If he does, there will be lamentations from the success-glutted San Francisco fans.
Their No 1 quarterback, Steve Young, is injured.
So is back-up Steve Bono.
And how do you shout for a rookie called Elvis Grbac?
Kansas City start their campaign with a visit to the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, who show very few piratical tendencies.
Tampa Bay Doormats would be more like it.
It should be a stroll by the seaside.
But Montana, great professional that he is, will approach them as though they were the Dallas Cowboys.
And Allen — well, after the way the Raiders treated him, he will be ready to explode for his new team.
He was named most valuable player when the Raiders won Super Bowl XVIII.
A couple of big years followed but then owner Al Davis started bringing in a whole series of running backs handed star billing.
Napoleon McCallum, though, was rarely available because of naval duties.
Bo Jackson put baseball first.
There was Steve Smith, Roger Craig, Eric Dickerson.
And Davis wondered why Allen was getting narked.
Kansas City have been the nearly-men of the American Football Conference for a few seasons.
The craft, experience and hunger of Montana and Allen can take them all the way this time.
THIS WEEKEND'S SCHEDULE Week 1 (today): Atlanta Falcons at Detroit Lions; Cincinnati Bengals at Cleveland Browns; Denver Broncos at New York Jets; Houston Oilers at New Orleans Saints; Kansas City Chiefs at Tampa Bay Buccaneers; Los Angeles Rams at Green Bay Packers (Milwaukee); Miami Dolphins at Indianapolis Colts; Minnesota Vikings at Los Angeles Raiders; New England Patriots at Buffalo Bills; New York Giants at Chicago Bears; Phoenix Cardinals at Philadelphia Eagles; San Francisco 49ers at Pittsburgh Steelers; Seattle Seahawks at San Diego Chargers.
Tomorrow: Dallas Cowboys at Washington Redskins.
Joe Montana — smartest play-caller in the game
Carr back in the fold
NEIL McKAY REPORTS
NIGEL Carr is back in big time rugby — with a watching brief to help Ulster retain the inter-pro title.
Carr, one of the best — and unluckiest — players ever to wear the white jersey, has been drafted onto the Ulster selection panel.
And this is one call up that can't be ruined by injury!
Carr has taken a back seat since retiring because of persistent injuries in October 1988.
The open side flanker won just 11 Irish caps in a career that was constantly interrupted by knee problems, and was prematurely ended by injuries sustained in a border bomb blast.
He made almost a clean break with the game, except for some local television work.
Selection was the furthest thing from his mind when he was approached at the Scotland-Ireland game last season.
He said: ‘It was something I'd never given any thought to, but it was nice to be asked, and when the Ulster Branch were happy to accept my nomination I was delighted to take up the offer.
‘It is a totally new departure for me, and I have to admit I don't know what it is going to be like or what to expect.
‘I'm told it is very enjoyable, and it is nice to be involved again.’
Carr joins a selection committee chaired by Dick Milliken, and also including his schooldays mentor and Ulster coach Davy McMaster, Stephen Blake-Knox and Harry Steele.
He brings to the panel an acute understanding of the demands placed on modern players, and of course, a whole host of specialist back row knowledge.
‘I'd like to think that I can offer useful opinions on other positions, and that I wouldn't be confined to just the back row,’ he said.
‘The more expertise you have available the better, and I'm just going to try and do the best job I can.
‘Selectors perform an important role — it can be a difficult balancing act at times, and you don't get a second chance to get it right.
‘There are so many things to consider — current form, the form of the player's club, experience, past performances, the right combinations and so much more.
‘I've been involved in a few preliminary meetings so far to pick a training squad, and I've also got involved in the training sessions themselves.
‘That is a good way to learn about players, about how they react in certain situations, about who has leadership qualities.
‘I'd much rather get involved that way than just stand about watching.
‘Just as long as the boys go easy on me!’
WATCHING BRIEF…
Nigel Carr is back in the Ulster fold and takes up a new responsibility as a selector
To hell…and back!
By GARY McDONALD
A LOCAL hack, filing copy from last month's Intercontinental Cup tournament in Poznan, frustratingly followed his name with the words ‘reporting from hell!’
That, he admitted on his return, summed up the gloom in the Irish camp as the national team failed to secure the top six finish they needed to win a place in next year's World Cup finals in Sydney.
Now the 11 strong Ulster contingent from that ill-fated Polish trip must drag themselves up by the bootlaces for an earlier-than-usual start to the domestic programme, as next weekend sees the opening round of matches, albeit in diluted form in the Harp Kirk Cup.
None of the big guns will be involved as Lisnagarvey, Banbridge and holders Holywood — each expected to reach the floodlit semi-finals of the competition — take time out to assist English national league side East Grinstead in their pre-season preparations.
The top three Ulster outfits face the English giants in a series of friendlies at Blaris and Olympia over next weekend.
The close season has seen perhaps less than normal player ‘wheeler-dealing’ between the top clubs, with the single most significant appointment being off the field.
Magic
The summer confirmation that Philip Anderson is to succeed Terry Gregg — the most successful coach in Irish hockey history — at Blaris will maintain the ‘Ireland Old Boy’ network between Ulster's three top clubs.
For Anderson, like his predecessor, weaved his mesmeric magic in the Ireland team of the late 1970s along with Norman Crawford and Mark Sinnamon, the respective coaches at Holywood and Banbridge.
On the playing front, Bann and Cookstown remain the only leading sides without a ‘plastic home’, though each should nonetheless be expected to make an impression of sorts.
Of the other leading contenders for honours, Instonians have boosted their squad with the return of Davy Wilson from the French League, where he figured for Amiens, while Irish U-18 Andrew McBride is back at Annadale slotting in for Vincent Devenney (working in the US).
At the opposite end of the table, Bangor may struggle again and their cause hasn't been helped by the loss to Cliftonville of ace striker Johnny Poole.
Kirk Cup fixtures for next weekend (times vary) are: Section A — Annadale v Mossley (Friday 6.30pm); South Antrim v Kilkeel.
Section B — Instonians v Down; East Antrim v Civil Service; Newry v RUC.
Section C — Cliftonville v Cookstown; Raphoe v Portadown.
Section D — Portrush v Ballynahinch.
Philip Anderson — new coach at Blaris
Irish boys go for gold
BOXING
By MICHEAL McGEARY
FOUR Irish boxers yesterday headed off in pursuit of European Championship glory.
And their prospects of striking gold have been enhanced considerably by the presence of the ‘A’ team, Nicholas Cruz and Harry Robinson.
Cruz, the tall, rangy Cuban, who masterminded Michael Carruth's gold and Wayne McCullough's silver medal in the Barcelona Olympics, is arguably the most respected coach in world boxing.
Add in Harry Robinson, whose name will forever be synonymous with Wayne McCullough's meteoric rise in the sport, and you realise this four-strong Irish side, three of them from Ulster, can at the very least get among the medals.
Nicholas Cruz though goes much further than that.
The man who tipped Wayne McCullough for Olympic gold well in advance of the Barcelona Olympics is convinced that flyweight Damaen Kelly can be the new McCullough.
Choosing his words with particular deliberation he said: ‘In terms of dedication and discipline he reminds me in every way of Wayne McCullough.
‘He's a great listener, a coach's dream.
You only have to tell him something or show him something once.
He's totally dedicated.’
In the world senior championships the young Holy Trinity protege boxed brilliantly to capture a bronze medal.
His progress only came to a halt when he had the misfortune to swop punches with one of the many irrepressible Cubans, the eventual gold medal winner.
Nicholas Cruz simply drools over the youngster who has made boxing an art form.
He said: ‘Inside the ring he impresses you with his style and his marvellous technique.
‘You sense right away that you're in the presence of a special talent.
He can fight or box, depending on the situation, and he's very hard to pin down.’
Antrim lightweight Mark Winters is another with genuine medal prospects.
He boxed magnificently in the world senior championships in Finland, and was beating a top Cuban until things went disastrously wrong in the last round.
Light welter Eamon Magee is an outstanding boxer, with tremendous confidence in his own ability.
Dubliner Paul Griffin heads to Turkey to defend the title he won two years ago in these same championships.
It's a chance for the gifted featherweight to erase the memory of the humiliation suffered in the Barcelona Olympics when he found himself barred from the sport for 12 months.
In the world seniors he fared little better, losing to a nondescript American, who then made his exit in the next round.
The biggest threat to the Irish is likely to come from Germany and the former Soviet Union.
The one consolation though is there will be no Cubans — except the one in the Irish corner!
MASTERMIND…
Cuban coach Nicholas Cruz who is confident of Irish successes at the European Championships next week Picture: DARREN KIDD
IRISH trainer Michael Kauntze could well have saved next Saturday's Coalite St Leger with his decision — or that of his owner — to supplement at a cost of £25,000 the dual Oaks runner-up Royal Ballerina.
With only 11 declared at the latest acceptance stage, the Doncaster Classic looked somewhat below par.
But now that Royal Ballerina is in, we may have a race of truly Classic proportions.
Michael had originally intended to run Royal Ballerina in the Prix Vermeille at Longchamp the day after the St Leger and now Kauntze is hoping for dry conditions at Doncaster for what he regards as an easier race.
‘I know that Royal Ballerina will stay the trip and the only thing which is likely to beat her is the ground if there is a cut in it,’ he said.
Harsh words
Royal Ballerina was only just touched off by Intrepidity in the English Oaks and then was runner-up again in the Irish version when Weymss Bright triumphed.
She's the sort of filly who deserves a big race win for she has been knocking on the door all season.
Kauntze had some harsh words to say about the St Leger entry system and it seems as if this will be renewed for next year.
With entries closing on March 3 it is impossible, Kauntze says, to gauge at that early date whether or not a horse will stay the mile and three-quarters of the St Leger.
Stable jockey Warren O'Connor hopes to be fit to ride Royal Ballerina following his ankle operation in July and if that's the case then the Kauntze filly should be worth supporting.
O'Connor, however, is fighting against time.
Meanwhile Henry Cecil's Armiger appears to be back to form and will be supported for the Leger.
The horse has had a disappointing season after having won the Racing Post Stakes as a two-year-old and looking like a ‘good thing’ for even one of the Derbys.
Nothing has gone right for Armiger or Tenby — remember him — and although Commander in Chief won two Derbys, the fact that Cecil's more exposed two-year-olds failed to blossom must have been a great disappointment to him.
Armiger flopped in the Great Voltigeur at York behind Bob's Return who is on course for the St Leger and this winner of the Sandown Classic Trial in April would be my choice in the absence of Royal Ballerina, whom I still think is good enough to win a Classic for the likeable Kauntze.
Next Saturday sees the Irish Champion Stakes at Leopardstown but what a difference from last year when the much vaunted head to head between the Derby winners Dr Devious and St Jovite helped give the race no end of publicity.
This time you would scarcely know it is on!
At the moment it looks as though Ezzoud, who won the Juddmonte International at York will take his chance and after that shock win over Sabrehill he must be fancied.
Market Booster represents Dermot Weld and is on course for the Arc.
Lord of the Field, a winner at the Curragh, is an English entry but to be honest it all looks a bit thin on the ground — a bit like the St Leger.
Maybe everyone is saving their horses for the Arc.
German racing as I've mentioned before in this column appears to be all the rage and there is a big meeting at Baden Baden today with John Oxx featured.
George Augustus who lost his last race in Germany in the stewards room is down for the Grosser Preis Von Baden and would have to be supported.
Rated
In case you hadn't noticed, Ulster's John Reid is having a barnstorming season and he could end up in the top four in the championship with over 100 winners.
But more than that, John has become rated as the man for the big occasion.
Last week's win on Richard Hannon's Swing Low at Goodwood was vintage stuff from the Dromore man and his weekend excursions to the Continent usually bring back the bacon.
He's at Baden Baden today and should remain on the winning trail.
Michael Kauntze — trainer to the rescue John Reid — having a barnstorming season
Just for the record
IN terms of All Ireland senior hurling titles Cork lead the way with 27, followed by Kilkenny and Tipperary on 24 apiece.
The big three's domination is such that their nearest rivals Limerick don't even make it into double figures.
They have seven, one ahead of Dublin, with Wexford five, Galway four, Waterford and Offaly two.
Clare, Kerry, Laois and London have one apiece.
Galway's first success came in 1923, and they then added a further three in the 80s, 1980, 1987, 1988.
ATHLETICS
Uphill task for runners
A 14-strong Northern Ireland team bid for major honours today in the world mountain running championships high in the French Alps.
North Belfast's Neill Carty, the current leader in the Northern Ireland fell running championship, spearheads the six-man senior team over a gruelling seven and a half miles course which peaks at a height of 2,300 feet.
Carty is backed up by Lisburn's Adrian Philpott, Northern Ireland's most consistent finisher in the world series, and by the outstanding veteran performer Jim Patterson of Duncairn Olympic.
His outing today marks a remarkable sixth appearance for the province in the World trophy races.
Brian Ervine (Ballydrain), last year's Northern Ireland champion, brings a wealth of experience to the side, and although sidelined for much of the season due to a thigh injury, will be operating at full throttle in France.
Newcastle, the hot-bed for local fell running, supplies Edinburgh-based Richard Rodgers who has performed many times for Northern Ireland and Willowfield's George Morris — making his debut at this level — completes the senior mens' team.
The women's squad is led by Comber woman Stephanie Pruzine, Northern Ireland's top finisher in last year's race in Italy, and former Belfast Marathon champion, Bangor housewife and mother of four, Roma McConville.
Mary Havern, from Newry, races in her third world trophy event while newcomer Anne Sandford has made a superb transition from the world of cycling to top class fell running.
The junior U20 squad is made up of 16 year old Ballygowan student Neil Jackson (Ballydrain), Padraig Mallon (18) from Newry, Dean Fisher (Ballydrain) and Paul Curran (North Down).
On the track and field scene, didn't the province do well in last weekend's All-Ireland League finals in Tullamore with victory by the Lisburn women and third placings for the young Lagan Valley women and understrength Annadale men.
GERRY CARSON
Masters event a winner
BOWLS
WHOEVER wins the qualifying game between Belfast's Alan McMullan and the Provincial's Ian McClure can expect a tough battle in the opening quarter-final of the Flogas Causeway Coast Masters in Ballymoney on October 9–10.
The prize awaiting the winner of that one is a first round battle with former world indoor singles champion John Price of Wales.
And McMullan owes McClure one after losing his last two games against him in the Irish indoor singles championship.
The Masters qualifier will be played on the morning of the opening day.
And with such a high class field picking an overall winner is a task in itself.
The draw has produced some cracking games, with Neil Booth of County Antrim running up against reigning world indoor singles champion Richard Corsie in the quarter-final.
John Bell (England) takes on former UK champion Stephen Rees, while reigning outdoor world singles champion Tony Allcock clashes with Scotland's Angus Blair.
The beauty about the Causeway Coast Masters, which will more than fill the gap left by the sudden demise of the Bushmills Irish Masters two years ago, is that each game is of the 21 shot duration, and not three sets of seven up.
The 21 shots format was used when Coatbridge hosted the world indoor singles championship, before television put the pressure on for a change.
The quarter-finals will be played off in two sessions — two games at 2pm, and another two at 6pm.
Then the semi-finals will commence at 2pm on the Sunday, with the final scheduled for a 6pm start.
The runner-up will receive £800, beaten semi-finalists £400 each, beaten quarter-finalists £200, and the beaten qualifier £100.
United effort!
KILKENNY'S Pat Dwyer is equally at home in Croke Park or Old Trafford.
Dwyer, a tower of strength in the full back berth, was in danger of missing today's All Ireland final until a visit to Old Trafford and a date with United physio Jim McGregor put him well on the way to recovery.
He missed Kilkenny's All Ireland semi-final win over Antrim last month after limping out of the Leinster final replay victory over Wexford.
For a number of weeks he was unable to train with his colleagues, but in the past fortnight he has been able to step up his training.
It was always touch and go whether he would be fit to take his place, and he only got the nod after coming through a trial game without any problems.
He said: ‘The selectors showed a lot of faith in me and gave me every chance to prove my fitness.
‘Now I don't know if I'm more delighted, or just simply relieved to have been selected.
‘The last few weeks have been difficult because I didn't know how I was fixed.
‘Words can't express how pleased I am.’
Pat Dwyer
Galway ace is still going strong
GERRY DEFIES THE CRITICS
GAA: Micheal McGeary sets the scene for today's eagerly awaited All Ireland hurling final between Galway and Kilkenny at Croke Park, Dublin
GALWAY'S Gerry McInerney revels in defying the critics.
One of the game's great half backs, manager Jarlath Cloonan gambled by playing him centre half back against Tipperary in the All Ireland semi-final.
The critics claimed McInerney's defensive limitations would be exposed like never before by Tipperary.
But someone forgot to tell McInerney.
He played the proverbial blinder as Galway stormed to a famous victory.
In the process he proved himself one of the sport's great survivors.
Two of his former colleagues, Tony Keady and Pete Finnerty, have fallen victim to the passing years and can no longer command first team places.
But there is no shifting the swashbuckling McInerney.
Galway's All Ireland semi-final win is now history, and counts for little as they prepare to face defending champions Kilkenny.
Gerry said: ‘Victory over Tipperary was an outstanding reward for everyone involved with this team since the season began.
‘We've been criticised in various quarters, but we used it as motivation before we met and beat Tipperary last month.
‘We knew that criticism was unwarranted, and we've proved the knockers wrong, but we're still only halfway to finishing the job.’
Old scores may have been settled with victory over Tipperary, but he's quick to emphasise that Galway have won nothing yet.
The painful memory of last year's semi-final defeat by Kilkenny acts as another spur.
He said: ‘On that occasion the game was there for the taking.
‘We just made the wrong moves, and Pat Malone was injured.
He was a key player and was a dreadful loss.’
Today Gerry McInerney is again centre stage, and his clash with John Power promises to be just one of the highlights of an intriguing 70 minutes.
Gerry McInerney
Van Troost puts squeeze on
ANDRE Van Troost made an quick breakthrough after Somerset set Surrey an imposing victory target at The Oval.
Surrey needed 421 to win in a minimum of 120 overs — but the Dutch paceman struck with his fourth ball.
Opener Darren Bicknell, on two, fended off a snorter but the ball looped up and allowed the bowler to take an easy return catch.
Ray Alikhan (nine not out) and Andy Smith (14 not out) managed to survive to the close with the home side on 36 for one.
Earlier, stand in skipper Richard Harden took his score on to 132, his highest score of the season, before declaring at 344 for seven.
Harden, who hit 14 boundaries and faced 292 balls, shared a fourth wicket stand of 151 with Robbie Turner, who completed a season's best 70.
But it took him almost five hours and contained just four fours.
Joey Benjamin was the pick of the Surrey bowlers with four for 79 off 29 overs.
AFTER the midweek Arbroath avalanche, there wasn't a snowball's chance at sun-drenched Firhill of another crazy scoreline as Celtic picked up their first league win of the season, courtesy of Mark McNally.
McNally is an odd phenomenon.
Consistently lauded by his manager, Liam Brady, the 22-year-old central defender's winner was his second goal in two matches.
Last season, his rapport with the troubled Parkhead support was based more on his madcap defensive antics.
If victory was eked out at the back, the inspiration belonged to the evergreen Charlie Nicholas.
Thistle played it rough — sweeper Ray Farningham joined two other booked players, and in the 83rd minute was sent off for a professional foul on Nicholas.
And it was Charlie who set up the winner with a headed flick on for McNally to score from eight yards out.
It's double delight for Bangor
THE Bangor club set something of a record yesterday when their junior team won the NIBA Tyrell Tanks Division one championship with a victory over Lisnagarvey.
That means the Bangor club have lifted a double-double in league championship and cup competition this season.
The senior team won the Division One championship and beat Lisnagarvey in the NIBA Senior Cup final, while the ‘B’ team also won the Junior Cup title with a victory over Lisnagarvey.
‘I think it is a record’ said Maurice McKeown, a Bangor senior skip and this season's President of the NIBA.
‘I can't recall it ever happening in any association affiliated to the IBA before, although it may have happened some time ago,’ added the former Irish international player.
It has indeed been a brilliant season for the Ward Park club, with Alex Lightbody returning from the British Isles championships in Worthing in July with the singles title under his belt.
Meanwhile, Carrickfergus, winners of the CIS Irish
Senior Cup last weekend against Old Bleach, came unstuck yesterday in their bid to grab the runners-up spot in the senior division, which has already been won by Bangor.
The Carrick men could only manage two and a half points from their top of the table clash with Lisnagarvey (85–79), but they still could be in with a chance when they meet Gilnahirk next week.
Incidentally Irish international lead Martin McHugh skipped in the game yesterday and earned a 17–17 draw with fellow Irish international John McCloughlin.
Robert the star turn
HAROLD CROOKS REPORTS
BALLYMONEY'S Robert Dunlop and Glengormley's Jeremy McWilliams were the stars of the show at yesterday's European Short Circuit Championship meeting, organised by the Coleraine club at Kirkistown.
Dunlop won the 125 race in style, and McWilliams did the double in the two Superbike races.
In the European championship 125 race Robert Dunlop scored maximum points and did his image a world of good when he beat the hot favourite Stefano Perugini, the unbeaten championship leader.
The 250 race saw Italian Guiseppe Fiorello beat two French riders Bernard Cazade and John Foray.
After his race Dunlop, although exhausted, said: ‘That was a really hard race.
It was very warm for Kirkistown and I lost concentration half way through, but luckily got it back together before the end.’
In a hectic sidecar race British crews filled the first three places with Kevin Webster winning from Kieron Kavanagh and David Hoskin.
McWilliams' two wins in the Superbike races were both top drawer performances.
He came from behind in both races to beat New Zealander Robert Holden.
Afterwards McWilliams said: ‘Before today I had only ridden a 250 machine round Kirkistown and I found the grand prix bike a hot handful.’
Scot Ian Simpson had a double in the Supersport races winning the 400 race from Iain Duffus and the 600 race from Alan Irwin.
Europe's best no match for Robert
DUNLOP HITS GLORY TRAIL
BALLYMONEY'S Robert Dunlop covered himself in glory at yesterday's European Short Circuit meeting at Kirkistown with victory over Europe's best in the 125 race.
Glengormley's Jeremy McWilliam's gave the home fans a further treat with victories in both Superbike races.
Dunlop took over the lead in the 125 championship race on lap 13, which proved unlucky for Italian Ivan Cremonini, who had set the pace for eight laps.
The early pace-setter was series leader Stefano Perugini, who was passed by both Dunlop and Cremonini on lap five.
Once in front Dunlop never really looked like being beaten, although he gave his supporters plenty to worry about in the middle of the 30-lap race.
‘Once I got in front I settled into a rhythm and started to lose concentration.
But then I saw my pitman Liam Beckett giving frantic signals and this brought me back to my senses,’ he explained.
‘Tough race’
Having regained his edge Dunlop turned up the wick again, and went on to win by four seconds from Perugini with Gianluigi Scalvini third.
‘That was a tough race but good,’ said Dunlop.
‘It really was a long race, maybe too long for this circuit.
Covering one-and-a-half miles 30 times is hard work, but I'm not really complaining.’
Dunlop averaged 93.35mph with Cremonini setting the fastest lap at 94.77.
There was another superb performance from Dungannon's Phelim Owens who finished fourth, but there was disappointment for Mark Coates who had to be content with 10th place.
Local interest in the 250 race was lost when Antrim rider Alan Patterson, a favourite to repeat his first round win, crashed out on lap 11.
At the front of this race it was a two horse race between Italian Guiseppe Fiorello and Frenchman Bernard Cazade.
Fiorello led all the way with Cazade putting up a strong challenge in the early part of the race.
Completing the top three was championship leader Jean Foray, also from France.
The first Irish rider home was Eugene McManus in 12th place.
After the race Fiorello was flown home immediately.
His father died on
Thursday but his family decided not to tell him until after yesterday's race.
Three British crews filled the first three places in the sidecar race.
Kevin Webster partnered by Gary Broadley beat Kieran Kavanagh and Belfast man Michael Finnegan by 11 seconds.
Third, after a terrific three-cornered fight, were David Hoskins and David James.
In the support races there were doubles for Jeremy McWilliams and Scot Ian Simpson.
McWilliams thrilled the crowd with the immense power and speed of the Millar Yamaha in his two victories over New Zealander Robert Holden.
Scottish visitor Ian
Simpson did the double in the Supersport races.
In the 400 event he beat fellow Scot Iain Duffus and Adrian Archibald, and in the final 600 race Simpson was followed home by Alan Irwin and Duffus.
KICK-BOXING
TWO times World kick boxing champion, Billy Murray is set to attempt what no European exponent of the sport has accomplished by winning three World titles at three different weights.
Belfast-based Bill's quest begins against Dutchman John
Nelso at La Mon House Hotel this afternoon.
Murray won his first professional welterweight title back in 1989 at the Ulster Hall, outpointing champion Richard Hill of America.
After two successful defences at welterweight, Murray moved up a weight division to Super Welterweight and took the vacant title in Switzerland by knocking out another American Eric Melton in just three rounds.
Now he is attempting to win a third title in the middleweight division but first he must win his European title fight against the tough Dutchman John Neslo today.
That would set him up for a world title shot at the end of this year in Belfast.
Keith Courtney from Dungannon has withdrawn from his British Title fight due to a cracked rib.
The fight will be rescheduled for the end of this year.
Feherty fired up
BERNHARD Langer stands between Ulster's David Feherty and the victory which could spectacularly catapult him into the Ryder Cup.
Langer leads the Volvo German Open at Hubbelrath by two strokes from Feherty (69) and Midlander Peter Baker (71).
Down in 24th place in the Ryder Cup points table, Feherty could earn automatic selection by lifting the £108,330 first prize.
Victory would give him 314,328 cup points.
Baker is the man he is trying to displace and he already has 306,209 points.
Only if Baker drops to 19th today will Feherty go past him, but David says: ‘Even if Peter is still ahead of me I would like to think that winning would give me a good chance of a wild card.’
Bernard Gallacher names his three wild cards tomorrow.
Darren Clarke fired 71 for six under while Ronan Rafferty is one shot further back after a disappointing 74.
KILMARNOCK'S LATE SHOCK FOR RANGERS
KILMARNOCK arrived at Ibrox as sacrificial lambs, but left bursting with pride after recording a sensational victory.
A goal from former Rangers striker Bobby Williamson two minutes into injury time at the end of the contest handed the Glasgow side their first home defeat since March 1992.
‘It's a 90 minutes game,’ pointed out veteran George McCluskey.
‘We've come to the best club in the country and won.
We always thought we had a chance if we played well.’
‘Some of the youngsters were in awe of Ibrox, but once they settled down we went on to dominate the second-half.’
Ironically the champions had apparently weathered the storm after falling behind to a Mark Roberts diving header on the hour mark.
Twelve minutes later Steven Pressley grabbed a scrappy equaliser which seemed to end any prospect of an upset.
Even before kick-off Rangers got the afternoon off to an unexpected start.
Last week Walter Smith sprang a major surprise by giving striker Duncan Ferguson his debut in the Old Firm encounter.
This time the Rangers manager pulled another rabbit out of the hat by fielding England international full-back Gary Stevens after 15 months of injury.
Even so, most eyes were on the Kilmarnock defence which had proved unexpectedly resilient in their opening three games.
It was widely predicted that last season's First Division runners-up would melt in the white hot cauldron of Ibrox.
But, as at Pittodrie a fortnight ago, the Kilmarnock defence held firm, and even on the rare occasions when Rangers did find a route
to goal, veteran goalkeeper Bobby Geddes was on hand to snuff out any danger.
His two first-half saves from Neil Murray and David Robertson were of the highest quality, but even Geddes required some assistance from the woodwork when Duncan Ferguson hammered a low left footer past him in the 50th minute.
Steve's blast stops the rot
ASTON Villa ended a run of three matches without a win with a second-half
Steve Staunton goal against Tottenham at Villa Park.
But it needed a penalty from the Republic of Ireland international to settle the issue as Villa struggled to find a way through.
Three of the four previous league clashes between the clubs had ended goalless, and this game appeared to be heading the same way.
But then Villa skipper Kevin Richardson was brought down in the area by Dean Austin after bursting through, and Staunton converted a 71st minute spot kick.
Villa woke up after Staunton's strike, and only fine saves by Tottenham keeper Erik Thorstvedt prevented Dean Saunders and Guy Whittingham from adding to their tally.
England manager Graham Taylor was at the game but Spurs striker Teddy Sheringham, who has been touted as a possible candidate for a World Cup place against Poland, did little to enhance his chances.
Steve Sedgley had Tottenham's best chance in the 14th minute when he latched on to a Gordon Durie centre, but Villa goalkeeper Nigel Spink reacted quickly to block his attempted shot.
Stalemate!
BOTTOM of the table Swindon won their first Premiership point with a resolute display at lack-lustre Norwich.
John Gorman's men, who had conceded 10 goals in their previous two games, decided to pack the midfield and leave Andy Mutch on his own up front.
For most of the game they were able quite comfortably to hold the Norwich front line.
Only once did Norwich break their stranglehold, midway through the first-half, when John Polston moved up to rattle a post.
Philip strikes at the double
KNELL RESCUES BLUES
NO WONDER Linfield refused to trade Philip Knell for Raymond Campbell.
They will get their hands on Campbell this week anyway and still have a match winner in Knell.
The blonde midfield ace scored two quickfire goals in a minute to rescue this opening Gold Cup tie for the Blues.
A late third goal from Scottish midfielder Gary Peebles left Linfield looking comfortable winners against ten-man Newry.
But it was a far from impressive victory.
Lee Doherty summed it up afterwards when he said: ‘We'll settle for the 3–1 win, but you wouldn't want to be watching that kind of football every week.
‘Still, Newry are no pushovers these days.
After all they dented Glenavon's reputation last week.’
A potentially good game between two committed attacking sides deteriorated into a war of attrition.
Five players were booked, and Newry had David Coleman sent off for a bad challenge on Peebles.
Ref Miller dished out yellow cards to Newry's Ralph, Loughran and Tomilty as well as Dornan and Doherty of Linfield.
This was a real struggle for Linfield — not the kind of performance manager Trevor Anderson would have wished before Wednesday's tough European Cup return against Dinamo Tbilisi.
As for Newry, they are a much better side than last season, and they get credit for refusing to buckle after being reduced to ten men at 2–1 down in the 54th minute.
Bargain basement Newry matched their high price rivals stride for stride.
And while Newry didn't create many chances either they put away the one that counted after 26 minutes.
Dubliner Paul Staunton played the ball into the box, Linfield had two chances to clear, but were beaten by the bounce while Ultan McCabe stuck to his task and stabbed in a shot from eight yards
Linfield certainly needed the inspirational Knell to win the game for them.
The midfielder cracked in two crisp volleys in the 50th and 51st minutes, both made possible by Haylock challenges forcing the Newry defence into mistakes.
It should have been a procession for Linfield after the Coleman dismissal.
But Haylock and Gorman missed enough chances to make it five.
It was left to Peebles to give the scoreline a deceptively convincing look with an 88th minute shot under the keeper's body.
NEWRY: Keeley 7, Lavery 7, Loughran 6, Tate 6, Gray 7, Ralph 6, Coleman 5, O'Kane 7, Staunton 6, Tomilty 6, McCabe 7.
Subs O'Neill 5, Magee 5, LINFIELD: Lamont 7, Dornan 6, Easton 7, Doherty 7, McConnell 6, Beatty 6, Knell 8, Gorman 6, Haylock 7, Peebles 7, Bailie 8.
Subs not used.
Referee: E Miller (Bangor) 7
Peacock is a winner
UNITED SUFFER
A BLUNDER by goalkeeper Peter Schmeichel cost Manchester United their unbeaten record at Stamford Bridge yesterday.
Schmeichel failed to hold onto a weak 19th minute shot by Chelsea's Steve Clarke, and Gavin Peacock prodded home the rebound for his third goal of the season.
United responded like champions and laid seige to the Chelsea goal for the remainder of the game.
But the final cutting edge was missing, with eight of the star-studded United line-up perhaps jaded after playing midweek for their respective countries in World Cup qualifiers.
Price
‘There is always a price to pay for international duty,’ said United manager Alec Ferguson.
‘We were second to every ball in the opening 20 minutes.
In this type of games you want to make an early impact, but we allowed Chelsea to dominate until they scored’.
Peacock's strike condemned United to their first League defeat since March.
But Ferguson, whose champions begin their European campaign against Honved on Wednesday, said: ‘We are still top, so we have not cut our throats too badly.’
United left out Mark Hughes, because he is suspended against Honved, and switched Ryan Giggs to play up front with Eric Cantona.
Northern Ireland international Mal Donaghy and his colleagues in the Chelsea defence were often at full stretch to keep out this dynamic duo, who were ably supported by the surging runs of Republic of Ireland international midfielder Roy Keane.
Skipper Brian Robson, Lee Sharpe, Giggs, and Gary Pallister, all went close to an equaliser but United's two best chances fell to the mercurial Cantona.
He hit the crossbar with an audacious lob a minute before Chelsea took the lead.
Wide
Then the big Frenchman squandered a golden opportunity after 70 minutes, when he headed wide from six yards out.
Chelsea's victory was only their second of the season.
But player manager Glenn Hoddle, who was outstanding in midfield said: ‘This will do wonders for our self belief.
‘It could kick start something.’
Hoddle admitted the exclusion of Hughes and the subsequent team re-shuffle was worth a goal start for his team.
He said: ‘United usually play with two wide men instead of the one they used today.
‘It was a little bit negative and we pounced on that.’
Roy Keane — surging runs came to nothing
PARTICK Thistle, those much loved eccentrics of Scottish football, swapped roles with mighty Rangers at Ibrox yesterday.
For while the Jags put on a polished professional display which deservedly earned them a point, Rangers produced a curate's egg of a performance.
Their customary brilliance was still seen in bursts but schoolboy blunders were also in abundance and a lack of concentration in defence left goalkeeper Ally Maxwell exposed far too often.
For all that last season's treble winners could still have clinched both points in the second half.
Andy Murdoch's fine penalty save from Mark Hateley was a bitter pill for the home support to swallow but worse was to come in the 65th minute.
A high ball into the visitors penalty area eluded both Hateley and Murdoch but £4m striker Duncan Ferguson was following up and scored with ease from point blank range.
But before Ferguson and the Rangers fans could celebrate his very first goal for the club it was ruled out.
Hateley, it was felt, had been overly physical when challenging for the ball.
Earlier Rangers had been thinking of survival rather than victory as for the third weekend in a row the Glasgow giants found themselves seriously threatened by a club from the bottom half of the table.
The alarm bells began ringing as early as the seventh minute when Albert Craig struck the post from a narrow angle after capitalising on a moment's hesitation in the home defence.
Roddy Grant went one better midway through the first half, deflecting David Byrne's low driven cross past Maxwell with the toe of his outstretched boot.
Whisker
This provoked Rangers into vicious retaliation and in quick succession Dave McPherson, John Morrow — back in the form which earned him a Northern Ireland call-up two years ago — and Ferguson all came within a whisker of the equaliser.
The Jags looked as though they would hold out until half time but barely two minutes before the break they conceded a free kick just outside the box.
All the signs pointed to an Ian Ferguson thunderbolt but as the defensive wall braced itself, Hateley stepped forward to find the far corner of the net.
Mark Hateley: hero and villain at Ibrox
Campbell has centre stage
IAN WRIGHT and Kevin Campbell take their goal scoring double act into Europe next week and after this demolition of Ipswich, the Danes of Odense had better watch out.
The Arsenal pair might just be capable of staging the best road show since Hope and Crosby — but Ipswich had very few laughs at Highbury.
Campbell cracked his first ever senior hat-trick after England ace Wright set the ball rolling with his 62nd strike in just 87 games for the Gunners.
‘They are simply the best in the business,’ admitted Ipswich veteran John Warke but until Campbell's treble blast yesterday, Arsenal manager George Graham was worried that Wright was getting all the best lines.
‘Kevin's a bit in awe of Ian and I have told him he has got to become his own man,’ said Graham.
‘There was no doubt he was the man-of-the-match here though Ian showed his magic as well.’
Campbell turned up at his Mum's birthday party last night with an unusual present — the match ball awarded to him in recognition of his treble.
It started in the 38th minute with a straightforward close range blast after Wright destroyed the Ipswich defence and curled an audacious chip-shot that came back from the underside of the bar.
A thumping header from Nigel Winterburn's cross and a firm finish from Wright's perfect touch rounded off the hat-trick in the second half and made Highbury Campbell's kingdom for once.
So often he has played second fiddle to Wright and notched only nine goals last season to his partner's 30.
Wright already has six this term and although statistics will show he was only second on the bill yesterday, discerning patrons will appreciate that it was his intuitive skills that lifted the depression of a scrappy first 30 minutes.
Wright's dazzling run destroyed two defenders before he slotted in the opening goal — and before the finish he was unlucky not to add two more.
Kevin Campbell — brilliant hat-trick
Mike Sheron (second right) finds a way through a crowded QPR goalmouth to score Manchester City's second goal in their 3–0 win at Maine Road yesterday
Battling Brand hits the jackpot trail
GORDON Brand Jnr stayed on course for a £100,000 jackpot with a third round 71 in the GA European Open at East Sussex National.
Without a victory for over four years and bitterly disappointed to miss out on this month's Ryder Cup, Brand Jnr held a four-stroke lead over Swedish rookie Olle Karlsson, with struggling Welshman Phillip Price a shot further back.
The 35-year-old Bristol-based Scot, five clear at halfway after two dazzling rounds of 65 and 68, did not play with the same style in much calmer conditions but rarely looked like losing his grip.
Dungannon's Darren Clarke had a best-of-the-day 65 to equal the course record and share fifth place with Scot Paul Lawrie.
Fellow Ulsterman Ronan Rafferty, who just missed out on a Ryder Cup cap, moved into fourth place on six under, six behind, with a 68.
Because of a bad weather forecast today's tee-times have been brought forward and play will end at around 4pm instead of the scheduled 6.30pm.
The seven surviving Ryder Cup men in the field — four missed the cut — appear to have little chance of a confidence-boosting victory.
Seve Ballesteros still leads them, but a 71 left him nine adrift on three under.
All the other current Ryder Cup players broke par.
Ian Woosnam's 69 put him on two under, Colin Montgomerie is one under after a 68, while defending champion Nick Faldo (69) and Sam Torrance (70) are level par, Peter Baker (70) two over and Mark James (71) four over.
Darren Clarke — equalled record
Warning for Ards
NEWRY TOWN 0 ARDS 0
ARDS manager Paul Malone wasn't in the least bit perturbed at his side's inept display at Newry.
But the warning signs are flashing before the league gets under way next week.
Ards lacked imagination and drive against an inexperienced Town side, and had a lucky escape in the first minute.
Marty McCann breathed a sigh of relief as he watched his intended back pass rebound off the post for the keeper to scramble it away for a corner.
They had another lucky escape in the second half when Ollie Ralph's header was headed off the line by David Jeffery.
Tommy McDonald and Ken de Mange were unlucky with shots — the first being well saved by Keeley and the second sliding outside the post.
The best chance of the game fell to McDonald with nine minutes remaining.
McCann's excellent cross found McDonald but his header skimmed the bar with the goal at his mercy.
Tommy Leeman for Ards and Newry's Paul O'Neill were booked for tackles in an otherwise tame affair.
Mitchell master
OMAGH TOWN 0 DISTILLERY 3
DISTILLERY romped to a TNT Gold Cup quarter-final tie against Cliftonville with this comfortable win.
Although rarely seen as an attacking force in the first half, the Whites, nevertheless, led 1–0 at half-time thanks to Billy Totten's eighth minute goal, a tragedy for home keeper Declan Devine.
The luckless Devine was also at fault as the visitors added a second with a penalty eight minutes from the end, the keeper needlessly fouling Totten after hacking the ball clear.
Phillip Mitchell stepped up to ram the spot kick home and then capped a fine individual performance with his second and his side's third with a powerful strike from the edge of the area.
Shot-shy Omagh were unlucky not to equalise with long range efforts from full back John Quigg and Lee King, but gradually they lost their way.
OMAGH TOWN: Devine 6, E Doherty 6, Quigg 7, S Doherty 7, Donnelly 7, Dunnion 6, L King 6, N King 8, Lawless 7, Crilly 6,
Kavanagh 6.
Subs: Beckett 5, O'Neill 5.
DISTILLERY: Collins 7, Drake 7, Calvin 6, Kennedy 6, Parker 6, Allen 5, Totten 7, Small 7, Armstrong 7, Mitchell 8, Dykes 8.
Sub: O'Donnell 5.
Referee: John Ferry (Londonderry) 8.