

Sign up for the green team
DO YOU want to know what's happening to our countryside, forests, seas and seashores at home and across the world?
Do you want to know how easy it is to affect the environment of the world by planting trees or buying eco-friendly products?
If so, read this feature every week.
I hope to show ways you can help heal our environment and enjoy yourself at the same time, regardless of your earning capacity, age, sex, sexual orientation, race, political ideology, whether you're an individual, couple, group, family and whether you're country-folk or a city-slicker.
This Greenfile will be complied from the vast body of experience of the conservation volunteers in Northern Ireland, who do practical environmental improvements on a day-to-day basis.
We will also be using the experience of the CVNI trainers and tutors who are familiar with the global problems or ‘big picture’.
Further information on volunteering, natural breaks (working holidays), special gala events, etc., from Conservation Volunteers Northern Ireland (CVNI).
But don't despair if you haven't the time to volunteer because some of the most important ways to be more ‘Green’ are concerned with your attitude to what you buy at home, in the office, for the kids, for friends, to eat etc…
There are no absolute rights and wrongs but sometimes we tend to use convenience a lot more than imagination and quality!
So, a little reminder about how the good things in life — even the ones you buy — can be green and fun and of the highest quality.
I suppose you may say: ‘Why should I be more green’? and what I say to that is: ‘I don't know what the reason is for you but I do know that for me it's about showing compassion for the planet we live on and trying to hand on as much beauty and good-will as we possibly can to future generations; while improving our own quality of life.
And most importantly it's about having fun — NOW!’
Creature comfort: The world of nature is part of life we take for granted.
Bird's island haven
A REMOTE Donegal island is proving a haven for a native bird threatened by extinction.
The corncrake, once a familiar sound on summer's evenings, with its distinctive croaking call, has been making its home on Tory Island, 11 miles off the north west coast.
At least ten birds have been sighted on the island this year, and they are causing quite a stir among ornithologists.
Tory is no stranger to rare and unusual birds, over the years up to 40 varieties have been recorded reachings its shores including many varieties from Arctic regions.
Tides alert
THE highest tides this century may hit the southwest of England next week, tidal forecasters have warned.
Producers of the Admiralty Tide Tables say the moon, sun and Earth should move in line on the night of September 17.
This combination means tides could leap from a level of nearly five metres to over six metres and flooding could occur.