

Soccer ladies
A COACHING session for senior women footballers is to be held at the Racecourse ground in Wrexham between 6.30pm and 8pm tomorrow as part of a community sports programme.
An under-16s ladies soccer meeting will be held between 2pm and 4pm on Sunday June 20.
Admission to both is free.
Bowling green
WORK on a new £141,600 bowling green at Rhosneigr, Anglesey, is due to start next year.
Play area
RESIDENTS are hoping a children's play area will be established on land at the Fron Heulog Estate, Bodffordd, Anglesey.
HARD WORK PAYS OFF
Spirit of endeavour earns student top marks
STUDENT Amanda Tay needed a combination of hard work and determination to face the challenge of studying abroad.
Amanda, who is from Singapore, completed her studies at Llandrillo Technical College, Rhos on Sea, despite only speaking English as a second language.
She also had to work in her spare time to help pay for her studies.
In recognition of her efforts she has now won the college's Gwen Eaton Jones Award for Endeavour.
She was one of several students whose work has been recognised in the college's annual business and professional studies awards scheme.
Student of the Year was a former NUM official and father of two, Andrew Hutchinson, from Prestatyn.
The award for Most Improved Student went to Johnathon Williams.
Winning students From left, Johnathan Williams, Amanda Tay and Andrew Hutchinson Picture: PHIL MICHEU
DREAM COME TRUE ROCKS ELLEN
A special anniversary gift
By Sue Ormesher Daily Post Staff
BLIND pensioner Dennis Coan has just celebrated six months of wedded bliss to his sweetheart Ellen by presenting her with a wooden rocking chair.
Dennis, 91, secretly ordered the chair for Ellen, 89, as a special surprise after learning how much she wanted one.
The gesture not only delighted Ellen but touched staff at the Godfrey Ermen Home for the Blind in Southport where the couple met and fell in love eight years ago.
‘It was lovely to receive the beautiful rocking chair,’ said Ellen.
‘Dennis is ever so good.’
While Dennis added: ‘I knew Ellen wanted a rocking chair to replace the one she had had years ago.’
The couple had been inseparable since they first went to live at the home.
Arriving within a week of each other they enjoyed coach trips, summer holidays and parties.
Love blossomed on a summer holiday in Morecambe and they decided to tie the knot.
The couple have spent the past six months buying furniture for their rooms within the Godfrey Ermen Home and are considering a belated honeymoon.
And they revealed how the secret of a happy marriage is compromise.
‘I am Protestant and Dennis is Catholic,’ said Ellen, a former mayoress of Wigan, who has two grandchildren and a great-grandchild.
‘We go to church together every Sunday, one week going to the Catholic church the next to the Protestant one.’
Ellen and Dennis Coan with the special rocking chair Picture: RICHARD WILLIAMS
Champion blow at double to Wimbledon
DEFENDING champions Andre Agassi and Steffi Graf could both be missing when Wimbledon starts in less than a fortnight.
Agassi was already doubtful because of tendonitis of the right wrist, but Graf's appearance is now in doubt because of a foot injury.
Less than 48 hours after the world No.1 had lifted her third French Open title, doctors in Paris revealed that she picked up the injury towards the end of her quarter-final win over Jennifer Capriati.
The problem is believed to be either an Achilles tendon strain or a stress fracture of the right foot.
She had painkilling injections for the easy semi-final win over compatriot Anke Huber and a smaller dose for Saturday's final against Mary Joe Fernandez, which went to three sets and lasted a gruelling 2 hours.
The 23-year-old is returning home to Bruhl in Germany for several days rest.
But her agent said she was still hopeful of defending her Wimbledon title.
Agassi was seeing a specialist in Seattle in a bid to beat the injury which kept him out of the French Open.
Graf's withdrawal would be a major blow to Wimbledon, with Monica Seles whom she deposed from the top of the world rankings in Paris still recovering from the knife attack in Hamburg on April 30.
But with the top two players sidelined, it would present 36-year-old Martina Navratilova with a golden opportunity to lift her 10th singles crown.
If both Graf and Agassi were to succumb to their injuries, it would be the first time in the Open era that both reigning singles champions have not returned to defend their titles.
A spirit with that touch of glamour
I MAY have had a sheltered upbringing, but to me gin has always been one of the most sophisticated of drinks.
OK, so it used to be called ‘mother's ruin' and it's reputation among the more desperate of women as a way of sorting out an inconvenient pregnancy problem might hardly have endeared it to the more sober.
But somehow, it still has that touch of glamour.
I mean, Americans drink it in martinis, the cocktail set love it ‘pink’ and a ‘G&T’is still the preferred drink of the ‘darling luvvy’classes as they bob up and down on their boats moored firmly in the sheltered dock of Liverpool Marina.
Even now, gin with ice cold tonic is the spirit I'd probably choose to take with me to a desert island just so long as there were plenty of lemon groves to hand on my castaway paradise.
(Then again, at 40% proof, who needs the desert island?)
But enough of this; instead…how about a spot of history.
It was a Dutch medical man who is credited with having discovered the first recipe for gin back in the 1600s.
At the time, he was actually hoping to discover the ‘recipe’ for a diuretic.
Instead, he came up with a drink that has spread its alcoholic tentacles around the globe.
Juniper berries give it its distinctive flavour (and its name), but each recipe is different.
Favourite
It is used as base for many cocktails, but one of my favourite ways of serving the stuff is with a little help from the hedgerows.
You see, after G&T, sloe gin runs a close second in the castaway stakes.
It's an amazingly heady concoction made from a good old bottle of Gordon's, or whatever your favourite make happens to be, sloshed all over the fruits of the sloe (blackthorn) bush.
If you fancy trying it yourself around harvest time in September, then gather together a few pounds of the bluey-black sloe berries, prick them all over with a fork, smother them in about 6oz of sugar and top up with a litre of gin.
Over the next two weeks, shake the mixture vigorously every night.
After two weeks, drain off the liquor from the fruit pulp and store the purpley liquid in a screwtop bottle just like the one it came out of in fact.
Leave it to settle for about three months and, come Christmas time, you'll have one of the most potently delicious concoctions to offer your guests.
Serve it as a delicious liqueur, or topped up with soda or tonic.
Meantime, don't throw away the sloes that have been steeping in the gin; use them instead to make a wicked fruit pie with the bitter taste of sloe sweetened by the addition of sugar.
Cup draw
THE draw for the quarter finals of the Merseyside Competition Lever Cup is: Birkenhead St Mary's v Prescot and Odyssey, Caldy v Aigburth, Ainsdale v St Mary's College OB, Liverpool Nalgo v Irby.
David Kaufman Memorial Cup draw: Birkenhead St Mary's v Aigburth, Ainsdale v Wirral or Caldy, Rainhill v Prescot and Odyssey, Wavertree v Irby or Port Sunlight.
Tommy set for Lewis crunch
Tommy Morrison lands a left to George Foreman's chin
By Steve Roberts in Las Vegas
TOMMY MORRISON defeated George Foreman on points to win the WBO heavyweight crown and immediately walked into a broadside from Britain's Lennox Lewis.
Morrison, 24, won a unanimous verdict over a man 20 years older than him, and could now get a crack at Lewis' WBC crown.
The man called ‘the great white hope’ of heavyweight boxing by the American media and boxing fans, has been offered a 50–50 split of the estimated 25 to 30 million dollars the fight would gross by Lewis' manager Frank Maloney.
The percentage is higher than that normally offered to a challenger and when Lewis was first asked why he replied simply: ‘It's business.’
But later he said: ‘He's white.
It's not an important factor, it's just a factor that is there.
‘There hasn't been a white champion for such a long time and I think a lot of people are looking toward that and want to see a white champion.’
Dan Duva, Lewis's promoter, said: ‘When Larry Holmes (a former black champion) fought Gerry Cooney (a white contender), Larry Holmes got four million and Gerry Cooney got eight million.
It's the market place.’
Referring to WBA and IBF champion Riddick Bowe, he added: ‘There are two heavyweight champions who are bidding for someone's services.
We're certainly not saying that Tommy Morrison is worth equal to Lennox Lewis, but in order to get him we have to pay what we have to pay.’
Morrison, who has been criticised for standing mobile in front of opponents, fought a smart fight against the old man of boxing, moving in and out of range to throw punches.
Parkes looks lucky
By Captain Becher
THE omens are good for Lucky Parkes in the Hopton Conditions Stakes at Yarmouth tomorrow.
The flying filly had trainer Jack Berry purring after a stunning success at Beverley last month.
Flying out of the stalls, Lucky Parkes made all, needing only to be shaken up two furlongs out to beat Sir Harry Hardman six lengths.
Berry, an experienced judge of sprinters, rates her Listed class she finished third in that grade at Haydock in April and Lucky Parkes should come through this test.
Trapezium could break her duck in the John Holdrich Maiden Fillies Stakes following a three-quarter length debut second to Waffle On at Newmarket.
Luca Cumani's well-related filly figured prominently until fading in the closing stages.
She will have learned from that experience and the extra furlong tomorrow will suit her perfectly.
Moidart's trip from her Newmarket base to Edinburgh last time was rewarded with victory and she should score closer to home in the Charter Handicap.
James Fanshawe's filly was showing improved form in storming to a six-length win from Absalom's Pillar.
With more progress expected, she looks well worth following.
Newmarket challengers Alinova and Al Shaati can send punters away happy at Beverley by taking the last two races.
Alinova, three lengths second to Kassab at York last time, looks certain to hand out a lesson in the New University Maiden.
Al Shaati, head second on her reappearance at Carlisle, should improve for the run and open her account in the Polygon Quality Management Maiden.
THE omens are good for Lucky Parkes in the Hopton Conditions Stakes at Yarmouth tomorrow.
The flying filly had trainer Jack Berry purring after a stunning success at Beverley last month.
Flying out of the stalls, Lucky Parkes made all, needing only to be shaken up two furlongs out to beat Sir Harry Hardman six lengths.
Berry, an experienced judge of sprinters, rates her Listed class she finished third in that grade at Haydock in April and Lucky Parkes should come through this test.
Trapezium could break her duck in the John Holdrich Maiden Fillies Stakes following a three-quarter length debut second to Waffle On at Newmarket.
Luca Cumani's well-related filly figured prominently until fading in the closing stages.
She will have learned from that experience and the extra furlong tomorrow will suit her perfectly.
Moidart's trip from her Newmarket base to Edinburgh last time was rewarded with victory and she should score closer to home in the Charter Handicap.
James Fanshawe's filly was showing improved form in storming to a six lengths win from Absalom's Pillar.
With more progress expected, she looks well worth following.
Newmarket challengers Moscow Sea and Al Shaati can send punters away happy at Beverley by taking the last two races.
Moscow Sea, making his first appearance of the season, caught the eye on his debut last October, running on strongly to finish one and a half lengths third to Bob's Return.
Held up and then taken wide, Moscow Sea was given far too much to do.
He is sure to take some beating with more enterprising tactics and can hand out a lesson in the New University Maiden.
Al Shaati, head second on her reappearance at Carlisle, should improve for the run and open her account in the Polygon Quality Management Maiden.
Lancs are held back in knockout struggle
LANCASHIRE were facing an uphill battle as underdogs Leicestershire set their sights on a Lord's return after putting in an excellent morning's work at Grace Road.
Last season's Nat West Trophy finalists took a firm grip on their Benson and Hedges semi-final by reducing Lancashire to 119 for three from 39 overs at lunch.
Alan Mullally, Gordon Parsons with a superb spell of 8–4–13–1 and Vince Wells picked up a wicket apiece before the break.
By lunch, Lancashire, finalists twice in the last three years, were looking to captain Neil Fairbrother (25 not out) for inspiration.
Mullally gave Leicester an early boost, dismissing Lancashire's recalled opener, Gehan Mendis, during his third over after the visitors had won the toss.
Having made 11, Mendis clipped Mullally straight to Phil Robinson at square leg.
Lancashire might easily have lost a second wicket when Nick Speak backed up too far.
Had Robinson's throw from mid-on hit the stumps, there would have been no need to call on third umpire Chris Balderstone and TV replays for a verdict.
When Gordon Parsons dismissed Mike Atherton (33) Lancashire were really struggling at 66 for two in the 27th over.
Leicestershire were celebrating again when Speak, having toiled 29 overs for 27 runs, skied Wells to long-on where Tim Boon judged the catch superbly.
Redknapp rallies young England
AN INSPIRATIONAL performance from Liverpool's Jamie Redknapp helped England's Under-21 side make a superb start to the Toulon tournament with a 2–0 win over holders Portugal.
Lawrie McMenemy's men went ahead when a free-kick by Tottenham striker Darren Anderton was headed into his own net by defender Nuno Luis.
Redknapp created the second goal in the 16th minute, his incisive pass enabling the overlapping Neal Ardley to cross, and after Mike Sheron's shot was blocked, Phil Whelan drove the ball home.
The Portuguese rarely threatened and a bad night was rounded off when Paulo Ferreira was sent-off 16 minutes from time for spitting at Anderton, having already been booked for fouling Redknapp.
FORMER Arsenal winger Graham Rix has returned to London to team up with former Tottenham rival Glenn Hoddle at Chelsea.
The ex-Gunner is Hoddle's first appointment, taking over from another Highbury old boy Peter Nicholas as youth team coach.
Nicholas was sacked by Hoddle yesterday, with the new Stamford Bridge boss admitting: ‘It was nothing personal with Peter.
I just want to build up my own team around me.’
Both Hoddle, with Monaco, and Rix, with Caen and Le Havre, have experience of the Continental game.
Rix said: ‘Glenn's way is my way.
Like him I learned so much in France.
They were the happiest four years of my life.
I enjoyed the French way of playing.’
Rix was playing with Scottish Premier League side Dundee.
It's promotion for Rovers! page 54
Scott Gibbs…ankle ligament injury
Ace Akram's six-pack is the toast of Lancs
WASIM AKRAM grabbed six wickets to send Surrey crashing to a 96-run defeat at The Oval to set Lancashire up for their Benson and Hedges Cup semi-final at Leicestershire today.
The home side, who collapsed spectacularly to Lancashire in the Benson and Hedges Cup, again slumped as the Pakistani all-rounder ripped through their batting.
The hosts crashed from 296–4 to 302 all out in 47 balls to rekindle memories of their Cup disaster last month when they lost nine wickets for 18 runs.
Akram ended with six for 49, which included a spell of four for four in 15 balls after the interval.
Surrey resumed on 114 without loss, needing a further 285 for victory but once Darren Bicknell (58) and Monte Lynch (63) departed, the innings fell away.
Akram said: ‘I didn't need to take the new ball before tea because the old ball began to swing.
This has put us in good heart for Leicestershire.’
In today's semifinal Lancashire skipper Neil Fairbrother won the toss and decided to bat first at Grace Road.
A promising start was cut short when Gehan Mendis turned a ball from left arm over bowler Alan Mullally into the hands of backward square after making just 11.
Leicester, including Winston Benjamin who had a spell with Chester BH in the Liverpool Competition, kept things tight as Lancs reached 57–1 in 20 overs.
Mardood in mood
VERSATILE stayer Mardood stretched his unbeaten sequence to five with victory in yesterday's Pontefract Cup.
Successful in three hurdle races in the West Country, Mardood won on the Flat at Catterick last month and was completing a nap hand inside seven weeks.
Mardood was a first ever runner at Pontefract for former jump jockey Paul Leach, who trains at Taunton, 250 miles away.
Report by Cathy Gordon
Get Drinkwise!
Down and out…don't let your life become ruled by the booze know your limit on National Drinkwise Day
MOST people enjoy a tipple or two and a little of what you fancy doesn't do you any harm.
But when it comes to alcohol, the emphasis is on the word ‘little.’
Today is National Drinkwise Day and health bosses want to force the message home.
But what is safe?
IF it's more than a small amount that you're drinking and also a regular thing then booze may not be quite as harmless as you think.
Too much, or even drinking a little at the wrong time, can cause untold problems.
As well as the almost inevitable hangover and the frequently heard cry ‘never again,’ there are more serious consequences.
It can damage your health, your family, your pocket and cause accidents at home, work and on the road.
Excessive drinking can lead to stomach disorders, high blood pressure, depression, sexual difficulties, brain damage, muscle disease, hepatitis, cirrhosis, cancer of the mouth, throat and gullet and vitamin deficiency.
Yet many of us do not really know how much we drink or the medically recommended sensible drinking levels.
Drinkwise 1993 is designed to provide the public with information about alcohol to help them make informed choices about drinking.
The idea is to increase people's knowledge about the strength of drinks and weekly limits, and the link between drinking and health and fitness.
Up to 14 units for women and up to 21 units for men spread over a week is considered sensible.
One unit is equal to a small glass of wine, or half a pint of ordinary strength beer or lager, one measure of spirit or a small sherry.
It takes your body about an hour, on average, to burn up one unit of alcohol, such as half a pint of beer.
Women are more at risk from the harmful effects of alcohol than men, partly because women have less water in their bodies and the alcohol is more concentrated, and partly because of differences in men and women's metabolism.
Pregnant women should also be aware of the risks to their babies.
Limit
During pregnancy, alcohol passes from a mother's bloodstream into her baby through the placenta and can affect the baby's development, particularly in the early stages of pregnancy.
Pregnant women are advised to limit their drinking to not more than one or two units, once or twice a week, or to cut out alcohol completely.
If you want to change your drinking habits: Choose low-alcohol or non-alcoholic drinks sometimes.
You don't need a drink to enjoy yourself.
Pace your drinking throughout the evening.
If you drink with other people who regularly buy rounds for each other, it's easy to end up drinking more than you want.
Try drinking more slowly so you can skip some rounds.
Remember that getting drunk does not make you smart, witty or sexy.
If you have tried to change the way you drink and find it's just too difficult, don't give up.
Seek advice from Alcoholics Anonymous on , or the Merseyside, Lancashire and Cheshire Council on Alcoholism on .
Painter's hair-raiser
Painter's dodgy success
BUDDING jockey Richard Painter will never forget his first turf winner after a hair-raising experience on 13–8 favourite Dodgy Dancer in the Bilborough Apprentice Maiden at Nottingham.
His helmet slipped over his head three furlongs out and was dangling under his right armpit passing the post, falling off a few strides later.
Coventry-born Painter, 21, sensed trouble soon after the start and made repeated efforts to keep the headgear in place.
However, he also concentrated on the job in hand, sending Dodgy Dancer ahead well inside the final furlong.
By Rob King
THE inspiration behind England's emergence from World Cup shock is concentrated in one suite at an isolated roadside motel outside Boston.
Room-mates Ian Wright and Paul Ince are manager Graham Taylor's key characters as he seeks to recharge morale and confidence against the USA tomorrow in a stadium that, aptly, usually hosts the New England Patriots.
‘Everybody thinks the roof's caved in but I'm sure we'll show them it hasn't,’ said Arsenal striker Wright in the wake of last week's debacle in Norway.
Close pal Ince will lead the rookie side that Taylor plans to name late today for the first of three US Cup games.
He said: ‘We're all back together and things can only get better if we start winning again.’
It is a stunning honour for the 25-year-old Manchester United midfielder who only made his England bow six caps and nine months ago.
Wright is delighted with Taylor's bold captaincy decision, saying: ‘Incy was unlucky not to get either the players’ or the football writers' honours last season as top player but this is ample compensation.’
Des Walker will not be considered, while Tony Adams and Paul Gascoigne missed the trip.
It means Taylor will name a vastly inexperienced side.
England are conscious that what was planned as a dress rehearsal for the finals next summer now threatens to be the closest they get.
But Wright said: ‘The World Cup is the biggest thing in your career.
I don't think I've got many left in me and this is the one I'm going to be doing everything to make sure we qualify.
‘The game against Norway was really disappointing.
‘But you get on with it, you want to go and win your next game.
Everyone's still quite bubbly and confident’
John back in fashion
JOHN Curant's visits to the racecourse lately have been as a ladies clothing salesman operating from a mobile stand.
But he rolled back the years wearing his old jockeys' uniform in the Radcliffe Selling Stakes at Nottingham.
Curant teamed up with the Colin Williams-trained Tinker Osmaston for a well-backed victory.
It is three years since his last winner and Curant, 41, nowadays concentrates on the business he operates with his wife, Sue.
He admitted afterwards: ‘This is only a hobby.’
Dettori double
FRANKIE Dettori completed a 80–1 double aboard Palace Pageant in the Lowdham Conditions Stakes and Ewald in the Sandiacre Handicap at Nottingham yesterday.
Palace Pageant's trainer Ian Balding is hoping the colt is given a chance in next week's Brittania Handicap at Royal Ascot.
Leaders turn up the heat
DAVE HEYES and Peter Potter combined to keep Carborundum on top of the West Lancashire Cricket League.
Heyes scored 65 and then Potter took five wickets to overcome Action.
The leaders were brought down to earth in the Hanson Cup when Darren Crumpton's half century steered Goodlass to victory.
Neil Howard took six wickets to clinch Billinge's first win of the season over Salisbury.
In the second division Duncan Ormshaw produced a remarkable display for Golborne taking seven wickets for nine runs in eight overs to stun Haydock.
M Stacey, of Earlstown, was in equally devastating form with 8–14 in eight overs to send Sutton crashing.
RESULTS Div one: Haydock 54 Mersyebus 102–6; Salisbury 53 (Neil Howard 6–18) Billinge 77; Action 93 (Peter Potter 5–19) Carborundum 159–5 (Dave Heyes 65); Orrell RT 109–6 Essemmay 90 (Julian Binding 5–12); Garswood 137–1 (Tony Duffy 68 not out) Goodlass 132–7.
Div two: Billinge 66 (Barry Hunt 5–15) Garswood 161–4 (Dave Taylor 58 not out); Golborne 97 Haydock 92 (Duncan Ormshaw 7–9).
Sunday section: Gullick Unionist 143–9 (Phil Moorfield 57) Friends 148–6; Orrell RT 214–7 (Jonathan Peet 63) Highfield 148–8 (M Moran 53); Sutton 68 (M Stacey 8–14) Earlstown 71–6; Winstanley Park 168–5 (Ian Wilkinson 57) Haydock 78; Action 130 Winwick 47.
Hanson Cup: Billinge 99 Haydock 102–2; Essemmay 173–3 (Mike Owen 69) Merseybus 76; Carborundum 134 Goodlass Wall 135–5 (Darren Crumpton 57); Salisbury 104 Garswood 109–7.
NORTH Cheshire League leaders Daten were held to a draw by
Runcorn but still lead
ICI by two points.
RESULTS Old Parkonians 152–4 Hale 155–5; Westminster Park 178–7 ICI 180–7; British Alcan 48 Shell 49–7; Runcorn 215–6 Daten 154–7.
2nd XI: Westminster Park 67 ICI 68–4; Hale 173–7 dec Old Parkonians 39–9; Runcorn 121–8 Daten 109–5; Shell 161 British Alcan 121.
Don't panic…keep calm and beat the attack
Where to fish
WIRRAL fishermen rate the promenade between Seacombe Ferry and Egremont as capable of giving some of the best fishing in the North West.
A noted spot is the Bee Hive pub.
During summer (May to September) fishing is for flounders, plaice and eels, while between October and the end of January there can be outstanding sport with whiting and codling.
Casts between 50 and 100 yards are all it takes when fishing at high water for the best sport and most baits can be used.
It is fair to warn anglers that thousands of crabs soon make short work of rag and lugworm.
Not surprisingly, peeler crab is the best hookbait.
Bailey's United memory
CHATTING to former England all-rounder Trevor Bailey during the Old Trafford Test, I was intrigued to discover that he once played football against Manchester United in front of 57,000 spectators.
The occasion was an F.A.
Cup-tie, with Bailey playing for the well-known London amateur side, Walthamstow Avenue, who switched the replay to Stamford Bridge because their home ground could not hold more than a fraction of the spectators who wanted to attend.
Bailey, of course, is best known for his many gritty displays as an allround cricketer.
Apparently he once had ambitions of becoming a genuine fast bowler, until they were exploded by Don Bradman's famous 1948 touring team, who hit more than 700 runs off Bailey's county, Essex, in a single day.
As Keith Miller, the biggest hitter of them all, gave away his wicket first ball it was quite a performance, but Bailey remembers one factor that few would believe today.
‘We used three quick bowlers, including myself, there were a lot of 4s and 6s, and the boundaries are quite long at Southend,’ he told me.
‘In spite of that, we still managed to bowl 128 overs in the day.’
When you realise that 90 are now considered a reasonable number, it is clear that at least one thing has not changed for the better.
Dubai hotshots on Ascot alert
Maktoum trio target Royal date
by The Marquis
THE Maktoum family's Royal Ascot challenge next week is to include three horses that are trained in Dubai.
Sheikh Mohammed has sanctioned plans to run Woodhaunter in the Britannia Handicap, Promise City in the Windsor Castle Stakes and Aljathaab in the Chesham Stakes.
All are trained by American Richard Conway.
‘Aljathaab is the most forward of the group.
He is a very nice horse but we have not been able to test him in Dubai,’ said Conway.
Last month at York, Dayflower, trained by Satish Seemar, made history by becoming the first horse trained in Dubai to win a race in Britain.
Prince Khalid Abdulla, the season's outstanding owner, is set to mount a powerful challenge on next week's prestigious Royal Ascot meeting with a team headed by Zafonic.
The brilliant 2,000 Guineas winner will aim to start the week in triumphant style for jockey Pat Eddery in the St James's Palace Stakes next Tuesday.
His clash with French 2,000 Guineas winner Kingmambo is one of the meeting's highlights.
Among those backing up Zafonic are the progressive sprinter Specified (Cork & Orrery), Free Handicap winner So Factual (Jersey Stakes) and Factual (Queen Anne Stakes).
Handicap hopes could include Source Of Light in the Bessborough and Tychonic in the Britannia.
Thirsk trainer David Barron took the IR£25,000 Cara Ballyogan Stakes at Leopardstown with Sea Gazer.
The Kevin Darley-ridden colt beat Bradawn Breever by a length with Jack Berry's Palacegate Episode less than a length back in third.
St Ninian provided more evidence at Nottingham that sex and business do mix when it comes to racing.
The seven-year-old's victory in the River Trent Conditions Stakes came only 24 hours after he covered his latest mare.
Pat Eddery
…plum rides
Join us plea to Keane
KEVIN MORAN today urged Irish pal Roy Keane to join him at Blackburn Rovers.
The Nottingham Forest midfielder is stalling over a £4m move.
Although he has agreed personal terms with Rovers manager Kenny Dalglish and been offered a lucrative four-year contract, Arsenal and Manchester United are also chasing the young star.
Moran said: ‘Director Jack Walker's money has enabled the manager to put down a good foundation and if we can get Roy coming in alongside the likes of Alan Shearer, the club will really be going places.’
Deborah Wintle: It's far better to be a lone parent than be in an unhappy relationship in which the child suffers too.’
Nina Rowlands: ‘No judge is going to award access away from the mother while the child is still dependent on her.’
by JANET TANSLEY
WHEN it comes to parenthood more and more women are deciding to go it alone.
FOR some a broken-down relationship means they have no choice: Others simply long for motherhood without the commitment of marriage or a steady relationship.
BUT what happens when the father of the child demands access?
What are her or his rights?
IT'S a dilemma facing more and more women.
They want the baby but not the father.
The reasons are many.
Either the man she is with is not ready for a long-term commitment, he may be violent and she wants to keep him away from the child.
Or she may simply have opted for motherhood without the father which normally completes the traditional ‘set’.
Either way they are a growing group, especially on Merseyside which has many unmarried mums.
Explains Deborah Wintle, an advice worker and counsellor for Liverpool One Parent Families Trust: ‘There are a number of unmarried mums on Merseyside, many of which we see coming into the Trust.
‘A lot more women are making the conscious decision not to get married, for whatever reason.
They want the child but not the relationship that goes with it.
‘The way we see marriage has changed.
People decide not to get married but to go ahead and have children anyway.
For some the relationship has broken down, others have never been with the father.
‘But today's more liberal attitudes mean they have the freedom to do that.
It's far better to be a lone parent than be in an unhappy relationship in which the child suffers too.’
There can be problems, women may have to work harder to maintain a standard of living, but support normally offered by the father can be obtained, says Deborah, 23, from family and friends.
Deborah, from Aigburth, herself is a lone parent with a three-year-old little girl, Rebecca, so she knows the problems women face.
One is if the father wants to see the child.
Few women know where they stand.
Says Deborah: ‘We have had women in this situation and it can be disturbing for them and the child.
‘The father may have been violent, the woman might be involved with someone else who has taken on the role of father.
‘When this happens they don't know what to do or where to go.’
We asked Liverpool-based Goldsmith Williams' solicitor Nina Roland, who writes the Echo Woman Extra's LE Law column where these women stand when it comes to the question of access.
Says Nina: ‘The immediate answer is that if the couple are not married the mother has all the rights the father has none.
‘He would have to apply to the courts for any access.
‘And he certainly can't demand to see the child when and where he wants, say every weekend.’
Yet while the mother has all the rights invested in her, the courts will be amenable.
Says Nina: ‘Unless there is a valid reason why the man should not see the child, then the courts will probably grant some sort of access.
‘It may be once a week or once a fortnight perhaps, but it wouldn't be a lengthy period until the baby is older and more independent.
‘No judge is going to award access away from the mother while the child is still dependent on her.’
But it is important that the baby doesn't become a tug of love in between two warring parents.
And it is always better to settle out of court, says Nina.
‘It is far better for you, and the child, to come to an agreement outside the court system, than get involved in a legal battle.
Best for child ‘If you have a good reason why you don't want the father to see your baby then you will be able to put your case to the courts.
‘At the end of the day you have got to decide what is best not just for you but for your child.
‘Remember, the new Children's Act gives them rights too and a court will usually consider that it is in the child's interest to know both parents where possible and reasonable.’
Not surprisingly, the access granted can often depend on whether the child is a girl or boy.
Says Nina: ‘If it's a girl the courts often deem she needs her mum's influence.
But boys are thought to need a man around
…’
Deborah adds: ‘While the legal situation makes things clearer this is obviously an emotional problem and it can help to talk things through.
‘Sometimes there may be bitterness between the mother and father but we can help put things into perspective.
‘It may better if the child can get to know both parents where possible, even though many unmarried mums are happier on their own.’
New worries for Wire boss
By Nick Walker WARRINGTON coach Brian Johnson returns from holiday next week facing a contract headache.
Seven Wire stars have refused deals, including regular packmen Paul Cullen and Gary Sanderson and back Tony Thorniley.
New Zealand international hooker Duane Mann has also been given a deadline of next week to decide on his new deal.
Mann is likely to be selected by the Kiwis for their three-Test tour of England next season, which would leave an overseas berth, alongside Kelly Shelford and Greg Mackey, open.
He has been offered alternative deals to cover both options.
Speculation has linked Wire with huge Australian forward Trevor Gilmeister, known as ‘The Axe.’
Warrington, who scraped into the Premiership play-off competition after finishing eighth in the Stones Bitter Championship, had a trophyless season and average gates at Wilderspool went down by around 800.
JOHN NESTOR, skipper of the City of Liverpool team, receives the Carlsberg Tetley North West Unemployed League Cup from Brian Riding, representing the sponsors.
It is Liverpool's third successive win.
Also pictured are team managers Jim Smith and Steve Swinnerton.
The National 6-a-side soccer finals take place at Wavertree tomorrow (11.30 am).
Excuses run thin as England problems continue
By David Lloyd
ENGLAND'S defeat in the first Cornhill Test has left them with even more problems than those produced by last winter's disastrous tour of India.
Graham Gooch insisted there would be ‘no wholesale changes’ for the second Test, which begins at Lord's on Thursday week, but the captain and his fellow selectors will have been dismayed by the worrying lack of technique and substance shown by most of the team at Old Trafford.
Gooch and new boy Peter Such were the only England successes as Australia won by 179 runs.
And Gooch has clearly run out of excuses for a team which has lost six consecutive Tests.
His magnificent second innings 133, plus a top score the first time around, has served to magnify the glaring deficiencies in the batting line-up.
Gooch said of his batsmen: ‘You can't bat for them.
It's the way they perform that counts.’
And on the bowling side he admitted: ‘Peter Such had a dream debut in helpful conditions in the first innings, but we then struggled to make inroads and our bowlers did not look penetrative in their second innings.
We have to improve if we want to get back into this series.’
Gooch has complained too many times now that the players needed to compete more keenly.
Along with team manager Keith Fletcher, they both continually insist that the England team is packed with quality players.
But performances have been consistently below par for too long and drastic action needs to be taken.
Every Australian player made some contribution to a fully deserved victory.
They looked combative and confident and they had an aggression which, Gooch and Such apart, England too clearly lacked.
The Essex pair and debut-making fast bowler Andy Caddick are the only three names that should be written down automatically for Lord's at Saturday's selection meeting.
Graeme Hick and Robin Smith were both exposed again as uncertain against pace and spin respectively.
Hick was softened up with alarming ease by Merv Hughes.
For all his success in India, he has yet to prove he can survive, let alone prosper, against a Test-class pace attack.
Australian captain Allan Border said: ‘You saw how we bowled at him.
Obviously we talk about how to bowl specifically to certain players.’
Smith was bemused by leg-spinner Shane Warne, despite his successful battle to overcome similar problems during the Indian tour.
Alec Stewart still looks out of sorts as wicket-keeper batsman and his position will again have to be reconsidered.
David Gower, Jack Russell, Mark Ilott and Mark Lathwell are among those who should come back into contention for Lord's.
But if England lose the second Test, they will need a new captain as well as a new-look team Gooch would surely not survive any longer.
Forest finally sign Clough transfer form
NIGEL CLOUGH today officially became a Liverpool player.
Nottingham Forest agreed to sign the transfer form which makes the England star the first summer addition to Graeme Souness' squad.
However, it is still not known how much Clough will cost.
Liverpool will resume negotiations with Forest chairman Fred Reacher on his return from holiday, and if no fee can be agreed, the matter will be decided by a transfer tribunal.
Scottish clubs have been ordered to re-design their goal nets for next season.
Last season a Dundee United player ‘scored’ against Partick but the ball rebounded from the stanchion and the referee waved play on.
The steel stanchions will now disappear with the net supported by ropes and a pole.
Goal nets were invented and patented in 1890 by James Brodie, of Liverpool.
Cashing in on a record prize
THE biggest individual guaranteed cash prize ever offered in North West fishing is up for grabs in Saturday's Octoplus Echo Spring Classic final.
Top prize in the competition, on the banks of Moreton Mere, is £1,000.
The runner-up will win £600, third £400, fourth £300, fifth £250 with £150 for 6th place.
And there will be £100 for each of the four section winners (nine anglers in each section) with a rule of one prize per angler.
Line-up is: From Leeds-Liverpool Canal, April 17 Paul Farquhar, Paul Jones, Alan Murray, Bob Roberts, Richard Hunt, Ted Stanley, Paul Johnston.
Sefton Park Lake, April 24 Phil Barwell, Steve Fleming, Chris Hargadon, Mick Shuttleworth.
Halsnead Park Lake, May 1 Phil McConnell, Simon Loyley, Paul Tinsley, Mick Wolvine.
Sefton Park, May 8 Jimmy Brown, Norman Ambrose, Paul Hitchen, Steve Finn.
Moreton Mere, May 15 Tom Irvine, George Edwards, Peter Price.
Shropshire Union Canal, May 22 Kevin O'Hanlon, Dave Horan, Phil Hardman, Hughie Allen, Alan Talbot, Mark Grimes, Peter Wade.
Leeds-Liverpool Canal, May 29 Wally Lyon, Derek Bennett, Steve Hargreaves, Maurice O'Culshaw, Mike O'Neill, Keith Wilson, Peter Bailey.
Draw time on Saturday is 9.00am with fishing over four hours from 10.00am-2.00pm.
Each finalist will receive a commemorative medal and the top three will win a silver salver.
Full preview in Thursday's Echo.
Dressmaker Barbara gets TV treat
By FELICITY
NEWSON
GLAMOROUS grannie Barbara Flanagan never has to shop around when she fancies a new outfit she simply reaches into her stocks of material and rustles something up.
Barbara, 60, from Widnes, has always made her own clothes, originally to save cash and then out of habit.
But she was confused when it came to buying an off-the-peg suit for her 40th wedding anniversary party.
So Barbara decided to seek advice.
She wrote to presenter Becky Want, who has a ‘fashion victims’ slot on Granada News.
And she was duly guided round the shops and revamped.
Barbara has won countless glamorous grandmother contests since becoming the first ever winner of the Widnes title in 1977.
She found fame again due to her prowess at sewing a fine seam.
She is especially renowned for creating a long silk jersey halter-neck evening dress, which can be worn five different ways and is easy to make because it only has one seam.
However, Barbara would be the first one to admit she is a novice at choosing ready-to-wear.
With guidance she picked a long, beaded dress with a side split and see-through sleeves, which she wore to a special anniversary dinner.
She says: ‘I felt very glamorous indeed but I'll still probably stick to making my own clothes in future.
‘Trying on all those clothes was fun but it made me realise how tiring shopping for clothes really is.
‘It's much simpler just draping a piece of material round you to work out what shape would work best and then just sitting down at the sewing machine!’
Dressed to thrill…glamorous Barbara Flanagan gets set for her anniversary treat
A recipe for disaster
TWO days of sunshine brings a lot of rare breeds from their lairs.
I have confirmed sightings of the greater spotted car park attendant, the red-necked typist and the pink-backed wedding guest who forgot her hat.
It doesn't take much.
Clear skies at 8am, warming up nicely by 10am and, by 11am, it's loungers out, shirts off, into the garden (with the bedding plants as an excuse) and…come back in at sun down.
Or, in Sainsbury-ad speak: Take one chunk of human and peel off the outer layers.
Next rub in a little oil, and allow to brown.
Remove from heat, when warmed through.
Garnish with moisturiser, white T-shirts and shorts to taste.
Trouble is we tend to forget the ‘remove from
…’ bit once the sun and beer has gone to the head and we're talking as we are after this weekend severe overcooking.
Come Monday morning, there's a host of well-done faces, with a curious red stripe crossed with white lines down the front of the neck to match.
These days, with all the skin cancer warnings, there's also tendency to have an excuse ready for the burning.
‘I was clipping the hedges,’ said a colleague with red forearms.
It's okay for Australians to bang on about the risks they get a summer.
But does anyone over here have the willpower to adopt the strict routine of day one five minutes, day two seven minutes…?
The palest people were distinct on Monday.
They were the Test Match addicts, very small babies, icecream van drivers or, as in our house, parents with toddlers who WON'T stay put long enough to let them catch breath, let alone get a tan!
Fancy that?
Lineker out for six weeks
GARY LINEKER will be out of action for at least six weeks with a broken toe, his Japanese club announced today.
Nagoya Grampus Eight said doctors had confirmed that Lineker suffered a stress fracture of the second toe on his left foot during Saturday's defeat by Osaka Gambas.
‘It will take him six weeks to recover so we expect him to be out of action for longer than that,’ the spokesman added.
Scott's target: Scott Hastings, the Lions and Scottish centre who broke his cheekbone against Otago last weekend, rejoined the Lions today keen to play rugby again as soon as possible.
‘I don't see why I can't be playing when the season starts in Scotland in September,’ said Hastings, who needed a four hour operation.
Hot shot: Rangers striker Ally McCoist has won the Adidas Golden Boot award for the second consecutive season.
McCoist scored 34 Premier League goals last season.
Runner-up, with one goal less, was Greek striker Vasilis Dimitriadis of AEK Athens.
Moran out: Republic of Ireland manager Jack Charlton has dropped Kevin Moran for tomorrow's World Cup clash with Latvia in Riga, just five games short of Liam Brady's 72-cap Irish record.
Charlton recalls Aston Villa's Paul McGrath but has also opted for Middlesbrough's Alan Kernaghan, who wins only his fifth cap.
Wilko and out: British No 2 Chris Wilkinson pulled off the most spectacular win of his career today as he put fourth seed Goran Ivanisevic out of the Stella Artois Championships at Queen's Club.
The 23-year-old from Hampshire, ranked 176 in the world, outplayed the Wimbledon favourite to win 6–3 3–6 6–3.
WIRRAL anglers Keith Pemberton and Bill Wallace took the championship title as gales threatened to wreck the B & I Line Small Boats Sea Angling Festival at Rosslare in Ireland.
After two days reluctantly fishing in Wexford Harbour, on the estuary of the River Slaney, the flotilla sneaked out to the Saltees Island as the winds dropped.
This was the real sport and the Moreton pair, fishing from their own boat ‘Brenda Lee,’ produced a fine performance to hook 11 different species and a £500 prize.
Included in the catch bag were coalfish, cod, dab, dogfish, ling, plaice, pollack, pouting, launce and a ballan wrasse.
Brothers Peter and Dave Grundy from Willaston should rename their boat ‘Mr Cool’ after winning the first day and taking a major prize on the second day at Wexford Harbour.
Five target fish were nominated for the second day as the anglers struggled to overcome persistent torrential rain and buffeting winds.
After two hours of fishing Peter hooked a large eel which he felt had an excellent chance of winning the £100 prize.
With that in the bucket they headed back to shore, had lunch, a couple of pints, and returned in time for the weigh-in.
They were right the eel tipped the scales at 2lb 2oz for best of the day!
YOU can get a fuller forecast of what the stars have in store for YOU today by calling Russell's Horoscope Hotline for YOUR Starsign.
Each call costs 36p a minute cheap rate, and 48p at other times.
Watch out for a fairweather friend or a back stabbing buddy Wednesday and don't be too disappointed or upset if someone you like and admire turns out to be a real rotter with feet of clay.
If you can't get your own way or what you want by openly and honestly asking for it, don't use sly or surreptitious methods because they could backfire and land you in the soup.
Be especially wary of using emotional blackmail.
Beware of the clandestine manoeuvrings of jealous colleagues or covetous rivals Wednesday.
If you're caught off balance by a particularly audacious act or challenge you must bounce back and not let on how you feel inside.
You'll be overjoyed to see a child or youngster living life to the full and getting every ounce of pleasure out of every moment of the day.
Why not try to follow their carefree example and shrug off your worries and woes?
You could be surprised by the strength and intensity of your own feelings and emotions Wednesday.
Apart from the potent drives and desires surging through you there's a loved one's wants and wishes to be considered as well.
Having your suspicions is one thing, proving them is another.
Don't be too quick to condemn or criticise people you think are up to no good or are getting special treatment for one reason or another.
Be patient, tolerant and bide your time.
Things aren't so clear cut and straightforward as you think Wednesday and that message is best illustrated by looking at your financial affairs.
Joint accounts and shared monies need urgent attention.
Find out what's going on.
You might be just a wee bit too clever for your own good now.
At home you may get away with a subtle plan to mislead and manipulate trusting relatives, but people at work or in your community won't be so easy going.
Understanding yourself is your biggest battle Wednesday.
You must come to terms with the fact that some dreams and desires are never going to be fulfilled while other equally wonderful wants and wishes will take their place.
Just when you think you have got your finances whipped into shape something or someone comes along to upset the apple cart.
Wednesday brings surprise news affecting future cash decisions.
People have to earn your respect and just because they have a big desk, long title or an impressive uniform it doesn't mean you should automatically give way to their judgements and decisions.
Your mind's got a life of its own Wednesday and it will keep taking you off on flights of fancy and imaginative excursions.
It'll be specially hard to concentrate or focus your thoughts today.
There are lots of new opportunities coming your way in the year ahead, but you must move quickly to take advantage of them or unscrupulous colleagues and rivals will get there before you.
A loving partner's selfless support gives you the extra edge you need to succeed.
Double delight
TWO schoolboy boxers, Joe Ainscough and Tony Maguire, helped to make it a successful night for Kirkdale ABC by outpointing their opponents, J.Addison (Tuebrook) and A.Khaliq (Bradford) respectively, at their club's final show of the season at The Mons, Bootle.
ANDY GRAY is sadly amiss in his comments on the Clough signing.
For one thing, his obsession with tactics has led him into an absurd devaluation of the merits and achievements of Peter Beardsley.
What's worse, it seems to have blinded him to the facts of Liverpool history.
Since the war, every spell of Anfield success has been set or kept in motion by the signing of a top-class ‘striker-cum-provider’ a player who not only scored goals but also made them for his colleagues.
There was Stubbins in the late 40s, St. John in the 60s, Keegan from 1971 to 1977, Dalglish from 1977 to 1987, and Beardsley from 1987 to 1991.
The creative stimulus, as well as the goal scoring example, supplied by such players brought the best out of fellow strikers like Liddell, Balmer, Hunt, Arrowsmith, Toshack, Heighway, Rush, Aldridge and Barnes.
Sensible
I therefore take issue with Andy.
Given due attention to other departments of the team plus average luck and good management (rare commodities in recent times, I admit) I see nothing wrong and everything right with the purchase of Nigel Clough.
His signing is wholly in line with Anfield tradition.
In my view he is the one player Beardsley apart ideally qualified to bring inspiration to a rejuvenated Rush and to anyone else brought in as partner or, in time, successor to the great Welshman.
F. J. McNeill, Crosby.
Rovers land promotion for reserves
By Ian Hargraves
TRANMERE won their long fight to provide a better standard of competition for their reserves today when they were admitted to the Pontins League.
Next season they will replace Wigan, who finished below them in the four club ballot held during the league's annual meeting at Preston.
Top of the four clubs involved were Preston, who earned 28 votes, followed by Tranmere with 25, Wigan with 15 and Stockport County with 2.
Preston and Wigan were having to apply for re-election having finished in the bottom two places of the Pontins League's second division.
Tranmere chief executive Frank Corfe, who led a powerful delegation to today's meeting, said ‘We are absolutely delighted.
This was one of the biggest issues facing the club, and our success will mean a great deal as we strive to strengthen our overall standards.
‘For the last few years we have been seriously handicapped by the fact that our second team have been unable to compete regularly against quality opposition.
‘It is terribly important that young players are able to progress upwards through a good competition before being pitched into the League.
‘It is also desirable that members of our senior squad not in the first team are able to continue playing at a reasonable level, and they have not been able to do this in the past.’
Up to now Tranmere reserves have had to play in the Midland Senior League, having had several previous applications to join the Pontins League rejected.
Last season they won it for the second year in succession with some ease, and without their players being seriously extended.
Top clubs
The Pontins League includes the reserve teams of most of the North's top clubs, with Everton gaining promotion back to the first division last season after being relegated 12 months previously.
Home-help
ANY information or stories about the Home Guard in Ormskirk will be welcomed by reader Mr Kevin Reeve, of 36 Benchleys Road, Hemel Hempstead, Herts, HP1 2AQ, whose grandfather, Richard Clayton, MM, a member of the Merseyside Military Medallists' Association, was one of its number.
Roche leads Trophy chase
THE Echo Star Trophy series for senior racing cyclists is developing into a close battle following the Merseyside road race championships at Delamere.
Senior champion Andrew Roche (Liverpool Mercury-Townsend) shot to the top of the table by retaining his title for the second successive season and now has 17 points.
Close behind are: Tommy Snape (Merseyside Wheelers) 16, Graham Veal (Weaver Valley) 15, Matthew Middleton (Kirkby CC) 13, Graham Arnold (Kirkby CC) 12 and David Williams (Merseyside RC) with 10.
The junior competition looks set for new champion Andrew Martin (Prescot Eagle-Atlas), whose title win shot him up to 17 points.
Next comes bronze medallist Dylan Yates (Liverpool Mercury) with eight and Paul Moore (North Wirral Velo) on seven.
Graham Thompson (Anfield BC) has five, Michael Rumph (Kirkby CC) three and Paul Kelly (New Brighton) two.
Banned Jason vows to fight on
JASON Livingston has vowed to continue the fight to clear his name after his appeal against a drugs ban was rejected.
But the independent three-man appeal panel of the British Athletic Federation only dismissed the sprinter's appeal against his four year suspension on a split verdict of 2–1.
Chairman Robert Reid QC and BAF representative David Littlewood voted to uphold the original four-year ban, but former Olympic 800 metres medallist Derek Johnson disagreed.
The majority decision was enough for the BAF to rule that the 22-year-old Croydon sprinter, who was found positive in an out-of-competition test just before the Olympics, remains banned until 1996.
Impressed
Describing the verdict as ‘perverse’, Livingston vowed to fight on.
Though none of the hearing details were revealed by the BAF, it is believed that Johnson had been impressed by the evidence delivered by the sprinter.
Tony Ward, the BAF spokesman, would only say the hearing had been full of ‘extremely complicated and technical aspects.’
A statement from Livingstone's solicitor said: ‘Jason continues to deny, despite erroneous press reports to the contrary, that he has ever taken any banned substance knowingly or otherwise.’
Clear view of future
FOOTBALLING people are famous for their turn of phrase, but I was still intrigued to see the reason given by Graham Taylor to justify his choice of Paul Ince as England's latest captain.
‘He will lead by example,’ said Taylor.
‘We saw his importance by his absence against Norway.’
On that basis, we could still win the World Cup by giving 11 newcomers their first England caps.
Glamorous grandmother Barbara Flanagan never has to shop around when she fancies a new outfit — she simply reaches in her stocks of material and rustles something up.
Barbara (60) has always made her own clothes, originally through austerity and then out of habit.
But recently, fancying an off-the-peg suit for her 40th wedding anniversary party, Barbara realised that she would be so confused by clothes shopping that she would need to seek advice.
She decided to write to Becky Want, who has a fashion slot on Granada Reports.
And Becky duly chose Barbara as an ideal make-over subject, and took a camera crew over to Widnes to do an interview and to re-vamp Barbara's image.
Barbara has won countless Glamorous Grandmother contests since becoming the first ever winner of the Widnes title in 1977.
She has also appeared in several national magazines due to her prowess at sewing a fine seam.
She is especially renowned for creating a long silk jersey halter-neck evening dress which can be worn five different ways and is easy to make because it only has one seam.
However, Barbara would be the first one to admit she is a novice at choosing ready-to-wear.
And she says her day with Becky and the team was a revelation: ‘The Granada Reports people came to my house to film me in some of my own clothes and then took me to the Hillcrest Hotel in Widnes where I had my hair styled and my make-up done, and then tried on lots of different outfits.
‘In the end Becky helped me to choose a long beaded dress with a side-split and see-through sleeves.
‘The staff at the Hillcrest then invited my husband Bill and myself to sit down and have a special anniversary dinner — I felt very glamorous indeed!’
Barbara says although she had a fantastic day, she will probably stick to making her own clothes in future: ‘Trying on all those clothes was fun but it made me realise how tiring modelling — and shopping — really are.
‘It's much simpler just draping a piece of material round you to work out what shape would work best and then just sitting down at the sewing machine!’
Mike grabs new record
AFTER his recordbreaking show with the bat last week, Mike Ness did it again with the ball this week in the Cheshire Cricket Association.
The Whitefield allrounder followed up his innings of 137 not out, with 8–24 against Metal Box to beat his own club record of 7–75 set in 1990.
Joe O'Toole took 8–39 for leaders Liverpool MES — but finished on the losing side at Parkfield.
The Wirral side got home by two wickets after Mark Warrington's 5–32 helped dismiss Liverpool for 113.
RESULTS Ellesmere Port 176–7 Maxonians 69; Moore and Daresbury 100 (T Crew 5–36) Mossley Hill 155–5; Metal Box 61 (Mark Ness 8–24) Whitefield 62–4; Latchford and Padgate 89 Laporte 71–4; Glazebury 76 (N Carruthers 5–20) Rylands 141; Greenalls 153 Cheshire Lines 133; Liverpool MES 113 (Mark Warrington 5–32) Parkfield 118–8 (Joe O'Toole 8–39); Appleton 93 (Dave Owen 6–28) Chester CO 149–7 (Mike Beeton 59).
‘I love meeting people that's why it's so special’
Mum in a million…
Frances Bradburn, with one of her foster pets
Interview by JANET TANSLEY
WONDER WOMAN!
‘COME in, would you like a cup of tea?
You must see the kittens…’
Frances Bradburn is loving every bit of the attention bestowed on her after winning the region's Mum of the Year Award.
Not because of the new-found fame, the cash she's pocketed or the car she stands to win in the national finals.
Says Frances, 53, of Delamere Road, Ainsdale: ‘I love meeting people and that is what has made it all so special.
I have chatted to people who I wouldn't ever have met if this hadn't happened.
‘It's fascinating.’
Another big plus is the enormous pride she feels having been nominated by daughter Joanne: ‘The pride I feel knowing that Joanne saw fit to nominate me is indescribable.’
Joanne, 13, says simply: ‘Mum hasn't just looked after her own children, she has looked after so many others.
At work, some of the patients call her mum and she fosters all the animals.
I just knew she had to win.’
Frances has a comfortable life in many ways.
She lives in a cosy detached home, with plush wall to wall axminster.
Photos of her family at every stage of development line the walls.
There's even a framed copy of her invitation to a Buckingham Palace Garden Party in 1989.
It is here she and husband Roy brought up sons Jonathon, 26, and Jeremy, 24, and daughter Joanne.
Frances says: ‘There's a big gap between Joanne and the boys.
It wasn't planned that way, she just didn't happen too quickly.
‘She was born just before my 40th birthday which was quite rare 13 years ago.
I had three easy pregnancies, three easy births and I loved every minute of bringing them up.
Comfort
’ They're my friends as much as my children.’
But, despite her comfort, she never forgets that other people don't always have it so easy that life can be hard.
And there is no more constant a reminder to her than her experiences teaching in special needs schools and her present job as adult education tutor at Ashworth.
Frances explains: ‘I decided to go into special education two years after I qualified as a teacher.
I had no experience, just a gut feeling.
‘My first job was at Maghull Home for Epileptics which proved my gut feeling was right.
There's an extra feeling of satisfaction and achievement.
‘Without being magnanimous, I have been very blessed in life.
But I am also realistic and realise that there are people who don't make it in life.
This is my way of sharing some of the good fortune I have had.
‘I like the challenge, the demands it puts on you.
Above all, I like the love you get back.’
Frances has been working at Ashworth for the last four years.
She teaches literacy, numeracy and music to a variety of patients from the centre, and has set up a small bible group with the chaplain.
Some of those she teaches have a criminal background but many do not.
Asked whether she ever feels a sense of danger, Frances replies: ‘The immediate answer is no.
But working in this sort of hospital you are always aware of the potential and you have to be alert.
You become astute at picking up the vibes.’
Through therapy, teaching and psychological help, some patients are eventually rehabilitated for their return into society.
But France adds: ‘Some can expect to remain there for the rest of their lives.
‘It saddens me that there has to be people who are ill in life.
But that's the real world and we have to be positive and make it the best for them as it can be, with love, affection and trust.’
Frances has been fostering animals at Freshfield Animal Rescue Centre near her home even longer than she's been at Ashworth.
Her first two charges were a kitten that had been kicked so hard its front paw was broken and a dog who no-one would taken ‘because it was so strange-looking.’
Both Timmy the cat, now five, and lurcher Dizzy are still there.
But Frances never neglects Joanne, the only child still living at home.
She has a close relationship with her daughter ‘we go out together, and I don't have to drag her’ and the two work together visiting the homeless.
Caring
She says: ‘The caring side is becoming more and more evident in her too.’
Frances teaches keyboard and guitar at home, while Joanne does her homework upstairs, so the two can spend time together later on.
And into her hectic life Frances even manages to fit the occasional game of badminton, squash, jogging and the odd 10K road race.
But she asks for no accolade.
‘I'm just a representative of the thousands of mums on Merseyside who, through thick and thin, soldier on and bring a family up.’
Pick a winner with strawberries
AS you will have noticed strawberries are now in the shops.
So far they seem to be the Spanish variety with the lovely English ones still to come.
But strawberries of any sort, served with cream are one of the great delights of summer and I see that in Cheshire the fruit farms have already put out their ‘Pick Your Own’ notices.
At weekends it makes for a good day's outing to take the family for a picnic, after which they can gather as many strawberries as they want at the various fruit farms dotted around.
Disappointingly strawberries do not freeze so if you do not eat them at once you need to use them up in some other way.
Home-made strawberry jam is particularly delicious but there are plenty of recipes around which centre on this scrummy fruit.
ICED STRAWBERRY SOUFFLE
(Serves 4 to 6)
3 level tsps powdered gelatine; 4 tbsp orange juice; 2 oz granulated sugar; 8 oz cleaned, hulled strawberries; pint double cream, lightly whipped; 3 egg whites, whipped until stiff but not dry.
Put the gelatine and orange juice in the top of a double saucepan over hot water, or in a cup standing in a pan of hot water.
Set over a low heat and stir the gelatine constantly until it dissolves.
Add the sugar and as soon as it has dissolved, set the liquid aside to cool a little.
Meanwhile, press the strawberries into a large bowl through a nylon or aluminium sieve.
Stir in the gelatine mixture and fold in the whipped cream.
Cover the bowl and put it into the fridge for about 10 minutes, so that the gelatine just begins to set.
Fold in the whisked egg whites.
Pile the souffle high into a straight sided souffle dish, or into individual souffle dishes if preferred.
Put in the refrigerator to set for an hour or more.
Extra report
THE sun's out and hundreds of Merseysiders are flocking into their gardens for a good old barbie.
Let's face it, we don't get the chance to do it often unless you don your arctic-weather anorak and stand huddled round the coals to keep warm.
So we might as well make the most of it while we can.
It great to eat outdoors on warm summer days.
But there are precautions which must be taken to make sure the barbecue goes without a hitch and you don't get a roasting about the raw fare.
The food must be properly cooked to ensure the diners don't go down with food poisoning.
So here are a few golden rules to follow…just in case the sun keeps shining.
Play safe.
Overcook food rather than undercook it.
Marinate the meat for a couple of hours.
It tenderises it and helps it retain its natural juices.
This allows for longer cooking to ensure it is cooked right through.
If in any doubt and particularly when cooking for large numbers part cook the meat in the microwave or oven before placing on the barbecue to finish.
Don't cook over a fierce flame.
The outside of the food will cook before the inside.
Turn the food frequently for even cooking.
Barbecues vary, so test the food yourself before serving.
For an informal barbie with the children, stick to simple food like burgers or sausages.
A quick barbecue pud is to part split a banana, put half a Mars bar in the middle, wrap it in tin foil and cook over the flames for five to 10 minutes.
The Mars bar will melt into a gooey mess
…which tastes absolutely delicious.
IT'S A FACT
by Harold Wolfe
WAS Bill Shankly associated with Huddersfield Town when they were relegated in 1956?
Please list the other clubs he managed, apart from Liverpool.
Shankly was assistant manager to Andy Beattie when Huddersfield were relegated.
He took over when Beattie resigned the following season.
Shankly had previously managed Carlisle United, Grimsby Town and Workington.
I SAY that Rocky Marciano had 49 fights, of which 43 were won by knockout, six went the distance and there were no draws.
Correct.
Following the question about Everton playing for the Brylcreem Trophy, readers Neil Girard and John Wheatland point out that Everton beat Ipswich Town in a competition based on the Superstars TV programme in which players from both sides took part in various games of skill.
Gordon Lee was manager at the time.
Tranmere put light on rule frustration
By Ian Hargraves TRANMERE Rovers have won Football League backing for a resolution that would give the league power to order a match that has been abandoned, to be restarted at a later date at the point it was called off.
The resolution will be put to the League's annual meeting on Friday, and Rovers hope the fact that it now has official support, will be sufficient to have it passed despite anticipated opposition.
Anger
The reason for the resolution is the club's simmering anger over an incident last season, when the match at Swindon was abandoned after 61 minutes due to a floodlights failure, with Tranmere leading 2–1.
Under League rules, the game had to be replayed in its entirety, and Tranmere lost, to suffer a mighty setback in their drive for promotion.
Chief executive Frank Corfe said: ‘I thought the whole thing was a disgrace.
I know some people accused us of whingeing, but it was ridiculous that they were able to benefit from something that was entirely their fault.
‘It was their ground, and their floodlights that failed.
They had even been giving trouble during the morning and had still not been put right.
Power
‘Swindon benefitted from having two large gates, and I thought it was unbelievable that our supporters were expected to pay twice.
‘As the rules stood at the time, the League had no choice but to order the game to be replayed over a full 90 minutes.
Under our amendment, they would have the power to order that the game be replayed from the time when it was stopped.
‘I don't know whether we shall be successful, but we are optimistic.
After all, the existing rules are a charter for disruption.
‘We are not suggesting Swindon did anything deliberate, but the fact is that they are now in the Premier League.’
Rovers hope to reserve place page 54.
Lancs look to ace Neil for a knockout boost
LANCASHIRE looked to Neil Fairbrother for inspiration as they struggled to set a winning target in today's Benson and Hedges Cup semi-final against Leicestershire at Grace Road.
The England one-day expert hit an unbeaten 65 as Lancashire reached only 218 for six off their allotted 55 overs after they had been pegged back by Leicester's lively attack.
The home side set their sights on a Lord's return after putting in an excellent morning's work.
Last season's Nat West Trophy finalists took a firm grip on the game by reducing Lancashire, finalists twice in the last three years, to 119 for three from 39 overs at lunch.
Alan Mullally, Gordon Parsons with a superb spell of 8–4–13–1 and Vince Wells picked up a wicket apiece before the break.
Mullally gave Leicester an early boost, dismissing Lancashire's recalled opener, Gehan Mendis, during his third over after the visitors had won the toss.
When Gordon Parsons dismissed Mike Atherton (33) Lancashire were really struggling at 66 for two in the 27th over.
Leicestershire were celebrating again when Speak, having toiled 29 overs for 27 runs, skied Wells to Tim Boon at long-on.
After lunch, Graham Lloyd reached 34 before falling to Parsona, but Wasim Akram hit only five and Mike Matkinson was out for a lively 16.
YOU can get a fuller forecast of what the stars have in store for YOU today by calling Russell's Horoscope Hotline for YOUR Starsign.
Each call costs 36p a minute cheap rate, and 48p at other times.
Don't let this dispiriting, depressing Thursday get you down; seek out the company of light-hearted pals who never let anything get on top of them.
You need to be cooped up with a Jermiah like a hole in the head!
You're desperate to see some progress and push a plan to success, so today's delays will be all the more infuriating.
Look on the bright side, you're given a chance to review and revise your current plans and make any changes or adjustments necessary.
You'll be resentful of any time-wasting delays because you think you should be forging forward and making progress on all fronts.
Bide your time, be patient and take the opportunity to think through an ambitious aim.
Just as you were beginning to get to grips with the ins and outs of a new philosophy or idea your progress is barred.
Don't be impatient, assimilate the knowledge and learning you've gained so far and then when the time is right you will coast forward even faster.
There are hitches and hassles aplenty to contend with now and what makes it worse is that you're powerless to do anything except grumble and grouse.
Worst affected is your love life, so expect dates to be cancelled or romantic liaisons to be put on ice.
You won't want to extricate yourself from a personal promise or commitment, but you will begin to feel tied down and wish you'd never got involved in the first place.
Wednesday gives you a chance to review your position.
Whether you like it or not you're going to have to change your ways and alter your lifestyle.
Why?
Because if you don't a fresh ambition or optimistic plan will fall flat on its face.
You need a new routine to give you more time.
This is a dangerous time to be slipshod or careless about anything, for your mistakes will be ruthlessly and embarrassingly exposed.
Pay special attention to cash concerns and professional decisions.
Thursday could be a tiresome time thanks to the problems and difficulties making your neighbourhood a miserable place.
Make the best of a bad job and busy yourself doing something that'll keep you out of the firing line.
Saturn's brakes are well and truly on today as you are left to cool your heels with nothing special to do and no particular place to go.
Use this useless lull in your life to think through your next step or rectify a recent move.
Take a long hard, and penetrating look into the way you handle your life and the pattern of your partnerships in general.
You're in a cool and aloof mood Thursday so this could be the ideal time to take a practical decision.
You are given a much needed breathing space to sit back and assess what progress you've made so far in life and where you're likely to go from here.
Don't waste time by avoiding difficult issues.
Many of your values, ideas and attitudes are set to change over the next twelve months.
You must take a more mature, philosophical view of the world and you'll be less quick to condemn and more tolerant of others.
Telroc tennis treat
M ANY readers will be delighted to see this mid-1930s picture (above) of one of the Telroc Lawn Tennis Club's pre-season socials at West Derby Village Hall.
It comes from Major Harold (Bill) Corlett, of Ainsdale, a former secretary of Birkdale Golf Club, who became manager of America's famous golf club the Augusta Club, Georgia.
The background to the tennis club began in 1929.
Harold, William Snowden (now a retired bank manager), Albert Graham (retired building contractor) and Alan Bennett (who became a schoolmaster and died in war service with the RAF) were all chums at St.Margaret's School, Anfield,(now located at Aigburth).
With only ninepence in their pockets, they founded an old boys' association that went on to include a thriving club (albeit minus clubhouse), a sports field and four football teams competing in the Zingari and Old Boys Associations' leagues.
They also ran a tennis section, starting with one court (later two) at Almonds Green, West Derby and followed with hard courts at Tynwald Hill, Stoneycroft, and ‘a super location at the tram terminus, Muirhead Avenue East, where there were six grass courts.’
Eventually, when interest in running the tennis club waned, Harold took it over and ran it as his own business.
He called it ‘Telroc’(his surname backwards).
‘We specialised in many happy social events in addition to tennis,’ says Harold, who would like former members to contact him with a view to holding a reunion.
His address: 106 Pinfold Lane, Ainsdale, Southport, PR8 3QG .
ENGLAND TEAM:(v USA in the opening US Cup fixture in Boston tomorrow is:
Woods (Sheff Wed), Dixon (Arsenal), Pallister (Manchester United), Palmer (Sheffield Wednesday), Dorigo (Leeds United), Clough (Liverpool), Batty (Leeds United), Ince (Manchester United), Sharpe (Manchester United), Ferdinand (QPR, Barnes (Liverpool).
Tour clashes too tough for the refs
THE way things are going, any Rugby Union player who has kept himself fit during the summer, can expect a sudden telephone call inviting him to join either the Lions or England on tour.
The list of casualties in New Zealand has become truly horrific, with one player following another onto the plane home, and plenty of others needing a bit of attention like the 12 stitches Stuart Barnes had put in his face after the game with Southland.
There is no suggestion that this latest spate of injuries has anything to do with deliberate dirty play, but one gets the impression that things are now so tough that the referees just leave the sides to fight it out, while awarding penalties on a quota basis.
All good fun, and I don't suppose it has anything to do with the fact that an All Black can now earn up to £45,000 a year without sacrificing his status as an amateur.
Aces are low for Wimbledon
IT looks like being a distinctly sub-standard Wimbledon this year.
There are question marks hanging over the appearance of major grass court stars like Andre Agassi and Steffi Graf, while both Monica Seles and Guy Forget are already sidelined.
The probable absence of both Graf and Seles is particularly disappointing, because they have dominated the women's game for the last two years.
Who knows, the evergreen Martina Navratilova may now be poised to add to her staggering total of more than 160 major titles.
As for the men, it is hard to look beyond Pete Sampras and Stefan Edberg, unless Boris Becker suddenly hits top form on his favourite surface.
Any British challenge is likely to be confined to the Plate.
Going, going, gone…
Graham Gooch turns and instinctively pushes the ball away from his stumps (above), only to be given out as Australia captain
Allan Border (below) celebrates the dismissal.
ABA meeting
THE ABA holds a meeting for all coaches at Kirkdale Community Centre tonight (7–8pm).
Welsh ace Gibbs joins casualty list after victory
By Terry Cooper
SCOTT GIBBS became the British Lions' latest casualty in the jinxed centre positions during a messy 34–16 victory over Southland today.
The Welsh centre will be out for 10 days after bruising ankle ligaments, and his injury means the Lions have only one fit centre Jeremy Guscott after the injuries last weekend to Scott Hastings, who is returning home, and Will Carling.
It is becoming increasingly essential that Carling recovers from his strained thigh muscle in time for Saturday's first Test against the All Blacks.
There was further bad news on the injury front both stand-offs received head wounds.
Rob Andrew went off with a bang on the nose which needed an X-ray, although it was later revealed that there was no fracture, while his replacement Stuart Barnes had 12 stitches in a head wound caused by a stray boot.
The Lions ran into similar refereeing trouble as in Auckland in the second match, conceding 15 penalties during the second half.
Stamping
The opening half contained several episodes of foul play, including a dreadful double stamping by Mark Tinnock on Richard Webster.
Mike Teague felt compelled to punch the wild Tinnock away and was in turn punched.
Referee Mike Fitzgibbon did not have a clue what had happened, but fortunately New Zealand's best referee, David Bishop, was on the touchline.
Tinnock was penalised, but in England he would have been sent off.
Lions captain Gavin Hastings said: ‘It was very frustrating.
The referee obviously made up his mind that penalties were to be given.’
Lions manager Geoff Cooke said: ‘It was pretty boring.
We cruised to a big lead without getting out of bottom gear and continuity was difficult to obtain after half-time.’
When the Lions should have been exerting control from a position of 31–3 ahead with 28 minutes left, it was Southland who did the scoring and the Lions' only score in that final period was a drop goal from Tony Clement.
Hastings collected four penalties in the opening half, three of them from 50 yards down the strong wind.
The Lions scrum was consistently wheeled, but they put their act together twice in the 21st and 30th minutes, a pushover try being prevented illegally and the referee awarding the Lions a penalty try that Hastings converted.
Then the Lions controlled a scrum-five which turned into a maul, allowing lock Andy Reed to score.
But easily the best Lions' movement of the match came when Tony Underwood and Gibbs made breaks to allow Clement to go on a weaving run for a converted try.
Sparkling
But by this time Southland had started scoring.
Simon Culhane kicked two penalties and the wings Jimmy Cormack and Phil Johnston were sent in after sparkling movements.
How Gooch put on a display of naked courage
CAPTAIN FANTASTIC
JOHN Major, Graham Gooch and Graham Taylor have had a lot in common over the last week, with the latter two probably coming under even more public pressure than our beleaguered Prime Minister.
It is a measure of the importance we now attach to sport, that although few either know or care who the latest Minister of Sport is, we pay our national team bosses far more than members of the Cabinet.
Everything seems to have gone wrong for poor old Gooch since his marriage broke up, culminating in that bizarre dismissal on Monday, but he does at least have one big advantage over the other members of the trio.
Unlike them, he does have the chance to come out and lead his troops in person, purging any doubts about his leadership with the sheer, naked courage of his performance.
Whatever one feels about his captaincy at Old Trafford, nobody could possibly do other than admire a man who went on to bat for more than five hours, immediately after suffering a truly horrific hammering in the field.
Unfortunately all the evidence of the last 12 months suggests that while Gooch's batting ability remains invaluable, England would do better under a more imaginative skipper, if one could only be found.
Mike Gatting will probably get the job this winter, but I doubt if either he or the two younger contenders, Mike Atherton and Alex Stewart, are quite up to the task of masterminding a major English renaissance.
If it's any consolation to Gooch, Allan Border was in a very similar situation not so long ago, and he came through with flying colours.
Unfortunately, at the time he was a good deal younger than Gooch is now.
GRAHAM GOOCH…under pressure
No loyalty from Glenn
GLENN Hoddle's almost instant decision to walk out on Swindon and join the much richer Chelsea is not unexpected, but still a little disappointing.
His former club, who grabbed their place in the Premier League via a 4–3 play-off final victory over Leicester City, would probably have been a prime candidate for relegation in any event.
But player/manager Hoddle's departure has made it pretty well certain.
I may be a little naive, but it would have been nice to see a man mentioned as a future England manager demonstrate that he understood the importance of loyalty.
I cannot imagine he is terribly short of money.
Moran dropped short of glory
REPUBLIC of Ireland manager Jack Charlton has dropped Kevin Moran for today's World Cup clash with Latvia in Riga, just five games short of Liam Brady's 72-cap Irish record.
Charlton, as expected, recalls Aston Villa's Paul McGrath but the slightly surprising choice as his partner in central defence is Middlesbrough's Alan Kernaghan, who wins only his fifth cap.
McGrath, who made his peace with Charlton after failing to join the squad for the game in Albania two weeks ago, is the only change from the team that won that match 2–1 in Tirana.
It means another big question mark against the Ireland future of Moran, the 37-year-old Blackburn Rovers defender who has twice made comebacks after announcing his retirement from the international arena.
But Charlton explained the choice of Kernaghan by saying:’ I've got to think of the future.
Alan is just 26 and it's probably purely that which has got him my vote.
‘Kevin is not written off.
He has been playing well and we might well need him again.
It has been a very difficult choice for me this time.’
Kernaghan, seeking a transfer this summer from relegated Middlesbrough, said:’ I'm pleased and relieved because I blamed myself for the goal Albania scored against us in the last match.
‘I feel sorry for Kevin.
It's his age that is against him, but he's helped me a great deal since I came into the Irish squad.’
Kernaghan, who has actually won schoolboy caps for Northern Ireland added: ‘I've been given a big chance now to book my ticket for the World Cup finals in America and I'll do everything I can to take it.’
Full-back Terry Phelan was injured in training but expects to be fit for the match.
Republic of Ireland: Bonner (Celtic); Irwin (Manchester United), Kernaghan (Middlesbrough), McGrath (Aston Villa), Phelan (Manchester City), Houghton (Aston Villa), Townsend (Chelsea, Capt), Keane (Nottingham Forest), Staunton (Aston Villa), Aldridge (Tranmere), Quinn (Manchester City).
Subs: to be named.
I'll fight on — Foreman
GEORGE FOREMAN is ready to carry on fighting after his defeat by Tommy Morrison in Las Vegas on Monday night.
Foreman, 44, who lost a unanimous decision to Morrison, 20 years his junior, said immediately after the fight for the WBO heavyweight title, that he would probably retire.
But later he said: ‘If the public thinks I deserve to fight for the title again and one of the champions would give me a title shot, I'll come back.
I don't want to end it like this,’ said Foreman, who won the world title in 1973 from Joe Frazier and lost it in 1974 to Muhammad Ali.
SCOTT HASTINGS, the
Lions and Scottish centre who broke his cheekbone against Otago last weekend, rejoined the Lions yesterday keen to play rugby again as soon as possible.
‘It's early June now and I don't see why I can't be playing when the season starts in Scotland in September,’ said Hastings.
‘It was a bad injury and I needed a four-hour operation.
But I feel fine now.
I will be going home on Monday after the first Test.
‘I know there was speculation that my career was over, but at 29 I am sure I can play in the 1995 World Cup.’
Hastings, brother of tour captain Gavin, was driven to Invercargill from Dunedin yesterday and proved he had lost none of his usual high spirits.
When the tour liaison officer offered his driver 50 NZ dollars petrol money, he reached into the official's wallet and plucked out another 50 dollar note.
Wounded Lions
Tourists are plunged into Test turmoil
THE LIONS injury crisis worsened yesterday as Scott Gibbs suffered an ankle injury and both Rob Andrew and Stuart Barnes received head wounds in the messy 34–16 over Southland.
With the first Test against the All Blacks now only three days away, the Lions have only one fit centre Jeremy Guscott.
Welshman Gibbs, who was stretchered off near the end of an ill-tempered match with bruised ankle ligaments, will be out of action for at least 10 days.
And, with Scott Hastings returning to Scotland next week after his horrendous cheekbone fracture, the Lions desperately need Will Carling to recover from his thigh strain to partner Guscott in the Test.
The Lions used all three back replacements.
Andrew, the original stand-off against Southland, received a blow on the nose and his replacement Barnes was kicked in the head and needed 12 stitches.
Gibbs and Andrew had X-rays, which revealed no broken bones.
Barnes believes he will be fit for the Test but it would be a major risk playing him.
The injuries may give Tony Clement, who scored the only backs' try for the Lions, a reward for his versatility.
Play-anywhere Clement could become a Test Lion in the centre, even though he was chosen as full-back understudy.
Tour manager Geoff Cooke, however, is hoping Carling will be fit.
The match was marred by first-half fighting and 15 penalties against the Lions in the second half.
Tap-dancing
The worst episode of foul play was perpetrated by Southland lock Mark Tinnock, whose feet went up and down repeatedly in a tap-dancing motion on Lions' flanker Richard Webster during a ruck.
Inevitably, referee Mike Fitzgibbon did not see the incident and needed to be helped out by a touch-judge.
Equally inevitably, Tinnock was only penalised and not sent off.
And, of course, every official New Zealand or British sitting in the stand claimed not to have witnessed a gross act of violence, right in front of their eyes.
Webster said he had ‘no complaints’.
‘It did not hurt.
I really feel I'm a Lion in New Zealand now that I have been trampled on,’ he said.
Tinnock went around assaulting Lions, as did No.8 Rata Smith, who, incredibly, received the ‘Fair Play’ Award.
The Lions went badly off course after compiling a 24–0 half-time lead against second division opposition and captain Gavin Hastings said: ‘It was very frustrating.
The referee obviously made up his mind that penalties were to be given.
We were penalised all the time.’
The referee was on the Lions' side in the first half, before finding that their style did not suit him.
Hastings landed three 50-yards plus penalties down wind and a shorter penalty while the Lions forwards created two close-range tries.
The first was a penalty try awarded when local scrum-half Bobby Murrell strayed offside as the Lions were pushing a scrum over the line.
Hastings converted.
Lock Andy Reed was driven over following a scrum-five for the second.
The only classy Lions' back move of the second half came when Tony Underwood and Gibbs made sharp breaks and gave Clement the chance to burst through tackles for a converted try.
Clement added a late drop-goal, but Southland won the second half with two penalties from Simon Culhane and tries from wings Jimmy Cormack and Phil Johnston.
Welsh Tennis review WELSH junior international Claire Bullen Evans of Prestatyn launched her bid for the womens' singles crown at the North Wales Open Tennis Championship in Prestatyn with a no-nonsense performance.
Schoolgirl Claire romped to a straight sets win in her fourth round tie with Anglesey's Bonnie Williams and without conceding a game.
Ocsian Williams of Arfon battled through three tough sets before going out to George Wilshier of Manchester in a marathon second round encounter in the mens' event.
Results: -Men's singles second round: Gavin Thomas (Carnarfon) beat Ocisan Jones (Carnarfon) 4–6, 6–2, 6–4; George Wilshier (Manchester) beat Ocisan Arfon 6–3, 3–6, 6–3.
Women's singles third round: Bonnie Williams (Holyhead) beat Joanne Attwood (Mold) 6–1, 7–6.
Fourth round: Claire Bullen-Evans (Prestatyn) beat Bonnie Williams 6–0,6–0.
Men's doubles first round: Kevin Goodall and James Mawrey (Prestatyn) beat Nigel Jones and Adam Jones (Rhyl) 6–1, 6–3; Albert Lewis and Nigel Jones (Colwyn Bay) beat Gavin Elliott and Phil Richards (Prestatyn) 4–6, 6–0, 6–3.
Mixed doubles: Danielle Morris-Jones (Rhyl) and Arwyn Pierce (Ruthin) beat Vanessa Brown and David Lee (Prestatyn) 6–2, 6–3; Nicola Jones (Prestatyn) and Doreen Bennett,(Mold) beat Viv Spencer and Gavin Spencer,(Prestatyn) 6–1,6–2.
British No 2 Chris Wilkinson tamed one of the fiercest serves in tennis to dump Wimbledon finalist and fourth seed Goran Ivanisevic out of the Stella Artois championships at Queen's yesterday.
The 23-year-old Southampton player, ranked a lowly 176 in the world and only appearing in the tournament on the back of a wild card, rocked the world No 6 with 6–3, 3–6, 6–3 triumph.
Forlorn
And Glasgow qualifier Ross Matheson, the lowest ranked player in the tournament at 563, completed a memorable day of British giant-killing when he uprooted Swiss 13th seed Jakob Hlasek 6–3 7–6.
But fifth seed Ivan Lendl's hopes of mastering grass looked more forlorn than ever after he was dispatched in straight sets by Byron Black of Zimbabwe.
The match between Wilkinson and Ivanisevic saw the Briton take the sting out of the giant Croat's fearsome serve with some brilliant returns.
And Matheson's victory over former world No 46 Hlasek, was easily the finest result of the Scotsman's career.
STELLA SUCCESS: Chris Wilkinson gave British tennis a boost by taming Goran Ivanisevic at Queens Club
Nick returns with a ton to boost Oswestry seconds
It's ding-dong Bell
NICK BELL marked his return for Oswestry seconds by hammering a fine 103 against St Georges reserve division One of the Furrows Shropshire League.
Bell's magnificent knock took Oswestry to a daunting 233–4 in which Andrew Clarke weighed in with 58 and Mike Robinson 35.
But the home side had to settle for a winning draw after St George's finished on 175–7, despite a 2–55 return from 16-year old slow left arm bowler Howard Jones on his debut.
Skipper Dave Owen helped Llanidloes seconds salvage a losing draw at title contenders Cae Glas seconds with a well crafted 60 in reserve division three.
Llanidloes finished on 127–9, in which Sean Southern bagged 2–34 in 25 overs, while Cae Glas had earlier compiled 191–5 thanks to Jeff Potts (65) Mike Evans (37) and Ben Hipkiss (31).
Gerald Wilkinson hit 41 as third placed Newtown seconds chalked up a six-wicket success over Much Wenlock seconds.
Damage
Wilkinson received good support from Jason Jones (24) and Eric Edmunds, who finished unbeaten on 21, as Newtown eased past the home side's 146 all out.
Medium pacers Keith Powell (5–42) and Phil Jones (4–58) had done the damage in the Wenlock innings.
Oswestry thirds, pressing for honours in the reserve second division, suffered a 13 run reverse against Albrighton.
Skipper Andrew Leggat took 5–28 on his comeback after injury and left armer Allan Morris 4–33 as Albrighton were bowled out for 122.
David Timmis held firm with 26 in 44 overs but received little support as Oswestry were sent back for 109.
John Steer struck an unbeaten 24 to guide Oswestry fourths to a two-wicket win against British Sugar in the reserve division four.
Steve Norcross had earlier taken 5–24 as British Sugar were bowled out for 99.
Northop snub as Flint give youth a fling
Young guns!
Preview by Mike McEvoy
FLINTSHIRE launch their North Wales county championship challenge against Montgomeryshire at Hawarden Park on Sunday without any Northop Hall players.
Team manager, Buckley's Tudor Jones, has decided to entrust Flint's bid to recapture the crown to youth and that means no places for Hall's heavyweights.
‘They seem more committed to the club than the county which is the way they want it but I have my own opinion on that,’ said the highly respected Jones.
‘I have to be concerned with Flintshire and so I am biased, but I still feel very confident that we have a squad of players capable of serving us really well this season.’
Northop Hall have consistently encountered problems when county fixtures have clashed with club successes at local and national level.
Jones has become increasingly loathe to change his side to accommodate individual clubs' fortunes, and that has brought a first county call-up for young Hawarden Park batsman Darrell Bowden.
Matthew Needham, the prolific Connah's Quay run maker, is another to break through, together with Buckley's opening partnership of Chris Lamb and Phil Davies.
Back
Welsh international Russell Wiseman, who has graduated from the schoolboy ranks in Mold to become a key player with Boughton Hall, links up again with his former Mold team-mates wicketkeeper Brian Williams and the most prolific wicket taker in North Wales this year, Nigel Morris.
Also back on the scene is veteran spinner Keith Madeley, who has changed his mind after retiring from the county set-up
Flintshire: Gareth Ryan (St Asaph) captain, Chris Lamb (Buckley), Tudor Hughes (St Asaph), Phil Davies (Buckley), Darrell Bowden (Hawarden Park), Matthew Needham (Connahs Quay), Brian Williams (Mold), Russell Wiseman (Boughton Hall), David Hodgson (Buckley), Keith Madeley (St Asaph), Nigel Morris (Mold).
Champion Mac gets European team call by Tim Channon.
MIKE MACARA from Llandudno Maesdu and Ian Rowlands of Old Padeswood will fly the flag for North Wales golf in Europe next month.
Welsh open stroke play champion Macara is the only northerner in Wales' six-man squad for the European men's team championships in Czechoslovakia from July 1–4, although Wrexham's Matthew Ellis is also named in the squad as a non-travelling reserve.
Ian Rowlands has been named in the Welsh under-18s team for the European boys' team championships taking place in Denmark from July 8–11.
Squads:— Welsh men: Richard Dinsdale (Newport), Bradley Dredge (Bryn Meadow), Craig Evans (West Monmouthshire), Richard Johnson (Cardiff), Mike Macara (Maesdu), Calvin O'Carroll (Brynhill), Matthew Ellis (Wrexham).
Welsh boys: Stuart Austerberry (Radyr), Russ Davies (Pennard), Peter Hunt (Haverfordwest), Mark Lucas (Brynhill), Steven Raybould (Pontypridd), Ian Rowlands (Old Padeswood).
Simon Wilkinson of the St Melyd club won the Aberconwy trophy for the third time in four years with a 72 hole total of 296 in his last amateur tournament before turning professional.
He held off a late charge from Rhuddlan's Chris Davies who had a hole in one at the 179 yard 13th in his final round to take runners-up.
Former Hawarden member Seve Giardina now at Berkhampstead led the field going into the final round but fell away badly after a triple bogey six at the par 3 eighth.
Trouble
Wrexham's Chris Platt was well in contention until he had a triple bogey seven at the 17th where he put his tee shot into bushes and trouble.
Wilkinson also had problems at the 17th with a six, but then birded the 18th for a level par 72 to finish three shots clear of the rest of the field.
Wilkinson will now try to qualify for the British Open as he aims for a European tour card later in the year.
Conwy fought back brilliantly from two down with two to play to beat Flint in a sudden death play-off to reach the northern semi-finals of the Welsh victory shield foursomes.
The Conwy pairing of Gary Macara and Roy Williams won the last two holes to level the match and then won at the 19th after Flint had put their tee shot out of bounds.
Conwy now play Rhuddlan who beat Abergele 2 & 1, while Prestatyn beat St Deiniol (Bangor) 4 & 3 and now play Mold, 2 & 1 winners against Rhyl in the other semi-final.
Llandudno professional Simon Boulden picked up the £360 winner's cheque at Bull Bay's annual pro-am tournament with a two-under par round of 69 which included birdy twos at the short 10th and 12th holes.
Betterball Stableford results: 1.
D Reidford (Hawarden) & A Kirkham (Wrexham) 43, 2.
E Dawson & I Kelly (Llangollen) 41, 3.
T J Morris (capt) & J Waugh (Chirk) 41, 4.
T Palin & C Watson (Hill Valley) 40.
Graham Walker fired a five under par 65 to win Newtown Golf Club's captain's day medal, finishing two shots ahead of Norman Davies on 67.
Len Vickery finished third after carding a score of 68a round which helped him secure the past captain's cup.
Cash blow has Barnet
by Robert Beasley
DEBT-RIDDEN Barnet are once again on the brink of closure.
Manager Edward Stein admits he fears the worst after Barnet's company secretary Stanley Beller warned him that the club would be put into liquidation inside 24 hours unless ‘things are sorted out.’
But with Barnet owing £1.3 million and the players and staff unpaid for three weeks, Stein believes it is unlikely the crisis can be averted.
Indeed, Stein went as far as to wish his players ‘all the best for the future.’
The PFA acted by paying the players' wages and bonuses for winning promotion to the second division.
Stein said yesterday: ‘Mr Beller told me told that if things were not sorted out by tomorrow, the company would cease trading and I do really fear that this is the end.
‘He actually blamed the players for all the troubles saying it would be their fault if the club went into liquidation.
‘But that's rubbish.
Over the past few years, they have continued to perform successfully for this club even though they didn't know whether they would end up having their wages paid.
Departure
’ The reason this club is £1.3 million in debt is down to some bad, bad financial decisions.’
The departure of controversial chairman Stan Flashman and Barnet's promotion raised hopes that the troubles at Underhill were finally over.
But while Flashman may have now stood down, he remains the major shareholder at the club and the legacy of his reign remains untouched.
The club are already struggling to pay £75,000 in fines to the Football League after being fined £50,000 for not keeping proper financial books.
And they were also hit by a further £25,000 fine for an ‘irregular payment’ to a player.
The bulk of the £50,000 is still outstanding while Barnet are appealing to the FA over the £25,000 fine.
The League have been alerted to the current problems by disgruntled players at Underhill and spokesman Ian Cotton said: ‘We are very concerned about Barnet's financial situation and will be looking to the club for assurances that they will be able to meet their commitments.’
If Barnet do go out of business it could spell joy for Walsall and Halifax.
New League rules say that the next highest-placed team will be promoted should a side be able to fulfil it's obligations in the higher league.
That could see Walsall, who finished fifth in the third division, go up and Halifax, who finished bottom of the table, stay in the League after all.
The French League yesterday began court proceedings over bribery charges involving Marseille.
Allegations have been made by players from Valenciennes that they were offered bribes to let European and national champions Marseille win a first division match on May 20.
Jacques Glassmann said he had received a phone call from a Marseille official and a player before the game, which Valenciennes lost 1–0.
Nature walk
GEOLOGY and the sandstone wildlife of Frodsham will be examined on a walk organised by the Cheshire Wildlife Trust this evening.
The walk leaves from Beacon Hill car park at the start of the Sandstone Trail (7pm).
Stitch that
DRESSMAKING classes continue this afternoon at the Rock Chapel, Farndon, from 1.30pm till 3.30pm.
For further details contact Mrs J Adams on .
Church meets
METHODISTS celebrate today at Brown Knowl Chapel.
The annual gathering of the Whitchurch Circuit will feature singing by youngsters and adults.
Open ground
THE gardens of Cholmondeley Castle are open to the public today (noon-5.30pm) as are those at Reaseheath College, Nantwich (2–4pm).
BEAUMARIS A, last season's champions of the Bangor and District Bowls League, have climbed to within one point of the familiar top spot again in brilliant fashion.
Fulfilling an outstanding fixture at Benllech A, the 1992 title winners romped home with an easy 11–1 victory.
As a result Beaumaris have raised their current points total to 53 as they harass the leaders Llanfairpwll who are on 54.
Third placed Bangor City A are on 43 points.
Although Beamaris overpowered Bennlech most of the matches were relatively close, with their best performers being Hefin Jones and Trevor Ashenden, each with 21–10 cards.
Lanfairpwll top the Anglesey Bowls League with six wins in a row the latest a 12–0 whitewash of visitors Bennllech.
Llanfairpwll dominated all the action with David Evans returning the best card, 21–6.
Surprisingly, the league's second versus third clash was also one sided, Cefni A hammering Holyhead A 11–1 to keep in touch with the leaders.
Cefni two best wins came from Andrew Hughes 21–3, and Elwyn Parry 21–4.
Four bowlers from Anglesey and Arfon have qualified for the Welsh Merit championship in Rhyl next month.
The early qualifiers gunning for places in the British Championship are David Williams and Derek Caughter (both Bangor City) and Andrew Stanley and David Mathias (both Beaumaris).
Results:— Bangor and District Bowls League: Bennlech A 1 Beaumaris A 11.
Anglesey Bowls League:Benllech B 4 Menai Bridge A 8, Cefni A 11 Holyhead A 1, Holyhead B 8 Cefni B 4, Lanerchymedd 9 Beaumaris 3, Llanfairpwll 12 Benllech A 0, Meani Bridge B 4 Peibio 8.
Lindsay lets fly
RUGBY LEAGUE chief executive Maurice Lindsay has defended the International Board's decision to exclude Wales from the 1995 World Cup.
Welsh manager Jim Mills is angry and has vowed to fight the International Board's decision, but Lindsay responded by saying: ‘The credentials for the inclusion of World Cup debutantes Fiji, Tonga and Western Samoa are first class.
‘They all have league structures in place.
This is not the case with Wales.
‘We are committed to the development of rugby league in Wales and will be monitoring their progress on the international scene during their home fixtures with New Zealand and France next season.’
MAURICE LINDSAY: backs Wales' exclusion
Stage 10 from Sheffield to Liverpool is 116 miles, ending with eight laps of a city centre circuit.
The Liverpool route will take the riders along Scotland Road into Byrom Street and William Brown Street and along Commutation Row.
The riders will then race along Churchill Way South into Dale Street and Castle Street and along North John Street to Victoria Street.
The main finishing dais will be set up on the cobbled William Brown Street.
TOP rugby coach Mostyn Richards has made a plea for all clubs to back fully the Mid-Wales District representative team.
Richards, who has just completed his first year as the Welsh Rugby Union development officer for Mid-Wales, wants to see the representative side going from strength to strength.
‘The only way that's going to happen is if it receives wholehearted support from the clubs,’ he said.
‘I would like to see players and coaches making it their priority.
‘I want everyone to really want to play for the side.
But at times last season I felt it took second place from a few other clubs.’
Richards has yet to appoint a coach and manager for the district team next season but hopes the jobs will attract a number of applicants.
Historic castle set for ‘rebuild’
By Peter McBride Daily Post Correspondent
A REPLICA of a famous castle is to be rebuilt, it was disclosed last night.
Plans to restore the remains of Liverpool Castle a replica of King John's fortress have received a £40,000 cash boost.
Restoration work is scheduled for completion this August when the ‘new’ castle will be unveiled and opened to the public.
The project marks the fulfilment of a dream for one of the city's legendary entrepreneurs, the late Lord Leverhulme, who started the rebuilding work on the replica castle in 1912.
Work was never completed and when the wealthy founder of the Port Sunlight-based Lever Brothers died in 1925, the project remained unfinished.
Since then the replica castle has fallen prey to vandalism and decay.
Situated on the shores of Rivington reservoir, near Wigan, it is now owned by North West Water.
‘It represents an important piece of both Liverpool and Rivington's history,’ says project manager Phil Luff.
‘Our first priority is to make the castle structurally sound and safe by securing the stone work and clearing away the rubble.
‘Then we will rebuild parts of the castle walls and clean off the graffiti.’
The original castle was built by King John in 1235 on the present day site of Castle Street in the city centre.
THE future of Barnet Football Club is again in jeopardy with the debt-ridden club under threat of closure today.
Manager Edward Stein fears the worst after Barnet's company secretary Stanley Beller warned him the club would be put into liquidation inside 24 hours unless ‘things are sorted out.’
Emergency action
But with Barnet owing £1.3million and the players and staff unpaid for three weeks, Stein believes it is unlikely the crisis can be averted and went as far as to wish his players ‘all the best for the future.’
The Professional Footballers' Association took emergency action yesterday to intervene and pay the players' wages and end-of-season bonuses for winning promotion to the Second Division.
Stein said yesterday: ‘Mr Beller told me if things were not sorted out by tomorrow the company would cease trading and I do really fear this is the end.
‘He actually blamed the players for all the troubles saying it would be their fault if the club went into liquidation.
‘But that's rubbish.
No one could ask for more from these players.
Over the past few years, they have continued to perform successfully for this club even though they didn't know whether they would end up having their wages paid.
Uproar
’ That says everything about their professionalism and I wish them all the best for the future.
The reason this club is £1.3million in debt is down to some bad, bad financial decisions.’
Meanwhile, Exeter manager Alan Ball and his Second Division club have been charged by the FA over last month's end-of-season uproar.
Bristol referee Bob Hamer was rescued by Exeter player Ronnie Jepson after being knocked to the ground by angry fans following a last-minute penalty award in the 1–1 draw against Port Vale.
Ball also had to be restrained.
Now the England World Cup winner could start next season with a touchline ban after being charged with bringing the game into disrepute.
His team may be ordered to play behind closed doors if they are found guilty of failing to control their fans.
BRITAIN'S No.2 tennis player of 1992, Andrew Castle, is making a post-Wimbledon trip to Liverpool to coach the finer points of the game to novices who may never have seen a racket.
Former Davis Cup player Castle has become a well respected coach since leaving the tennis circuit and his involvement in the city-based event is sure to increase attendance at the city-based event.
The Parks tournament at Calderstones Park, which starts on July 19 and goes on for a week, will have the added bonus of the Dunlop tennis roadshow, with Castle and other leading coaches topping the bill.
‘To my knowledge, it's the only event open to everyone on Merseyside this year,’ said tournament organiser Joe Connor.
‘It's a bad sign but lack of sponsorship is one of the major factors.
‘We're delighted that Dunlop have got involved but the tournament would have taken place no matter what.
We are committed to it and it is our intention to make it the centre of a big programme of tennis in the city.’
The City Council, anxious to back tennis now that a new complex is to be built in Wavertree, insist there is an emphasis on the novice players in this year's Parks event.
‘This tournament is open to everyone,’ adds Connor.
‘But we particularly want to attract players who don't compete at club level.
Hopefully Andrew's involvement will help attract people whatever their talents.’
Nineteen different events from junior singles to veterans doubles will make this tournament one of the biggest of its kind and Connor says he is expecting an entry of around the 350 mark.
‘When we say it's an open tournament we really mean it,’ he said.
‘Everyone who applies to enter will be accepted.
We have 32 grass courts and these will cater for a larger turnout than we could imagine.’
Andrew Castle, now retired from the ATP tour, has replaced his racket for a broadcaster's microphone.
This week he's at Queens Club with Sky for the Stella Artois tournament, then he moves on to the Manchester Open on June 14.
Wimbledon fans will remember Castle's fine court one performance in 1986 when he led Matts Wilander two sets to one before going down in five.
Now he is one of British tennis' great ambassadors and his commitment to the sport will be evident at Calderstones next month.
The tournament caters for all ages and talents and entry forms are available from the Council's sports development department at Steers House, Canning Place in the city centre (225 6313).
Sally takes the pace
SALLY Gunnell reckons she now knows what it feels like to be a marked woman but Britain's golden girl insists she will be able to cope with the new-found pressure when she launches her world championship campaign in earnest in Rome tonight.
The one-lap hurdles queen has quickly discovered that winning the Olympic title has not just brought her fame and fortune.
The down side has included a touch of envy from rivals determined to bring the Barcelona champion down to earth.
‘It's true everyone expects me to go out and win all the time,’ says Gunnell, who has managed to remain as unspoilt as she was before her Barcelona triumph.
‘I'm obviously a target.
It puts so much more pressure on but it doesn't panic me.
‘I'm realistic enough to know I'm going to have good days and bad ones.
‘In Rome, I'll be going out to win but I'm looking on it first and foremost as the chance to get the feel of the hurdles again.’
It will be the first of only six 400m hurdles races she is planning in her build-up to the world championships in Stuttgart and she will be up against Vera Ordina, the 25 year-old Russian Olympic finalist who Gunnell has identified as a major threat this summer.
Linford Christie also runs his first major individual race of the summer in tonight's Golden Gala and will be looking for the sort of confidence-booster he gained at the same meeting last year.
Boost
On that occasion, he ran a sizzling 10.11secs to win the 100m and finished third in a blanket finish in the 200m behind winner Frankie Fredericks and runner-up Michael Johnson.
Christie will have his work cut out when he again faces the same pair, as well as Nigerian Olapade Adeniken, in tonight's star-studded 200m.
Wigan's David Grindley can boost his chances of winning the European Cup 400 metres spot if he can produce a fast run tonight against Olympic bronze medallist Samson Kitur.
Join the club!
Rovers reward as ‘closed shop’ opens its doors
Report by PETER JARDINE
TRANMERE ROVERS yesterday won a six-year battle to join the Pontins League.
Rovers' reserve side was admitted to the Pontins second division at a special meeting at the expense of Wigan Athletic.
And the decision means Tranmere's second string will finally have quality opposition after years of languishing in the Midlands Senior League.
Rovers applied for a Pontins League place along with Stockport County, while Preston and Wigan were up for reelection.
Preston polled 28 votes, Tranmere 21, Wigan 15 and Stockport 2 votes.
Rovers chief executive Frank Corfe said: ‘We are absolutely delighted to have made it in after six years of trying.
‘We won the Midlands Senior League this year but the only way you can get into the Pontins League is through the vote.
‘It has been a closed shop for years but we conducted extensive lobbying of other clubs this time.
‘We produced a brochure and the decision went in our favour with Wigan dropping into the Midlands Senior League.
‘It is a massive boost for the club because we need to have our first team squad playing the best quality of opposition possible,’ he said.
‘Games can be cancelled in the Midlands Senior League for the slightest reason and the opposition is not up to standard.
Boost
’ We feel we will be good for the Pontins League and it will be good for us.’
The decision is a boost for Warwick Rimmer, who brings on the young players at Tranmere, reserve coach Ray Matthias and manager John King who has often been forced to play senior players coming back from injury against youth teams.
King is currently on holiday but Mr Corfe added: ‘John will be delighted when he hears about this because he feels that getting into the Pontins League is, in the long-term, almost as important as getting into the Premier League.’
FRANK CORFE: ‘A massive boost’
Saints alive!
ST Aloysius, of Huyton, the 1987 champions, beat Prescot's champions BICC three frames to one in last night's first round match in the LiCat Merseyside Top Snooker Team Championship at Derby Lane.
St Aloysius' John Timson made the best series break of 44.
Garston champions St Christopher's, Speke, had a fine 3–1 win over NALGO of St Helens.
Tomorrow Snookers Club, Warrington, play Civic Club, Birkenhead, and Crosby champions Corals meet Cherryfield Social Club of Kirkby.
Seaside fury over plastic tourists
A PLAN to put lifesize plastic tourists on Southport seafront has been branded a waste of taxpayers' money.
Tony Quirke, spokesman for Southport 2000, a group aiming to restore the town's Victorian splendour, said the money Sefton Council plans to use for ‘environmental art’ would be better spent on improved security and lighting.
Three-dimensional figures, inspired by Donald McGill's saucy postcards, are being tested for an environmental art scheme.
Chief planning officer Tim Cox said the scheme aimed to make Southport ‘more interesting.’
SMILES BETTER
GO on, have a laugh it really is good for you!
It's the one highly infectious condition that doctors The expert view is that laughter is medically beneficial.
It involved 14 groups of facial muscles and it releases chemicals to the brain that help combat depression.
Laughter is an exhilarating exercise which, like deep breathing, massages the internal organs.
Scientists believe human laughter has an evolutionary origin and is linked with monkeys who grin and display the same shoulder-shaking signs.
So how does this wonderful tonic actually work?
Dr David Taylor from the Department of Physiology at Liverpool University explained: ‘Physically, when we laugh, we take in a deep breath and let it out again in short sharp bursts.
When we breathe in we contract our pectoral muscles, the muscles in the wall of our chest, and our diaphragm.
‘When we laugh the air out, our abdominal muscles do most of the work.
Most people, when they laugh, also exercise more than 14 groups of muscles in their face.
A deep belly laugh is good exercise!’
Dr Taylor said the reason why a good laugh makes you feel better is still a mystery.
‘We know that an hour of mirth is enough to lower our adrenalin levels and also lower the levels of the hormones which the body releases during stress.
So laughter is a good antidote to stress.
‘Some people have also said that laughter helps the body release chemicals in the brain that are our own internal morphine supplies.
So things really don't feel so bad after a good laugh.’
Professor Hugh Foot, Head of Psychology at the University of Strathclyde wrote a book on humour and laughter some years ago with Professor Tony Chapman at Leeds University.
Professor Foot said: ‘Laughter and the ability to enjoy a sense of fun is taken as a sign of healthy well-being.
People who have a sense of humour are regarded as being balanced and stable compared to people who are depressed and anxious and have difficulty seeing the funny side of life.
‘If you can laugh at yourself and recognise your own folly it is a healthy sign.’
We also use laughter to mask our incompetence and to cover for possible failure.
Michael Argyle in the department of Experimental Psychology at the University of Oxford has written several books and articles on laughter's close companion, happiness.
Happiness, he says, is greatly enhanced by close relationships falling in love rates high on the happiness scale as does a satisfying job.
But people without a job who have found fulfilling voluntary work or an absorbing hobby also score highly.
And what about money?
Well according to Mr Argyle, money plays a small part but does not have as big an effect as people might think.
So next time you're thinking of reaching for the tablets or slumping miserably into despair, try having a good laugh instead.
It costs nothing, there are no harmful side effects Some of the great smilers Mona Lisa, Bruce Forsyth, Terry Jones, Meg Ryan, Princess Diana, The Joker (Jack Nicholson).
IT'S the Echo's Fun Fortnight and today we examine exactly what it is that makes you smile, laugh and be happy! by Philippa Bellis
Luckless Lineker's
GARY LINEKER will be out of action for at least six weeks with a broken toe, his Japanese club announced yesterday.
A spokesman for Nagoya Grampus Eight said doctors had confirmed that Lineker suffered a stress fracture of the second toe on his left foot during Saturday's defeat by Osaka Gambas.
‘It will take him six weeks to recover so we expect him to be out of action for longer than that,’ the spokesman added.
It was the latest blow in what has proved an unhappy first season so far for the former England striker and Grampus in the new J.League 10-club championship, launched on May 15.
Frustrated
Before he limped off during Saturday's game, the league's highest paid player had scored just one goal in six matches.
Deprived of top-class service by an inexperienced midfield, Lineker has often appeared a lonely, frustrated figure in the midst of the opposing defence.
But in an interview published last week in the English-language Daily Yomiuri, he expressed confidence that the goal drought would soon end.
‘Frustration is part of a soccer player's life in Japan, England or anywhere else,’ Lineker said.
‘I know the goals will come.’
What was worrying him more, he said, was the language barrier which prevented him from linking up with his Japanese teammates.
‘Communication is difficult but I can sort of make myself understood in some ways.
But there's always going to be a problem until I learn the language.’
POSTSPORT: Focus on an athlete running out of time
Injury woe throws Backley
STEVE BACKLEY yesterday wrote off his chances of being fit to compete in this month's European Cup and admitted that his continuing injury woes are causing him major concern.
Britain's javelin maestro confesses he has no idea when he will be back in action as he struggles with a stubborn injury to his throwing shoulder.
And, casting an eye towards the world championships in August, Backley insisted that if the injury hung around he would have no hesitation in pulling out of the year's big event in Stuttgart to prevent further damage.
Problems
’ It's too early to start talking in heavy terms but the injury is a big concern,’said Backley.
‘To be honest, I couldn't even say when I'm going to be back but I've got to realistically think I won't make it for the European Cup.’
The 24-year-old, who injured himself while winning bronze at last year's Olympics, has not thrown competitively for 10 months since.
He had a successful operation in December but suffered problems with his shoulder socket while training at the start of last month.
He has been having rehabilitation sessions at Lilleshall, attempting to strengthen the joint, and says: ‘The whole thing is very frustrating but I have to be philosophical about it.
‘Hopefully, the problem is on its way out.
Actually, I could throw at the moment but I couldn't afford the shoulder seizing up the next day and suddenly finding I'm out for three months.
‘The world championships are in the forefront of my mind and I have to be patient.
I'm not writing anything off because I've had problems like this in the past which have suddenly turned round in a week.
‘But this one is probably more stubborn than any I can remember.
It's early days but if the injury hung around and I thought that pulling out of the world championships was a necessary course of action to prevent more serious problems, I'd do it without hesitation.’
FRUSTRATION:
Steve Backley
BASEBALL — American League: Baltimore 3 Oakland 2, Toronto 4 California 2, Milwaukee 5 Seattle 3, Chicago 7 Detroit 3, Kansas City 8 New York 3, Texas 8 Minnesota 2.
National League: Cincinnati 12 Montreal 3, Philadelphia 7 Houston 5, New York 7 Chicago 2, Atlanta 4 San Diego 0, Florida 5 Los Angeles 3.
TODAY WORLD CUP
GROUP THREE Latvia v Republic of Ireland 4.30…
US CUP USA v England 11.00…
Batty welcomes Liverpool link
LEEDS UNITED star David Batty would be ‘honoured’ if Liverpool manager Graeme Souness tabled a bid to sign him.
But the 24-year-old midfielder, who plays for England against the USA tonight, insists he wants to stay at Elland Road.
Batty's name has regularly been linked with Liverpool during the last two or three seasons.
And along with Wimbledon defender John Scales he remains one of Souness's top transfer targets.
Batty, speaking on Leeds clubcall, said yesterday: ‘The speculation has been going on now for a couple of years.
It always seems to crop up.
‘If Liverpool were interested I would be honoured.
It is always nice to be linked with a club as big as they are.
‘But as I've always said, I'm happy at Leeds and the position is no different now.’
Batty wins his 12th cap against the USA and Leeds boss Howard Wilkinson knows that to allow such a popular player leave would doubtless spark fury in Yorkshire similar to when Eric Cantona defected to Manchester United.
Nigel Clough, meanwhile, will play his first game as a Liverpool player today for England.
Graham Taylor selected Clough as it became clear that Nottingham Forest have finally signed a transfer form which makes the striker the first summer addition to Souness's squad.
But the fee is still likely to go to an independent tribunal with Forest apparently asking £3m for their former manager's son.
DAVID BATTY: ‘Honoured’
CLOSE CALL: Neil Fairbrother narrowly avoids playing on while (inset) umpires John Hampshire and Nigel Plews deliberate on Fairbrother's run out scare
by Mitchell Gray
WALES skipper Gareth Llewellyn hopes his side can reach their target of six wins out of six when they bring down the curtain on their African tour against the South African Barbarians in Windhoek today.
‘We came out here looking for a 100per cent record and I'll be disappointed if we go back with a defeat,’ said Llewellyn.
The Welsh camp realises their tour finale is likely to prove their toughest game yet, especially as the South Africans have assembled a powerful team.
There are three members of the Transvaal team which won the recent Super Ten Series, five current Springbok squad members and three Namibian internationals.
Different
’ All the talk is they are going to be very big and physical but we're not going to worry about the opposition,’said Llewellyn.
‘We are trying to play a different type of game and it's taking time for some of the players to get used to it.
‘Players have tended to get isolated and run away from support.
Against a side of this quality that could be very dangerous.’
Wales have made five changes one of them positional from the side which beat Namibia 38–23 at the weekend.
Neil Jenkins switches from outside-half to centre to allow Adrian Davies to reclaim the number ten jersey and Ian Jones comes in on the right wing for only his second tour outing.
Up front, John Davies reclaims the tight-head prop slot and Mark Perego takes over from his injured Llanelli club-mate Lyn Jones on the open side.
Wales: M Rayer, I Jones, N Boobyer, N Jenkins, W Proctor, A Davies, R Moon, M Griffiths, A Lamerton, J Davies, P Davies, G Llewellyn (capt), S Davies, E Lewis, M Perego.
GRAHAM TAYLOR has laid his England future at the uncertain feet of Nigel Clough and John Barnes against the Americans in Boston tonight.
Rookies Lee Sharpe, Les Ferdinand and Gary Pallister are also named for a game in which defeat is unthinkable.
With the folks back home still seething after last week's World Cup disaster in Norway, Taylor's future is on a knife-edge.
He has made five changes from Oslo, with Barnes and new Anfield team-mate Clough teaming up hoping to give their beleaguered manager breathing space.
Speak easy
KIRSTY SPEAK and Sarah Burnell shared the lead with French challenger Delphine Bourson after the first of the two qualifying rounds for the Centenary women's British Open golf amateur championship yesterday.
All three came in with two under par rounds of 73 over the Royal Lytham and St Annes on a day when only eight players bettered a demanding par.
NO television replays were needed to separate the sides at Grace Road yesterday as Lancashire breezed into the Benson and Hedges Cup Final.
Eight changes are out of the question for Lord's next Thursday but England must do something to stop the rot before all hope of regaining the Ashes disappears for another two years.
Fairbrother survives a trial by TV
NEIL FAIRBROTHER admitted last night he was ‘a bit jittery’ while waiting to learn whether television would give him in or out.
Fairbrother's anxious moment came when he had made 43 during yesterday's Benson & Hedges Cup semifinal victory against Leicestershire at Grace Road.
Going for a second run, Lancashire's captain was at full stretch as Alan Mullally's return from long leg thudded into the gloves of wicketkeeper Paul Nixon who took off the bails.
The Lancashire skipper then had to wait for a tense two minute trial by television to decide whether he could continue his burgeoning innings.
Third umpire Chris Balderstone studied TV replays before getting on his two-way radio to inform colleagues Nigel Plews and John Hampshire that Fairbrother was safely home.
The deliberation took two minutes and Fairbrother said: ‘I felt in my own mind that I was in.
But I must admit I was a bit nervous.
‘It's one thing being in favour of a third umpire, as I am, but a little bit different when you are the batsman waiting for a verdict!’
Fairbrother went on to hit an unbeaten 64 and Lancashire roared to their third Benson & Hedges Cup Final in four years as Wasim Akram destroyed Leicestershire.
Akram bagged the last five wickets in nine balls to clinch a 110-run victory.
‘He's the best all-rounder in the world,’ said Fairbrother.
New boy Hunt sees training in action
By Malcolm Handley and David Banks
NEW Employment Secretary David Hunt turned the spotlight on training yesterday when he visited a number of sites in Cheshire and Merseyside.
On his first official engagements since inheriting the post in last week's Cabinet reshuffle, the Wirral West MP officially opened Castle View House, Runcorn, the new Employment Department building.
He then visited the Birkenhead headquarters of Cewtec, before heading for Liverpool.
At GPT's Edge Lane headquarters Mr Hunt saw an exhibition organised by Merseyside Tec showing training and development from school through to work.
He was given first-hand information on the quandary facing youngsters as they choose a career.
Eight-year-old Judi Ellingham of Eastcroft School told the Secretary of State:’ I want to be a footballer, or a violinist or a firefighter.’
After meeting pupils of Maghull High School, Mr Hunt was introduced to Merseyside Tec's Future programme which sets out a career and training plan for clients.
Mr Hunt presents a training voucher to Antony O'Brien, of Birkenhead Park High School, and a vocational award to Andrew Jones of A. J. Motors
Wilkinson puts Goran to the sword
BRITISH No.2 Chris Wilkinson tamed one of the fiercest serves in tennis as he dumped Wimbledon finalist Goran Ivanisevic out of the Stella Artois championships at Queen's yesterday.
The 23-year-old Southampton player, ranked a lowly 176 in the world and only appearing in the tournament on the back of a wild card, rocked the world No.6 with 6–3 3–6 6–3 triumph.
And Glasgow qualifier Ross Matheson, the lowest ranked player in the tournament at 563, completed a memorable day of British giant-killing when he uprooted Swiss 13th seed Jakob Hlasek 6–3 7–6.
But Ivan Lendl's hopes of mastering grass looked more forlorn than ever after he was dispatched in straight sets by Byron Black of Zimbabwe.
Wilkinson cooly ignored the gulf in rankings, not to mention the intimidating figure of Ivanisevic at the other side of the net, pointing out after his second round triumph: ‘He is only human, like anyone else.’
He added confidently: ‘This is a breakthrough.
I don't know what is going to happen in the next few weeks, but I know I'm capable of getting right up there.’
The stunning upset landed Wilkinson the second biggest pay day of his career with a guarantee of nearly £5,400.
Only his progress to the second round of Wimbledon last year proved more lucrative.
The contrast between Wilkinson and Ivanisevic on court could hardly have been sharper the towering 6ft 5ins Croat against a relatively feeble-looking Briton, coughing regularly between points after picking up a cold.
Matheson's first round victory over former world No.8 Hlasek, now down at 46, was easily the finest result of the Scotsman's career, guaranteeing nearly £3,000 in prize money treble his previous best cheque.
Lendl's 6–2 7–6 second-round defeat to Black, after a first round bye, was the latest blow to the 33-year-old's faltering career, having lost in the first rounds of the French and Australian Opens already this year.
Lindsay defends Wales snub
RUGBY LEAGUE chief executive Maurice Lindsay has defended the International Board's decision to exclude Wales from the 1995 World Cup.
Welsh manager Jim Mills vowed to fight the International Board's decision.
But Lindsay responded by saying: ‘The credentials for the inclusion of World Cup debutante Fiji, Tonga and Western Samoa are first class.
‘They are associate members of the International Board in their own right and all have league structures in place.
This is not the case with Wales.
The International Board have always recognised Great Britain as the World Cup entrant since the tournament's inception in 1954 with only one exception when England and Wales were entered in 1975.’
Fans pay price for
LONDON soccer fans pay more to see the game than anyone else in the country.
According to Football Trust figures, Arsenal, Tottenham and Chelsea top the admission league table, all with average turnstile charges in excess of £9.
Manchester City (£5.48) offered the cheapest average top-flight entrance fee, while near-neighbours Oldham hit their supporters with a 67 per cent increase to an average £6.39, after winning promotion.
The statistics, based on the final season before the Premier League split, show an average turnstile increase of 17 per cent and reveal ticket prices rocketed four fold since 197879 compared to a 2.6 per cent rise in the general retail price index.
Barrier
Altogether clubs raked in more than £133 million in gate receipts from domestic games during 199192 compared to the previous year's £114m.
Manchester United banked nearly £7m from all matches at Old Trafford, while Arsenal were the only other club to break the £5m barrier for League games alone.
The Gunners were edged into third spot overall by Liverpool, whose £5.8m haul included £1.3m for their FA Cup final triumph.
Clubs, however, are also paying out a lot more and transfers surged to an alltime high of £75m, a staggering 63 per cent increase on 90–91.
Division One teams accounted for £46m of the business as they adopted a Premier League or bust approach and clubs from the Third and Fourth Divisions made a net profit of more than £7m on dealings.
That helped meet police costs that rose by 16 per cent to a record level of £9.28m, although the Trust did weigh in with a £2.24m contribution.
The police earned their keep with arrests 20 per cent up at 5,006, but figures highlighted a varying police approach.
Liverpool topped the arrests league with 258 offenders followed by Preston's 223.
But Anfield ejections (14) were well down a list headed by Arsenal and Aston Villa with 279 each.
by Rob King
GRAHAM TAYLOR has laid his England future at the uncertain feet of Nigel Clough and John Barnes against the Americans in Boston tonight.
Rookies such as Lee Sharpe, Les Ferdinand and Gary Pallister are also named for a game in which defeat would be not so much unthinkable as indefensible for the beleaguered England manager.
Forty three summers ago, England suffered their greatest humiliation when the likes of Tom Finney, Billy Wright and Stan Mortensen lost 1–0 to the USA in the 1950 World Cup.
With the folks back home still seething after last week's World Cup disaster in Norway, Taylor's future is on a knife-edge in his opening US Cup game in New England's Foxboro stadium.
If he loses he still won't quit but the FA could be forced to throw him overboard in a latter-day Boston tea party.
Favourite
Taylor makes five changes from Oslo, foremost among them yet another chance for his favourite Barnes, this time used as a front-line partner for QPR's Ferdinand.
Gary Pallister and Carlton Palmer form a new defensive partnership and in comes Barnes's new Anfield team-mate, £2 million Nigel Clough, starting his first game since last September's friendly defeat in Santander.
Taylor has given the former Nottingham Forest midfielder 10 caps in his three years without ever finding a niche for the 26-year-old.
Now, in the absence of team conductor Paul Gascoigne, Clough has a chance to stake his claim for the autumn World Cup climax…if Taylor survives at the home of the New England Patriots.
Taylor believes that Clough's departure from the City Ground could be the making of him, saying: ‘This could be the turning point in Nigel's career.
‘There have been certain views about Nigel all the time and I've sometimes been criticised for not playing him.
The view I've always expressed is that he is an extremely good footballer.
‘He's now made a brave decision in many respects, because he's been brought up playing for one club in one way.
‘He's an intelligent boy, very sensitive and he's seen other players leave Forest and things not go well for them.
He's given that a great deal of thought.’
Group Two rivals Holland entertain leaders Norway, and England are praying for a Scandinavian win to increase their chances of making the World Cup finals.
Wembley runners-up Sunderland were similarly rewarded and topped the Second Division income chart with £2.9m, followed by Kevin Keegan's Newcastle (£2.3m).
Latest flop adds
Test chiefs ponder on major shake-up
GRAHAM GOOCH has insisted that wholesale changes are not on England's agenda despite a sixth consecutive Test defeat.
But the problem facing Ted Dexter and his selectors when they meet this weekend could hardly be bigger.
For only THREE members of England's team beaten at Old Trafford by Australia are sure-fire certainties to play at Lord's when the Ashes battle resumes next week.
Gooch's future as captain remains far from certain but he proved in Manchester once again that his batting is indispensable.
Spinner Peter Such, close to tears on Monday night after England's 179-run defeat, will be able to look back on his own performance with pride when the disappointment of collective failure fades a little.
And fast bowler Andrew Caddick, despite just taking one wicket, showed enough hostility and character to be given an extended trial.
As for the other eight including several who started this summer as bankers arguments can be made against them all.
Suspicion
Mike Gatting, a debatable choice for Old Trafford even by his own admission failed twice.
Falling to Shane Warne's ‘Wonder ball’ and then the final delivery of day four merely underlined the suspicion that he is permanently jinxed.
Robin Smith was once again embarrassed by spin and Graeme Hick all at sea whenever Merv Hughes targeted his chest.
Mike Atherton helped Gooch to lay solid foundations in both innings, but contributions of 19 and 25 are not compelling reasons for re-selection.
And Alex Stewart seemingly cannot successfully combine wicket-keeping and batting.
As a batsman only, he averages in the mid-40's at Test level and just 20 when doing both jobs.
England have been waiting for Chris Lewis to establish himself as a genuine allrounder since he made his debut in 1990.
But while his second innings batting on Monday looked as though it might save the match, his bowling was desperately short of aggression and conviction.
And Phillip DeFreitas, a late replacement for injury victim Alan Igglesden, never threatened to match Hughes's lion-hearted performance on a slow pitch.
Eight changes are out of the question for Lord's next Thursday but England must do something to stop the rot before all hope of regaining the Ashes disappears for another two years.
At least one top left-hander in the top six looks a must to help combat Warne's leg-spin-and the odds on David Gower returning are shortening almost by the hour.
As for the attack, England would benefit from Neil Foster's return after a four-year absence if only they can be convinced of his fitness.
AGONY AND
ECSTASY: Despair for Graham Gooch (below right) as his dismissal is confirmed but it's joy for the Aussies after they celebrate victory
DERBYSHIRE, the poor men of cricket, struck it rich yesterday when they crushed Northamptonshire by eight wickets to reach next month's Benson and Hedges Cup final at Lord's.
Down to a skeleton staff, half a million pounds in debt and with the smallest county staff cut to the bone by an injury crisis, Kim Barnett's side worked a miracle.
Barnett himself hit 61 after Devon Malcolm and Dominic Cork combined to restrict Northants to 210 all out.
But it was forgotten England batsman John Morris (48no) and Chris Adams (53no) who clinched victory with three and a half overs to spare after an unbroken third wicket stand of 95 in 12 overs.
Barnett said later: ‘In terms of finances, resources and staff Lancashire and us are poles apart.
And for us to get to the final without an overseas player is a great achievement.’
Akram special crowns Lancs' Wonder Wasim
Report by DAVID LLOYD
NO television replays were needed to separate the sides at Grace Road yesterday as Lancashire breezed into the Benson and Hedges Cup Final.
They booked their fourth trip to Lord's in as many years, crushing Leicestershire by 110 runs with Wasim Akram destroying any lingering home hopes of a dramatic victory.
The unstoppable Pakastani all-rounder took Leicestershire's last five wickets in the space of nine balls at a personal cost of just two runs.
Doomed to failure
Twenty fours earlier he produced a similar spell to bowl Lancashire to championship victory over Surrey at The Oval.
Yesterday, however, his deadly spell was merely a generous layer of icing on the cake with Leicestershire looking already doomed to failure at 86 for five.
Needing 219 on a poor pitch, Wasim put them out of their misery 15 overs ahead of schedule.
Fairbrother became the first batsman in this country to be given not out by a third umpire after TV replays of a close run-out incident had been studied.
The camera showed that the little left-hander had just beaten Allan Mullally's return from long-leg and ‘extra’ umpire Chris Balderstone, the former Leicestershire player, passed on the news to his two colleagues in the middle.
As is turned out, Gold Award winner Fairbrother 43 at the time had already done more than enough to guide his side towards a commanding score on a pitch where stroke play was never easy.
Team-mate Graham Lloyd (34) and Leicestershire's James Whitaker (33) were the only other batsman able to look remotely comfortable.
That rapid demise merely underlined the value of Neil Fairbrother's unbeaten 64 and last night the Lancashire captain was not only savouring thoughts of a trip to Lord's on July 10 but also smiling about his entry into cricket history.
I know how he feels — Robson
FORMER England boss Bobby Robson yesterday spoke of his sympathy for beleaguered successor Graham Taylor and told the critics: ‘Let's get round and support him.’
Robson, who was taunted by cruel headlines like ‘In the name of God, go!’ during his stormy years in soccer's most unforgiving job, said he knew exactly how Taylor must be feeling after the Norwegian nightmare.
‘My feeling is one of sympathy for him,’ said Robson in an interview with Radio Five.
‘I know what he's going through.
My advice to him is to not pay too much attention to it, be tough and carry on.
He needs some help but, knowing Graham, he'll handle it well.’
Robson, now manager of Sporting Lisbon in Portugal, watched Wednesday's game on television and insisted: ‘I wouldn't say it was a disaster.
A disaster is when a plane falls out of the sky and 296 people get killed.
‘It damages our pride and reputation but there are still games left.
We have to be patient and give the guy a chance.’
Ironically, on the day when the knives were out for Taylor, his main support came not just from the man he took over from in July 1990 but also from Terry Venables, a potential successor.
Venables insists Taylor should be allowed to stay in charge of England's World Cup campaign for the three remaining make-or-break qualifiers.
Problems
’ We can certainly win those three remaining games and if we do, the picture might be totally different,’said Spurs' chief executive.
Venables laughed off suggestions he should take control now to rescue the nation's American Dream.
‘I've got enough problems as it is!’ he joked.
Aussie ace revives painful memories as Ashes battle gets underway
MERSEY FOOTBALL GIANTS RACE TO SIGN MARVIN THE MARVEL
Schoolboy soccer ace faces tough decision
By Daily Post Correspondent
A YOUNG soccer star has battled back from serious injury to the brink of major success.
Ten-year-old Marvin Grugel has to decide whether to don the red or blue, with both Liverpool and Everton fighting for his signature.
Yet Marvin was in callipers for seven months after he fell 30ft from the roof of a building.
The accident happened two years ago when he was trying to retrieve a football from the roof of the city's derelict Rialto Ballroom.
It gave way under his weight.
But now he has made a full recovery to the delight of his proud parents, Fred and Denise.
The youngster has been offered a place in both the Liverpool and Everton schools of excellence.
Marvin, of Underley Street, Liverpool 8, plays with the Great Easton Under-10s' team in the South Merseyside Junior League.
The team is based around the pub of the same name in the area's Mill Street, which has a collection of trophies behind the bar.
Manager Lenny Jameson said Marvin, who plays in central midfield, was an exciting prospect.
‘He has done brilliantly, considering what a bad injury he had and he has set a lot of people talking.
‘We have told him to take his time before deciding who to plump for,’ he added.
Marvin is a Liverpool fan but played for an Everton junior side last season and has still not made his mind up for whom to sign.
Many believe he is in an enviable position of having to choose between the city giants.
His father, Fred said: ‘He faces a difficult choice.
I only wish I had that opportunity when I was his age.’
Red or blue?
Ten-year-old Marvin Grugel just can't decide Picture: DAVE KENDALL
BATTLE of the Atlantic celebration letters continue to pour into the Echo office.
Today we print a further selection received from Merseysiders and people from all over the country as well as abroad…
Planning early and a are the secrets of a successful wedding
Big day can be so very expensive
Traditionally, if you wanted to get married, the chap was supposed to ask the girl's father for permission before dropping down on one knee and popping the question.
These days you need to get down on both knees and ask permission of the bank manager.
The fact is that getting married can cost an arm and a leg, not to mention a cake, three bridesmaids and an organist.
The list of possible expenses is longer than the aisle in most churches.
Let's concentrate on the wedding and set aside minor matters like setting up home together, buying furniture and the honeymoon.
The basic cost of a simple civil service is £35 but that rises to £52 if one or other partner lives in a different district.
You can be married more quickly with a special licence but that will cost you £80.
As soon as you start to add in churches, organs, choirs, flowers and gowns, the figures start going up.
Based on a survey of Brides And Setting Up Home readers, the average cost of a wedding is now £6,344 without the honeymoon.
Church extras such as organ, choir and bellringers can help inflate the basic cost for the banns, service and marriage certificate from £82 to an average of £262.
‘The recession may have made a difference in the sense that people are being more realistic about what they can afford,’ said the magazine's associate editor Fenella Willis.
‘But it doesn't stop people wanting a white wedding and working hard to make it happen.’
There are ways of cutting costs and still having a wonderful wedding.
The sooner you start planning, the better.
Ideally, save for a wedding rather than start your married life with wedding-related debts that need to be cleared.
The sooner you start planning the better.
Organising a wedding in less than six to nine months can be done, but it means more pressure on your nerves and possibly your pocket.
The best reception venues tend to be booked well in advance.
You need to decide whether you are simply looking for premises and plan to do your own catering, whether you want to hire a professional catering service, or choose a hotel or restaurant that can provide the venue and the food.
Get a number of different quotations, not only for different venues but for different types of meal.
Don't forget to ask about VAT and service charges.
Alcohol can make a big difference to the final bill so take care choosing wines and think of opting for a good sparkling wine rather than Champagne.
‘There has been a big swing to pay bars, which may also be linked to the recession,’ said Fenella Willis.
Take time to plan your bridal outfit, but don't forget the groom.
Hire costs, or the price of a new, smart suit, should be built into your calculations.
Start looking for suits and going away outfits early hopefully, you may find a sale bargain or two.
Beware if you are going on a pre-wedding diet.
A dress that doesn't fit, no matter how cheap it was, counts as an extravagance.
A dress doesn't have to be a designer original to be beautiful.
Bridal shops and department stores also have a wide range of gowns, both in price and style.
‘You may know somebody who can make a dress for you, or help you make your own,’ said Fenella Willis.
Some questions should be considered together.
For example, how many bridesmaids you have not only relates to the look of the wedding but also its cost.
Take time working out your guest list.
Do you want to feed a few people sumptuously, or entertain masses of relatives and friends in a more modest manner?
Shop around for limousines and photographers, prices can vary but so can the service.
You may have a friend with a nice car willing to chauffeur you.
Similarly with photographs or video, but beware of relying on family and friends to take pictures unless you have total trust in their abilities.
Corners can be cut on flowers and remember, the flowers at the reception are going to be seen for a longer time than those in the church.
Brides And Setting Up Home magazine is full of suggestions but their most valuable piece of advice is undoubtedly start planning early.
Baby Andrew heads the queue for TB alert test