

NEW YORK, Wednesday, 10pm: WALL Street ended modestly higher, buoyed in part by rising bond prices.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 1.11 points to 3,511.65.
NYSE volume totalled 242.39 million shares, against 238.09 million in the previous session.
The NYSE's composite index rose 0.62 to 245.77.
Smart Sids
SMALL private investors are becoming increasingly smart bargain hunters by spotting firms on the recovery trail, says telephone stockbroker Sharelink.
Bargain bosses offer a great deal
By Anne Harrison THE SKILLS of out-of-work bosses are to be offered at cut-price rates in a bid to encourage local firms to look after their workers.
The jobless executives could be on hire for as little as £50 a week to firms who may not otherwise be able to afford to devote full-time staff to improving the skills of the workforce.
The idea is the brainchild of Chester, Ellesmere Port and Wirral Training and Enterprise Council which is looking for 15 companies in the region to take part in a pilot scheme.
CEWTEC's chief executive Alan Moody says the aim of the scheme is to encourage companies to become investors in people.
He added: ‘We are confident this innovative scheme will help create a more flexible and better trained workforce in the area.’
A pedigree of craftsmanship
ROVER is relying on tradition to sell its newest car, the 600 saloon, which battles for customers against the cheaper UK made Honda Accord.
For the cars share virtually identical body shells and both are powered by engines from Honda's Swindon plant where the Accord is also manufactured.
‘Rover touches’ on the Cowley-built 600 series include burr walnut trim, stainless steel sill finishers and a radiator grille reminiscent of older models.
The 600 is priced from £13,995 for the 620i to £21,995 for the top-of-the-range 623GSi which I tested recently.
Both Rover and Honda cars have a specification which includes electric windows and powered, heated door mirrors.
They share central locking and a stereo complete with electric aerial.
The Honda has metallic paint as standard while Rover fits an anti-theft alarm with engine immobiliser as standard.
I haven't driven the Accord yet but I was very impressed with the 623GSi.
And Rover is right: by no stretch of the imagination could it be called a replacement for the dogged Montego because it competes in a different class.
The four-door 600 is stylish from the outside and well-groomed around the cabin, though I didn't care all that much for the light coloured fascia trim the company expects to be popular.
Rover says the cabin ‘reinforces the image of British craftsmanship’ but some of the styling touches are a little at odds with parts also fitted to the Accord.
Honda make fine engines and the 2.3 litre unit provided plenty of smooth power.
Rover say the 600 is aimed at taking sales from, among others, the BMW 3-Series which it resembles.
I am sure it will but I also think that it will take sales away from the bigger, but less attractive 5-Series.
The 4-cylinder 16V DOHC 2259cc engine, mated to a four speed automatic gearbox, can push the 623GSi to a top speed of 134mph and takes 9.5 seconds to reach 60mph.
Despite its impressive performance, the Rover is not particularly thirsty.
In town, it only returns 23mpg but at a steady 56mph, it gives an amazing 40mpg and even cruising on the motorway, drivers can expect over 32mpg.
As befits a car that is going to appeal to businessmen, standard equipment is impressive driver's airbag, air conditioning, electric windows, electric sunroof, electrically heated and adjustable door mirrors, top quality stereo radio cassette with RDS, alarm with immobiliser, and anti-lock brakes.
I was surprised it had both a sunroof and air conditioning as they seem to me to cancel each other out.
30 jobs lost as firm closes
By Barry Turnbull A MERSEYSIDE engineering firm has folded today with the loss of 30 jobs.
Bosses at Reads in Bootle called in the liquidator after battling for more than a year against cash flow problems.
The decision was taken reluctantly by the company with a number of important orders on the books.
Bootle MP Joe Benton sent an urgent message to Board of Trade president Michael Heseltine in a last ditch plea for help.
Along with Merseyside MPs Peter Kilfoyle and Eddie O'Hara he was instrumental in securing a £50,000 development grant for the firm last year.
Tragedy
Mr Benton said: ‘Read's did seem to have a bright future as long as they could overcome short term cash difficulties.
‘It is always a tragedy when a firm in an area like Bootle is forced to close but especially in this case when they seemed to have things going for them.’
A company director recently asked that he be allowed to plough a £250,000 tax liability into the business while debts were paid off in instalments.
The request was rejected by ex-Chancellor Norman Lamont.
Here's something different
LOOKING for something a bit different?
What about this three bedroom detached property on the books of Halifax Property Services?
The house, which has gas fired central heating and double glazing, is situated in Ormskirk Road, Liverpool 9.
Accommodation comprises hall, lounge, dining room, inner hall, kitchen, three bedrooms and bathroom/w.c.
There is a small paved frontage and rear lawned garden.
PRICE: £72,000
A semi to smile about
HERE's a semi that could put a smile on your face.
Situated in Parlow Road, Liverpool 11, the three bedrooom property sounds ideal first time buyers, say Whitegates.
Gas fired central heating and double glazing are among the features.
At ground level is a porch, hall, lounge, dining room and kitchen.
Upstairs are the bedrooms and bathroom/w.c.
PRICE: reduced to £42,950
Much improved semi
THIS imposing four bedroom semi has plenty to offer, say Thompson Sloan.
The much improved property in Roby Road, Liverpool 14, has been rewired and a new roof has been fitted.
Gas fired central heating and secondary/double glazing have also been included.
Accommodation: porch, hall, lounge, dining room, morning room, four bedrooms, bathroom, w.c.
Average sized front garden and a large rear garden.
Brick garage.
PRICE: £79,000
Six of the best
FAMILIES searching for extra space should make a quick exit left to Barry Evans & Co.
They are handling the sale of this six bedroom detached property in Wood Lane, Huyton Quarry, Liverpool 36.
The house has four reception rooms ideal for the growing family.
Accommodation: hall, w.c., lounge, dining room, study, morning room, kitchen, utility room, six bedrooms, bathroom/w.c. and attic lounge.
PRICE: £79,950
On the terraces
HERE's an attractive three bedroom terrace property that will almost certainly attract plenty of fresh interest.
Whitegates urge an early inspection of the house, situated in Southbank Road, Liverpool 7.
Accommodation comprises: hall with wall mounted heater, two reception rooms each with fitted gas fires and fireplaces, a kitchen with range of units, three bedrooms and bathroom/ w.c.
PRICE: reduced to £29,995
Saddle up for the Paddocks
THIS extended three bedroom detached house has plenty to commend it, say Halifax Property Services.
Situated in Ayala Close, The Paddocks, Orrell Lane, Liverpool 9, the property will be of special interest to growing families: The 19 feet x 11 feet rear extension provides spacious ground floor accommodation comprising hall, cloaks, lounge, dining room, lounge and fitted kitchen.
Other features include gas fired central heating.
PRICE: £74,950
Insurance charges for old blasted
PROFITS RAP FOR COUNCIL ON LOANS
By Jules Stenson, local government reporter
COUNCIL chiefs have been accused of ‘creaming off’ fat profits from pensioners in house insurance commission.
Liverpool City Council made £70,000 profit under the scheme last year which was used to improve services.
Deal
The profits were made after people, mostly pensioners, took out mortgages with the council.
Under the deal, mortgage holders have to take out house insurance with approved council agents.
Age Concern in Liverpool claims that pensioners are paying up to 40% more than they should for their insurance.
Chief executive June Roberts said it could mean an extra £80 on pensioners' bills.
‘We have approached the council about this and it has just not moved,’ she said.
‘The insurance can cost £80 more than policy offered by Age Concern.
‘It distresses quite a few people when they find out the difference.
‘We would like to see the council address the issue seriously because it is affecting quite a lot of pensioners.’
Liberal Democrat Councillor Rosemary Cooper said she had received complaints about the policy, which she claimed the council used to ‘cream off’ commission from the insurance companies.
A council spokesman said mortgage holders were offered a choice of insurance companies.
Helping
She said a complaint over the policy was made to Local Government Ombudsman, who found in favour of the council.
She said council was helping people by providing mortgages to those who would not normally qualify.
Cllr Cooper (above) and Mrs Roberts
£2bn up
NORTHERN FOODS has passed £2bn sales thanks to the addition of Express Dairies and Eden Vale, which also helped a healthy rise in profits to £153.2m from £126.3m.
type for Brian Hill, please
Some jobs are to go when the Aberystwyth based family owned Cambrian News weekly newspaper places the paper's printing contract with another company, possibly in Swansea.
The decision by the Cambrian News board to close down the company's newspaper printing operation in Aberystwyth, after 103 years in the town, stems from plans to improve the quality of the paper to meet competition from other newspapers in Ceredigion, Montgomeryshire, Meirionnydd and Dwyfor.
With a combined weekly circulation for the various editions of just under 24,000, the company's managing director Robert Read said yesterday that the decision to seek printers elsewhere was taken because the company just could not justify spending around 2m (pounds) on new printing machines in Aberystwyth.
‘Contrary to rumours circulating in the area, the Cambrian News is not in financial difficulties, and we are simply placing the contract for printing the paper elsewhere because we cannot justify an investment of around 2m (pounds) for new machinery to go tabloid and bring in colour,’ said Mr Read, whose great grandfather established the company in Aberystwyth in 1890.
‘The loss of some jobs is inevitable, but our highly successful Cambrian Printers commercial operation will remain in Aberystwyth,’ he added.
‘Contrary to speculation, there are no plans to part company with the newspaper, and the editorial side will remain in Aberystwyth, where we have invested heavily in modern technology.
‘Some staff will be transferred to Cambrian Printers, where we are very busy, while others, possibly two or three, will be offered voluntary redundancy.
‘The decision to print elsewhere was a commercial one, for we have known for some time that the quality of our printing of newspapers leaves a lot to be desired, while our commercial printing side is first class.
‘The plain fact is we are a small independent company, and we just cannot afford to spend 2m (pounds) on new printing machines.
This is purely a financial decision to improve service to our customers.’
end…
‘It's a long-term resource and no short-term government should be able to close it down’
Profits up
THE benefits of splitting up a business were demonstrated when Racal Electronics reported trebled annual profits.
Racal unlocked security business Chubb last year, floated off mobile phones group Vodafone in 1991 and on its own made annual pre-tax profits of £51.5m, up from £16.1m.
Shares hit: Wall Street's 21-point fall sent the FTSE down in early trading.
Drugs companies continued to weaken because of gloomy news about Aids treatments.
Sterling tonic: Devaluation of the pound boosted profits of life sciences group Amersham International, which makes radioactive products, to £26.3m from £20.7m.
Pound up: The pound rose to 1.5230 dollars and 2.4829 marks from 1.5182 dollars and 2.4655 marks at the previous close.
Top job: Jeremy Peat, economic adviser to British and overseas governments, has been appointed chief economist at the Royal Bank of Scotland.
Danger of the growing gap as money rolls in at top
TRANMERE Rovers go into tomorrow's Football League annual meeting hoping that a move to prevent clubs playing on a Friday evening is defeated.
‘We believe that, in general, the home club should be allowed to play when they want,’ said chief executive Frank Corfe today.
‘Every club is in a different situation, and with the economic situation so difficult, it makes sense to play games when most people are able to attend them.
‘We have always tried to co-operate with other clubs when they have wanted to switch games and would like them to do the same for us.’
Tranmere's fear is that a move inspired by the Pools companies, who pay the League a great deal of money each year, will result in clubs being forbidden to switch fixtures away from the traditional Saturday except where television or the Police demand otherwise.
‘There seems no objection to Premier League clubs switching games to all sorts of strange days and times,’ said Mr Corfe.
‘I don't see why our fixtures are so different.
‘I agree totally that where fixtures are moved to another day, supporters should be given plenty of notice so they can make their plans well in advance.
‘But if we have our way, we would be playing the bulk of our home games on a Friday evening, when they do not clash with either Liverpool or Everton.
‘The Police generally support us on this, but I have to say the problem does not seem quite as serious now as it used to be, and they did not mind us frequently playing Saturday games last season.’
Tranmere are not expecting any dramatic changes this time round, 12 months on after the massive upheaval that launched a new set-up last season.
‘In the end, I don't suppose it made all that much difference,’ Mr Corfe admitted.
‘We were playing much the same clubs as before in a very similar competition.
‘The main difference, especially where the Premier
League is concerned, is the amount of money coming into the game and the danger that over a few years it could widen the division between the haves and the have-nots.
‘It is more important than ever that we manage to make that little extra effort and get into the top flight.
‘We have managed to get our reserves into a better class of football after a six year campaign.
Now we have to repeat that with the first team.’
Mr. Corfe is unimpressed with a League plan to impose a levy on transfers and performance money, which would be held individually on behalf of each club and used for items like ground improvements.
‘I just don't see the point of it,’ he explained.
‘We are quite capable of running our own piggy bank, without asking someone else to do it for us.’
IAN HARGRAVES Frank Corfe
…
Friday battle
Council admits poll tax claim blunder
By David Jones Daily Post Staff
A COUNCIL has admitted it blundered by sending a former employee a letter claiming magistrates had granted it a liability order over alleged non-payment of poll tax.
Wrexham Maelor Council conceded that no such order had been made against pensioner Iorwerth Jones.
Mr Jones, of Herbert Jennings Avenue, Wrexham, appeared at the town's magistrates' court last month over a disputed demand for £60.26 allegedly owed in respect of his 1992–93 community charge.
He said the case against him had been adjourned after he said he believed he owed less than £12.
But last Friday he was astonished to receive a letter from the council saying a liability order had been granted by the magistrates and demanding payment of the £60, together with £15 court costs.
‘I am very upset that the council think they can get away with sending out a liability order before magistrates have even considered the case,’ said Mr Jones, a part-time council security man for over five years.
‘Presumably the next step would have been to send bailiffs in.’
A council spokeswoman said: ‘The liability order was issued in error and has been withdrawn.
‘It is now up to Mr Jones to come in to see us to try to sort it out.
If we can do that, he will not have to pay court costs.’
Cutting the cost
HOW'S this for a bargain?
Children often want to buy their dads something special on Father's Day, but often find most things are out of the range of their pocket money.
Chances are brains are working overtime now trying to think of something to buy that won't cost the earth but he really will appreciate.
Special
Asda may have helped a number of youngsters make up their minds this year with their special offer on Lichfield aftershave lotion.
Normally £19.50, they have reduced the price to £4.95 a gift most children's pocket money will stretch to.
The offer ends on June 19, so you'll have to make sure you get there before the big day on June 20.
FINISHED cattle marketings fell by 16 per cent in Great Britain during the week commencing May 31.
Steer and heifer prices remained firm throughout the week, however, young bull prices weakened slightly.
The provisional clean cattle price for the Monday-Thursday period was calculated at 143.16p per kg lw, up 0.45p on the previous week.
Store cattle: Medium weight (300–399 kg) Charolais cross store steer prices increased by 3.8p to average 160.8p per kg lw in the week ended May 29.
Hereford cross steer prices fell by 4p to 144.4p per kg lw while Limousin cross prices fell by 2.7p to average 155.7p per kg lw.
The GB cull cow price fell by 1.16p to 109.86p per kg lw during the Thurday/Wednesday week ended June 2.
Lambs: Marketings of new season lambs fell by nine per cent in Great Britain during the first four days of the week commencing May 31.
The GB SQQ for the Monday-Thursday period was calculated at 128.47p per kg lw, down 9.57p compared with the previous week.
Pigs: The United Kingdom average all pigs price for the week ended May 29 1993 was 116.83p per kg dw.
This was an increase of 0.78p on the previous week.
Selected deadweight pig prices.
Method 1 and Method 2 up to 49.9 kg dw. 118.68p per kg dw, -2.68p. 50–59.9 kg dw. 118.64p per kg dw, +0.40p. 60–69.9 kg dw. 118.04p per kg dw, +1.11p.
Livweight pig prices (England and Wales) W/E May 29, 1993.
Porkers, 126.30p per kg deadweight equivalent, +0.37p.
Cutters, 122.79p per kg deadweight equivalent, +0.08p.
Baconers, 118.82p per kg deadweight equivalent,— 0.93p.
Market Prices: The EEC beef reference price fell by 0.1 per cent in the week ended June 3 to 68.07 per cent of the guide price.
Prices fell by 1.7 per cent in Ireland, 2.1 per cent in Spain and 0.1 per cent in Germany.
These were slightly offset by a 1.7 per cent increase in UK prices, and a 0.1 per cent increase in French prices.
The EC pig meat reference price decreased by 0.3 per cent in the week ended May 30 to 57.41 per cent of the basic price.
Prices increased by 3.2 per cent in Germany, 0.6 per cent in the Netherlands, and by 0.2 per cent in the UK.
However, this was offset by a fall of 3.1 per cent in Spanish prices and 3.7 per cent in France.
The EC sheep representative price increased by 0.2 per cent in the week ended May 30.
Irish prices recorded the largest increase, rising by 4.0 per cent.
Prices also rose in Portugal, France and the UK up 1.7, 0.8, and 0.4 per cent respectively.
These sharp gains were dampened by a 1.5 per cent decline in prices in both Germany and France and a 2.7 per cent fall in Italy.
CHILDREN from Llandudno schools have been doing their bit to help soften the impact of a massive building project on the town's promenade.
Helped by local artist Sian Parry, they have been using their artistic talents to brighten hoardings around the site of Llandudno's £4m arts, leisure and convention centre complex, with paintings inspired by the sea, fairy tales and the story of Alice in Wonderland.
HOUSE prices are booming in the North West but the population can't wait to move out.
The survey found prices rose by more than 18pc between 1989 and 1992 only Scotland and the North saw bigger increases.
But, at the same time, the North West saw the largest population slump, with more than 80,000 fewer people living there in 1991 than a decade earlier.
Cutbacks threat to dairy industry
By David Lloyd
BRITAIN'S dairy industry must prepare for likely cutbacks of 20pc or more as the European Community moves to eliminate distorting production subsidies.
This was the stark warning given by Professor David Harvey of Newcastle University, when he presented the first in a series of Northern Foods' milk industry papers.
While dairy farmers had little to fear from the current round of GATT trade proposals now nearing formal agreement, he insisted that UK milk producers must be alive to threat that the inevitable ‘son of GATT’ could mean quota cutbacks of 20 to 25pc by the year 2000 or 2005.
Professor Harvey, who predicted the introduction of milk quotas 10 years ago, said the industry had buried its head in the sand at that time.
He said:’ I remember milk board and other leaders saying that quotas would only be introduced over their dead bodies.
Despite the total chaos that followed their introduction there was a conspicuous lack of corpses.
‘The plain truth is that farmers did not recognise the inevitable and lobby hard enough for their interests in what was an entirely predictable future.
‘If history is not to be repeated, they should take the lead now and not merely be content to wait and see what might happen.’
Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Republics which have a larger share of world dairy production than the EC yet command less than 10pc of the world export posed perhaps the biggest medium term threat.
Potential
The former Eastern bloc countries are widely recognised as having a potential comparative advantage in agriculture.
At the same time, the EC is politically, morally and economically bound to respond to those emerging economies by allowing freer access to their products.
‘Sooner or later the EC will be forced by these and other international pressures to tackle its continuing over supply of milk especially butterfat.
My calculations indicate that this will require a 20pc reduction in Community production, with particular pressure on commodities such as butter, skim and hard cheese.
‘Like quotas, the direction of EC dairy policy is crystal clear.
The level of market support will decline and, I believe, we should plan for it to be eliminated by the end of the Century.’
AMONG companies reporting today are: Finals: ACT Group, Alphameric, Blacks Leisure Group, Christian Salvesen, Chubb Security, James Cropper, Oxford Instruments, Welpac, Staveley Industries, Powerscreen International, Scottish HydroElectric, Pilkington.
Interims: Control Techniques, Eldridge Pope & Co, RCO Holdings, Watson & Philip.
Waiting for rescue a woman and her baby
By Mark Currie Deputy Business Editor
The accreditation, heralded as a major requisite for firms wishing to compete in the new European single market, does not guarantee any improvement in quality performance or customer focus, it is claimed.
Policy delay
PLANNING policies on wind farms and wind turbine developments in Dyfed is being delayed by Dyfed County Council, pending consideration of comments from the public.
Sent to Siberia CAMBRIDGE student Sally Ward, 18, from Garthmyl, is teaming up with 80 Operation Raleigh International volunteers for an expedition to Lake Baikal, Siberia.
Cash crop
A TOTAL of £590 was raised for the Welshpool Friends of Hope House when the town's Dingle Nurseries opened their grounds to the public.
New York, Wednesday 10pm: TRADING ended modestly higher buoyed in part by rising bond prices although analysts said many investors were uncertain about the market's direction.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 1.11 points to 3,511.65 and the NYSE's composite index rose 0.62 to 245.77.
Shopping changes in store
By Gareth Hughes Daily Post Staff
RHYL'S biggest High Street store is to be given a massive facelift.
The six-figure investment in the Marks and Spencer store will expand the food and drink section, which produces 60pc of the takings, despite occupying only one third of the floor space.
The reorganisation, which is likely to take seven weeks, will result in the food and drink section taking up 45pc of the floor space at the expense of the textiles section.
‘Our customers have told us that they want to spend more on foods,’ said unit manager, Helen Blaydes.
To offset the loss of clothing space, the store is introducing an ordering service, by which items seen at any other branch may be obtained within days.
An automatic door will be provided for the disabled.
The store employs 76 staff, most of them part-time, and about 14 administration posts at Rhyl will disappear.
All staff concerned have been offered redeployment at other stores or a financial settlement.
‘For the past couple of years, there have been countless rumours that we are closing down but this investment demonstrates the strength of our commitment to Rhyl,’ said Miss Blaydes.
By Gareth Hughes Daily Post Staff
POLICIES for agricultural support and the environment need to work together to the mutual benefit of farming and the countryside.
This has been stressed by new Minister of Agriculture Gillian Shephard in her first speech since taking up her new job in the Cabinet.
Industry
Mrs Shephard told farmers in her native Norfolk: ‘Farming is a major industry whose importance to maintaining the health of rural life, both for those who work in the countryside and those who visit it is all too easily forgotten.
‘MAFF exists to serve the interests of that industry although it is not simply there to look after farmers as too many commentators still assume.’
Agriculture was undergoing considerable change and she saw as one of her main tasks the need to ensure that the UK farming industry benefits in full from CAP.
David Naish
Prices on the rise and we just can't wait to move out
HOUSE prices are booming in the north west but the population can't wait to move out.
The survey found prices rose by more than 18pc between 1989 and 1992 only Scotland and the North saw bigger increases.
But at the same time the north-west saw the largest population slump with more than 80,000 fewer people living there in 1991 than a decade earlier.
The region also boasted the highest proportion of births outside marriage one in three babies were born to unmarried parents.
In Wales, more doctors' prescriptions were issued than anywhere else in the UK.
On average, they get nearly 11 prescriptions per head per year compared with the lowest figure of six for the North West Thames region.
At the same time, Wales has the highest proportion of heavy smokers among men with nearly one in five having 20 or more cigarettes a day.
Other findings included: Welsh police had one of the most successful clear-up rates for recorded crime at 35pc in 1991 in Dyfed Powys this rose to 50pc, the highest rate of any force in England and Wales.
The principality has the highest proportion of homes built more than 100 years ago.
FURRY coats can mean it's a dog's life in hot weather, as Irish terrier Dibbits found at Snugbury's, his Nantwich ice cream farm home yesterday.
Luckily, however, there was a tasty mint and chocolate flavoured cone available to help keep Dibbits cool.
Picture: CLIFF BRETT
Firms wanted to take part
IBM is anxious to recruit more North West and Welsh firms to take part in the on-going survey, which is due to report again in six months time, Peter Willis, a consultant with the computer giant, said last night.
‘We want to double the sample size to 400 by the end of the year,’ he said.
‘Participating firms have the services of a consultant for between one and four hours, they receive a summary of his findings, a copy of the complete study and a return visit when he advises on ways of acting on the results of his findings.’
Comparisons
And the next study will not be confined simply to the manufacturing sector.
Mr Willis said the next stage was to look at design development and engineering performance.
‘We are also hoping to extend the study to Europe and the US so that eventually, by the end of 1994, we will be able to make international comparisons.
That's what the CBI and the Department of Trade and Industry are anxious for us to do and, if we don't like what we find, we will know where we stand.
‘We cannot bury our heads in the sand and become competitive just by thinking that we are.
No-one in industry can afford to stand still and be complacent.’
Firms interested in participating in the next survey should contact Mark Brennan on .
Tax expert Simon elected as first deputy chairman
SIMON McKie, a director of Rathbone Brothers, the quoted banking and investment group, has been elected the first Deputy Chairman of the Faculty of Taxation of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales.
The Tax Faculty, with a membership of 7,200, was formed by the ICAEW Council in March 1991 as a free standing body with its own constitution within the Institute.
Mr McKie is a Fellow both of the ICAEW and the Institute of Taxation.
He joined Comprehensive Financial Services, which later became Rathbone Brothers, in 1985 and became a director in 1990.
Author
He is responsible for the Group's taxation, UK trust and pension services and he is also a well known author of books and articles on taxation.
Rathbone, with offices in London, Liverpool, Geneva and Tortola, currently has private client funds approaching £1bn under discretionary investment management.
Last year the firm with its strong Liverpool roots celebrated its 250th anniversary and advanced to full quotation on the London Stock Exchange.
Simon McKie
Yesterday, the EC announced that Kemira and the other British fertiliser manufacturers had won their case against the Russians.
Although Kemira is not completely home and dry, the EC will find it virtually impossible not to find a solution to the problems it has recognised.
‘We understand they have found in favour of us and the other UK producers,’ said a spokesman for Kemira.
Land sales may help solve problem of house repairs
By Geoff Barnes Daily Post Staff
WIRRAL Council may have to sell off more land to head off the crisis over home improvement grants, Liberal Democrat leader Coun Phil Gilchrist warned last night.
The backlog of inquiries now stands at more than 5,700, representing work worth between £30m and £40m.
The council's overstretched housing department can only deal with grants at a rate of £6m to £7m a year.
Coun Gilchrist said: ‘The situation is so serious that the whole system is creaking under the strain.
‘The money we have is spoken for and the queue gets longer.
‘It comes down to what the council can sell or sacrifice to deal with this big backlog.
‘Reports are being prepared which suggest cash could be raised by selling off various plots of land.
‘But selling off the ‘family silver’ in a desperate effort to keep pace is not acceptable.’
Labour housing spokesman Coun George Davies said: ‘I can't see any other way forward than to sell off further land.
‘We are reaching a situation where this is all we have left.
‘If we were instructed to enforce all the outstanding grants at this moment we would be looking to find £40m, which would mean the council's entire capital programme would have to be sacrificed.’
Wirral housing committee has called for an urgent meeting with housing minister Sir George Young.
He rejected an initial request for a meeting, indicating that a consultation paper would soon be released.
Coun Gilchrist said: ‘In an ideal world all this improvement work to houses would create work.
‘Unemployment in the building industry would be cut, small builders would have a field day.
‘Instead the council finds itself in an impossible position.’
Phil Gilchrist
TERRY VENABLES: Mammoth task
MARCO VAN BASTEN: Future in doubt
By Mark Currie
THE much-vaunted BS5750 quality standard is hardly worth the paper it is written on, according to a major study of British manufacturing industry published yesterday.
The accreditation, heralded as a major requisite for firms wishing to compete in the new European single market, does not guarantee any improvement in quality performance or customer focus, it is claimed.
Joint
The study, ‘Made in Britain: the true state of British manufacturing industry’, is a joint project by IBM Consulting Group and London Business School to test whether British manufacturers measure up to the best in the world.
The practices and performance of more than 200 companies were analysed in detail and, in a damning indictment of their global standing, a team of experienced industrial consultants concluded that only 2pc were what could be termed ‘world class’ although a further 42pc were real contenders to join the elite.
The study found the food industry was the UK's strongest asset while the aerospace and automotive industries under-performed in every area measured.
In terms of manufacturing strength by region, Wales and the South West was judged to be weakest, the North West was about average with Northern Ireland and the South named as the strongest.
But Beverley Nielsen, assistant regional; director for the CBI in the North West, said the judgement was a bit harsh.
‘In our dealings with North West companies we find that many have shown increases in productivity and earnings, even during the recession, proving that they have been able to compete effectively in the international arena,’ she said, adding that there was nevertheless no room for complacency.
No-one was available from the Wales CBI for comment but Meirion Lewis, Welsh spokesman for the Institute of Directors, said he was surprised at the findings of the study, but could not comment further until he had seen it.
Contenders
One of the authors, Phil Hanson, who is IBM's consultancy team leader, commented: ‘While few of our manufacturing companies have proved to be world class, it is good to see we have a significant number of strong contenders.
‘This suggests that the engine room of the British economy the wealth-creating manufacturing base is in better condition than many people think.’
The house from where Miss Slater was kidnapped
By David Hope Business Staff
THE CHILL of recession is expected to be felt in today's year end figures announced by glass giants Pilkington, with a continuing down turn in profits expected to register around £35m halved for the third year running.
In 1991 profits fell from £314m to £151m and in 1992 it halved again to £77m.
Last year the Group cut its dividend for the first time since it became a quoted company in 1970, but this year analysts expect the dividend to be held at last year's figure, with Pilkington digging into reserves in order to fend off the resulting loss of confidence.
Collapse
The collapse of profits arises from recession with glass used mainly in the construction industry and car manufacturing, both sectors amongst the hardest hit.
And with glass volumes down, prices have tumbled by 20pc in the three main markets Britain, Germany and America.
But there have been errors too, with Pilkington investing in foreign glass capacity during the 1980s, at the peak of a cycle which soon slumped, leaving the St Helens based group with over capacity just as the down turn arrived.
A Merseyside based analysist said last night: ‘Sadly they are still in a mess, they badly need to reduce debts of approaching £1bn even though we expect to see a improvement in profitability this year.’
Stockbrokers say there is little interest in Pilkington shares and today's figures will lead to little change in a ‘continuing sell’ attitude towards shares.
A dividend of around 5–6p, similar to last year's level, was the general consensus in both Liverpool and Manchester.
But digging into the reserves will hurt them further, even though profits are expected to double the current year.
Debt is seen as Pilkington's main difficulty with estimates of £840m at the end of March now said to be standing at £950m and likely to hit the £1bn figure.
Though debt levels could be dramatically reduced through the sale of Pilkington's Solaglass wing, for which they have been seeking a buyer.
Last year Pilkington was regarded as the company still most likely to face a takeover bid, according to analysts.
They had fought off a spirited £1.1bn bid from the BTR conglomerate six years earlier when chairman Sir Antony Pilkington and his team argued the key lay in dedicated research and investment.
Now further suitors, such as the American glass maker PPG International and the building products conglomerate MB Caradon, are said to be lying in wait.
Economy continues it's slow recovery
By Andrew Stevens
THE UK economy continues to recover while inflation pressures remain weak, according to the latest monthly Treasury report.
But the Treasury warned that it was too early to predict whether the unemployment rate had peaked.
Despite three monthly falls in the number of jobless, the Treasury was not prepared to say that the worst was over.
‘It is still too early to say whether the peak in unemployment has passed, but the likelihood of sustained increases in unemployment in the months to come recedes with each monthly fall,’ officials said in the June monthly monetary report.
The report painted a generally optimistic picture of Britain continuing to recover from the worst recession since 1945.
It noted that non-oil economic growth in the first quarter had been revised up to 0.7pc.
Retail sales were up 1.4pc over the past three months, consumer expenditure was up half a percent on the first quarter and there were indications that consumer confidence had shown a sharp rise in May.
Encouraging
House prices were also on a rising trend despite the 1.2pc fall reported by the Halifax Building Society, Britain's biggest lender, last month.
Inflation prospects were encouraging following the fall in the headline and underlying rate, which excludes mortgage rates, in April.
The Treasury said that the growth of unit wage costs in manufacturing was at its lowest level for more than two decades while falling settlements pointed to ‘continuing downward pressure on inflation’.
Britain's economic activity compared favourably with its key industrial trading partners.
Growth had appeared to be stalling in the US, Germany had reported a sharp decline in activity and output remained weak in Japan.
Britain's economy, excluding oil and gas production, grew 0.7pc in the first three months of the year while the whole economy expanded by 0.3pc.
The trends in both retail sales and consumer confidence are positive, the report said.
Ice cream firm sizzles in the sun as sales soar
By Sue Cocker Daily Post Staff
THE heatwave has proved a sizzling success for ice cream manufacturer Pendleton's.
Staff at the Kirkby factory have been working flat out to meet demand for their popular ice lollies as temperatures rose this weekend.
And Pendleton's managers are hopeful their sales will continue to soar when their famous Twicer ice lolly is relaunched next week.
Pendleton's general manager, Ted White, said: ‘We are doing very well at the moment and looking forward to launching the Twicer next week.
‘We did very well over the weekend on our van sales and sold 81,000 ice creams to the Co-op.
‘We also sold between £1,500 and £2,000-worth of ice creams to the shops locally this weekend.’
Once the wrappers arrive with a new-look logo for the Twicer, the company will be ready to commence its maximum production of 1.2m lollies a week.
The warm spell has also been good news for workers at the factory after a difficult year when 67 people were made redundant when their parent company, Clarke Foods, collapsed last year.
The former Lyons Maid staff faced an anxious seven month until a successful workforce buy-out backed by Knowsley Borough Council.
Now the company is making more than 200,000 lollies a week and staff have been placed on overtime to cope with extra demand.
Early morning swoop…police raid a house in Kirkdale today.
Picture: MARTIN BIRCHALL
Region's bid for EC cash aid boost
AN IMPORTANT strategy for jobs, investment and regeneration in the North West was handed to the European Commission last night.
The North West Economic Strategy was described as a unique voice for the region.
It pulls together a series of wide-ranging recommendations for business, transport and education.
It could be the key to securing millions of pounds of European funds which can be used to address the multiple deprivation, economic and social problems facing the region.
Lancashire County Council leader Louise Ellman said the document drawn up by the North West Regional Association which she chairs would have an impact on everyone in the region.
It is the North West's first economic strategy.
Coun Ellman said: ‘It is a major landmark for the North West produced by a unique partnership of local authorities, private sector, trade unions, inward investment agencies, voluntary and higher education groups.’
Douglas McIldoon, of the EC, said: ‘This document demonstrates that you have come a long way in this region and it will give us great pleasure in working with you to make it happen.’
‘For Lease’ signs to go up
BRITISH Coal will soon advertise Parkside Colliery for lease to private operators.
Interested parties will be invited to tour the pit and discuss the possibilities with the company.
But hopes of a big jobs bonanza will not materialise.
Under present legislation the pits belong to the nation, and private operators can only mine under licence with a maximum of 150 miners.
In the meantime, Parkside is being maintained by a crew of former pit men working for a private contractor.
Point of Ayr A spokeswoman for British Coal has denied union claims that redundancies at the pit were actually compulsory rather than voluntary because of a lack of options.
‘All were offered alternative jobs at Point of Ayr colliery and decided not to take them,’ she said.
‘Unfortunately because of the contraction of the industry and the state of the market we have been forced into this position.
It's a very sad situation for everyone employed in mining.’
British Coal would not comment on the protests by Lancashire Women Against Pit Closures.
MERSEY Docks and Harbour Company is moving into the Irish sea ferry business after clinching a £15m deal.
It has bought a 50% interest in Merchant Ferries Ltd, which operates daily roll-on, roll-off services between Heysham, Fleetwood and Warrenpoint, Northern Ireland.
Success
Mersey Docks already operates a lift-on, lift-off container service between the UK and Ireland and the development is its first interest in shipping services from ports other than Liverpool.
Mersey Docks managing director and chief executive Trevor Furlong said the deal ‘followed the resounding success of our involvement with Coastal Container Line and is in keeping with the company's strong commitment to Irish Sea trade.’
He said it was an exciting but logical acquisition.
Five pits are put on the market
By Alan Jones Daily Post Correspondent
BRITISH Coal yesterday offered to private investors five more collieries where production has ended and which it no longer wants to operate.
They are Rossington and Markham Main, both near Doncaster in Yorkshire, Bevercotes, near Retford, Clipstone near Mansfield in Nottinghamshire and Betws, near Ammanford, Dyfed, South Wales.
The corporation has already advertised for lease or licence four other pits where coal cutting has also ended
Cotgrave and Silverhill in Nottinghamshire, Easington in the North East and Bolsover in Derbyshire.
The move follows an announcement by British Coal after the recent energy review that it would offer to the private sector pits it no longer wanted to operate.
Potential licensees have to register their interest in the latest group of pits by July 2 and will be able to visit a colliery and receive more detailed information on payment of a £10,000 bond.
Applicants will have eight weeks to submit a tender, accompanied by a further bond of £50,000.
The two payments will be returnable to all applicants.
Proposals to develop closed pits for uses other than mining will also be considered, said British Coal.
Coal production ended in April at Rossington, Bevercotes and Clipstone last November, and at Markham Main, and in January at Betws.
Bye-bye on a high!
CHAIRMAN Bill Goodall bowed out of industrial materials company Scapa Group with record annual results.
Turnover reached £347.3m in the year to March 31, up from £300.2m previously and pre-tax profits also reached a new peak at £47m, up from £44.6m.
Mr Goodall, who announced he would be retiring in October after 37 years with the company, said Scapa had produced another resilient performance, having overcome some of the disadvantages of the difficult environment by increasing its market share.
Earnings per share at the Blackburn-based company advanced to 13.8p from 13.2p and the dividend total for shareholders is up to 5.63p from 5.36p.