

3 classic video sets to be won
Urgent need
MANY thanks for the excellent series of articles on the proposed Sports Museum they put the situation accurately and can do nothing but help our cause.
We have heard recently that Trafford is working on the same lines, so we will have to get a move on.
Myer ,.
THE JOKES are still coming in thick and fast from young readers.
We challenged them to make our theatre critic, Joe Riley, laugh.
The reward was an Echo T-shirt.
Jerome Lesley, aged 11, of Old Swan: What do you call a chicken crossing the road?
A flat egg.
Jenny Lunt, 11, of Anfield: Why do giraffes have such long necks?
Because they can't stand the smell of their feet.
Paul Forbes, 10, of Aintree: What's white and swings through the trees?
A fridge I lied about swinging through the trees!
Jerome Lesley…chicken joker Jenny Lunt…giraffe joker Paul Forbes…silly joker
No to hanging call
NEWSAGENTS have rejected a move which would see them campaign for the restoration of capital punishment.
The motion was put to the annual conference of the National Federation of Retail Newsagents which is meeting in Llandudno.
However, it was withdrawn after several speakers said such a call would have little impact on Parliament.
It might also have an adverse effect on the reputation of the federation.
But delegates reacted favourably to calls for tougher sentencing, with proper life terms.
Birmingham newsagent Daniel Clarke said the main problem was not the absence of a death penalty but the sinister influence of drugs on young people who committed crimes when ‘out of their minds’.
Bringing back capital punishment would do nothing if the drug problem was not solved.
Newsagent John Ellis also said he did not believe such a call would have much influence on Parliament.
The conference had also backed a move to call on Parliament to make the possession of tobacco products by children under the age of 16 a punishable offence.
Breakfast at school's 25th anniversary
CELEBRATIONS start today at Gayton Primary School.
A special assembly will be followed by a breakfast for pupils' parents.
Head teacher Heather Ensor has invited former headmaster David Rowlands to help launch the first event to mark the silver anniversary of the school.
This afternoon pupils will be entertained in the school yard.
A committee has been formed to organise special events throughout the year.
Workers shell out for charity WORKERS at Shell's Thornton Research Centre increased donations to charity in the second year of a GAYE (Give as you Earn) scheme.
During 1991, when the scheme was launched at the Stanlow site, £3,335 was donated.
Last year donations totalled £5,200 through additional subscriptions.
A committee will decide how the money is spent.
Club's plans
ANYONE interested in future plans of Ellesmere Port Boys' Club is invited to this evening's annual general meeting.
Starting at 7.30pm it will be attended by the Mayor and Mayoress of Ellesmere Port and Neston, Councillor and Mrs Tony Sherlock.
History night
MEMBERS of Burton Local History Society meet this evening in Gladstone Village Hall at 8pm.
A choir is raising money to fund a trip to Reutlingen, twin town of Ellesmere Port and Neston.
Fashion note
HADLOW Green Singers are holding a fashion show in Willaston Memorial Hall this evening.
(7.30pm)
Thanksgiving
WIRRAL people who have any connection with the outreach work of the Children's Society are invited to a festival Service of Thanksgiving next week.
BOXING is a sport that has learned to live with controversy.
Many believe it should be banned.
Today, doctors' leaders call for a full inquiry into the dangers of brain damage in boxers.
At amateur level, the sport has sought to protect those who enjoy boxing.
Worryingly, the British Medical Association today suggests those measures like head guards do not offer any real protection.
Many involved in boxing will argue that people should be free to follow activities which are dangerous if they choose to do so.
Physical contests of strength and skill are found in all cultures and seem to be a part of the human condition.
But nobody can argue that boxers should not be given the fullest possible information on the long-term risks they run.
Round one to the BMA.
Jazeel ready to make amends
By Captain Becher MAIDEN races for two-year-olds frequently offer the punter tremendous scope for making money.
Few runners in each contest go to post fully prepared and even fewer have the in-born talent to win.
The first horse home is usually one of the more prominent in the betting, from a stable boasting a good record with juveniles.
So backers latching on to John Dunlop's Jazeel on his debut at Doncaster last month must have thought they had discovered a goldmine.
The Arundel-trained colt came to the course having shown up so well on his home gallops that he held a Royal Ascot date.
His starting price of 11–8 made it clear he was strongly fancied by somebody with reliable information.
And Dunlop's string with a score already well into the thirties for the season knows the time of day when assessing its youngsters.
Unfortunately, Jazeel was blissfully unaware of his responsibilities and fell out of the stalls before finding every pocket of trouble in what proved a remarkably rough race.
The son of Topsider did make up a lot of ground in the closing stages, but by then it was far too late.
Jazeel eventually scraped a share a third spot behind Ben Hanbury's short head winner Polish Laughter.
Tomorrow's Kennett Maiden Stakes at Newbury, however, offers Dunlop's charge an ideal opportunity to regain losses.
The opposition with form is nothing special.
Rainbow Lake's first run was equally costly.
The Henry Cecil-trained filly's massive reputation ensured that she, too, started a short-priced favourite to overcome her inexperience when taking on 11 rivals back in mid-April.
But Cecil's string was struggling to find its form at the time and Rainbow Lake could manage no better than a modest sixth to subsequent Derby fourth Cairo Prince.
Her only outing since when she scored in a canter by five lengths at Haydock has proved that debut form all wrong and she is expected to win again in the Ballymacoll Stud Stakes.
John Dunlop
…trains Jazeel
Albie's missus thanks the Echo
Dear Sir, I'm just writing to tell you about the fun we had when everyone saw Albie's (Mr Misery) photo in the Echo.
He took stick from everyone his mates said it was about time they had a good laugh.
One fellow even bought Albie a pint because he said his wife might leave him alone now she knew there was somebody more miserable than him.
Albie has become a celebrity in Speke, and now he has got over the shock I think he is actually enjoying the limelight.
Thanks for the laughter and smiles you gave everyone,
Yours, Mrs Misery,(Edna Rankin).
PS: I bought ten copies to send to friends at home and abroad, so they have been joining in the fun from Runcorn, to Malta.
Pocket rocket in tune for Ascot
By The Marquis
LYRIC Fantasy is quoted at a generous-looking 5–2 for the £103,000 King's Stand Stakes at Royal Ascot a week tomorrow.
William Hill make Richard Hannon's ‘pocket rocket’ clear favourite for the Group Two event, in which she could face challenges from Wolfhound, Paris House and Zieten.
But one definite absentee from the five-furlong contest is Lochsong, trained by Ian Balding.
‘She is just not quite running to her best and has gone to her owner's stud for a rest,’ the Kingsclere handler said.
Full King's Stand betting: 5–2 Lyric Fantasy, 11–4 Wolfhound, 11–2 Paris House & Zieten, 8–1 Gharah, 14–1 Surprise Offer, 16–1 Elbio.
The fast-acting tranquillizing drug already used in three instances of doping has been found in another racehorse.
Point-to-pointer Northern Barry was tested positive for acepromazine after a race on April 22.
The same substance was involved in the doping of Her Honour at Kempton in January and Bravefoot and Norwich at Doncaster in 1990.
However, Jockey Club spokesman David Pipe quickly dispelled fears that there was any skulduggery involved in the latest incidence of the drug.
He said: ‘Our investigations indicate that this substance was not deliberately administered.
There is nothing sinister in this case.’
In the earlier cases all the horses appeared to run below form, but the tranquillizer did not stop Northern Barry, who won easily.
Kevin Darley, heading for a record score this season after doubling his tally in the past 17 days, was brought down to earth in an ugly fall at Pontefract.
Darley's mount Starica stumbled on a path as the six runners in the Thorne Maiden Fillies Stakes, won by 11–2 chance Bella Parkes, were pulling up on the bend past the stands.
Richard Hannon
…
Royal hope
Bubbly battle: Two of France's proudest industries are at each other 's throats over a perfume called Champagne unveiled by fashion house Yves Saint Laurent.
Vintners are taking the name dispute to court.
Soccer pitch at end of the line
THE FORMER South Liverpool FC football ground could become a railway park-and-ride site.
The Holly Park site in Garston has been empty since the club gave up the battle against vandals in 1990.
Now it is being viewed by Merseytravel for possible park-and-ride use.
A spokesman for Merseytravel today confirmed its interest in the site which is adjacent to Allerton Station.
But he stressed that no formal approach had been made.
Top points scorer Sarah Maddock, who won five gold medals, holds the North West Inter Association Cup, flanked by some of her Liverpool and District team-mates
Mull over this
WINNERS of tickets to the Broken Wings gig at the Royal Court on June 24 are Annamarie Owens of Liverpool 16 and Andrew Kay of Mawdesley, near Ormskirk.
They were the first correct entries out of the hat to the question: How many weeks was Mull of Kintyre at No 1 in the UK charts?
The answer is nine weeks.
Tony Britton, actor, 69; Charles Saatchi, director of Saatchi and Saatchi, 50; Ossie Clark, Sixties dress designer, 51; Michael J Fox, actor, 32.
Today's cricket
Tour match WARWICK v AUSTRALIA at Edgbaston Australia first inns: 59–2 Rain stopped play
Rowing challenge
MEMBERS of the public have the chance to try their hand at rowing tonight on dry land!
As part of a 12 hour sponsored row organised by the Liverpool universities' combined club, an ‘Ergo’ machine will be made available.
The action takes place outside the Haig Building, in Maryland Street, near the Everyman, starting at 5.30pm, writes Ian Hargraves.
The machine is used to gather information on personal performance.
The event is the first of several planned in advance of the club's double challenge at Henley Royal regatta.
The women's eight, who won their Head of the Float race this season, challenge in the women's regatta starting on June 20, while the men's eight start their campaign 10 days later.
Doddy's ready to drop in
KING of the tickle tonic Ken Dodd will be visiting patients at a Liverpool hospital next week.
Doddy is dropping in to the Royal Liverpool University Hospital to open the refurbished Women's Royal Voluntary Service tea bar.
Ken will perform the official opening at noon on Wednesday, June 16.
Paul gets fell in-to Gill's arms
By Jules Stenson
ROMANTIC soldier Paul Barlow married the teenage pen-pal he fell in love with while serving in Bosnia and said: ‘I'm the happiest man in the world.’
Paul, 23, wrote and proposed to 19-year-old Gillian Spencer at Christmas while he was on a six-month tour of duty with the UN.
They finally tied the knot yesterday at West Derby Register Office in Liverpool.
Radio operator Paul, who is serving with the Second Battalion Royal Irish Regiment, said: ‘Gillian is the perfect bride I only hope I can be as good a husband.’
The couple will begin their married life in Cyprus, where Paul, whose home is in Liverpool, has been posted for the next 18 months.
They met after care assistant Gillian, of Aintree, put an ad in a Forces' newspaper asking for a pen-pal a year ago.
Paul's touching letters stood out and they met for the first time shortly before he was posted to the former Yugoslavia.
It was love at first sight and Gillian accepted Paul's proposal with a telephone call.
Sealed with a kiss…
Paul and Gillian, the pen-pals who became husband and wife
Career threat to Dutch ace
DUTCH striker Marco van Basten may never play top class soccer again the doctor who operated on his injured right ankle said today.
Professor Marc Martens carried out an hour long op on the 28-years-old AC Milan player in Antwerp today and is worried that the former European player of the year's career may be over.
England call: Mark Reppion, a member of the Speke Gemini Boxing Club, will compete for England in the Golden Gloves tournament in Glasgow tomorrow.
Reppion, who is 15 and will fight in the 57k class, has also been chosen to represent England schoolboys in a match in Russia next month.
He is a pupil at Speke Comprehensive School.
Super Saints: St Aloysius of Huyton, the 1987 LiCat top Merseyside snooker team champions, beat Prescot's champions BICC 3–1, with John Timson contributing a best series break of 44, in the first round at Derby Lane last night.
Garston champions St Christopher's of Speke had a fine 3–1 win over NALGO club of St Helens.
Lewis date: Tommy Morrison, the ‘great white hope’ of American heavyweight boxing, today admitted that Lennox Lewis is likely to be his next opponent.
Morrison, who defeated George Foreman on points in Las Vegas on Monday to win the WBO crown, is keen to accept the offer from Lewis' promoters of a 50–50 split of an expected 30m dollar purse to fight the WBC heavyweight champion in the Autumn.
Olympic boost: A leading Sydney official today admitted he rated Manchester as an increasingly serious rival for the right to stage the 2000 Olympic Games.
Bob Elphinston, general manager of the Sydney bid, said the Manchester bid was gaining support among the 91 International Olympic Committee members.
Barnet fear: Barnet manager Edward Stein and his newly promoted side are today waiting to see if their season of glory was all for nothing.
There are fears that the Second Division club, £1.3m in debt, could finally go out of business today after a long-running saga of financial troubles at Underhill.
Historic church's big week
SPECIAL displays of fountains, a waterfall, and models of a watermill and Noah's Ark will decorate Eastham's historic parish church next week as part of its water of life festival.
The six-day event at St Mary's will be launched on Monday with a concert given by the Wirral Schools' Orchestras and a pageant performed by St Mary's CE Primary School, starting at 7.30pm.
VOLUNTEERS are needed for Channel, a charity which supports family social work on Merseyside.
It consists of a number of locally-based groups, linked together by a holding committee on which the district groups are represented.
The groups raise money and distribute it to help those in need, mainly through social workers.
They also recycle unwanted domestic goods through a small objects store based at St Bede's Church, in Hartington Road, Liverpool, and are hoping to open a baby equipment store in the near future.
If anyone wants to help they should contact Rebecca Black on .
Steve takes it in his stride
Athletics by Paul O'Brien
LIVERPOOL high jumper Steve Smith will again use his shortened five-stride run-up in this weekend's Pearl British Athletic Championships at Crystal Palace.
Steve's coach Mike Holmes, who confesses he was ‘astonished’ by the 20-years-old's 2.33 metres effort for Liverpool Harriers in last weekend's British League match, said: ‘Because Steve had not jumped in competition, or even in training before last Thursday, we decided that his first two competitions would be off the shortened run-up.
That plan is unchanged.’
Smith will return to his normal run-up the following weekend when he plans to compete at the big Belfast meeting and then for the AAA against Loughborough University.
Holmes says: ‘Steve could not have made a better start to his outdoor season and it opens up all sorts of possibilities.
I think there is only one jumper, world record holder Javier Satomayor, who would be capable of doing what Steve did in a first outing.’
Also at Liverpool Harriers, coach Ernie Gallagher is optimistic about the summer ahead for 800 metres star Curtis Robb.
‘He looks very strong,’ says Gallagher.
Robb takes part in his first 1500 metres championship race since winning the English Schools Championship when he competes at Palace.
He ran his first 800 metres race of the season last weekend, when he was clocked on a relay leg at 1–46.4 seconds.
His second will be in Holland in 10 days time.
Also racing in Holland is Liverpool Women's 10k winner Suzanne Rigg (Warrington AC), who goes in the 10,000 metres.
Diane Allahgreen (Liverpool) and Helen Wilding (Wirral), both English schools champions, head the list of top local youngsters taking part in the TSB Merseyside Schools Championships, at Bebington Oval, but one national champion, Ben Reese, will be missing.
He runs at Crystal Palace.
Field events at Bebington start at 10am and the first track race is timed for 11.15.
Matthew enjoying a taste of success
By Echo reporter A TEENAGER with a flair for cookery has tasted success by beating 3,000 young people to win a place in a national contest.
Matthew Casson, 14, was chosen as one of only six finalists in the North of England in the Sainsbury's Future Cooks Awards after his winning recipes impressed judges.
The pupil at Chesterfield High School in Crosby, selected a menu of Earl Grey and honey chicken, and Chocolate Orange meringue pie, created for his favourite food personality, TV cook Michael Barry.
He will now travel to Manchester for the North of England final at the end of this month when he will cook his dishes in front of a panel of judges.
Matthew of Lyndhurst Road, Crosby, said he was surprised to learn of his success.
‘I didn't win anything when I entered last year, so I adapted the recipe then heard I was in the North of England finals.
‘I cook at school and make dishes for my family once a week.’
Proud father Brian Casson said: ‘We were very surprised but delighted when Matthew won, and we will all be going to Manchester.’
Winner
If Matthew wins the North of England finals he will travel to The Savoy in London for the finals in the Autumn.
The overall winner will get a trip to Walt Disney World in Florida for four and £500 to spend.
Matthew's recipes are set to be included in a cookery book being compiled by Sainsbury's.
Super cook…schoolboy Matthew Casson.
Picture: RICHARD WILLIAMS
Luca set to strike
BARATHEA apart, it has been a wretched season for trainer Luca Cumani, but recent signs suggest a flood of winners is pending.
Raneen Alwatar proved the point in the City Bowl Fillies Handicap at Salisbury, cosily beating Elaine Tully by three lengths.
Cumani's filly had been officially handicapped on three efforts over inadequate trips and should have no problem defying a penalty.
Mersey aces eye up Blackpool bid
Towers of strength
Schools sport by Paul O'Brien 005-000 05
EIGHT hours of athletics at Bebington on Saturday will go a long way to deciding who goes on a two-day trip to Blackpool next month.
A ride on the Big Dipper is not on the prize list, just the chance to be part of the TSB English Schools Athletics Championships, one of the biggest events of its kind in the world.
Competition in the Merseyside championships at Bebington starts at 10am with the boys hammer and junior girls high jump events, and is scheduled to finish just before 6 pm.
Intense activity
And those who gain a place in the Merseyside team face two days of intense activity and competition at Blackpool's Stanley Park on July 9–10.
Some of those contesting Merseyside titles have already shown good form at higher level.
Wirral's Helen Wilding, a current national schools champion, won the Northern Women's under-17 shot title at Derby, where Dawn Adams (Liverpool) took the under-15 title over 1,500 metres.
Both performances would rate in the top grade at schools level.
Jan Irving (Wirral) was another to win at Derby, where he took the long jump with 6.64 metres.
The threat to him could come from Paul Hourihan, who finished fourth on that occasion but was just eight centimetres adrift.
Other performances the schools selectors will have noted include the 300m hurdles sub-46 seconds runs of Joanna Mahony (Wirral) which have won her the Meseyside under-17 title and a silver at the Northern.
Also noted will have been the 2–17.33 800 metres run by under-15 Claire Duncan at Derby and the under-17 100 metres hurdling of Jon Haslam (Liverpool) which also gained Northern silver.
One schools runner who will miss the Merseyside championships is Wirral's Ben Reese.
He takes part in an invitation event at Crystal Palace and a week later will run his first international steeplechase in America.
ALAN Kernaghan is ready to book a World Cup passage to America but it means waving goodbye to Middlesbrough.
The big centre-half who has eased veteran Kevin Moran out of the Republic of Ireland side for tonight's group three qualifier against Latvia said: ‘I've been at Boro nine years and loved the club, but I've got to quit now.
‘I turned down a new contract at the end of the season, even though it meant getting a testimonial next year because I've got to be playing in the Premier League to confirm my place in the Irish side.
‘Boro being relegated was a disaster for all the players.’
Only 20 players can be named in the squad for the finals and Kernaghan said: ‘I badly want to be part it if we get there.’
The Premier League
THE Premier League celebrates it's first birthday tomorrow after promising a football revolution.
Representatives from all 22 clubs join Premier League officials at London's Park Court Hotel for an Annual General Meeting which will reflect on the inaugural campaign and point the way to a brighter future.
Liverpool chief executive Peter Robinson is an experienced and respected figure, who is not short of ideas about ways of improving the game.
And while cynics still doubt the value of a breakaway body, Robinson has no doubts that a year after it's formation, it represents a step forward.
He said today: ‘I think the Premier League has laid the foundations for a better future for football generally.
‘There are long-term benefits, but not all have been seen yet.
Hopefully there will soon be a reduction in matches played, which will benefit the players and the England team.
‘Additional money has been generated through
TV contracts and so on, and a lot has been spent on modernising grounds.’
He added: ‘Ideally the Premier League needed a further 12 months of planning.
‘It was rushed through, and because of the way it had to be constructed in getting the support of all 22 clubs, there was no way all the changes could be made in such a short space of time.
‘I don't think other divisions have been affected by its formation.
They have obtained other TV contracts and hopefully they'll obtain their own sponsorship.
‘Gates have risen, particularly in the First Division.
‘There is a better understanding among Premier League members now.
It was predictable there would be some internal difficulties in view of the time-scale.
‘The officials were new and the League was being run by a chairman and chief executive, rather than committees.
‘I've also been keen to have dialogue with supporters.
That's important because they are the customers.
‘Fans are the livelihood of the game and their views need to be sought constantly.
‘The Premier League has had several meetings with supporters groups, and discussions are taking place about improving the game at grass-roots level.
‘That's where you have to start if football is to be improved.
Steve Heighway and Tom Saunders are involved in the whole aspect of developing younger players.
‘They are on a special Premier League committee looking at the development of youngsters.
That has to be encouraged if our game is to produce the skills which are found in other countries.
But it will take time.’
A reduction in the number of matches and the space of time in which they are played is something Mr. Robinson is pressing for.
‘I would like to see the end of clubs playing two games in three days,’ he said.
‘That's not fair on the players and it's not fair on the fans.
‘The programme has to be planned differently.
Another problem are the Monday night games.
‘This is something we opposed since day one, but the majority voted for it and the majority has to prevail.
‘Some clubs found it difficult, though, and I don't think you get results which are ‘correct’ in those situations.’
Mr Robinson continued: ‘The Premier League executives now talk to clubs between meetings to get a better understanding.
‘Controversial items are not put on agendas until they have been properly discussed by everyone.
‘We may eventually have a slightly longer season — even accounting for a reduction in Premier League matches.
‘Having four blank Saturdays makes it hard to get games played, so there could be a one or two week extension.
‘I think the fans would welcome that because it would mean more weekend games.
That's not for next season, but possibly sometime in the future.
‘The Coca-Cola Cup causes congestion in the second half of the season.
I'd like to see a much earlier final.
‘But because there has to be a majority decision, so there will always be differing views.
‘We still feel there are far too many TV games, but we had to accept the majority decision.’
RIC GEORGE Peter Robinson
…
Premier League is not the finished article yet, but football will benefit in long run
By Philippa Bellis
CHEERS!
Giving the cold shoulder to his usual tipple, Ian Knight raises his coffee cup to Drinkwise Day.
The father-of-three from Whiston (right) was one of the visitors who dropped in at the Pumphouse yesterday where a Drinkwise Fun Day was underway.
And although Mr Knight admitted he'd prefer a pint of bitter, he agreed that Drinkwise Day was an excellent idea.
He said: ‘Anything that helps to improve health is a good idea.’
Health promoters were on hand at the Albert Dock watering hole to ask people about their drinking habits, give free health checks and advice on healthy drinking levels.
The Pumphouse served up alcohol-free cocktails and free coffee flowed all afternoon.
Jackie Rankin from Mersey Regional Health Authority said the event was a great success.
She said: ‘We have been swamped with people taking advantage of the free health checks and having their blood pressure and cholesterol tested.’
The event has been organised by Mersey Regional Health Authority to mark National Drinkwise Day.
City goes festival crazy
NEWS of two festivals in town this week.
This year's Africa Oye, which starts tomorrow, promises the best-ever lineup of African and African-Caribbean musicians and singers to visit Merseyside.
Among them is the Cuban outfit Sierra Maestra, who are at the Irish Centre on Saturday, and are responsible for a type of music called ‘son’, described as one of the most crucial dance rhythms of our times.
The programme, which is also based at the Bluecoat Arts Centre and at Birkenhead Park, features visitors from Columbia, Ghana, Madagascar, South Africa, Tanzania, Zaire and Zimbabwe.
Meanwhile, the Mersey River Festival, which is running until Sunday, features an Isle of Man midnight yacht race on Friday, as well as a water slalom in Queens Dock and a regatta in Salthouse Dock both on Saturday.
Keeping up with Hyacinth
LIFE'S full of little dilemmas, isn't it?
I mean, what DO you wear for yachting?
That is one of the problems exercising the mind of the socially striving Hyacinth Bucket (pronounced Bouquet) in the new BBC video compilation from Keeping Up Appearances.
Merseyside's Patricia Routledge plays the divine Mrs B to such comic perfection that the programme reels in more than 13 million viewers a show.
The three episodes on the £10.99 tape see her supervising her sister's stormy love life, going on that yachting holiday and planning a trip on the QE2.
The tape is out now and we have five copies of it to give away.
Senders of the first postcards out of the hat next Friday telling me her husband's first name in the series, will take the prizes.
Is it:
1.
Robert, 2.
Richard, or 3.
Tarquin?
Roman battle decider
DAVID GRINDLEY'S battle with Roger Black to earn the 400 metres place in Britain's European Cup team looks set to be resolved in Rome tonight.
If Wigan youngster Grindley can produce one impressive lap of the Olympic Stadium in the Golden Gala meeting, selectors seem likely to pick him to run the event in the same arena in a fortnight's time.
But Black, who will not be running any 400 metres races before the team is chosen at the weekend, could be given the nod to defend the European Cup title he won in Frankfurt two years ago if the 20 year-old runs poorly.
With selections for most events being clear-cut, the main dilemma is over the one lap event.
Both men want the place and both ran almost identical times in Saturday's 4x400m relay in Portsmouth.
Do selectors go for Black's experience, or Grindley's youthful promise?
‘I'd really like to run the 400, but I wouldn't be disappointed if someone was running better than me and they decided to take him,’ said Black, whose domestic pre-eminence was sensationally ended by Grindley in Barcelona.
Fate
‘It looks as if it is probably down to the two of us,’ said Grindley.
‘Roger looks as if he's running well, so it will be interesting to see what the selectors will do.’
Grindley may have his fate in his own hands, with Black spurning the chance to run tonight and deciding to run the 200 metres in this weekend's Pearl British Championships at Crystal Palace.
Olympic champions Linford Christie and Sally Gunnell will have their work cut out in their first individual races of the summer.
It would be asking a lot of Christie to beat Michael Johnson, Frankie Fredericks and Olapade Adeniken, three of the best in the business, first time out in the 200 metres.
But Gunnell showed with her relay run in Portsmouth that she is in shape to beat Olympic finalist Vera Ordina.
‘I think she is going to be a real danger this year,’ she said of the talented Russian.
Colin Jackson hopes to turn the tables on his best friend, Olympic champion Mark McKoy, in their first meeting since the Canadian controversially won the world indoor sprint hurdles title after seemingly getting a flyer.
Barcelona silver medallist Tony Dees also runs.
Super Sarah star clincher
SARAH MADDOCK turned in a five star show to help the Liverpool and District Association to a comfortable win in the north west inter-association age group competition at Everton Park.
The Everton swimmer won five events in the 13 years group.
These were:
The 100 metres backstroke in 1 min. 11.64; the 400 metres individual medley in 5 min. 21.39; 100 metres butterfly in 1 min. 08.82; the 200 metres individual medley in 2 min. 32.00 and the 200 metres butterfly in 2 min. 34.94.
Final result: Liverpool and district 718 points, Central Lancashire 636, North Midlands 596, Bolton and district 514, North Lancashire 369, Manchester and district 246 and Cumbria 161.
In the Northern Counties three metres springboard diving championships at Kirkby, Amy Howard (Knowsley DC) finished second in the Ladies' championship to Olympian Naomi Bishop (Oldham DC).
The respective points were 388.75 and 298.50.15.
Amy bounced back to win the junior championship with a record number of points (239.05).
In the junior boys' championship Stephen Logan (Knowsley DC) was third with 196.80 points.
Merseyside swimming is mourning the death of Charlie Tranter, 88, of Hoylake, who was a stalwart in the diving world for over 50 years.
He was an international judge who operated in the Olympic Games in Tokyo in 1964.
He was a life Vice-President of the Cheshire County Swimming Association.
To celebrate the 25th Anniversary of the Ellesmere Port SC, an Inter-Club relay gala will take place on Saturday when Wallasey, Birkenhead and Bebington join the host club.
Swimming by Austin Rawlinson
House this for a place by the sea
CROWNING glory…pretty Karlie Nye, 13, finishes off her entry in a sand house competition in New Brighton.
Karlie and her team finished second to Beechwood Community Association.
Picture: FRAZER BIRD
Pat clear of rivals
NINE times champion jockey Pat Eddery pulled five clear of closest rival George Duffield when winning on Tremolando in the Ropergate Maiden Stakes at Pontefract.
Home-bred by Derby winning owner Khalid Abdullah, Tremolando made virtually all the running to come home ten lengths clear of Graegos and put Eddery on the 55 mark.
Trainer Roger Charlton was not present to outline plans for the son of 1987 ‘Arc’ hero Trempolino, but his travelling head man Martin Franklin said: ‘Like his sire, I'm sure that he'll improve with more experience.’
City delivery date on Milk round!
‘Mums’ army' plan angers teacher unions
PLANS to mobilise a ‘Mums’ Army’to teach young children were announced today by Education Secretary John Patten.
The move, allowing newly-trained teachers without a degree to teach pupils up to seven years old, will spark a fresh protest from teachers' unions already boycotting national school tests.
Head teachers have threatened to turn away Mr Patten's new recruits, insisting they will be under-qualified.
Discipline
Radical reform of initial teacher training will also mean all primary school student teachers must spend far more time in the classroom and less in college.
New emphasis will be placed on training teachers to maintain order and discipline in class.
Priority will be given to teaching English particularly reading arithmetic and science.
A draft circular proposes a new one year course for parents and other mature students, like nursery nurses, with experience of young children.
After just 12 months' training, they will be able to teach nursery and infant pupils.
Teachers are poised to resume their attack on government school tests today, with a boycott of English literature and essay papers.
Teachers claimed a 99.9% effective boycott of the English reading and writing test on Monday.
Wimbledon boost for ace Steffi
STEFFI GRAF'S hopes of defending her Wimbledon title have improved after doctors revealed that her foot injury was not as serious as had been feared.
The German played the last two rounds of the French Open with painkilling injections in her right foot but medics have now ruled out a stress fracture, diagnosing an inflammation of tissue membrane covering a bone in the foot.
Graf said: ‘I am going to rest up before travelling to England next week to prepare for Wimbledon.’
French Open champion Sergi Bruguera has confirmed that he would not be making his first Wimbledon appearance since 1990 because he is ‘exhausted.’
Bootle-born Shirli-Ann Siddall has been given a wildcard entry.
Roll of honour
GORDON Edwards (Bromborough), who never seems to lose his form with the passing of years, won the English Open Seniors Championship for the second time his first success was in 1988.
Completing a great Bromborough double, plus one man Steve Shaw, new in the Cheshire team this year, landed the Cheshire match-play championship.
Lancashire and Cheshire made impressive starts in the Northern Counties League Lancashire thrashing Northumberland 15–3 at Hillside (they won ten and halved two of the 12 singles), and Cheshire completing an equally fine demolition job on Cumbria at Seascale by 14–3.
They should continue this fine opening next weekend, Lancashire tackling Durham at Seaton Carew on Saturday, Cheshire at Stockport against Northumberland on Sunday.
Greg Helsby, the up and coming youngster from Grange Park, pulled off a fine, if surprise, win in the Lancashire County Championship at S & A.
In an unprecedented finish, with five men sharing the lead on five over par 293, Helsby (only 20) won a sudden death play-off after five holes.
Hillside (Paul Williams, Paul Kenyon and Mark Howard) won the team championship.
Mark Landrum, the talented 17-year-old from Wallasey, won the Stableford Memorial Competition for the second successive year over his home course.
Brian Nattrass, a former captain of Chester Curzon Park, is secretary of the Cheshire Union in succession to Robin Butler, now secretary at his own club, Heswall.
Ormskirk win
ORMSKIRK scored a 14-run victory over St Helens in the Echo Cricket Knockout last night
David Whittaker hit an unbeaten 48 as Ormskirk reached 127–5 and then Paul Griffiths took four wickets for 19 runs as St Helens replied with 113–9.
Future up to you, Rhyl tell members
Report by PHIL STANLEY
RHYL Football Club will put their future in the hands of members and season ticket holders at a special general meeting in the Town Hall tomorrow night.
After failing to reach an agreement over the rent with Belle Vue's new owner, David Butters, the committee has decided that their faithful followers should be the ones to vote on the club's fate.
‘We told the public meeting a fortnight ago that we would report back with all the facts and this is what we shall do,’ said committee spokesman John Daley yesterday.
Abide by decision
‘We maintain that we cannot afford the rent being asked for by Mr Butters as it would amount to a 60 per cent increase on what we have been paying and we refuse to put the club in that sort of liability.
‘Mr Butters says we have buried our heads in the sand but the officials will not commit the club to a debt of this nature,’ he said.
All other interested parties are invited to attend the meeting which starts at 7.30pm but only members and season ticket holders will be able to vote.
‘We will abide by the decision but if the vote is to remain at Belle Vue they must realise that they will have to commit themselves to raising funds towards the rent,’ emphasised Daley.
‘Mr Butters has placed obstacles in our path all the way while at the same time stating that he wants us to stay at Belle Vue.
‘He said the rent would not necessarily be raised in future after stating that it would be index-linked and he also wants to stage concerts and fetes at the ground in the close season when we would need to work on the pitch.’
Only option
Meanwhile, the committee has held talks with other clubs, including Colwyn Bay, about the option of ground-sharing and details will be revealed at the meeting.
‘We believe that ground-sharing is the only remaining viable option but it is up to the members now,’ said Daley, who added that Butters had not been invited to the meeting.
WELSH Junior international Michael Price came from behind to land a place in the semi-finals of the men's singles second draw at the LTA VW Ratings North Wales Open tennis championships at Prestatyn.
The Penyfford youngster dropped the opening set 6–1 to Adam Elliott of Prestatyn but squared the match at 6–3 before taking the competitive decider 6–4.
North Wales coach Arwyn Pierce of Ruthin also had to battle through three tough sets with partner Gavin Spencer of Prestatyn to survive in the men's doubles.
They eventually overcame dogged youngsters Ben Lees and Paul Willman of Rhoson-Sea in another demanding three set marathon.
MINNOWS Mynydd Isa collected another prized scalp when they toppled hosts Shotton by eight wickets to reach the third round of the Flintshire Knockout Cup.
Report by Phil Stanley EDDIE GARRETT, the former Carlisle Utd midfielder, has been appointed manager of ambitious Prestatyn Town.
Garrett, who is based in the town, takes over from Ricky Westwell who has stepped down because of work commitments, but will remain at the club in another capacity.
Widely respected
‘We are delighted to have Eddie with us and with his experience and contacts, I'm certain the club will take off,’ said Prestatyn secretary Henry Porter.
Scotsman Garrett is widely respected throughout North Wales having joined Rhyl following a professional career at Carlisle.
Bethesda Athletic, Holyhead Town, Llandudno and Nantlle Vale are also amongst his previous clubs.
After breaking a leg in 1973, Garrett tried his hand as manager of Llandudno Swifts and then Rhyl, where he had had spells in charge of both the senior and reserve teams.
Garrett now hopes Prestatyn, runners-up in the OCS Clwyd Premier Division, are admitted into the Sealink Stena Welsh Alliance League at the AGM at Cemaes Bay on Saturday week.
Planned
Meanwhile, Shaun Hallett has been put in charge of Prestatyn's revived reserve team which will operate in Division Two of the Clwyd League.
AN extended course for soccer coaches at school and club levels will get under way at Plas Arthur Leisure Centre Llangefny this Sunday at 10 am.
Sessions will take place both indoors at the centre and outdoors on the adjacent comprehensive school playing fields.
Anglesey soccer development officer Osian Roberts, who will be in charge has planned a programme lasting 33 hours, spread throughout the summer.
The course, which will enable the participants to gain the equivalent to the FA's former preliminary badge, is suitable for those aged 15 and upwards.
EDDIE GARRETT: In the hot seat
THE HARP have lost their appeal to the North Wales Coast FA against a decision by the Deeside Sunday League to deduct six points and fine them £90 for fielding two ineligible players.
Mold Victoria protested that Darren Martin and Timmy Williams, who are on Colwyn Bay's books in the HFS Loans League, did not have international clearance when they played against Mold on March 7.
The Harp, who had been chasing a fifth consecutive Division One title, were also thrown out of the Queensferry Sports Challenge Cup and this decision was upheld by the Coast FA.
Harp recently lost an appeal to the Welsh FA against a separate ruling.
As a result of the appeal, the Queensferry Sports Challenge Cup final could not be staged last season, so the trophies and mementoes were presented to Mold Victoria and Ship and Anchor who agreed to meet in a special charity match for the Andrew Wilday Eye Cancer Fund.
NORTHOP Village, who carried off a league and cup double last season, are in danger of folding after losing their pitch.
In their first season back after a six-year absence, Northop won the OCS Clwyd League Division Two title and the Halkyn Cup playing their home fixtures at Connah's Quay Sports Centre.
Big blow
But now the club have found that on applying for renewal of permission to play at the same venue next season, the pitch has already been allocated.
‘It would be a big blow if we were to fold after such a successful season,’ said Nick Pemberton, the manager and secretary.
‘We have applied for the use of a pitch at the Welsh College of Horticulture in Northop but, meanwhile, if anyone else has any ideas I would be grateful if they would contact me.’
On par!
WHETHER he's a scratch player or just learning to tee off, My Golfing Record by Studio Designs could be just the thing for any dad this Father's Day.
He can record memorable rounds, personal triumphs and every bit of his progress in this bound journal mind he doesn't cheat.
It even contains amusing anecdotes from other golfers.
My Golfing Record costs £6.99 from major department stores.
Wrexham ace Craig takes top
Ruthin schoolboy Gareth Edwards, rated one of Wales' outstanding young prospects, will make his belated senior county debut in this game.
The Welsh schools international spin bowler was to have taken his senior bow in the recent WCA Ansells Cup match against Breconshire but that game was washed out without a ball being bowled.
He is the only newcomer in an otherwise seasoned side although not the only teenager.
Jude Chaminda, of Colwyn Bay, the former Denbighshire Colts captain, is found a place on merit following his numerous bountiful performances this season including top score 78 against unbeaten leaders Bangor last Saturday.
Opening batsman Richard Buckley Jones is Marchwiel's only representative with Wrexham captain Chris Lloyd carrying the flag despite his club's problems at the foot of the competition table.
Denbighshire: P Lloyd (Brymbo, capt), J Chaminda (Colwyn Bay), M Jones (Brymbo), R Buckley-Jones (Marchwiel), C Lloyd (Wrexham), N Roberts (Brymbo), D Went (Mochdre), S Williams (Brymbo), G Davies (Mochdre), J Parry (Llay), G Edwards (Ruthin).
WREXHAM turned out a depleted side for their McDonalds Young Athletes League fixture at Rotherham but in teenager Craig Jones had one of the top individual performers.
His 52.3s win in the under-17s' 400m earned him the award for the top track athlete in the Northern Division One West match.
Wrexham finished in third place overall with 167 points, behind Rotherham (231) and Preston (215).
In the North West Division Two Deeside were also without a full squad but came fourth at Crewe and now lie sixth overall.
There were numerous personal bests and three Grade Three performances.
They were by Carl Prior (second in colts'’ A’800m in 2:38.7), David Lemon (second in boys'’A’800m in 2:17.5) and Liam Walsh (1st in colts' 100m in 14.6).
In the first of BS Deestriders'’ Off The Road’Grand Prix series of races last year's overall winner Dave Alexander (CEPAC) took up where he left off.
He took an early lead which he never conceded, winning eventually by seven seconds from Martin Hinson (Helsby).
Results: 1 D. Alexander (CEPAC) 25.52, 2 M. Hinson (Helsby) 25.59, 3 S. Asher (CEPAC) 26.34, 4 R. Elliott (NWRR) 26.59, 5 J. Fidler (CEPAC) 27.10, 6 M. Davies (Whitby Heath) 27.27.
M40: 1 Asher, 2 Fidler, 3 C.Morgan (CEPAC) 27.46.
M45: 1 Elliott, 2 R. Bell (Wrexham) 28.25, 3 I. Jones (Deeside) 29.19.
M50: 1 J. Thomas (CEPAC) 29.32, 2 P. Lonsdale (Wallasey) 30.05.
M55: 1 P. Povey (CEPAC) 33.07, 2 G. Faulkner (CEPAC) 33.23.
M60: 1 D. Morris (Oswestry) 32.13, 2 R. Orford (CEPAC) 38.14.
Junior: M. Orford (CEPAC) 35.19.
Ladies: 1 E. Davies (Ceside) 32.45, 2 B. Bell (Wrex) 34.13, 3 A. Bond (Wrex) 35.20.
F35: 1 L. Clarke (Colwyn Bay) 30.21, 2 D. Meldrum (Prestatyn) 37.01.
F40: 1 K. Scott (Helsby) 35.01, 2 G. Wood (Wrex) 36.10.
F45: 1 J. Hallard (CB) 33.15, 2 C. Bell (Wrex) 34.00.
F55: M. Gartrell (Wrex) 36.37.
Junior: A. Morris (Dee) 38.12.
AFTER a hectic couple of weeks the coming weekend is relatively quiet, with only the Carneddau mountain race on Saturday.
The 10 mile event includes 3,500 feet of climbing.
Also on this weekend, but not involving any North Wales clubs, is the annual Welsh Castles Relay, which starts at Caernarfon on Saturday and finishes in Cardiff on Sunday afternoon.
On June 15 Eryri Harriers stage the latest in their Tuesday night series of races.
This time it is a 5.5-mile event with 1,400 feet of climbing at Nebo, near Penygroes.
Denbighshire packing a punch
CHAMPIONS Denbighshire are taking no chances of a slip-up by sending a power-packed side into action in their opening match in defence of their North Wales county title against Merionethshire at Gwersyllt on Sunday.
They have named no fewer than four Welsh internationals in their formidable line-up against a county generally struggling to avoid the wooden spoon.
This will be the first county fixture ever staged at Gwersyllt and local followers can expect an explosion of runs if Brymbo's prodigious run-makers Mark Jones and Nigel Roberts cut loose.
Jones, a current Wales choice, hammered a century at the weekend while Roberts unleashed 68 off 25 deliveries as well as picking up three cheap wickets.
Denbighshire's captain and wicketkeeper, Phillip Lloyd, also hammered 94 in the same match and with his club captain Stewart Williams completes the talented Brymbo contingent of potential match winners.
Newcomer
Ruthin schoolboy Gareth Edwards, rated one of Wales' outstanding young prospects, will make his belated senior county debut in this game.
Edwards is the only newcomer in an otherwise seasoned side although not the only teenager.
Jude Chaminda, of Colwyn Bay, the former Denbighshire Colts captain, is found a place on merit following his numerous bountiful performances this season including top score 78 against unbeaten leaders Bangor last Saturday.
Opening batsman Richard BuckleyJones is Marchwiel's only representative with Wrexham captain Chris Lloyd carrying the flag despite his club's problems at the foot of the competition table.
PLANS to promote environmental tourism and encourage birdwatching in Mid-Wales have been put forward by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds and the Development Board for Rural Wales.
Friends' event
THE League of Friends of Glan Clwyd Hospital is to hold an evening of wine and music at Rhuddlan Castle tomorrow.
It will be the first event at the castle since it reopened to the public last month, after a four year interval.
ANGLESEY sheep farmer Iolo Owen, of Trefri, Bodorgan, will have a dual role at Saturday's Dyffryn Ogwen Agricultural Show, held at Doddafydd Fields, Bethesa.
A regular exhibitor at the event he is president for the 22nd annual show and will also be showing his pedigree Wiltshire Horn Sheep as a preliminary run before they go on to next month's Royal Show, at Stoneleigh.
Friends' night of song
THE League of Friends of Ysbyty Glan Clwyd, Bodelwyddan, is to hold an evening of wine and music at Rhuddlan Castle on Friday.
It is the first event at the castle since it re-opened to the public last month after four years.
Appeal lost AN APPEAL against a decision by Ynys Mn Borough Council to refuse planning permission for the change of use of a building at Brackendene, Llanfair NB, to a riding school has been dismissed by a Welsh Office inspector.
French flier FLY-HALF
Alain Penaud scored two tries as France began their rugby union tour of South Africa with a hard-fought 18–8 victory over Eastern Province at Port Elizabeth yesterday.
France dominated most of the first half but the home side, one of South Africa's weaker provinces, came back after trailing 15–3 at half-time to threaten an upset.
The French tight forwards won ruck after ruck in the opening spell and towering lock Olivier Roumat, captaining the side, won clean line-out ball with ease.
The pressure told after 12 minutes when Eastern Province fly-half Greg Miller was slow to clear from his own line and had his kick charged down by opposite number Penaud.
Penaud dived on the ball to score and two minutes later he squeezed through a struggling defence for a second try with third-phase ball.
Centre Thierry Lacroix had an unhappy day with the boot, slotting one conversion and a penalty for France while missing five other feasible kicks.
Marriage melts
THE marriage of world champion ice skater Christopher Dean to Canadian skating star Isabelle Duchesnay is over.
The 29-year-old Canadian is seeking a divorce from Mr Dean, 33, a former Nottingham policeman, who partnered Jayne Torvill to a string of ice dancing triumphs.
VINNY CUNNINGHAM, the Irish centre who has flown to New Zealand as a British Lions replacement for the injured Scott Hastings, accepts his need to get fit in a hurry.
Cunningham, who has not played since May 1 has still trained hard, and he admitted yesterday: ‘Realistically, I could not play in Saturday's Test that would be a bit early.’
Cunningham travelled to New Zealand with another Lions replacement, Martin Johnson, who has the advantage of being fully match-fit after touring Canada with England.
But Cunningham at least has the benefit of knowing New Zealand conditions.
He added: ‘I was here last year with the Irish team and was lucky enough to score a couple of tries in the Test that we lost in Dunedin.
‘Ireland's vastly-improved performances obviously helped me get on stand-by for this tour.’
Woosnam weighs up
OUT-OF-TOUCH
Ian Woosnam is debating whether to go back to the drawing board and change his putting style for today's Honda Open in Hamburg.
Woosnam is not sure whether to follow Bernhard Langer and several other leading players and putt cack-handed in future left hand below right in a determined bid to get back to his best.
Woosnam, currently 25th in the Ryder Cup points table, has been struggling both with his long game and his putting in recent weeks and believes that confidence is the key.
‘Putting is my biggest problem,’ he admits.
‘I often have rounds where I keep knocking it to 15 feet and then miss the putts.
And you have to get some of them in to make good scores.
‘At the PGA championship two weeks ago I putted cack handed for the last nine holes and I did quite well.
But I'm not sure whether to do it full-time.
‘Lots of good players like Bernhard Langer, Fred Couples and Tom Kite use this method but it doesn't feel right.
I'm not comfortable but I suppose if I gave it a go I would get used to it.
I need to do something.’
Woosnam, who needs to do well in Hamburg to build up his confidence for the U.S Open next week, has brought only two putters with him this week, although he says he has 30 more in his garage.
Woosnam knows he will have to be near his best to challenge for the Honda title for among his challengers are Langer, who won last year, Sandy Lyle, Ronan Rafferty, Barry Lane, Sam Torrance, Paul Broadhurst, Joakim Haeggman, Rodger Davis and Jim Payne.
The 35-year-old Welshman, though, has no doubts he is still good enough to play in the Ryder Cup match at the Belfry in September.
Wild card
If he fails to make the top nine in the European money list, he would accept, if offered, one of the three wild card places by Bernard Gallacher, the non-playing captain.
Langer, who won the US Masters, the first major of the year, at Augusta in April, is also playing in the U.S Open next week but says: ‘This week is very important to me as I am playing in my own country.’
Langer has won seven European PGA tournaments in Germany, four German Opens, two German Masters and one Honda Open and wants to make it eight.
LANCASHIRE'S young lions came to the rescue, winning five out of the last six games to force a draw with reigning Northern Counties champions Yorkshire in the annual friendly match between the arch rivals at Scarcroft.
After the morning foursomes had been shared, Yorkshire took a firm grip on the proceedings when they won five out of the first six afternoon singles but then the young players took a hand.
Steve Ainscough of Gathurst, Craig Fort of Nelson, Daniel Harding of Worsley, Grant Hamerton of Manchester and Paul Dwyer of Clitheroe all won to help halve the singles, Denton's Bob Bardsley was Lancashire's only early winner.
It was a difficult baptism for new Lancashire champion Greg Helsby of Grange Park, St Helens.
He partnered Dwyer in the foursomes against vastly experienced Yorkshire captain Steve East and ex-professional Chris Bloice and they fought all the way before going down 2 & 1.
Then East beat Helsby in the afternoon by just one hole.
Hillside pair Paul Williams and Phil Kenyon had a blank day losing their morning foursomes 4 & 3 and both going down in the singles.
Cottrell takes a Tillman tumble
AROUND GOLF by Trevor Peake HESWALL'S Dave Cottrell let the prestigious Tillman Trophy slip through his fingers when he shot an 82 in the final round of the 72 hole open scratch event at Royal Liverpool last weekend.
After opening with rounds of 73–74–71, the Cheshire county player was level with Stuart MacPherson of Felixstowe on 218 with a round to go.
Famous victory
MacPherson himself could only manage a closing 75 and Cottrell's Cheshire team mate Carl Nowicki finished with a 70 to claim a famous victory.
Nowicki, son of John the professional at Wilmslow, set up his triumph with a brilliant course record 67 in third round over the testing Hoylake links.
The 24-year-old, runner-up in the recent Welsh Amateur Championship, scored his best win to date by two strokes from MacPherson, when at one stage it looked as if he would miss the cut.
His first round 79 left him seven strokes off the pace set by MacPherson and two other southern players, and when he added a second round 75, he was nine strokes behind his Cheshire team mate Dave Watson of Helsby, who started 73–72.
Watson slipped to a 77 in the third round while Nowicki shot his record breaking 67, but the lead going into the final round was shared by MacPherson and Cottrell, who added a 71 to his earlier rounds of 73–74.
Sadly Cottrell slumped on the final afternoon to total 300, while Nowicki's 70 put him on 291, two strokes in front of MacPherson.
Watson held on to third place with a final 74 for a 296 total, with former England international Martin Foster of Worksop just a stroke behind after a closing 68.
Cottrell's 82 left him in fifth place, along with Tim Paterson of Letherhead, with his Cheshire captain Phil Bailey of Caldy and another Cheshire player Gareth Bradley of Bramhall in a group on 302.
FALL-GUY: Dave Cottrell
McLean takes share of ninth
MIKE McLEAN of West Lancashire finished five under par in the Dry Blackthorn Lancashire PGA stroke-play championship but had to be content with a share of ninth place along with Craig Corrigan from Haigh Hall, Wigan.
McLean shot 70–67 over the Duxbury Park course at Chorley and Corrigan 68–68, but their 137 total was five behind winner Donald Sterling of Great Lever and Farnworth who grabbed a pair of 66s.
DAVID WILLS, from Portal near Tarporley, grabbed eight birdies when he added a course record 65 to his opening 73 to win the Warrington Classic at Walton Hall.
Birchwood's Derrick Cooper picked up over £8,000 to move to 55th place in the Volvo Order of Merit when he shot 68–70–68–73 for a share of 15th place in the Dunhill Masters.
Shaw steps in
NEW Cheshire match-play champion Stephen Shaw makes his Northern Counties League debut in the match with Northumberland at Stockport on Sunday.
The 24-year-old Bromborough plus one man moves in at the expense of Royal Liverpool's Ian Farrall, who is the only one out of the team which beat Cumbria in the first league match at Seascale.
Northumberland lost 15–3 to Lancashire in their opening match, so Cheshire will be looking to grab another two points in their bid to regain the Northern title they won in 1990 and 1991.
Lancashire, who have won the title just once in it's nine-year existence back in 1987, travel to play Durham at Seaton Carew in their second match, bolstered by last weekend's draw against Yorkshire.
St Helens' new county champion Greg Helsby leads off in the singles and Raife Hutt of Southport & Ainsdale is back in the side.
Cheshire: Bailey, Hughes (both Caldy), Bradley, Higginbotham (both Bramhall), Watson (Helsby), Shaw (Bromborough), Cottrell (Heswall), Curtis (Didsbury), Bolton (Chorlton), Hill (Hazel Grove), Hodgson (Tytherington), Nowicki (Wilmslow).
Lancashire: Helsby (Grange Park), Hutt (S&A), Ainscough (Gathurst), Squires (Oldham), Wild (Ashton-under-Lyne), Hamer (Manchester), Boardman (Castle Hawk), Uttley (Nelson), Andrew (Clitheroe), Harding (Worsley), Bardsley (Denton), Wallbank (Ashton & Lea).
FORMER RAF pilot Albert Williams, of Greenfield, has received a nostalgic souvenir of his service in the Spitfire Squadron at Luqa, Malta, when the island was under siege in 1942.
Malta's government decided last year to commemorate the 50th anniversary by issuing medals to all servicemen who served there.
Picture: JEFF PITT
Super Hockley sets hot pace
JOANNE HOCKLEY from Felixstowe Ferry booked her place in the match-play stages of the British Women's Amateur Championship when she handed in a 72 during the second qualifying round at Royal Lytham and St Annes.
Hockley set the early pace with a one-over-par aggregate of 151, three shots clear of Kate Egford, another England international from Kent.
Hockley produced stunning eagles at the 11th and 15th as she stormed home in a five-under-par 34.
Walsham Banana
MARK Walsham, riding for the Banana professional team of overall leader Chris Lillywhite, sprinted to victory on home ground in yesterday's ninth stage of the Milk Race from Wrexham to Rotherham.
Lillywhite's yellow jersey was threatened when Czech rider Daniel Kovar, in a race-long break with Walsham, became the leader on the road.
But Walsham, from Chesterfield, took the flag by two lengths in the uphill sprint from Mark McKay, the GB amateur team rider from Northampton.
Walsham and McKay's teammate, Steve Farrell, from Stoke-on-Trent, had launched the decisive move after seven of the 120 miles.
Drop back
The leading group became 16 riders at Alsager, after 30 miles, and then split again on the first big climb of the day 15 miles later.
The seven leaders, who also included Banana rider Ben Luckwell, were five minutes clear of the main field and Kovar, who had started the day in 17th place 3mins 8secs down on Lillywhite, looked set to turn the race upside down.
At that point Banana manager Keith Lambert instructed Luckwell to drop back and help with the chase and it was touch and go as the next group brought the gap down to three minutes on the finishing circuit at Rotherham.
Walsham took the £1,000 stage prize from McKay and Norway's Joergen Pettersen, with the next places going to Andrei Kivilev, of Kazakhstan, and Kovar.
The six leaders were timed in 2min 43sec clear of the chasing group, and Lillywhite salvaged his yellow jersey by 25 seconds.
But both Kovar and Kivilev moved ahead of Lillywhite's Banana team-mate Brian Smith and Ireland's Conor Henry, last year's overall winner.
The Great Britain Manchester 2000 team took the daily team prize as a result of having McKay and Farrell in the leading group.
Today Stage Ten of the Milk Race takes place in Liverpool after a tough ride from Sheffield.
The 116-mile stage ends with eight laps of a city centre circuit.
The finishing line is at the top of William Brown Street.
Dutch draw cheers Taylor
ENGLAND boss Graham Taylor was given a much-needed boost last night when World Cup rivals Holland dropped a crucial point at home to Group Two leaders Norway.
England could now reach the US finals by only drawing against the Dutch in Rotterdam next October.
The 0–0 draw puts the
Dutch level with England in joint second place with nine points apiece and three games to go though England have a slightly better goal difference.
‘Watch the birdies’ plan for tourism
PLANS to promote environmental tourism and encourage birdwatching in Mid-Wales have been put forward by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds and the Development Board for Rural Wales.
The board hopes to open up a Red Kite Trail and has agreed to fund a consultant's report, which should be available in mid July.
A application for finance under the Welsh Office Rural Initiative scheme has been submitted.
Best for beaches TWELVE out of 39 award for beach quality have been given to Ceredigion council.
Keith Evans, chairman of the council's public services committee, attended a ceremony in London where the 1993 Seaside Awards to local authorities were made.
Circus school
MORE than 40 Powys children aged 9–13 years attended a circus skills workshop at Knighton organised by the Powys Health Promotion Unit.
Time to go
EIRLYS Morgan has retired after 27 years service in the canteen at Penygloddfa primary school, Newtown.
Best brass THE sound of music will take over at Rhyl's New Pavilion Theatre when 36 brass bands compete in the second annual Rhyl Festival of Brass, on the weekend of June 19–20.
ONE of Anglesey's oldest town halls is set to rise from the ashes of a fire which destroyed it.
Ynys Mn Borough Council, which is responsible for the hall, has confirmed that it has had separate meetings with representatives of Llangefni Town Council and Bangor Market Company.
But he warned: ‘Although the precise amount will need to be determined, it is clear that there will be a substantial difference between the total cost of refurbishment and the amount which can be recovered through the council's insurance policies.
Plan to promote ‘second division attractions’
FLINT Castle would have a permanently manned visitors' centre under improved marketing plans for historic Welsh monuments demanded by MPs yesterday.
Problems of declining care and vandalism at one of the earliest Edward I castles in Wales were highlighted in a Commons Select Committee Report.
The Committee of MPs concluded that too much of the care of Welsh heritage was determined by ‘the values of English polite society’ instead of native Welsh culture.
In a Wales Tourist Board report, Cadw, the Welsh Office agency responsible for historic monuments, is criticised as a South Wales based organisation which concentrated its efforts on the top 20 attractions.
It was estimated the agency's vital re-survey of important buildings to be protected could take 55–60 years.
The select committee made 42 recommendations based on six sessions of evidence and two visits to Wales.
Among them, Cadw would be told to complete its survey in three years.
Agencies taking a narrow ‘English perspective’ should broaden the range of monuments to better reflect the history and culture of Wales.
Delyn MP David Hanson welcomed a call in the report for a North Wales office for Cadw, and supported demands for better marketing of so-called ‘second division’ monuments, like Flint Castle.
Flint Castle would benefit from plans
Jackson the Golden boy in Grand Prix flier
COLIN JACKSON made a flying start to his Grand Prix season in Rome's Olympic Stadium last night.
The 26-year-old Welsh ace won the Golden Gala sprint hurdles title with the fastest time in the world this year 13.11secs.
Jackson left all three Barcelona Olympic medallists Mark McKoy, Tony Dees and Jack Pierce in his slipstream.
Then, he revealed a double target for the World Championships in August.
In addition to seeking a long overdue first global hurdles title, Jackson wants to qualify for the 100 metres and compete alongside his great pal, Linford Christie.
That is the reason behind his decision to run the distance at this weekend's British Championships at Crystal Palace.
He said: ‘I feel I've reached the stage of my career when I could take on another event seriously.
‘I've run 10.29secs with no special training and I'd like to bring that down to around 10.19secs this year.
‘It would still be nothing special, but when Linford retires in a couple of years there is going to be a big opening in the 100.
‘It wouldn't interfere with the hurdles at the World Championships because there is a gap between the two events.
If anything, it should help me with my leg speed.’
Jackson, narrowly beaten by McCoy in the Indoor Championships after coming a poor seventh in the Olympics, is determined to prove his worth at the highest level.
Olympic champion Sally Gunnell, having her first individual race of the season, also made a bright start over 400 metres hurdles.
Her 54.64secs victory was comfortably inside the time set last month by American rival, Sandra Farmer-Patrick.
Limited success
Gunnell, running a controlled race, came through strongly into the final bend and pulled away in the straight to win by half a second.
David Grindley's bid for a European Cup 400 metres place ahead of Roger Black met with limited success.
The powerful 20-year-old from Wigan, who set a new British record of 44.47secs in Barcelona and went one better than Black by reaching the final, was second in 45.44secs to Barcelona bronze medallist, Kenyan Samson Kitur.
Race crowds
CROWDS lined the streets of Wrexham to cheer riders at the start of yesterday's 120 mile Milk Race leg to Rotherham.
Mayor of Wrexham Maelor, Coun Willow Williams, waved the competitors off.
Friends night
THE League of Friends of Glan Clwyd Hospital is to hold an evening of wine and music at Rhuddlan Castle on Friday, the first event at the castle since it re-opened to the public last month after four years.
Abbey plan
A SCHEME to convert the listed Talacre Abbey near Gronant into a hotel, arts, crafts and antiques centre should be refused say Delyn planners.
The borough planning committee will be told today that the applicants have not completed proposals to improve the access from the A548.
GRAHAM BARROW hopes to take the first step towards a brighter future for Chester City today.
Barrow expects to complete the signing of two former Blackburn youngsters, Lee Moss and Ian Berry, this afternoon.
Uncertainty
And that will be a welcome step forward for the troubled City boss, whose dealings have been restricted in recent weeks by the uncertainty surrounding the Deva Stadium club.
Chairman Ray Crofts announced yesterday that there would be no change in the running of the club for the foreseeable future, despite recent speculation on new owners.
Barrow said: ‘We have only nine signed professionals at the moment so we had to make a start somewhere for the future.
‘Lee and Ian have shown they have what it takes to earn first-year professional terms and I'm delighted they've agreed to join us.
‘If they make an impact next season great but if they need time to develop they will get it.
‘Now I hope to talk to more senior players who are available on free transfers.
Availability
‘If I can come up with the names then I will take that to the chairman or whoever is in charge to try and get the backing I need to sign them.’
BARNET were last night offered a £250,000 life line on condition that the Football League also weighs in with financial aid for the stricken second division club.
Company secretary Stanley Beller said a consortium had agreed to buy into Barnet, but only if the League temporarily returns £91,000 withheld from the club since April.
The cash was deducted by the League to pay fines and costs imposed on Barnet after last year's investigations.
Opportunity RU juniors
LANCASHIRE RU officials are hoping the cream of the county's junior talent will be on show when an ‘open’ coaching course is held at Orrell RFC on Sunday, June 20.
Object of the exercise being organised by Tameside RU Youth Development Officer Mark Nelson is to provide a coaching day which will cater for and attract most of the county's emerging players in the 14/17 years age-group.
Senior
‘This age-group is a very important and potentially difficult one for us,’ says Nelson.
‘We know that we have a huge pool of talent, but the fall-out factor is also greatest at this stage.’
Simon Hodgkinson, Paul Turner, John Bevan, Kevin O'Brien, Andrew MacFarlane and Peter Buckton are among the senior players taking part, together with members of Lancashire's county championship winning side.
Their will be work on individual and unit skills, together with a session of fitness testing to give the players an idea of how they compare with the elite.
And to provide an added edge of motivation for the youngsters, the World Cup Sevens trophy, won by England at Murrayfield recently, will also be on show.
The event runs from between 10am and 4pm.
For further information call Mark Nelson on .
Martin's by Aussie
MARTIN Offiah will leave Australia with a massive pay off for his 52 minutes of action for Eastern Suburbs.
Offiah picked up a shoulder injury in his first match for his Australian club and is due to undergo surgery in Manchester next week.
Offiah's manager, Alan McColm, said: ‘He was obviously very disappointed about the injury.
‘But we have sorted out an agreement with the club under which Martin will be paid a very substantial sum.
Keen
‘It is worth many thousands of Australian dollars so that will partly make up for the disappointment.
‘But I know that Martin was keen to show what he can do in Australia because his three-year contract with Wigan only allows him to spend one summer abroad.
‘Martin is hoping now that next week's operation is a success and that he will be fit for the start of next season.’
Offiah is hoping he can fly home at the weekend in readiness for the reconstruction surgery on his shoulder on Tuesday.
TWO of the Rugby League's three relegated clubs Chorley Borough and Nottingham City yesterday decided to play in the new National Conference League next season.
Blackpool, the other club to lose their place in the RFL, will compete in the Alliance Second Division.
SKIPPER Allan Border hit his highest first-class score of the tour as Australia made up for lost time on a rain-hit day against Warwickshire at Edgbaston.
Border had not passed the 50 mark since his first innings of the tour against Somerset.
But he looked in confident form with a flowing 66 off 120 balls with 11 fours as Australia reached 263 for four after choosing to bat.
Border shared in a fourth wicket stand of 147 in 35 overs with Damien Martyn, who continued his impressive run.
Martyn moved past 50 for the third successive innings and by the close had reached 84 off 153 balls.
Michael Slater then reaffirmed his current form with 64 his seventh score of 50 or more in 10 innings.
Warwickshire's South
African paceman Allan Donald experienced another miserable day and conceded 67 runs in 10 overs.
Shooting day
A CLAY pigeon shoot has been organised at Poulton Airfield on Saturday from 11am to 3.30pm.
More details are available from .
Japanese style
A TWO-day course on building a Japanese garden is being held at Tatton Park, Knutsford, on July 24 and 25.
Advice session
GEORGE Loughlin, of Making Space, will be giving advice on schizophrenia at Ellesmere Port council offices on June 15 between 10am and 3pm in the first of a series of events organised by the Community Health Council.
Shutdown
THE towpath on the river Weaver is to be closed to the public for a fortnight because of British Waterways repairs.
STAYING POWER!
Graham Gooch has been given the go-ahead to lead England through the entire Ashes series
Japanese style
A TWO-DAY course on building a Japanese garden is being held at Tatton Park, Knutsford, on July 24 and 25.
Duke misery in title
Reign of battling Briton at an end
DUKE McKenzie's WBO super bantamweight title reign ended on a split decision to Puerto Rico's Daniel Jimenez in Lewisham last night.
Jimenez took the verdict on two cards, while German judge Norbert Krosch had it level at 115 points each.
McKenzie looked as if he might have done enough to retain his crown after coming back from a ninth-round crisis in which he was floored by a two-punch combination to the body.
The 30-year-old champion from Croydon pulled himself up at nine with seemingly no more than a split second to spare and it was possible that American referee Rudy Battle, handling his 57th world title fight, gave him the benefit of the doubt.
Thereafter, McKenzie had to dig deep into his resources to reach the final bell.
He lacked spark from the start and never hit the kind of form which won him this title in the same ring last October.
On that night, McKenzie outscored a very capable performer in Jesse Benavides but could never reach those standards.
Jimenez was always the better fighter inside, although McKenzie was the tactical master when it came to jabbing and crossing with the right.
McKenzie, who lost his WBO bantamweight title 13 months ago when another Puerto Rican, Rafael Del Valle, stopped him in a round, will now have to consider his future after becoming Britain's first fighter this century to win world titles at three different weights.
This time McKenzie took no chances at the start and started to gain an early edge, but Jimenez was always busy, firing away with both fists.
The Puerto Rican's work rate kept him well in contention until that crucial ninth, when McKenzie had to call on all his experience and determination to get through it.
TODAY'S CRICKET:(11.00 unless stated) Tetley Bitter Challenge (day 2 of 3): Edgbaston: Warwickshire v Australia.
Britannic Assurance County Championship (day 1 of 4): Basingstoke: Hampshire v Kent Chesterfield: Derbyshire v Yorkshire Gateshead Fell: Durham v Middlesex Hove: Sussex v Northamptonshire Old Trafford: Lancashire v Essex The Oval: Surrey v Glamorgan Worcester: Worcestershire v Leicestershire.
Wasim out on his own-Fairbrother
LANCASHIRE captain Neil Fairbrother yesterday hailed Wasim Akram as ‘the most valuable cricketer in the world’.
Fairbrother's supreme tribute came in the wake of Wasim's sensational display in the Benson and Hedges Cup triumph at Leicester where he grabbed five for two in nine balls.
And that was only 24 hours after he had demolished Surrey in the championship with a blistering 4–4 from 15 deliveries.
Like an express
‘Only two bowlers could produce that sort of stuff Wasim and Waqar,’ said Fairbrother.
‘Surrey might disagree but I rate Wasim as the most valuable cricketer in the world.
Nobody can touch him when he is in that mood.’
And manager David Hughes said: ‘He is bowling like an express and swinging it’.
That adds up to a great confrontation in today's championship clash with title-holders Essex, with England captain Graham Gooch making an early return to Old Trafford where he hit one of the great Test centuries on Monday.
Gooch's 133 failed to save England but it proved he is back to top form just like Wasim, who said: ‘I am playing well, enjoying my cricket and giving 100 per cent for Lancashire.
‘This team has the talent to win trophies and I am talking about the championship as well as one-day competitions’.
Conquest
Lancashire are 25 points off the top with a game in hand over the leading five sides and Fairbrother pointed out: ‘We could be a lot closer.
We have won two out of four and it should have been more because we were in winning positions at Taunton and Liverpool.’
Wasim will try hard to remind Gooch of Pakistan's conquest of England last summer.
And Lancashire's other pace star, Phil DeFreitas, also has reason to catch the Essex captain's eye.
DeFreitas is under pressure for his Test place after a moderate display at Old Trafford.
If England decide on changes for the second Test at Lords the bowling department is the one most likely to suffer, with DeFreitas' name top of the list unless he produces something special in front of Gooch.
GOLDEN BOY:
Wasim the most valuable player in the world, says his captain
Seconds out in Spurs battle
TOTTENHAM'S uneasy boardroom truce is set to end today as Alan Sugar and Terry Venables rejoin battle in the High Court.
The drama will begin again as the club's internal turmoil is once more exposed to public view.
And with a mass of highly critical evidence built up against him, chief executive Venables faces a mammoth task in trying to persuade the court he should be allowed to stay on the board despite his sacking on May 14.
But potentially devastating revelations about big-money transfer deals in soccer are apparently lurking in Sugar's evidence.
He is expected to cite aspects of the deal under which Spurs signed £2.1million striker Teddy Sheringham as an example of Venables' unsuitability.
The whole board, apart from libel lawyer Jonathan Crystal, is against Venables and wants him to go, if only to end the disastrous deadlock which is keeping the club in a state of commercial limbo.
Last week Sugar sent a letter to every member of Tottenham's staff confirming his intention of remaining in control of the club.
But since then £2 million-rated defender Neil Ruddock has handed in a transfer request in an indication of behind-the-scenes unrest.
However, one Spurs shareholder, Mike Staunton, has submitted an affidavit in Venables' support, which will be submitted to the judge, Vice Chancellor Sir Donald Nicholls, for consideration as evidence.
About 150 fans roared their approval outside court at the last hearing while screaming ‘Judas’ at Sugar.
Whether the law is on Venables' side is in the hands of the judge.
He has to decide whether he should stay on pending a full trial of the bitter dispute between the two men, who stood side-by-side as saviours of the financially troubled club in 1991.
The Spurs board yesterday demanded details from Venables of his deal with want-away Ruddock.
Promise
Ruddock's transfer request was slapped in last Friday and Sugar is ready to sell him even though the £2 million-rated player was a huge success in his first season back at Spurs.
Ruddock, 25, signed a three year deal when he moved to Spurs from Southampton for £750,000 12 months ago, and claimed Venables promised him a renegotiated contract if his first season went well.
But in a letter to club secretary Peter Barnes, Sugar said: ‘The board has never been familiarised with the terms Mr Ruddock refers to.’
Mac back in style as Ireland march on
Latvia…0 Republic of Ireland…2
Report by Bill Pierce
PAUL McGRATH guided the Republic of Ireland on a gentle stroll through their World Cup Group Three qualifier against listless Latvia in Riga last night.
McGrath, returning after being forgiven for failing to turn up for the Irish trek to Albania two weeks ago, rewarded Jack Charlton's faith in him with a goal and a swagger as though he had never been away.
Goal-poacher John Aldridge registered their 400th international goal to settle any possible nerves after just 14 minutes, and McGrath ducked low to nod in the second three minutes before the break.
It should have been the signal for a resounding runaway triumph in the second half especially after a Niall Quinn header also hit the woodwork.
Relish
But skipper Andy Townsend and midfield partner Roy Keane both hit the frame of the goal as well before Aldridge and Steve Staunton wasted simple opportunities to bury the Latvians under an avalanche.
The towering Quinn led the Irish attack with relish despite an overnight scare when he was in agony from a grumbling appendix.
But it was Aldridge's flying header at the edge of the six yard box on 14 minutes which provided a conclusive finish to a classic down-the-line move between Keane and the overlapping Irwin.
The Irish forced a total of 15 corners and, with three minutes to go before half-time, a combination of Popokovs and ‘keeper Karavajevs had to clear off the line after Quinn hit a post.
Seconds later, however, Quinn smartly allowed Ray Houghton's skimming cross-field pass through and the unmarked McGrath stooped to conquer with a header for his seventh goal in 60 international appearances.
The win took the Republic back up to second place in the Group behind Spain on goal difference but they had enough chances to close the six-goal gap on the pace-setters.
DUTCH striker Marco van Basten may never fully recover from injury to play soccer again according to a doctor who operated on the star's injured right ankle.
‘We are worried that the damage to the ankle is so serious that there will never be a full recovery for professional sports activity,’ said Professor Marc Martens after he had operated on the AC Milan player for more than an hour in Antwerp.
Martens said that van Basten, 28, will be out of action for at least four months, and only then will doctors be able to assess if he can return to top class soccer.
Van Basten bombshell
UNSUNG South African Grant Stafford heaped more misery on world number one Pete Sampras yesterday by sensationally knocking the top seed out of the Stella Artois Championships at Queens.
The American, 4–1 joint favourite for Wimbledon with Stefan Edberg, crashed 5–7, 7–5, 6–4 to the world's No 110 player then admitted: ‘I played like an idiot.’
After netting a lazy backhand to hand Stafford a place in the third round after two hours and 21 minutes Sampras said: ‘I just felt tired and a little lethargic on court.
‘It is not a good start to my grass court season.
It would have been nice to get another couple of matches under my belt for Wimbledon.’
He confessed he was homesick for America after five weeks in Europe.
‘I feel more comfortable in the States.
A lot of American guys dread coming to Europe, but it's not an excuse.’
It was the second major blow in a week for Sampras, who failed to live up to his top seeding in Paris when he lost in the quarter-finals of the French Open.
Stafford, who lost in the semi-finals at Beckenham last week to British number four Chris Bailey, said: ‘I had a feeling I would win.
‘I am surprised because of the difference in our rankings, but I have played well through the year,’ added the 22 year-old from Johannesburg.’
Elsewhere, normal service returned to the tournament as Britain's twin triumph of Tuesday was followed by double defeat for the two home players in action.
British number one Jeremy Bates was over-run 6–3, 6–2 by former Wimbledon champion Michael Stich, while Ross Matheson went down 6–3, 6–4 to fellow qualifier David Witt of the United Sates.
It was a far cry from the second day heroics of Matheson and Chris Wilkinson, who both put out seeded players Wilkinson spectacularly dismissing Goran Ivanisevic.
Bates was overwhelmed by Stich's powerful delivery and he admitted: ‘When he serves well he plays well, and you can do nothing about it.
No part of my game could hurt him.
I felt totally ineffective.’
Stich, Wimbledon king two years ago, unleashed nine aces, and was only in trouble on his serve in the opening game of the match, when he saved three break points.
Disappointing
After that the sixth seed lost only nine more points on serve while Bates, world No 102, was broken three times.
Matheson's defeat by Witt was disappointing following his first round victory over 13th seed Jakob Hlasek but hardly surprising given the 372 places separating them in the world rankings.
The 23-year-old Glaswegian acknowledged that he was beaten by another big server.
‘That was the best two sets of serving I have played against for a long while,’ he said.
Witt now plays lone British survivor Wilkinson for a place in the quarter-finals.
By Peter Went, Press Association Soccer Editor Barnet were tonight offered a £250,000 lifeline on condition that the Football League also weighs in with financial aid for the stricken second division club.
Company secretary Stanley Beller said that a consortium had agreed to buy into Barnet, but only if the League temporarily returns £91,000 withheld from the club since April.
The cash was deducted by the League to pay fines and costs imposed on Barnet after investigations last year into the club's books.
‘The consortium prepared to step in, have made a conditional offer and it will require help from the Football League,’ said Beller.
‘The League will be asked if they will release money back to the club in the short term with the promise that it will be repaid from future transfer revenue.
‘We must have a decision by close of business tomorrow and I'm optimistic that we can survive.
We had a good meeting today, the problems were explained to the interested parties and now we are in the hands of the Football League.’
Barnet have 16 professionals, but six are out of contract including £400,000 rated Gary Bull.
Bull looks set to join former boss Barry Fry at Southend, while current Underhill supremo Edwin Stein puts the total value of his squad at £2.16 million.
‘If we can get through to July 1 we will be okay, but at the moment people (other clubs) are sitting around like vultures waiting to pick up the pieces,’ added Beller.
‘If the League agree to our request we are also asking them to lift the transfer ban on incoming players the consortium will make £250,000 immediately available to the club.
That would get us to the start of the season.’
It had looked as though Barnet's days were numbered, only weeks after winning promotion from division three.
A cash injection now followed by income from transfer tribunals would guarantee their immediate future and dash Halifax's hopes of escaping relegation to the Vauxhall Conference.
If Barnet, reportedly £1.3m in debt, went to the wall, Walsall would probably go up in their place and Halifax would remain in the League.
Players and management at Underhill are still owed wages and bonuses for winning promotion and Beller says the club also needs to spend six figures on ground safety this summer.
USA…2 England…0
from ROB KING in Boston
ENGLAND suffered the ultimate humiliation under Graham Taylor when they crashed to their most embarrassing defeat in 43 years.
After losing 2–0 to the United States it will take the greatest resilience by both the Football Association and the England manager himself to defend his position now.
A week after the World Cup debacle in Norway, Taylor desperately needed a big win and an upbeat performance to boost his position.
Instead, his side were a shambles again, a disgrace.
And few will now back a manager who sends on a defender when his side is struggling to retrieve pride and reputation, let alone the result.
The Yanks, whose aim is to be great World Cup hosts rather than realistic trophy contenders next summer, hardly dared to dream that they might equal their famous 1950 win over Walter Winterbottom's star-studded side led by Billy Wright.
Yet a team which is happy to pick up the odd win among the world's soccer minnows went on to better it against an England side with pretensions to be among the best.
Thomas Dooley scored the Americans' first goal in 389 minutes of international football just two minutes before half-time.
It was the witching hour of midnight back home but the England nightmare had only just begun.
Boost
As goalkeeper Tony Meola produced a string of fantastic saves, England's self-belief ebbed into the Foxboro turf and it was no real shock when budding rock musician Alexi Lalas powered in a 72nd minute header
England had been given a pre-match boost by World Cup rivals Holland's failure to beat group two leaders Norway in Rotterdam.
But on this showing they will not even beat Poland at Wembley in September, let alone collect the minimum draw in Rotterdam that they will need to come back here in 12 months.
They had their chances, Nigel Clough and Lee Sharpe missing badly before Jeff Agoos hauled a long cross from the left.
England did not seem to believe that Spanish-based Tab Ramos could juggle it back from the bye-line and when he did, no-one had picked up the 6ft 1ins Kaiserlauten defender as he powered his header past Chris Woods.
Meola saved superbly from Clough and substitute Ian Wright missed a chance before Ramos' corner saw Lalas rise to power his header past Woods' groping hands.
Right at the death Wright dashed through twice, but Meola was off his line and maintained his brilliant form in the face of England's raiders.
Unwanted
Bad luck?
Even England would not dare claim that.
And now the FA must decide whether they feel it is in everyone's best interests if they throw Taylor overboard into Boston harbour, just like the Yanks did 200 years ago to another unwanted English export.
After this Boston tea party it will be a wonder if they can do anything else.
U.S: Meola; Lapper, Doyle, Dooley, Harkes, Ramos, Wynalda, Agoos, Armstrong, Wegerle, Clavijo.
Subs from: Murray, Woodring, Kinnear, Stewart, Jones, Kooiman, Harbor, Friedel, Henderson, Klopas, Lalas.
ENGLAND: Woods (Sheff Wed); Dixon (Arsenal), Dorigo (Leeds), Palmer (Sheff Wed), Pallister (Man Utd), Batty (Leeds), Ince (Man Utd capt), Clough (Liverpool), Sharpe (Man Utd), Ferdinand (QPR), Barnes (Liverpool).
Subs (from): Martyn (Crystal Palace), Flowers (Southampton), Walker (Sampdoria), Keown (Arsenal), Winterburn (Arsenal), Barrett (Aston Villa), Platt (Juventus), Sinton (QPR), Merson (Arsenal), Sheringham (Tottenham), Wright (Arsenal).
Referee: A Weiser (Aut).
Baa-Baas blitzed as Wales bow out
Tourists stage
SUPER Wales saved their best until last as they rounded off their six-match African tour with a brilliant eight-try victory in Windhoek yesterday.
It was Welsh rugby at its best and it proved to be much too quick, clever and alert for a Baa-Baas side boasting five current Springbok squad members, three Namibian internationals and a host of top Provincial players from the Republic.
‘It was the kind of performance I've been looking for for two years,’ said Welsh coach Alan Davies.
‘We demonstrated that we have come a long way since our first game in Zimbabwe.
It was the best experience I have had for a long time.’
The South Africans arrived claiming they were going to teach the Welsh pack about power play but Gary Llewellyn's men blew them apart and the Welsh forwards bagged four of the tries.
Two of them were real stunners John Davies rocketing out of a rolling maul 20 metres from the line to score, and then Stuart Davies crossing a Llewellyn line-out take 15 metres out after it had been worked to the line.
Determined
Right from the outset Wales looked in a mean mood, determined to put behind them disappointing performances in winning their previous five games.
The first of the tries came after six minutes after Neil Jenkins had already landed a 30-metre penalty.
He also converted Ian Jones's try off the touchline.
Jones's wing partner Wayne Proctor scored next and flanker Mark Perego got another before half-time.
Then came the forward rush to the Barbarians' line as lock Phil Davies, prop John Davies and flanker Stuart Davies helped push the score to the half-century mark.
Outside-half Adrian Davies rounded off the rout and Jenkins's fifth conversion took his match tally to 16 points and his tour total to 89 in six games.
The Barbarians managed a try in each half, with Springbok outside-half Joel Stransky bagging 12 of his side's points.
MARTIN JOHNSON, the England and Leicester lock, has joined the British Lions in New Zealand after a marathon journey lasting 56 hours.
Johnson flew out as the replacement for Wade Dooley.
He left from London with Irish centre Vinny Cunningham, who replaces Scott Hastings, soon after arriving back home in England following the tour of Canada.
‘Both me and Vinny had a good sleep on the plane and we are ready for hard training.
The sooner we start the better,’ said Johnson.
All-Black alert — p37 STUART DAVIES:
Stunning try
by Peter Jardine
RONNY Rosenthal took a step nearer the Anfield exit door yesterday.
The Liverpool striker has rejected the offer of a new one-year contract to stay with the Reds.
And yesterday his name was circulated to other Premier League clubs.
Rosenthal, who is keen to move back to the continent, has also been touted in France although as yet there has been no definite interest.
The 29-year-old Israeli joined Liverpool for £1m from Standard Liege three years ago when he made a significant impact on the club's last championship success.
But he has failed to command a regular place during Graeme Souness's reign as manager and the signing of Nigel Clough looks to have been the final straw for Ronny.
Rosenthal scored seven goals for the Reds last season in 36 appearances, although in many of those games he was either substituted or came on.
And after scoring the derby winner against Everton in March, Rosy said: ‘I'd like to stay at Liverpool but not if it means another season on the bench.’
Liverpool will probably want around £750,000 for the player who Tranmere tried to take on loan earlier this season.
Rosenthal was also linked with Manchester City.
Souness confirmed yesterday that Norwegian full-back Stig Inge Bjornebye will be staying at Anfield.
Sources in Norway suggested the international leftback would move but Souness said: ‘Stig is not for sale.
I thought he played well against England last week and I see him as a valuable member of our squad.’
EVERTON striker Paul Rideout is to have an operation on a groin injury.
Rideout has been troubled by the problem for some time and will need six weeks to recover after surgery.
Manager Howard Kendall said: ‘It's better Paul has this done now and he should only miss the first two weeks of pre-season training.’
ROSENTHAL: Rejected contract
Norman Lamont: Merciless criticism
Garden day
ANOTHER gardening day is being held at Arley Hall, near Northwich, on June 23 (10am-3pm).
The cost of £20 includes a buffet lunch.
The superb gardens at the Hall are ideal for practical demonstrations and ‘hands-on’ experience.
More details are available from .
Hall meeting
MEMBERS of Burton Local History Society meet this evening in Gladstone Village Hall.
(8pm).
From Terry Cooper in Christchurch NEW ZEALAND stand-off Grant Fox will send his All Blacks colleagues into Saturday's first Test with the British Lions with a word of warning’ beware the quality of their back-row players.’
Fox, one of the greatest goal-kickers in the game's history, said: ‘I have been very impressed with the Lions from the start of their tour.
‘They have ability to win the ball in set-piece situations and then set their backs off with real speed.
Delayed selection
‘But they all seem to be able to finish off a try when they get the chance.
That is important a break is no good unless the score is improved by five points.’
The All Blacks assembled yesterday for a rugged training session but have been unable to prepare themselves fully as the Lions have delayed selection for another 24-hours due to ever increasing injury problems.
‘The All Blacks are inevitably nervous about a first Test at Christchurch,’ added Fox.
‘Our record is 15 Test wins out of 17 there since 1981 but 11 of them have been very close.
‘The application and desire to win a Test is always there but we need to combine that with combination and cohesion.
‘That is not easy because we have only a few days together after being split for 10 months.
The Lions have been on tour for a month.’
Slammed
Fox has recorded 573 points in 41 Tests.
He still trails behind the greatest points-scorer of all, Australian Michael Lynagh.
David Campese yesterday slammed the Australian rugby authorities for banning Aussie squad members from playing overseas in the 1994–95 close season.
Campese, the first of a number of players to sign lucrative contracts to play in Italy, said the Australian Rugby Union has ‘got to start paying players if they want to tell them when they can and can't play.’
Words of wisdom
THERE was a time when children's books in Welsh were drab and uninteresting, but that is no longer the case.
Of the wealth of material, most is well written and illustrated.
Several writers are quite prolific.
Strangely, when Tir Na Nog prizewinners were announced this week, no book was deemed worthy of the English language prize.
The prize for best Welsh fiction goes to Emily Huws, who lives near Caernarfon.
She goes one better than last year.
Then, she shared the prize for a novel, Wmffra, but this year wins outright for Tisio Tshipsan? a novel aimed at the 9–12 age group, published at £2.50 by Gwasg Gomer.
She is prolific, having been awarded the Mary Vaughan Jones Prize in 1988 for her particular contribution to the field of children's books over a number of years.
The new novel, published in the Welsh Books Council commissioned Cled Series, is a story about children and ordinary people, full of humour and exciting incidents, with which children can easily identify.
It is enriched by brilliant Jac Jones illustrations in which, as in the text, the wit succeeds.
The prize for the year's best book other than fiction goes to Gwyn Thomas and Margaret Jones for their third collaboration.
Professor Thomas, head of the Welsh department at the University College of North Wales, Bangor, wrote an updated words of a Welsh legend in Chwedl Taliesin, and the superb illustrations are by Margaret Jones, of Aberystwyth.
Expected to be a standard text that will entertain Welsh children for decades, it comes at £6.50 from Wales University Press.
The others in the series are Y Mabinogi and Culhwch ac Olwen, the latter winning the same prize in 1985.
The prizes, donated by the Welsh Joint Education Committee and the Welsh Books Council, are to be presented at a dinner in October.
IF ever there was need for proof of the quality of Welsh publishing these days, three recently published colourful hardbacks, superbly illustrated from Wales University Press provide ample evidence.
Described as Llyfrau Llygad-Dyst (Eye-Witness Books), these Welsh versions of Dorling Kindersley Books cover the world of the Fforiwr (Explorer) Cerddoriaeth (Music) and Dyfeisio (Inventing).
They are to my mind just the kind of material to satisfy the curiosity and thirst for knowledge of a young inquiring mind, with the dozens of just-right illustrations complementing the words perfectly.
Packed with information, each is priced at £7.99. and good value at that.
MARTINA NAVRATILOVA was forced to reconsider her Wimbledon preparations after suffering one of the most humiliating defeats of her career last night.
Navratilova was beaten 2–6, 6–4, 6–3 in the third round of the DFS Classic at Edgbaston by Australian qualifier Kristine Radford, ranked 179 in the world.
The plucky Radford troubled Navratilova when they last met at Wimbledon four years ago, leading by a set and 3–1 before their match was suspended overnight.
This time Radford did not let her chance slip away and she clinched the biggest victory of her career so far.
The tie lasted 94 minutes but the result, which will send shockwaves around the tennis circuit, will also raise doubts about Navratilova's Grand Slam pretensions.
LIZ Weir, a professional storyteller from Northern Ireland, demonstrated her skill in making a tale come alive to pupils at St John's School, Bebington, yesterday.
Ms Weir also let library staff in on the mysteries of the storyteller's art.
Librarians throughout Britain gathered at Bebington Civic Centre to hear her speak.
Picture: FRAZER BIRD
JIM MOODIE powered hid way to a winning TT double on the Isle of Man yesterday.
The 30-year old Glaswegian chalked up his maiden victory on the island in Monday's 400cc race and repeated the success in the four-lap, 600cc event.
Moodie won in a race record time of 1hr 18mins 41.8secs, an average speed of 115.06 mph 21.8 seconds clear of Windermere-based rival Bob Jackson.
Moodie always held the upper hand, powering his CBR Honda into the lead early in the race.
He opened up a 24.8 seconds advantage over Jackson at the half distance refuelling halt and never looked back on a course which measured just over 190 miles in length.
Moodie, suffering a bout of flu, kept up the momentum but eased off on the last lap with a minor suspension problem.
But by that point victory was already assured.
‘It was difficult to maintain the concentration, but there were no real problems,’ said a delighted Moodie after the race.
‘I decided to attack the race from the off and this winning double has made my whole career worthwhile,’ he beamed.
The flying Scotsman had earlier missed out in the Junior TT by just 7.2 seconds in a superb contest.
Brian Reid of Banbridge on his Yamaha, was always in charge in the four-lapper.
Moodie, despite a clutch problem on his Honda, closed within four seconds at Ramsey on the final lap, but the 37 year-old Reid put the power down and pulled away to win for the second successive year.
The win took Reid's career tally of TT victories to five.
Norway stretch lead at the top
NORWAY increased their lead to three points in the European Group Two World Cup qualifying section when they held Holland to a 0–0 draw in Rotterdam last night.
The Dutch, sorely missing injured striker Marco van Basten, squandered numerous chances in the first half while Norway were content to defend.
Norway stretch lead at the top
STRIKE ONE!
JOHN HARKES congratulates Thomas Dooley on his opening goal as the pressure mounts on beleaguered England boss Graham Taylor
Wimbledon favourite meets his match at Queens
Stafford shock for Sampras
UNSUNG South African Grant Stafford heaped more misery on world number one Pete Sampras yesterday by sensationally knocking the top seed out of the Stella Artois Championships at Queens.
The American, 4–1 joint favourite for Wimbledon with Stefan Edberg, crashed 5–7, 7–5, 6–4 to the world's No 110 player then admitted: ‘I played like an idiot.’
After netting a lazy backhand to hand Stafford a place in the third round after two hours and 21 minutes Sampras said: ‘I just felt tired and a little lethargic on court.
‘It is not a good start to my grass court season.
It would have been nice to get another couple of matches under my belt for Wimbledon.’
He confessed he was homesick for America after five weeks in Europe.
‘I feel more comfortable in the States.
A lot of American guys dread coming to Europe, but it's not an excuse.’
It was the second major blow in a week for Sampras, who failed to live up to his top seeding in Paris when he lost in the quarter-finals of the French Open.
Stafford, who lost in the semi-finals at Beckenham last week to British number four Chris Bailey, said: ‘I had a feeling I would win when I woke up.
‘I am surprised because of the difference in our rankings, but I have played well through the year,’ added the 22 year-old from Johannesburg.’
Elsewhere, normal service returned to the tournament as Britain's twin triumph of Tuesday was followed by double defeat for the two home players in action.
British number one Jeremy Bates was over-run 6–3, 6–2 by former Wimbledon champion Michael Stich, while Ross Matheson went down 6–3, 6–4 to fellow qualifier David Witt of the United Sates.
It was a far cry from the second day heroics of Matheson and Chris Wilkinson, who both put out seeded players Wilkinson spectacularly dismissing Goran Ivanisevic.
Bates was overwhelmed by Stich's powerful delivery and he admitted: ‘When he serves well he plays well, and you can do nothing about it.
No part of my game could hurt him.
I felt totally ineffective.’
Stich, Wimbledon king two years ago, unleashed nine aces, and was only in trouble on his serve in the opening game of the match, when he saved three break points.
Disappointing
After that the sixth seed lost only nine more points on serve while Bates, world No 102, was broken three times.
Matheson's defeat by Witt was disappointing following his first round victory over 13th seed Jakob Hlasek but hardly surprising given the 372 places separating them in the world rankings.
The 23-year-old Glaswegian acknowledged that he was beaten by another big server.
‘That was the best two sets of serving I have played against for a long while,’ he said.
Witt now plays lone British survivor Wilkinson for a place in the quarter-finals.
Interview by RIC GEORGE
RUSHIE IN GEAR FOR THE TIME OF HIS LIFE
IAN RUSH is gearing himself up for ‘the best year of my life.’
Nigel Clough's arrival at Liverpool, Wales' World Cup prospects and his natural thirst for goals has left the Reds' striker itching for action in a season which could turn out to be a memorable.
Rush knows the dangers of taking things for granted, and last term's experience makes him speak of hopes rather than expectations, refusing to make predictions.
But what is certain is that when the new campaign kicks-off on August 14, Rushie will be raring to go.
He told the Echo today: ‘Hopefully I'm looking at the best year of my life.
‘That would be the case if Liverpool won the championship and Wales qualified for the World Cup.
‘I'm sick last season has ended, but I'm looking forward to the next one more than I have any season.
‘I know it's easier said than done, but if Liverpool can get one or two more players, I think we'll be right up there.
‘New signings give people a new lease of life.
Nigel Clough will give us a lift.
Another new face or two will really have everyone buzzing.’
Rush, the Echo's Liverpool Man-of-the-Match winner last season, has carried his scoring form into the summer by notching the third goal in Wales' 3–0 World Cup win over the Faroe Islands last weekend.
A win which leaves Terry Yorath's men in a strong position to secure their passage to the USA in the forthcoming campaign.
Rush would dearly love to display his lethal finishing on a world stage, and there is every chance he will have that opportunity with teammates like Everton keeper Neville Southall and fellow front men Dean Saunders, Mark Hughes and Ryan Giggs.
‘We've been in this situation before, where we've needed a good result away from home only to lose 1–0,’ he said.
‘But I think this time it's different in that teams will have to score two goals to beat us because we're always going to get one.
‘The Welsh FA have got the fixtures right this time by making sure our last three games are at home.
It's in our own hands now.
‘I've done everything for Liverpool, and playing in the World Cup finals is probably the only big ambition I've got left.
‘Normally by now, England and Scotland have almost qualified.
You need a bit of luck in these games and while England have had it over the years, Wales haven't.
‘Before we beat Belgium, they hadn't lost a game.
They'd won all six and people were saying Belgium were maybe the best team in Europe.
‘After we beat them, those people were saying that maybe they weren't.
We have four players in our forward line which must make it the best in Europe, if not the world.
‘Against the Faroe Islands, we took off Mark Hughes and brought on Gary Speed.
When you've got players of that calibre on the bench it's the sign of a great team.
‘Terry Yorath has to take a lot of credit.
Beforehand, managers used to pick the best players and play the rest around them.
‘But he has a system now whereby he selects a side to suit a particular game.
In the last match it was Gary Speed, and it could be me next time.’
On the domestic front, Ian is thrilled that England star Clough has joined the Reds' ranks, and he is looking forward to establishing a fruitful partnership with a player whose vision and passing skills are widely appreciated.
He said: ‘I felt we needed another forward player.
I think Nigel can help me a lot and I think I can help him a lot.
He has a soccer brain and hopefully he will do a good job for us.
‘When you sign someone you don't want him to move on if things don't work out immediately.
I don't think Nigel is like that.
‘If Forest hadn't gone down, then he'd probably have stayed there all his career.
‘And I think that if he has a few problems at Liverpool at first, he'll hang on and try and make things work.
That's what I like about him.
‘I'm sure he's a player the fans are pleased to see here, as well.’
But he warned: ‘Nigel has already been compared to Kenny Dalglish and I think that's a bit unfair on him and on the fans.
‘If he turns out to be like Kenny, then great.
But for me there will only ever be one Dalglish.’
STAR QUALITY
…
Ian Rush celebrates another super goal and, left, his new strike partner Nigel Clough
Kinane in the groove
MICK Kinane, who partnered Commander In Chief to victory in last week's Derby, completed a 93–1 four-timer at Tipperary last night.
Kinane's winning mounts, his only four rides at the meeting, were Catwalker (6–1), Tawar (4–5), Safyn (6–4) and Seek The Faith (2–1).
Clough named in transfer ‘cash pay-off’
FORMER Nottingham Forest manager Brian Clough was accused yesterday of liking a personal pay-off to help transfer deals go through.
The claim was made by Tottenham Hotspur chief, Alan Sugar, who told the High Court about soccer's behind-the-scenes transfer market wheeling and dealing and alleged that former Nottingham Forest manager Brian Clough liked a ‘bung’ a personal payment in cash.
The allegations came as Spurs chairman Sugar met the club's chief executive Terry Venables in court in the latest round of their battle for control of the club.
It was in an affidavit from Sugar booed and hissed at by fans as he entered court that Martin Mann QC, for Venables, named Clough.
Venables is pleading for a continuation of a court injunction preventing his removal from Spurs.
The evidence related to Tottenham's selling of Gary Lineker to Japanese club Grampus Eight last year and the £2.1m signing of Nottingham Forest striker Teddy Sheringham.
Sugar, in his sworn statement, said: ‘Venables said what usually happens is that people would meet Clough in a motorway cafe somewhere, and that Clough would be handed a bag of money.’
Clough responded furiously from his home yesterday, saying: ‘Not a penny was passed between Terry Venables and me and the last time I was in a motorway service station, I went for a wee.’
The hearing continues today.
That's no joke…it's our heritage
Music Hall
ROYAL COURT THEATRE
Review by Keith Thompson LIKE it or loathe it, Victorian Music Hall is at the very root of modern British mainstream comedy.
Predictably, the ‘night of fun’ presented by the British Music Hall Company to open the Festival of Comedy generally appealed to the older age group.
But significantly younger people were seen chuckling in the wings.
The evening was hosted by ‘chairman’ Jonny Dennis a cross between Chester's town crier and Ted Ray.
As my companion remarked, the oldies are goldies and you can't get much (g) older than ‘I stood on this stage 30 years ago and I was so successful they've asked me back tonight.’
The archetypal music hall act came in the form of Fortnum and Mason, resplendent in boaters, stripey suits and false moustaches.
When the athletic Can Can girls had done the splits for the umpteenth time, the old master, 83-year-old George Williams, played on the state of his health.
Williams, his scarf drooping symbolically to his feet, began his act with delightful irony ‘I'm in the mood for love.’
Last night showed that music hall is a living breathing form of our national heritage.
Soccer chief's signs of trouble
A SOCCER club boss who admitted displaying illegal advertising signs at his ground must pay a £150 penalty.
Bootle FC chairman Frank Doran told magistrates the adverts had initially been taken down after a warning from council inspectors.
But he said they went back up after a picture request from the Bootle Times, and were not removed again till the next day.
Said Doran: ‘We got notice to take down the signs and did that.
The Bootle Times wanted us to put them up again for a photograph, and they were left until the next day because it was raining.’
Doran of Galloway Road, Waterloo, was fined £80 with £50 costs on four offences.
Sefton Council prosecutor Robin Thomaides told South Sefton court: ‘The signs had been put up without planning permission and were clearly visible to passing motorists.’
Fashioning a career
BIRKENHEAD Sixth Form College students Lisa Keenan and Lisa Hudson have both been offered direct entry to fashion degree courses.
Most students usually have to complete a one-year foundation course first.
But tutors were so impressed with the two girls' work in textiles that they made them unconditional offers.
Lisa Keenan, 17, from Oxton has won a place at the University of Northumbria, while Lisa Hudson, 18, from Claughton will study at the Preston-based University of Central Lancashire.
Wragg fires a double
TRAINER Geoff Wragg completed a Yarmouth double thanks to Blue Lion and Etosha.
The former, owned by Sheikh Mohammed's uncle Sheikh Ahmed bin Saeed, made light of a slow start in the Blackfriars Maiden and scored by a neck from Mitraas.
Etosha has long been well regarded by her trainer and her belated debut in the John Holdrish Maiden Fillies Stakes was explained by a long-held aversion to starting stalls.
Whyte's black mark
TRAINER John Whyte has been fined £350 by the Jockey Club's disciplinary committee after Child of the Mist tested positive for a prohibited substance.
Samples taken after the gelding's victory in the Canons Ashby Claiming Hurdle at Towcester on February 4 were found to contain sulphadiazine.
The committee was satisfied that the source was a substance being administered to another horse in Whyte's yard.
Child of the Mist is disqualified from the race with the horses behind him promoted a place.
Riders set for big city welcome
COMPETITORS in one of Britain's greatest sporting spectacles arrive in Liverpool today as the 1993 Milk Race enters its closing stages.
City centre traffic will be disrupted this afternoon as riders and support teams hit the city.
Hundreds of spectators are expected to line the route.
Riders will arrive in the city via Walton Lane and Scotland Road before joining their racing circuit near the Queensway Tunnel.
They will then cover eight laps of the circuit which takes in Commutation Row, Churchill Way South, Dale Street, Castle Street, Lord Street, North John Street, Victoria Street and Whitechapel.
Merseyside has produced winners in 1959 and 1960 with Southport's Bill Bradley; 1976 Bill Nickson from Orrell Park and in 1986 by Joey McLoughlin of Stockbridge Village.
Ton of joy for Gooch
GRAHAM GOOCH returned to Old Trafford today, thankful that his magnificent Manchester century has finally counted for something worthwhile.
When Gooch left the ground on Monday following Australia's first Test victory, it looked as though an innings of 133 would be remembered only for its bizarre, ball-handling conclusion.
But England have decided that century was all the evidence they needed to end speculation about their skipper's future this summer.
Far from reviewing Gooch's position after three Tests, as originally planned, the selectors confirmed him as captain for the entire six-match series.
Gooch led Essex against Lancashire today.
Lancs stars go on trial
LANCASHIRE'S England candidates were on trial at Old Trafford today in the Championship match against Graham Gooch's Essex.
Gooch was yesterday confirmed as skipper for the rest of Ashes series despite England's defeat in the first Test.
And that gives Mike Atherton, Phil Defreitas and Neil Fairbrother an extra incentive as Lancashire aim to continue their winning streak.
Atherton and DeFreitas failed to make the most of their first Test selection and face a nervous wait until Gooch's side for Lord's is named on Sunday.
Atherton failed to reach 30 in either innings while DeFreitas took 2–126 in 47 overs.
IRA accused:
IRA bombers were probably responsible for two nights of blasts on Tyneside at a gas depot and Esso oil terminal say Northumbria police.
Detective Chief Superintendent Barry Stewart also disclosed they were studying security video film from the Gateshead gas depot.
Atherton slips up
MIKE ATHERTON's hope of retaining his England Test place took a blow today, when he was out to a careless stroke in front of Graham Gooch.
Lancashire opener Atherton had gone comfortably to 39 on the first day of the championship clash with reigning champions Essex at Old Trafford, when he hooked a Steve Andrew bouncer to Salim Malik at backward square leg.
Gehan Mendis had fallen to Mark Ilott's second ball of the day, with the left-armer also hoping to impress Gooch before the England captain joins his fellow selectors on Saturday night to pick the team for next week's Second Test against Australia.
What a was!
LAUGHTER is the best medicine and over the last two weeks we hope we've given you a real tonic with our
Fun Fortnight Today we present the Fun Fortnight Laughter Awards Most Miserable Man on Merseyside Funniest School on Merseyside.
And as a special treat we have lined up jokes from the last people you would expect to give you a laugh, ranging from the dreaded tax inspector to an undertaker!
And Fun Fortnight isn't over yet!
In Saturday's Weekend Extra you can meet the people with the wackiest jobs in Britain and comedian Ted Robbins the official warm-up man for top comedy shows.
Clough in Spurs row
BRIAN CLOUGH liked personal payments during transfer dealings, it was alleged this afternoon.
The former Nottingham Forest manager was named in the High Court hearing involving the Spurs management row.
When it comes to schools…this one's a cracker!
by Rachel Halliwell
THE children at Mother Theresa School think it's the funniest school on Merseyside.
We went along with to investigate armed with a pile of Fun Fortnight T-shirts to see if the youngsters could make us laugh.
Headmistress Shirley Cunningham greeted us at the school gates with her own highly appropriate joke.
‘What is black, white and red all over?
THE ECHO!’
Says Mrs Cunningham: ‘Once they get in the playground the children seem to reel off the jokes non-stop.
‘They are a lovely bunch of youngsters who enjoy a giggle with their friends.
‘They always seem to be cheerful and full of beans…
I don't think you'll find a more fun school in the whole of Merseyside!’
We met 30 of the school's young jokers and had to admit that the children and staff at Mother Theresa's are a very funny lot.
Here are just a few of their crackers: BRIAN VANHARITY, 10.
What is the difference between Everton Football Club and Mickey Mouse?
Mickey Mouse stayed in Europe longer!
JAMES McCMAHON, 6.
What's black and white and blue all over?
A cold zebra!
LINDSEY JORDAN, 10.
What did the robot say to the petrol pump?
Take your finger out of your ear when I'm talking to you!
DAVID DUNPHY, 9.
What do you call a dinosaur with only one eye?
A do-you-think-he-saw-us!
STACEY SMITH, 6.
What did the big chimney say to the little chimney?
You're far too young to smoke!
LEAH FORAN, 10.
What did the hat say to the scarf?
You hang around here and I'll go on a head!
PHILIP ROGERS, 7.
There was an English man, and Irish man and a Scotsman on a plane and the Scotsman dropped his watch out of the window.
The Scotsman waited until the plane landed a few minutes later, held out his hand and caught it.
‘How did you do that?’ the others asked.
The Scotsman replied: ‘Easy, it was five minutes slow!’
Down to business
SECOND round matches in the Liverpool Business Houses and Merseyside Tournaments for societies from industry and business must be completed by the end of this month.
Paula is back in top gear Shape-up on the beach says Rosemary Off the booze: model Paula Hamilton Liverpool visitor…
Paula Hamilton
Winning habit…
THE Weightman Rutherfords Liverpool Competition has got off to a tremendous start with 54 wins coming from the first 72 fixtures.
That compares with 41 wins from the equivalent period in 1992.
It represents positive results in 75 per cent of games, with 32 wins by the home side and 22 by the visitors.
Twenty teams batting first have won matches.
Alistair Campbell (Wallasey) is poised to become the first batsman to reach the 500 mark.
The Zimbabwe Test player has 475 runs for an average of 52.77.
Geoff Blackburn (Liverpool) is second with 393 (49.12), followed by John Parker (Southport) 385 (55), John Hitchmough (New Brighton) 362 (40.22) and Barry Metcalf (Chester BH) 342 (48.85).
THIS is the face of English football…
June 10, 1993.
Graham Taylor, having taken us to the brink of a shock World Cup exit after miserable displays against Poland and Norway, contemplates on the latest national disaster.
The left hand reaches up to the forehead, urging the brain to confirm a score line that, in years to come, will rank amongst the most shocking we have ever had to endure.
United States 2 England 0.
A certain national tabloid put it a different way today: Yanks 2 Planks 0.
It is a humorous response.
But the result is no laughing matter.
Taylor is adamant that he is not going to quit.
But this is not a time for personal pride and stubborn resistance to stand in the way of the cold, hard facts of life.
The England manager does not have the confidence of the nation.
He might have the will to fight back, but everyone is asking the same question: ‘Does he have the way?’
He has selected bad squads, putting continuity before form…the Waddle Factor.
He has be- mused with some of his tactical ploys.
When push has come to shove, his teams have simply not been good enough.
The public perception of his players is not of a group of national heroes, battling to turn the tide and restore pride.
It's of a bunch of undertalented and over paid money grabbers who are motivated more by agents than managers.
This image might be totally unfair.
But it's epitomises the way people view the modern footballer.
Certainly, the greed factor has ensured that when players fail at the highest level, the knife will just not be delivered, but twisted with venom
To coin an American phrase: ‘The buck must stop with the manager’
He selects the squads.
He picks the team.
He dictates tactics.
Graham Taylor is a decent man.
He must now do the decent thing and resign.
The very least he must do is to swallow his pride and seek advice and help from fellow English managers at the highest level.
We must try and put this shock reversal in Boston to one side.
The most important thing right now is for England to qualify for next years World Cup Finals.
If we don't, the knock-on effect will be felt by EVERY club in the land, from the Premier through to the Third Division.
Taylor must recognise this fact now…and act.
Committee's warning to ex-skipper
By David Jones and Richard Williamson FORMER Liverpool captain Geoff Blackburn has been warned of his future conduct by a Liverpool Competition disciplinary committee.
The rap comes after Blackburn was involved in an incident with an umpire during a Liverpool Echo Knockout tie while bowling against New Brighton.
The all-rounder was immediately taken off by captain Jeff Teiman and did not bowl again in the match.
Competition secretary David Wright issued a statement on behalf of the committee, which stated:
‘The disciplinary committee appointed by the management committee of the Liverpool and District Competition inquired into a complaint made by one of the umpires at the Liverpool Echo first round knockout tie between Liverpool and New Brighton at Aigburth on May 21.
‘The disciplinary committee found that Geoff Blackburn had been guilty of misconduct during the match.
Reprimand
‘After taking into account several factors, the committee have severely reprimanded him and warned him that any further misconduct would result in very harsh penalties being imposed.’
Mr. Wright added that the committee had been impressed by the prompt action by Teiman.
Blackburn sent a written apology to the umpire in question and has since apologised personally to him.
JUMP TO IT!
Fashion extra by JANET TANSLEY
DURING Fun Fortnight we've had jokes on everything from cows to coughs, doctors to dentists, and everyone has given us a good laugh.
But there have been three outstanding efforts which we are proud to present once again in our great Fun Fortnight Laughter Awards.
The best children's joke is a joint effort from pals Gary Lunt age five from Anfield and five year-old Sam Tierney from Tuebrook.
What do frogs drink?
CROAK-A-COLA!
The winner of the best adult joke is Mrs May Jones from Prescot, and a T-shirt is on its way to her for this the Echo office favourite.
Two cows are standing in a field and one says: ‘Moo.’
The other one turns round and says: ‘Oi!
I was going to say that!’
And finally the winner of the funniest celebrity joke is Radio Merseyside's Wally Scott.
The following gem lands him a Fun Fortnight T-Shirt, and just to stop the pair of them falling out, we'll give Billy a T-shirt too.
There's a funeral procession going down the road with hundreds of people following the hearse.
At the front of the mourners is a fella with a huge rottweiler.
I said to him: ‘I've never seen such a big funeral.
Who's died.’
He says: ‘It's my mother-in-law.
But I feel terrible because the dog killed her.’
I said: ‘Any chance of borrowing the dog?’
He said: ‘Get to the back of the queue!’
Come on Rod, give us a smile you have been officially crowned the Most Miserable Man on Merseyside!
Crying Scotsman and former police officer Rod Mackay, 67, has out-grumped dozens of doom merchants to take our coveted title.
And his reaction?
‘What do I win, then?’
Well, what else would you expect from a man who could moan for Britain.
‘I was quietly confident and, to be honest, I deserved to win,’ said Rod, of Calderstones, Liverpool.
We are sending great Fun Fortnight T-shirts to Rod and the two women in his life who nominated him stepdaughter Christine Johnson and wife, Margaret.
The eternal pessimist will also be receiving tickets for a future show in Liverpool.
And, as a special bonus prize, Rod will be in the audience on Monday evening for a recording of Billy Butler and Wally Scott's hit Radio Merseyside show, Hold Your Plums.
DELIGHTED: Mr Misery Champion Rod is plainly over the moon about his new title
When it comes to schools…this one's a cracker!
by Rachel Halliwell
THE children at Mother Theresa School think it's the funniest school on Merseyside.
We went along with to investigate armed with a pile of Fun Fortnight T-shirts to see if the youngsters could make us laugh.
Headmistress Shirley Cunningham greeted us at the school gates with her own highly appropriate joke.
‘What is black, white and red all over?
THE ECHO!’
Says Mrs Cunningham: ‘Once they get in the playground the children seem to reel off the jokes non-stop.
‘They are a lovely bunch of youngsters who enjoy a giggle with their friends.
‘They always seem to be cheerful and full of beans…
I don't think you'll find a more fun school in the whole of Merseyside!’
We met 30 of the school's young jokers and had to admit that the children and staff at Mother Theresa's are a very funny lot.
Here are just a few of their crackers: BRIAN VANHARITY, 10.
What is the difference between Everton Football Club and Mickey Mouse?
Mickey Mouse stayed in Europe longer!
JAMES McCMAHON, 6.
What's black and white and blue all over?
A cold zebra!
LINDSEY JORDAN, 10.
What did the robot say to the petrol pump?
Take your finger out of your ear when I'm talking to you!
DAVID DUNPHY, 9.
What do you call a dinosaur with only one eye?
A do-you-think-he-saw-us!
STACEY SMITH, 6.
What did the big chimney say to the little chimney?
You're far too young to smoke!
LEAH FORAN, 10.
What did the hat say to the scarf?
You hang around here and I'll go on a head!
PHILIP ROGERS, 7.
There was an English man, and Irish man and a Scotsman on a plane and the Scotsman dropped his watch out of the window.
The Scotsman waited until the plane landed a few minutes later, held out his hand and caught it.
‘How did you do that?’ the others asked.
The Scotsman replied: ‘Easy, it was five minutes slow!’
Just one of the lads
ODDEST sight of the week: top Tory ‘mandarin’ Allan Clarke giggling at the readers' tips in Viz: ‘Taxi drivers, why not pop into your local garage and have your indicators fixed then the rest of us would know where you're going…
’ Clarke came across as a bit of a lad, which I suppose is what he wanted.
It is a humorous response.
But the result is no laughing matter.
The England manager does not have the confidence of the nation.
He might have the will to fight back, but everyone is asking the same question: ‘Does he have the way?’
FA chiefs to discuss
GRAHAM TAYLOR'S future as England manager will be subject to high-level discussion over the next few days.
But the Football Association are unlikely to make a decision on his three-year reign until they return from the trip to America, and they may delay until the FA summer meeting in Bournemouth on June 26.
Taylor's position has been severely weakened by Wednesday's 2–0 defeat by the USA in Boston.
After last week's World Cup setback in Norway, international committee chairman Peter Swales, the chairman of Manchester City, gave the England manager his unqualified support.
But yesterday, as the team transferred to Washington for Sunday's game against Brazil, the FA chairman, Sir Bert Millichip, said: ‘Clearly the matter is something we need to talk about.’
Millichip insisted: ‘I'm not going to be discussing it with you people (the press) before I have discussed it with my colleagues.
‘I know exactly what they have been saying on TV.
They want me to join in the whole furore.
I'm not prepared to do that.
‘We have to talk about it but I will be doing that with my colleagues at the FA before I talk to anyone else.’
Millichip refused to be drawn further and then fudged the issue by saying: ‘This does not mean there is a question mark over the manager but we have to examine the situation.’
Meanwhile England's shell-shocked footballers came under more fire yesterday for insulting American goalkeeping hero Tony Meola during the 2–0 defeat in Boston.
Meola accused Arsenal striker Ian Wright of ‘talking trash’ and claimed England players had been calling him fat in exchanges as bitter as the Boston Tea Party.
‘Ian Wright could be in the National Basketball Association, he did so much trash talking for 45 minutes,’ Meola said.
‘The English players were saying I didn't play in England that I was fat.
I thought that happened in the NBA, I didn't think that happened in soccer.’
Simensen turns tide on leader
Lillywhite Focus on the Milk Race
CHRIS LILLYWHITE fought off another challenge to hold on to his Milk Race yellow jersey in yesterday's 116.5 mile 10th stage from Sheffield to Liverpool.
First over the line was the Kazakhstan rider Alexandre Nadobenko last year's King of the Mountains winner who finished ahead of South Africa's Gary Beneke, British amateur John Charlesworth and Norway's Ole Simensen, respectively.
These four came in 31 seconds clear of a chasing group containing Lillywhite, the Banana professional.
Simensen, who had started the day only 51 seconds behind Lillywhite in ninth place, was the rider with most to gain from the attack which came as the leaders completed eight laps of a city-centre finishing circuit.
Charlesworth's Britannia team-mate Matthew Illingworth took the bunch sprint for fifth place from Denmark's Christian Andersen, with Lillywhite next.
The race had come together near Orrell after an 80 mile breakaway by Australia's Grant Rice and Holland's Marc Lotz.
They opened up a lead of more than two minutes by Huddersfield, but were caught with just under 30 miles left.
Britain's Paul Curran escaped as the race entered Liverpool but after opening up a 10-second gap, he was caught by Illingworth, Australia's Patrick Jonker and Denmark's Kim Marcussen as they entered the circuit with 11 miles to go.
The result means that Lillywhite's advantage has been cut to 20 seconds by Simensen, now in second place, with today's 86-mile stage from Liverpool to Salford and tomorrow's city-centre circuit race at Manchester remaining.
‘Wasn't worried’
The Norwegian rider pushes the rest of Lillywhite's main rivals down one position, with Czech rider Daniel Kovar a further five seconds back.
Lillywhite, the Banana professional team rider from Walton-on-Thames, said: ‘I wasn't worried about the first break.
I knew that only two riders together wouldn't be able to stay clear to the finish, but when the break went on the circuit there was only me and my teammate Brian Smith chasing.’
Mark McKay, the Great Britain amateur team rider who missed taking a lead in the King of the Mountains competition because of mechanical trouble, gained his reward at last.
McKay collected points on all five climbs in yesterday's stage and cannot now be beaten for the overall mountains title.
EX-WREXHAM youth team coach Idris Price is the new manager of Oswestry Town.
He plans a strong youth policy as the basis for taking the re-born club into the Welsh pyramid soccer system.
An application from Oswestry to join the Cymru Alliance will be considered at the League's AGM at Carno tomorrow when the management committee will recommend an increase from 16 to 18 clubs.
If Oswestry's bid fails Town are expected to apply for membership of Wrexham area's Read Construction Welsh National League or Richards Builders Mid Wales League.
Price, who lives at Gresford and has worked in Oswestry for several years, is waiting for the outcome of tomorrow's Alliance meeting before contacting players.
He said: ‘We hope for a favourable result because Oswestry could be a major force in the Alliance.
‘But until I know more about which league we shall be in, there is no point in talking to players.’
Champs handed promotion spoils
THE various champions of what are termed North Wales' three area soccer leagues have had their respective promotions officially rubber-stamped.
Llangefni Town, who won the B & M Roofing Anglesey League, and Caernarfon Athletic, who took the Sain Caernarfon & District League title, will be upgraded to the Copyrite Panasonic Gwynedd League next time.
And Mochdre who topped the Vale of Conwy League, will step up to the OCS Clwyd League's Premier Division.
These decisions were announced on Wednesday by Bob Owen, the Gwynedd League's chairman, after attending a meeting of the League's Liaison Committee.
Other promotion and relegation issues are pending and will hinge on further liaison committee meetings as well as certain leagues' annual meetings.
From the Gwynedd League's standpoint, it still has to be determined that the champions Holyhead Town will be promoted to the Sealink Welsh Alliance.
Holyhead could well swap places with the Sealink's basement club Penmaenmawr Phoenix.
Also, the future of Gwynedd's bottom club Bangor Normal College needs to be resolved.
They could go down to the Sain Caernarfon League.
The Llangefni club will adopt a change of style next season.
They will drop the title Town and will be known as Athletic.
Colin Saynor, dominant in Porthmadog's defence in the Konica League of Wales, picked up two awards at the club's end of season celebration.
Saynor was acclaimed as the supporters' player of the year and as the players' choice.
Top scorer, striker Dave Taylorhe netted 17 goals in just half a season was presented with a trophy and the special award by club chairman Iwan Jones went to defender Steve Smith.
The choice as the clubman of the year was Dylan Ellis, the match programme editor and press officer.
Porthmadog's Reserves awards went to Chris Banks (player of the year), Vaughan Jones (top scorer), Brian Price (chairman's award), clubman of the year Mike Anthony (clubman of the year).
Beaumaris Town marked the end of their comeback season in the B & M Roofing Anglesey League with an awards presentation evening.
Darryl Williams was handed two trophies the club's player of the year and as the players' player of the year.
Wayne Williams took the top scorer's award and David Flinn was the chosen as the best young player.
Old Colwyn Sunday League clubs West Shore and Hotpoint Reserves have applied for membership of the Subaru Vale of Conwy League.
Their applications will be heard at the league's AGM in the Royal British Legion Club, Llandudno tonight (7.30pm).
Triple trouble for Os
LEADING wicket taker Jim Philips is one of three key players to miss Oswestry's home clash with Shrewsbury in Division One of the Furrows Shropshire League.
The experienced medium pacer is ruled out along with former Surrey all-rounder Ian Payne and young New Zealand batsman Phil Lewis.
The trio are replaced by all-rounders Nick Williams, Andrew Clarke and Ian Davies.
Newtown call up Tony Rudd for the home game with Acton Reynald in Division Two, while batsman John Smout Snr replaces his son Richard.
Divison Three leaders Llanivaloes include spinner Michael Jones and Ian Jones, who steps up from the second team, for the home encounter with Cound.
Andrew Evans is ruled out along with quick bowler Robert Jones.
Cae Glas, who travel to Much Wenlock, are waiting on the fitness of Mike Broadbent who injured a finger taking the match winning catch against Hanwood last Saturday.
Welshpool are at full strength for the third division derby at unchanged Montgomery.
Guilsfield are boosted by the return of paceman Patrick Wildblood and batsman David Williams for the home game with Church Ashton in Division Five.
Derek Budgeon, vice-captain of Welshpool seconds, returns to strengthen the batting for his side's home match with Much Wenlock seconds in reserve division three.
Backs hold key to All Blacks' demise
MARTIN BAYFIELD believes the British Lions backs can roar the tourists to victory over the All Blacks in tomorrow's first Test in Christchurch.
The 6ft 10ins Northampton and England lock spoke for the forwards when he said: ‘Our backs can run rings round New Zealand.
‘They are incredibly talented and very quick.
When the forwards gave them the ball in the opening four tour wins they proved that with 13 tries.
‘In the last couple of games we have struggled to give them enough ball.
But if we can win decent possession those backs are good enough to run through New Zealand's defence.’
Bayfield and England captain Will Carling are playing only after making near-miraculous recoveries from injuries against Otago in Dunedin last weekend.
Both thought that their tours were over.
Carling strained a thigh muscle in Dunedin and Bayfield ended that match on a stretcher with a neck seizure.
They came through a rugged training session yesterday and were named in a Test side that contains nine Englishmen, four Scots and only one from Ireland and Wales.
Returned home
The surprise choices are lock Andy Reed to partner Bayfield and Reed's Bath colleague Ben Clarke.
Reed has taken his chance to impress and win the place that might have gone to England's Wade Dooley, who has returned home after the death of his father.
Clarke, like Reed, completed his first season of international rugby this year but is played out of position on the blind-side flank instead of his England slot of No 8.
The Lions have their best chance of winning a Test in this opening fixture as the All Blacks can be expected to hone their act by the time the Wellington and Auckland Tests come along in the final week of the tour.
If the Lions trip here is to be worthwhile in terms of Test results and tour morale it is essential that this one is a victory.
New Zealand have not played together as a unit since last August in South Africa, where they narrowly beat the Springboks.
‘Ten months is a long time to be apart and then to be brought together to compete against such a good, experienced team as the Lions,’ said Grant Fox, New Zealand's masterly goal kicker.
Fox's kicking is crucial to the All Black's game but there are inevitably, other great and experienced winners around him.
The Lions will be threatened by fullback John Timu's try-scoring skills and there is real class in the centre with Frank Bunce and Walter Little.
But, as usual, an All Blacks team depends on the back row and Jamie Joseph, Zinzan Brooke and the gifted Michael Jones must be tamed if the Lions are to have a chance.
Martin Bayfield…predicting glory
Affleck's in good company
CHESTER-based Paul Affleck and South African Ian Palmer both joined Ian Woosnam on the 67 mark in the first round of the Honda Open in Hamburg yesterday.
Affleck, who hopes to play for Wales in the World Cup this year, had a steady 67, five birdies and 13 pars, while Sam Torrance, beginning at the 10th, did well to come in with a 68.
Sandy Lyle had to share joint fifth place with seven rivals.
Woosnam, using a new, deep-faced putter for the first time, regained his confidence on the greens to shoot a five-under-par 67 just one shot behind leader, South African Ernie Els.
Lyle, who has missed the cut twice in his only four European Tour appearances this year, came in with a 68 and declared himself well-satisfied.
But Europe's Ryder Cup captain Bernard Gallacher will be a happy man if Woosnam and Lyle can maintain this form as both will be needed for the showdown with the United States at the Belfry in September.
Woosnam has been thinking of changing to a ‘cack-handed’ grip on the greens left hand below right because his putting has been so poor in recent weeks.
But he stuck to his orthodox grip yesterday and it paid off.
Lyle, starting at the 10th, began badly with a bogey five but he birdied the 15th, 16th, first, sixth and seventh holes.
FLYING START:
Paul Affleck
Rain clouds can't save Wood's bid
LORI McNEIL dodged torrential rain to end Clare Wood's hopes in the DFS Classic in Birmingham yesterday.
The fifth seeded American won the third round encounter 6–3 6–4 then raced for shelter as the rain flooded the Edgbaston Priory club.
Sandbags were used to stem the flow but several corridors were soon under water.
McNeil, anxious to snatch victory before a suspension gave Wood a chance to recover, broke serve to love, hitting a perfect backhand return down the line on match point.
‘I could see how dark it was and it was on my mind and I thought she rushed a little bit but it worked in my favour,’ said McNeil.
Sussex's Wood gave a good account of herself and should have claimed the second set.
She said: ‘I had chances but kept overhitting.’
Second seed Amanda Coetzer of South Africa joined Martina Navratilova on the sidelines when she was beaten 7–6 6–2 by 17 year-old American Chanda Rubin.
Twelfth seed Ros Nideffer went out 4–6 6–2 10–8 to US qualifier Katrina Adams in a second round match resumed after being halted overnight at 5–5 in the final set.
And 14th seed Elna Reinach of South Africa was also beaten, losing 6–3 6–4 to Italian Laura Golarsa.
Chris sails by Nick Robinson
CHRIS WILKINSON suffered a painful reversal of fortunes today as he slumped to defeat by world No 191 David Witt at Queens.
Just 48 hours after dumping fourth seed Goran Ivanisevic out of the Stella Artois championships, the 23-year-old from Southampton lost 3–6 7–5 6–3 to one of the few players at Queen's Club this week ranked lower than his 176.
To add insult to injury, the British No 2 led by a set and 5–1 before throwing it all away.
‘After he got back I felt like I was in a black hole,’ groaned a disconsolate Wilkinson after his two hour defeat.
‘If I could have got my nose in front again maybe I could have twisted it round but it wasn't to be.’
Witt, a big-serving 6ft 3ins American, produced a disastrous 12 double faults in the match but most of those came in the first set and a half when Wilkinson could hardly put a foot wrong.
But after sensing that the confidence was ebbing away from his opponent after reeling in Wilkinson in the second set, Witt's delivery became more consistent and appropriately he clinched a place in the quarter-finals with his 11th ace.
‘I was nervous and I was not making my first serves.
He played some good stuff and I didn't raise my game when I needed to,’ added Wilkinson.
‘It is frustrating but I tried my best and it's no point getting angry.’
He at least had the consolation of a third round loser's cheque for £5,355 pounds almost doubling his prize money for the year and of picking up valuable ranking points.
League general secretary Ron Bridges has blasted clubs who try to create a web of deception after being caught cheating.
In his report to the league's AGM at the Deeside Naval Club next week Bridges will say that discipline had showed an improvement with fines reduced by over 50%.
I’ Clubs must look at the players they are registering and decide if they are the type we want in the League,’he said.
‘It would help if clubs caught cheating accepted first time instead of trying to create a web of mystery and deception on the way because cheats never prosper.’
SCOTLAND paid a high price for a 33–8 victory over a rugged Western Samoan Development XV yesterday.
Scrum-half Brian Redpath injured his shoulder and will miss Sunday's Test against Western Samoa while No 8 Carl Hogg suffered a broken nose and is unlikely to play.
‘Hogg has a very badly broken nose from an unfortunate incident which saw a local player being sent off,’ said Scotland boss Allan Hoise.
Wales saved their best till last as they rounded off their six match African tour with a brilliant eight-try 56–17 victory over the South African Barbarians.
It was Welsh rugby at its best and it proved to be much too quick for a Baa-Baas side boasting five current Springbok squad members, three Namibian internationals and a host of top Provincial players from the Republic.
‘It was the kind of performance I've been looking for for two years,’ said Welsh coach Alan Davies.
Right from the outset Wales looked in a mean mood, determined to put behind them poor performances in winning their previous five games.
Fletcher's check on Gower is ruled out
ENGLAND manager Keith Fletcher made a wasted trip to Basingstoke yesterday to watch Hampshire's David Gower who was ruled out of the championship match against Kent by a cracked rib.
But just three days before the England selectors name their team for the second Test against Australia at Lord's, Fletcher was not too concerned about Gower's injury-enforced absence.
Fletcher said: ‘It's a bit of a pity because he's certainly one of the players in our thoughts but it's no great problem I know his capabilities.
Frustrating
He added: ‘I did not know he was not going to play until I got here.
It's not vital for batsmen to play in championship matches before Tests but it is different for bowlers who have to prove themselves.’
Fletcher chatted to Gower at Basingstoke after the 36-year-old batsman had failed a fitness test.
Gower said: ‘It's disappointing and frustrating because I feel I'm in good nick.
‘In many ways, it could not have come at a worse time because the selectors are obviously considering alternatives after the defeat at Old Trafford and I would like to think I would be one of them.’
Gower broke the rib attempting a diving catch against Nottinghamshire earlier this week during a championship match which saw him score 153 and stake a claim for an England recall.
Fletcher was also denied a chance to check on the form of Kent pacemen Martin McCague and Alan Igglesden who were both sidelined by injury.
Igglesden is still troubled by the groin strain which forced him to pull out of the squad for the first Test at Old Trafford while McCague was nursing a pulled hamstring.
County championship round-up
ROB BAILEY hammered the Sussex attack all over Hove to complete the first double century of the season.
The Northamptonshire batsmen blasted exactly 200 off just 210 balls in a stay of nearly four hours, hitting 28 fours and two sixes as his side piled up 335 for two from 86 overs.
Bailey dominated a superb second wicket stand of 281 in 65 overs with opener Nigel Felton, who went on to complete a more painstaking unbeaten century off 235 balls with five boundaries.
Graham Thorpe, unlucky not to be chosen for the first Test against Australia, issued a timely reminder to the England selectors with an unbeaten 90 as Surrey struggled against joint championship leaders Glamorgan at the Oval.
Gloomy day
England wicketkeeper Alec Stewart hit 75 and helped Thorpe put on 136 for the third wicket but Surrey could only manage 233 for six in 83 overs.
Derbyshire paceman Devon Malcolm, who also has England aspirations, lit up a gloomy day at Chesterfield with a haul of four for 57 as Yorkshire laboured to 154 for six.
Graeme Hick dragged Worcestershire out of trouble with an unbeaten 82 after a four-wicket blast by Leicestershire's Winston Benjamin at New Road.
Worcester were wobbling at 33 for three but Hick guided them to 158 for five.
Middlesex, the other championship joint leaders, had Durham in trouble at 27 for three at Gateshead Fell but an unbeaten 85 by Paul Parker brought about a recovery to 175 for seven.
Stumps fly as Mr Angry goes wild
Report by SIMON WILSON
LANCASHIRE led a charmed life at Old Trafford yesterday — and cricket's ‘Mr. Angry’ went on the rampage.
Essex paceman Neil Foster, hotly tipped for an England recall this summer, lived up to his nickname when he kicked two stumps out of the ground just before tea.
In trouble
The 31 year old had seen Mike Watkinson and Phil DeFreitas dropped in the same over.
And when DeFreitas edged a streaky four through the slips of Foster's last ball, Mr. Angry lost control, lashing out at the stumps.
Although umpire Barrie Mayer refused to comment afterwards, Foster could be in trouble for his outburst.
Mayer spoke at length to Essex and England skipper Graham Gooch after the flashpoint, and Foster didn't bowl another ball.
He had toiled for 19 wicketless overs on a bouncy pitch but seemed much more cheerful when he re-emerged after tea with his arm around Mayer.
DeFreitas and Watkinson's lifelines weren't the only ones on a day when Lancashire raced to 200–2, but in the end were lucky to reach 321 all out.
Neil Fairbrother, who went on to make 63 in 70 balls, was dropped off Peter Such — ironically by Foster at mid on -when he scored 14, and Derek Pringle fumbled a dolly at slip offered by DeFreitas.
But when Steve Andrew was bowling the Essex fielders sapped up every chance, giving the former Hampshire paceman career best figures of 7–47.
He tempted Mike Atherton into a rash hook before lunch then returned to break up a third wicket stand between Fairbrother and Nick Speak which had put Lancashire in complete command.
Nervous start
Fairbrother had destroyed England off-spinner Such, who took eight Australian wickets on his test debut at Old Trafford last week, slamming four sixes in five overs after his early reprieve.
And with Speak overcoming a nervous start -he took 33 minutes to get off the mark to hit a string of boundaries, the pair put on 141 in less than 30 overs.
Then Fairbrother lobbed Andrew to Such at mid-wicket, Graham Lloyd was lbw in the same over, and two overs later Speak was caught behind one run short of his first century of the season.
Only DeFreitas (43) and Watkinson (27) offered much resistance after that, as Andrew and England hopeful Mark Ilott mopped up the tail.
But DeFreitas struck an important blow for Lancashire — and for his England chances — when he trapped John Stephenson leg before with Gouch watching from the other end, to leave Essex on 37–1 at the close.
In the wake of Foster's outburst it is understood that he faces a club fine.
Gooch said afterwards: ‘The matter is being dealt with by the club.’
FOSTER FURY: Essex's paceman boiled over in dramatic fashion 
CHEERS!…
Alexandre Nadobenko kept his cool despite yesterday's sweltering heat to win stage 10 of the Milk Race from Sheffield to Liverpool.
Full report Page 38.
Picture: Tony Kenwright
SOMERSET batsman Mark Lathwell was yesterday named Whittingdale Young Cricketer of the Month after a flying start to the new season.
England's selectors must decide this weekend whether to give the 21-year-old his big chance in the second Ashes Test against Australia.
But two of them, captain
Graham Gooch and manager Keith Fletcher, are already convinced that Lathwell is a ‘rare talent’.
Fletcher said: ‘Mark is a rare talent, a batsman who excites crowds.
He has been described as a right-handed David Gower.
If he turns out to be half as good as David then he'll be a very good batsman indeed.’
He added: ‘Mark is quality.
He's not orthodox but clearly has a good technique because he scores runs on bad pitches.’
England expects…too much
Chief Soccer Writer Peter Jardine gives a personal view on England's troubles
IT'S been a great 10 days for Scots living in England.
First Norway, then another Test defeat by Australia, and then Wednesday's defeat by that great football power, the United States.
Unfortunately, it seems the loudest critics of English soccer are now not the Scots but the English themselves.
Frankly, as a sports journalist, I find the hatchet jobs being done on Graham Taylor embarrassing.
As a Scot, I happen to believe the nonsense is spawned by arrogance.
For some reason, England still expects.
In truth, England expects too much.
Bobby Robson was pilloried in exactly the same fashion then promptly hailed as a conquering hero when his team came within a penalty shoot-out of reaching the World Cup final in 1990.
On Wednesday night, Lee Dixon missed the goal when well-placed and the goalkeeper beaten.
Lee Sharpe fell over when clean through.
David Batty should have had a penalty.
Ian Wright missed three clear chances, while US ‘keeper Tony Meola was inspired.
Failing
How can Taylor be blamed for those individual actions?
And, in my opinion, Chris Waddle the current darling of the sports writers is equally capable of failing to deliver as the tabloids were quick to point out during his lengthy England career.
The hail of invective that followed defeat in Norway should be put in perspective.
Sure England were bad but what about the progress made by Norway?
As all Scots must have thought after Oslo: ‘When you've lost to Peru and Costa Rica, come back and see me about World Cup humiliation.’
You see, we've been through this public witch hunt before.
Fifteen years ago Ally MacLeod said we'd bring home medals from Argentina and reneged on his promise spectacularly.
Eleven years later I worked with him as a local newspaper reporter when he was a club manager at Ayr United.
He was sometimes difficult, often distrustful and the scars of a thousand press knives have never healed.
Yet MacLeod was guilty only of falsely raising a nation's hopes.
Taylor hasn't even tried to do that.
If Taylor goes, what idiot would take the job?
Kevin Keegan, Glenn Hoddle or Ron Atkinson, all loved by the media, would merely be walking the plank towards a couple of defeats.
It's time you English grew up and accepted defeat a little more graciously.
Even his enemies would have to applaud his courage in facing the music after one of the greatest embarrassments in England's history.
He did not duck one question.
Duke ends retirement talk
DUKE McKENZIE has set his mind on making yet another attack on a version of the world title.
McKenzie, 30, banished all notions of retirement today following talks with his manager Mickey Duff.
After sleeping on the split decision loss of his WBO super-bantamweight title to Puerto Rico's Daniel Jimenez at the Lewisham Theatre, McKenzie and Duff both feel there is enough left to offer the world scene.
And Duff will soon make approaches to Cedric Kushner, the manager of America's IBF 8st 10lb champion Kennedy McKinney, with a view to challenging for that title.
A ‘strong’ letter will also be sent to the WBO asking them to consider a re-match with Jimenez because of the close nature of a verdict in which German judge Norbert Krosch scored the fight even at 115 points each.
McKenzie is Britain's only fighter this century to win versions of a world title after previously holding the IBF flyweight crown and WBO bantamweight championship.
Commonwealth bantamweight champion Johnny Armour needed four stitches in cut sustained on his left eye in the later stages of his points win over rugged Algerian Boualem Belkif and is unlikely to fight again until September.
MORE TO OFFER:
Duke McKenzie
Tidy Tim!
AUSTRALIA'S reserve wicketkeeper Tim Zoehrer put away his pads at Edgbaston yesterday and took up his occasional job leg spin bowling.
And changing places with Ian Healy at tea, he skidded through a top-spinner to trap Warwickshire batsman Trevor Penney lbw with only his sixth delivery.
Worcester finished on 184 for eight before a torrential thunderstorm washed out the last 90 minutes play.
MARTIN BAYFIELD…predicting glory for Lions
Taylor left hoping for a miracle cure
Report by Rob King in Washington
GRAHAM TAYLOR will defy the fury of a humiliated nation and risk his entire reputation on an England miracle in the next five months.
Not even defeat by an American team whose followers barely understand the rules will persuade him that he has nowhere left to go but out of the national manager's chair.
In an emotional response to the 2–0 defeat in Boston which piled on the agony after an identical scoreline in the World Cup in Norway a week earlier, Taylor knows he has been left naked to the most virulent attacks by media and fans.
He may have only two games to save his job against the powerful Brazilians and Germans to conclude the ill-fated US Cup tour.
Smile
If he loses both he will still want to hang on in for the three autumn World Cup games in which England's fate is still in his own hands.
Asked if he had been tempted to quit at any time during the past eight days, he raised a smile and a quip: ‘I've felt like that for the last two years!
‘You go into the job, hopefully with your eyes as open as they can be.
But they're never fully open until you're into it.
‘After the first 18 months you know anything can happen.
There are no rules or regulations everything's up for grabs.
Nothing surprises me.
But I took the job.
‘It homes in totally on one man and that man is me.
If what I've got to do now is stand up to whatever is thrown at me, I'll stand up.’
Does he feel a failure?
Taylor shook his head and replied: ‘I'll go to sleep at night.’
Even his enemies would have to applaud his courage in facing the music after one of the greatest embarrassments in England's history.
He did not duck one question.
Confidence
‘It's a lonely task even when you're winning,’ he admitted.
‘This is a battle for me but I've been brought up to battle.
‘I've been taught that if things aren't going your way and they never do all the time when times are tough and you're a bit low in confidence, it's up to you to pick yourself up off the ground.
‘It's no good looking round, you don't make excuses or look for other people to help you.
‘You get in there son, and you work.
That's what my mum and dad told me and I believe them.
It's stood me in good stead and I'll keep doing it.
All I can do is get my head down and work.’
FLASHBACK…
To yesterday's Post
Taylor wins an FA vote of confidence
Report by Rob King in Washington
GRAHAM TAYLOR will remain England manager for next season's World Cup climax, despite the humiliation of Wednesday's 2–0 defeat by the USA.
FA chief executive Graham Kelly last night ended a day of speculation about Taylor's future when he insisted that his position is not up for discussion.
Power battle
‘He is still the right man for the job,’ said Kelly and it is now understood the issue will not even be on the agenda when the Football Association holds its annual meeting at Bournemouth on June 26, a week after the conclusion of the ill-fated US Cup tour.
But there is clearly a power battle going on among the Lancaster Gate mandarins, illustrated by the words of 78year-old chairman Sir Bert Millichip.
He signalled the first clear signs of disillusionment with Taylor when he revealed he was canvassing his fellow Council members about the events of the past six weeks.
Asked if he felt sorry for the fans back home, Sir Bert said, ‘I feel more sorry for myself.
It's been a very embarrassing situation so far.
‘It's not the end of the world but there are matters that we have to give thought to.’
After dropping four World Cup points in three games, concluding with last week's 2–0 defeat in Norway, and then the embarrassment of losing in Boston, Millichip suggested he had over-ruled last week's vote of confidence by Peter Swales, chairman of the FA international committee.
Consult
‘I don't want to talk about what Mr Swales has said.
He's entitled to his opinion.
‘Clearly the matter is something that needs talk but I'm going to consult with my colleagues rather than with the media.’
But Kelly insists Taylor will be allowed to complete his attempt to return to America for next summer's finals from the three final qualifying games against Poland, Holland and San Marino next autumn.
‘We are in the middle of a qualifying process and there's no useful purpose in discussing this before that process is concluded.
‘I felt he was the right man for the job in 1990 when he was appointed to succeed Bobby Robson.
With the greatest of respect I don't see that two defeats changes that.
‘I don't think any useful purpose would be achieved by indulging in speculation at this moment in time.’
Taylor meanwhile insisted he will battle on.
Haunt me
But as the campaign against him reaches a new and fierce intensity, he admitted: ‘I can't feel any lower than I do now.
‘You can't keep apologising.
That is a result that is in the history books now.
It will probably haunt me like it did Walter Winterbottom when he lost to the States in 1950.
‘It's impossible for there to be a lower point, simply because of this result and the fact that I am the manager in charge of a team representing the country.’
He added: ‘I can imagine how people at home feel now.
But I don't think they'll have any idea how I'm feeling.
None whatsoever.
That's where you're on your own in this job.’
Shell-shocked Des
GRAHAM TAYLOR looks set to stick with Des Walker right to the bitter end, after his shock introduction to England's 2–0 crash in Boston.
The Samdporia defender, whose mistakes have done more than anything to throw the team into crisis, remains the manager's favourite.
He has now missed just two of Taylor's 33 games, including the 1991 defeat by Germany.
There seemed no place for him in the context of an England team battling to wipe out a one goal deficit against a reeling American side in Foxboro.
So Taylor's explanation for pulling out Carlton Palmer only loaded the ammunition for critics of both manager and player.
With England staring at their greatest humiliation for nearly 50 years, he sent on a defender and explained: ‘He's not had the best of times lately but I believe this is the time to support certain people.
‘You have to battle your way through certain situations.
It's not just managers, players have to do it too.
‘If your form isn't so clear, you're not going to get it right sitting on the bench.’
Although he had already sent on Ian Wright for back injury victim Les Ferdinand, the rules of the competition still allowed for a third outfield substitution.
But he left Paul Merson, Teddy Sheringham and Andy Sinton sidelined.
Only current captain David Platt and Chris Woods come close to Walker with 29 and 27 caps under the beleaguered English boss and the Wednesday goalkeeper has also suffered an alarming dip in form in the past few weeks.
But Taylor might argue that, Chris Waddle apart, there are few players available outside his squad to turn to.
In his 33 games, he has called up a staggering 76 players and used 56 of them.
No less than 27 have won their first cap under the England manager but only six of the 13 players he used in Norway were his ‘new boys’ Carlton Palmer, Les Ferdinand, Lee Sharpe, David Batty, substitute Ian Wright and new captain Paul Ince.
And Taylor has created five one-cap wonders Earl Barrett, Andy Gray, Rob Jones, Mark Walters and David White.
COMEDIAN LES DIES
Vain bid to save star
THE entertainment world was last night mourning the death of top comic Les Dawson, who collapsed and died during a hospital check-up visit.
One of Britain's best-loved comedians, 59-year-old Dawson had gone to the BUPA Hospital in Manchester and collapsed from a suspected heart attack.
Staff tried in vain to revive him.
Full story Page 3 
Les Dawson hospital staff tried to save him