

Don't career ahead, for a fulfilling life play…
HUNDREDS of people today shun a family for the sake of a thriving career.
But, according to the experts, if you want to stay healthy and happy you should have children.
PRU LANGTON reports.
ARNOLD Schwarzenegger and Maria Shriver vouch for it, so do Goldie Hawn and Kurt Russell and a whole host of other celebrities.
Bill Cosby positively enthuses about it.
Having children is good for you.
Not just because it enhances and enriches a relationship, but because there are positive medical advantages too.
‘If you want to stay healthy and happy, make sure you have a family.
Couples who deliberately remain childless face mental and emotional problems,’ maintains social psychologist Dr Frederick Koenig.
Failures
‘Couples who are childless by choice have far more marital problems than parents,’ he adds.
‘And it's not uncommon for them to blame each other, as they get older, for taking the decision not to have a family.’
Indeed, he claims that they work too hard, substituting their career for a child and are more likely to become alcoholics or take drugs.
They can come to feel they are failures.
‘Those who tell you their careers come first and don't leave them time for a family, are simply making an excuse.
‘It is perfectly possible to combine a family with a career if you really want to.’
Someone who agrees with that is
Goldie Hawn.
Goldie, 46, has three children at home and has regular visits from live-in lover Kurt Russell's son Boston, 14, from his previous marriage.
But, at an age when most women figure their nappy days are over, the thought of never again hearing the patter of little feet is just too much for Goldie.
‘I feel lost without kids,’ she says.
‘I love to have them around me all the time.’
‘They make everything all right at home, and without that I'm no good in all the other areas of my life.’
Harrison Ford is married to ET writer Melissa Mathison, and they have two children, Malcolm, six, and Georgina, three.
He has vowed not to miss a moment of the children's formulative years.
His decision is based on bitter experience.
He has two grown-up sons by his previous marriage.
He says: ‘I didn't miss years, but I did miss some very important times in their lives.
Children are a vital part of happy married life and blessed with this new lease of family life, I don't intend to make the same mistake again.’
Movie tough guy Arnold Schwarzenegger and his TV reporter wife Maria Shriver have two children, Katherine, two, and Christina 18 months.
The 44-year-old star watched little Christina battle for life thankfully successfully after an operation for a hole in her heart.
He says: ‘It's when something like that happens that you know just how important children are.’
Please give to Sid in process Happy families
‘We wanted someone young, ambitious and on the way up a lad from Tesco applied
IN terms of the risk factor, which job carries the most stress?
Airline pilot?
Stuntman?
Lion tamer?
Or how about your every day football manager, suspect to the whims of ambitious chairmen and demands of football fans who hail you one minute and then call for your head if the glint of silverware is not on the horizon.
They don't call the manager's chair the hot-seat for nothing.
And yet an remarkable 50 people applied for the recent job at Wigan Athletic a team relegated to the Third Division last season and with five of their best players out of contract.
Club chairman Stephen Gage was astounded by the quality response of the 50 enquiries he received for a job advertised in just ONE national newspaper.
He said: ‘I expected six or seven calibre applicants, though others in the business said I would be surprised by the numbers to apply.
‘I suppose it shows there must be a lot of managers or ex-players who are looking for work.’
According to the chairman, applicants included 12 ex-internationals such as former Arsenal midfielder Graham Rix.
Mr. Gage said: ‘Graham had just finished a contract with Dundee Utd and was looking to get into management.
He had excellent credentials for the job, having played over 700 matches for clubs in three countries and 17 full caps for England.’
Other hopefuls included two ex-Premier League bosses, who Mr. Gage could not name to respect their applications made in confidence.
Also linked with Wigan were former Northern Ireland star Sammy McIlroy and Tommy Docherty's son, Mike, although these were not names confirmed by Mr Gage.
One amusing enquiry came from a local supporter.
The chairman said: ‘He was a shelf stacker at Tescos and said it fully qualified him for the job!’
Crewe Alexandra's number two, Kenny Swain, was eventually chosen as the right man to bounce Wigan back up the League ladder.
‘Kenny did stand out from the rest for the job, but it was an extremely hard decision,’ said Gage.
He added:’ We were looking for someone who was young, ambitious and on the way up in management.
‘Kenny's contributions and success at Crewe impressed us greatly and he also has a reasonable knowledge of the local non-League scene.
This was important as we recruit a number of players from there.’
A League title and European Cup winner with Aston Villa, Swain takes up the Springfield Park post next Monday.
His first job will be to try and persuade Wigan's promising trio of Alan Johnson, Allen Tankard and Bryan Griffiths that their futures lie with the club.
His second will be to walk that famous soccer tightrope that tests the best and topples the rest.
We wish Kenny and all the game's managers a successful 1993–94 campaign!
Granny Lucy pledges to keep battling
THE VICTIM WHO WON'T BE BEATEN
By Philippa Bellis
BRAVE great-granny Lucy Hughes is fighting back just weeks after losing both legs in a horrific accident.
Six weeks ago she was lying crushed under the wheels of a double-decker bus.
Both her legs had to be amputated above the knee.
However, the incredible Liverpool pensioner has amazed hospital staff and family alike with her remarkable recovery.
The nurses say she's even helped get THEM through her ordeal.
Lucy spent just three days in intensive care before doctors moved her to an ordinary ward at the Royal Liverpool University Hospital.
Today, leafing through the hundreds of cards from well-wishers, Lucy, 69, brushed off her bravery: ‘My legs have gone and I have got to get on with it.’
Lucy, who has 13 grandchildren and two great grandsons, added: ‘I have already been down to my flat and have had a laugh with my friends.
‘I just want to carry on as usual.’
Paramedics and a medical aid team fought for an hour by the roadside to keep her alive after the accident at the junction of Scotland Road and Stanley Road.
She was given pain relieving drugs and placed on intravenous drips to replace vital blood plasma and fluids.
She stunned the medical team by attempting to make conversation for more than half an hour before she lost consciousness.
And then she even thanked them for helping her.
Her lower legs were so badly crushed there was no hope of saving them.
Now she is learning to walk again and has already had a few day visits home.
Lucy, of Athol Street, Kirkdale, remembers little of her ordeal.
‘All I can remember is them lifting the bus off my legs using airbags.
‘But it started to topple so they had to let it back down on my legs again.
‘I get phantom leg pains and pins and needles which is very annoying.
‘But the staff have been wonderful.
‘They are going to try me with small artificial legs to start with and once I get my balance they will give me bigger ones.’
Lucy has planned a special Mass as a thank-you to hospital staff, medical and fire crews and everyone who sent goodwill cards.
It will be held at St Anthony's Church, Scotland Road, on June 18 at noon.
Getting better…
Lucy with some of her 200 cards from well-wishers How the Echo reported the accident
MY marriage has been in trouble for two years, ever since my husband started having affairs.
We have two children, aged eight and six, and I know my husband thinks the world of them, but he is carrying on living the life of a single man, with no thought for me.
I have started divorce proceedings, as we have been living apart for the last two months, but now he is pleading with me to take him back.
I don't know what I am doing.
I have a part-time job, but I have been off sick for the last two weeks, because I can't keep my mind on it.
I'm on tranquilisers to calm my nerves.
What would you advise me to do, Wendy?
He says he will be faithful, that he loves only me, but I know he has had three affairs in the last year.
WENDY SAYS…
I suspect you really have three children, not two the third one being your husband.
He is the kind of man who thinks that whatever he does, he should be forgiven.
Mother love has a tendency to forgive all, and a lot of men seem to think that their wife is their mother!
But you are not his mother, and you need to make this clear to him.
You don't say anything about your feelings for him.
Do you love him?
If you do, then maybe you should give him the chance he is asking for.
If you decide to do that, don't feel you are giving in.
What you are doing is taking a mature view of the situation.
If it doesn't work out, no-one including yourself will be able to blame you for the breakdown of your marriage.
GREEN-THINKING pupils cleaned up in a recycling competition to create new toys from old household items.
The youngsters from Grove Street community primary school in New Ferry made games and models from plastic balls and washing powder scoops.
Their ingenious green creations included a submarine, car, baby's rattle, hand puppets and board games.
Excellent ideas
The toys won the school £200 in a contest run by Wirral council and the Port Sunlight-based soap giants Lever.
Star pupils Gary Pringle and Laura Henderson were specially commended.
Wirral council's recycling officer Paul Jones said: ‘There were lots of different and excellent ideas.’
Toy makers…
Gary Pringle, 10, and Laura Henderson, 11
Dad's only gag is one he puts on the budgie
JOHN Carroll will do anything for a quiet life, according to his young daughters.
‘He gags the budgie so he can't sing and ties the hamster's wheel with string to stop it making a noise,’ say Helen, nine, and six-year-old Carrie Ann.
And John, 35, of Pagewood Close, Noctorum, Birkenhead, has strong views about television.
Hates
‘He won't let us watch Neighbours or Home and Away and will always say he wants to watch the other side, no matter what it is.’
Wife Sandra adds: ‘He's a man of few words who hates the slightest bit of noise.
But he's all right really!’
John protests: ‘I don't think I'm a misery but I do tell the kids to go and watch Neighbours and Home and Away on the other TV.
‘After all, I only want a bit of peace and quiet and I think I am entitled to that!’
Cheer up dad…
John with daughter Helen
THORNTONS bosses have had a bit of a chuckle with their Father's Day range this year.
They have brought out a range of confectionery for the man in you life, be it father or partner.
There's a lemon and lime Jelly Welly at 25 pence within almost anybody's reach and a dark chocolate novelty bow tie filled with mint fondant at 55 pence.
At the dearer end of the scale there are whisky truffles (£1.49) and a milk chocolate racing car with white chocolate headlights (£2.75).
Happy ending is big no-claims bonus for Michael
NOW for a story about a motorist which has a happy ending.
Four months ago, I wrote about Michael Harris from Crosby, who was the classic victim of the ‘no claim, no blame’ trap.
A woman driver ran into the back of his car at traffic lights in Formby.
She told him she would get a friend in the trade to look after the repairs, but when nothing happened Michael got the job done on his own comprehensive insurance policy with AGF.
But because his insurance brokers could not match up details from the other driver with her insurance company's records, Michael lost his no-claims bonus.
So insurance on the new Ford Fiesta car he had bought to drive his disabled wife about was going to cost him £750 double what he would have had to pay before the accident.
Gary Duckers, of insurance brokers Richard Bamber, said: ‘We live in a world of no-claim bonuses, not no-blame bonuses.’
But Michael called me the other day to say: ‘I wasn't getting anywhere until you contacted the insurance company and my agents.
I have now heard that, if I pay £152, I will get a rebate and my no-claim bonus will be restored.
‘Thanks very much indeed.
You have saved me a lot of money.’
Let's us hope we can do the same for Alan Fennah and his parking fine.
He seems to have just as strong a case.
Michael Harris…victim of insurance trap
Call for volunteers to CHANNEL their efforts
VOLUNTEERS are needed for CHANNEL, a charity which supports family social work on Merseyside.
It consists of a number of locally based groups, linked together by a holding committee on which the district groups are represented.
The groups raise money and distribute it to help those in need, mainly through social workers.
They also recycle unwanted domestic goods through a small objects store based at St Bede's Church in Hartington Road, Liverpool and are hoping to open a baby equipment store in the near future.
At present there are groups in the Garston, Speke, Belle Vale, Toxteth, Halewood and Prescot areas.
It is hoped to revive lapsed groups in the near future in the city centre, Vauxhall, Dingle and Walton areas and branch out into as yet uncovered areas.
Volunteers are needed to give about one hour a month for a group meeting, plus fund-raising events, usually three or four times a year.
If anyone wants to help they should contact Rebecca Black on .
Marriage frightens me
I AM a 35-year-old man.
I have been going out with my girlfriend for three years and she wants us to get married but I'm not so sure!
You see, I've had a few quite long relationships before but, although I think the world of this young lady and love her deeply, I don't feel that I am the marrying kind.
I see her most nights, but I really look forward to my ‘nights off.’
When I think of getting married and all that means I get this feeling as if I am being physically choked.
Is there something wrong with me, not wanting to be married?
Will I mellow towards the idea of marriage as I get older?
WENDY SAYS…
What you are telling me is that you are the kind of person who needs emotional space, and if someone tries to occupy that space all the time, then you don't want to know.
That is not unusual.
Space is something that we all need, but what is important is the amount of space we feel comfortable with.
This is something you must discuss with your girlfriend.
You may be surprised to find that she doesn't want to shackle you with a ball and chain.
There is no single blue print.
In marriage, every couple has to work out their own rules.
So get talking to this girl you love, or else you may very well lose her.
I can't get over my holiday fling
I HAVE been happily married for five years and we have two children.
Because of the difficulty of leaving the children, my wife and I decided to have a short break away on our own this year.
She went to stay with her sister in London, and I went sailing for a week with a colleague from work.
How I wish that I hadn't gone.
In the pub one night, I met a girl, fancied her and you can guess the rest.
Now I am filled with remorse, loathing and longing, because I love my wife and children but I remain attracted to this girl and can't get her out of my mind.
The loathing is for myself.
How could I have done such a thing?
I know I should put this girl out of my mind, and I have stopped myself getting in touch with her again.
I feel I should tell my wife what happened, because, if our relationship means anything, we should be honest.
Devastated
I know she will be devastated, and I'm not sure what she will want to do.
That is what frightens me and stops me from telling her.
What should I do?
WENDY SAYS…
Generally, I would agree that honesty is the best policy, but there are times in a marriage when it is better to keep things to yourself and this is one of them.
As you seem truly sorry and regret what you did, then I would advise you not to tell your wife, because once you've told her, you can't untell her.
You are bound to lose her trust and you could wreck your marriage.
Give yourself full marks for having the determination to try and put this girl out of your mind.
Keep at it and you will succeed.
As to why you did it, only you can tell.
You won't be the first or last man or woman who gets themselves involved in a holiday romance.
Can I be a better lover?
I WAS married four years ago to a girl I loved very much, but I lost her to another man, because I was so incompetent when it came to having sex.
I was a virgin when we married, but I know that she had been with other men before me.
I tried very hard to get it right and satisfy her.
I read a lot of books, and I knew the theory of it very well, but I failed when it came to the practice.
I have met another girl and I think there could be a future for us together, but I am frightened that the same thing might happen.
I couldn't face it a second time.
I would welcome your advice.
WENDY SAYS…
You loved her very much, but I am interested to see that you saw yourself as having sex, not making love.
There is a difference.
Could that have been part of the problem, I wonder?
Reading a cookery book about how to make a cake is very different from the actual doing of it.
Theory is all very well in it's place, but not in bed.
I think you were concentrating too much on giving a successful personal performance.
Forget about yourself and concentrate on your girlfriend, and try to be aware of the messages she is giving you.
Most of all, relax.
A woman is more likely to be put off by a polished performer, if that is all he has to offer.
MR GOULT'S faithful terrier Champ has been pining away at Huyton police station.
RSPCA experts, concerned for his care, were today due to ask police to release him into their care as early as possible.
They will then try to revive his spirits while they consider which offer of a new home is most suitable for him.
The beloved pet dog was found sitting next to the body of his dead master.
Doted
He has since been well cared for by Huyton officers.
Mr Goult's nephew, John Goult, who already has a guard dog at his home in Esthwaite Avenue, St Helens, said: ‘They were an inseparable pair.
‘Champ must be in a dreadful state.
‘Uncle John doted on him.
He would buy Champ's meal before his own.
‘He did everything for that dog and thought the world of him.
‘They went out for walks up to five times a day and he spoiled Champ rotten.
‘There was real love there.
‘We only hope Champ can find a new home and somehow get over this.’
John Hitch, of the RSPCA's Liverpool branch, said he would be asking Huyton Police to deliver the 10-year-old arthritic pet into the hands of the Halewood animal shelter as soon as possible.
Anyone seriously interested in giving Champ a lifelong home should contact Halewood RSPCA on .
Misery for a miner
SHOW MUST GO ON!
THE SHOW is over according to British Coal.
BUT the audience is still hanging around, waiting for an encore.
PARKSIDE COLLIERY, the last pit on the Lancashire coalfield, officially closed last Friday, with the loss of over 700 jobs.
BUT a week later protestors are still camped outside the locked gates.
JACKIE NEWTON spent a night at the camp to find out why Women Against Pit Closures refuse to accept defeat.
Can my mother divorce a missing husband?
MY dad left my mum about 12 years ago.
He was always unreliable and has never been in touch.
My mum doesn't have a clue where he is and says she doesn't think she can divorce him because of this for all we know he could be dead.
Could my mum get a divorce without knowing where he is?
NINA SAYS…
The answer is yes.
First of all, there are ways that missing husbands can be traced so that the divorce petition can be sent to them.
Where the divorce petition has in it a claim for maintenance payments for the wife or child, if approached by an interested solicitor, the DSS will provide details of the whereabouts of the husband if they can.
Information may also be obtained from the Passport Office.
However, if after all the reasonable steps have been taken your father cannot be traced, a court can order that the divorce petition need not be sent to him.
You will need to tell your mum to consult a solicitor if she now wishes to obtain a divorce.
I HAVE been treated for a particular medical condition since childhood.
Six years ago, I had my first child with no complications.
Shortly afterwards my usual medication was changed.
I was told that the new drug I was given was better than the one I had been previously taking and I was not warned about any side effects or told not to get pregnant.
I did not suffer any side effects myself from the new drug but, after I had been taking it for nearly two years, I became pregnant.
I asked the doctor who was seeing me in the hospital antenatal clinic whether or not I should stop taking the drug and he said it was OK and that I should just carry on.
I eventually had my baby, a little girl, but she was born with spina bifida.
My friend says I should not have been taking this drug during my pregnancy and that it is well known that it can cause these problems.
Can I sue?
NINA SAYS…
Unfortunately, you have not given me enough information about your medical condition or the drug which you were taking to enable me to say definitely whether or not you can make a claim.
Some drugs are known to cause foetal damage and should not be taken during pregnancy.
If the drug which you took is known to cause foetal damage, then it would appear that the doctor who advised you at the hospital has been negligent.
Once you have established fault, you are half way to proving your claim.
However, you would also have to show that the drug in question had actually caused the spina bifida and you still need an expert medical opinion in order to establish this.
If you can prove this question of causation and show that the doctor gave you incorrect advice then your claim ought to succeed, in which case the damages will be substantial.
My advice would be to see a solicitor immediately as your case needs very careful investigation and consideration.
Preferably, it should be someone who specialises in these cases.
Over-40 baby-boomers
FORTY-SOMETHING women are turning their backs on careers and embracing family life.
The number of babies born to single women over 40 has more than doubled over the last 10 years with the North West top of the older mums' baby league table.
Almost one in four births in 1991 among the over-40s are among unmarried women.
This compares with just 11pc a decade ago.
The contrast is most marked in the West Midlands, which has seen the percentage of births jump from 8pc to 20pc over the decade.
NORTHERN Ireland stands out as having the highest number of long-term unemployed.
In Strabane, Co Londonderry, more than six out of ten people have been out of work for at least the last year.
REGIONAL health trends uncovered in the survey show that men are least likely to hit the bottle in East Anglia, which has the lowest proportion of heavy drinkers.
Waiting two-year-old Rhys Daniels in his mother's arms outside the High Court yesterday
Farming vital to help maintain rural life
By David Lloyd Farming Correspondent
POLICIES for agricultural support and the environment need to work together to the mutual benefit of farming and the countryside.
This has been stressed by new Minister of Agriculture Gillian Shephard in her first speech since taking up her new job in the Cabinet.
Mrs Shephard told farmers in her native Norfolk: ‘Farming is a major industry whose importance to maintaining the health of rural life, both for those who work in the country- side and those who enjoy it as an amenity, is all too easily forgotten.
‘MAFF exists to serve the interests of that industry although it is not simply there to look after farmers as too many commentators still assume.’
Agriculture was undergoing considerable change and she saw as one of her main tasks the need to ensure that the UK farming industry benefits in full from CAP.
‘The CAP must not be slanted against our farmers because of the different structure of our agriculture, and competition in the Community must be genuinely fair,’ Mrs Shephard insisted.
Her job had been made a little easier by the price-fixing agreement reached at a recent meeting for European farm ministers.
The deal contained a number of very positive points for the UK.
Contradiction
Mrs Shephard said some conservationists saw a contradiction between MAFF's support for farming and its policies for the environment and some farmers were suspicious of the emphasis placed on green issues.
With 70pc of the UK farmland, effective conservation of the countryside and protection of the environment remains largely reliant on the activities of farmers.
Claiming that the landscape was created by farmers and can only be maintained by farming, she added: ‘Our policies for agricultural support and the environment need to work together, to the mutual benefit of our farming industry and of our countryside.’
Mrs Shepherd sees no incompatibility in her dual role as Minister for Agriculture and Food and that it was ‘nonsense’ for anyone to state that it was inappropriate to be responsible both for the agricultural industry and the quality and safety of food.
‘Consumers have the right to food of the highest standards, and farmers’ interests are surely best served by producing such food to meet consumer demand,’she concluded.
Country Landowners Association president Lord De Ramsey became one of the first of British agriculture's leaders to meet the new Minister.
He said afterwards: ‘I was delighted to find total agreement between the CLA and the Minister on the need for creating increased employment in the countryside, and on the crucial role of landowners in developing a thriving rural economy and attractive environment.
‘We also agreed that the emergence of supply management as a key element in CAP reform was worrying.
It introduces inflexibility and excessive bureaucratic controls at a time when the industry needs to be able to develop along economic lines.
‘It also creates undesirable strains in the landlord-tenant system.’
Gillian Shephard
Freeman Sophia's big day
By Richard Williams Daily Post Staff
PENSIONER Sophia Hymes will be given the freedom of Chester today at the age of 91.
Mrs Hymes becomes the oldest woman ever to receive the honour.
The mother-of-seven will now be able to pass the honour on to her large family which also includes 13 grandchildren.
Mrs Hymes, of Saltney, Chester, will receive her freedom from Lord Mayor Margaret Byatt at a special Pentice Court at the Town Hall.
And last night she said: ‘I am old, and by now this is something for my family really rather than for me.
‘I have had to wait a long time for the freedom, but it will be passed down and at least I can say that I was a Freeman of Chester.
‘It will just be my family and me there, and I have not really told that many people about it.’
Mrs Hymes was born in Chester to the Hand family, and her father was a well-known member of the Chester Corporation.
She married John Hymes, also of Chester, and then lived on a series of farms in this area and in Kent and Lincolnshire.
The title had been in her family for generations, and her family appealed against the early Middle Ages ruling which bans women from being Freemen.
But their plea was turned down.
Then, last year, the city's Guild decided to change their minds and open their doors to women.
The first admissions were two months ago, but Mrs Hymes will today make history by becoming the oldest woman to hold the title.
Steve Sutcliffe, of Chester city council's policy unit, said: ‘She will become the oldest female Freeman and as she feels she cannot attend a service later this month, we have staged this special ceremony for her.’
Making history at 91 oldest female Freeman Sophia Hymes Picture: CLIFF BRETT
Three out of four directors say social workers lack the necessary powers to act when they suspect old people are being abused by carers, relatives or neighbours.
The survey based on interviews with 79 social services departments concludes action on abuse is often unco-ordinated and unrecorded.
Only one in five departments is believed to keep a record of abuse of adults or the elderly.
The study, published in this week's Community Care magazine, shows financial fraud is the most common form of abuse.
Almost seven out of 10 directors say they have procedures for social workers who handle clients' money.
But more than half want the law to enable social workers to intervene more.
Nine out of 10 directors say there should be compulsory registration of private care agencies.
Bus stops
A EURO information bus arrives at Chester Castle car park today after being based for two days in Ellesmere Port.
The County Council is launching two Euro information centres for businesses on June 18.
The bus will be open to the public today and tomorrow from 9.30am to 5pm.
Club AGM ANYONE interested in the future plans of Ellesmere Port Boys' Club is invited to this evening's annual general meeting.
(7.30pm).
For the young
A SPECIAL service for families with young children is being held today at Christleton Parish Church.
The pram and toddler service starts at 10.30am.
Kenneth Prescott declared steroids at Customs
A riotous romp full of frantic fun and energy
A Flea in Her Ear
THEATRE CLWYD
Review by Penny Kiley
HALF WAY through the play you will have seen a walking table, several fast opening doors, the rapid interchanging of numerous couples, and a hotel foyer that is busier than Piccadilly Circus and has more familiar faces than your family tree.
Georges Feydeau's turn of the century French farce is a classic of its kind and this production brings it to funny frantic life.
This kind of action needs precise timing and director Mike Alfreds and his 14 strong cast provide the elegantly energetic execution that is required.
It all starts when Parisienne wife Raymonde (Susie Blake) suspects her husband Victor Emmanuel (Colin McCormack) of having an affair.
He is actually one of the few men around who is not obsessed by faithlessness.
But she sets a trap and sets off a series of events that entangle household, family and friends.
The play has some inventive touches: there is a servant mistaken for a master, a wife mistaken for a mistress, a deliberately revolving invalid and a reluctantly revolving hotel proprietress.
Then there are the lost consonants.
One character, Camille, cannot pronounce them until he is fitted with a false palate: one more object to get comically lost.
Riotous
It may not be politically correct to laugh at speech impediments but Simon Roberts' excitable characterisation gets some of the biggest laughs.
And with or without his full quota of words he makes as much noise as anyone in what is a rather riotous production.
Adding to the energy level is Colin McCormack doubling at deceptive speed as two mistaken characters.
He is almost a one man optical illusion.
The rest of the cast are equally enthusiastic in this exuberant production.
Kissing leads to tears for pair of lonely hearts
Kissing Sid James Unity Theatre Review by Penny Kiley
THE famous comic actor does not appear, except as an unflattering simile.
In fact, there are only two characters on stage.
Eddie (Charles Bartholemew) is a chubby sales rep who fills the gaps in his life with talk.
He talks about his money, his gadgets and his mother.
Crystal (Terri Morgan) is a croupier who likes doing things on impulse.
Her latest impulsive act is to agree when Eddie invites her, at length, to a weekend away.
They have only met once before.
The play, written and directed by prolific local playwright Robert Farquhar for his Peccadillo theatre company, is, in fact, taking a fairly well-worn theme: that of the two mismatched lonely hearts.
But he does manage to get some humour out of the situation.
His dialogue has a slightly exaggerated authenticity and his direction has pace.
There are some nice ideas, like the freeze-frame technique which tells a passing tale with swift comedy.
If those scenes evoke screen drama, others are closer to radio — particularly a very funny sex scene which takes place entirely in the dark.
The two actors make a good contrast.
Eddie is an overgrown schoolboy with a penchant for pulling fleshy faces.
Crystal is worldly but willing to take a risk.
Eddie gets the best lines, perhaps because he has the most lines.
He can lapse into playground language at moments of stress, or even, at one point, some pompous Hancockian self-pity.
Crystal's words, in contrast, are crisp and cynical.
The action takes place over one disastrous weekend full of rain, fights and missing room service.
Eddie tries to deny he still lives with his mum.
Crystal talks about walking out of a relationship.
Their own is obviously doomed.
Yet there are, very occasionally, moments that are genuinely romantic.
And there are many that raise some slightly sad laughter.
The women's night
IT'S 5.45am and we're jolted awake by a blaring car horn.
Through the caravan window we glimpse a fully blazing brazier, and the improbable sight of men, women and children already involved in a dawn protest.
By 6am two women are holding the Parkside pit camp barrier aloft to greet incoming traffic.
Grandmother Sylvia Pye is breaking up wood with a sledgehammer at the roadside.
As the morning traffic builds up on the A49 they are rewarded with constant beeps of support from truckers, bus drivers, ordinary motorists and men in suits driving expensive company cars.
‘What you need is an automatic arm to acknowledge the beeps,’ said one supporter.
There's no time for niceties, so we quickly dress and roll up our sleeping bags before the crowd outside invades in search of hot tea and coffee.
Overnight stayers at the Parkside pit camp get priority for drinks over those who have woken at 5am or earlier to register their protest before they carry on to work.
But everybody's starving by the time the bacon butty run is organised at around 7.30am.
The group is made up of miners' wives and relatives, ably supported by a cross-section of concerned individuals on this particular morning a retired teacher, two people running local businesses, and a lecturer.
It has also become the focus of protest for miners' support groups all over Lancashire and further afield, as demonstrated by the early arrival of three young members of Lancaster Miners' Support Group in a transit van.
This is, after all, the last working pit on the vast Lancashire coal field.
Or it was until last Friday, when British Coal locked the gates of Parkside for the last time, and over 700 men were made redundant.
Fifty-one-year-old Kenny was among those men last week.
Now he's facing up to his first week without work in 36 years
26 of them at Parkside.
‘I cracked up on Friday,’ he says.
‘I was all right walking down to the pit until I met the group of supporters then I had to crack.’
It's a hard thing to face when your family history has been totally enmeshed in the mining tradition.
And at the pit camp the loss is hardly being faced at all.
They just cannot come to terms with the death of the Lancashire coalfield.
They are angry, defiant, determined…and hurting badly.
The closure of this pit has left an open wound in their collective psyche.
Yet from the pit camp women there is only one message no surrender and certainly no talk of defeat.
‘It's not over until we say it's over,’ said Karen Beckwith.
‘It's a long-term resource and no short-term government should be able to close it down.
‘I really don't know how these people sleep at night.
I have two children aged five and 10 and I tell them everything I've been doing.
‘What do they tell their children?’
The camp certainly looks permanent enough, with two caravans, a porta- cabin with office, four chemical toilets, a generator for electricity and a healthy supply of food and drink.
They've even got their own merchandise…
Parkside pit camp mugs, T-shirts and badges are for sale, and a limited edition commemorative plate has been produced.
It is a home from home for Sue Wilson, who has probably spent as many nights at the camp since it was set up on January 18 as she has at home.
Her husband John was made redundant from Parsonage pit in an earlier wave of closures, and she believes that at the age of 41 he will never work again.
But there is always hope on the horizon for these battling pit lasses.
Her eldest daughter, at university studying geology, believes the Lancashire coal field can be safely revived in the future and she's making a mission of proving it!
As I left the next shift was settling in for the day, writing up diaries, reading novels and brewing up endless cups of tea.
They're right…it's not over yet.
These drivers are driving me mad
I NEVER cease to be amazed at poor driving standards and lack of road manners shown by many drivers today.
Examples include: Driving too close to the car in front and thus intimidating the driver.
Overtaking the car in front when it is not safe to do so and then cutting in front.
Lack of patience with drivers whose only ‘crime’ is to be strange to the area.
Driving faster than conditions allow and thus being a danger to other road users (including pedestrians).
Pulling out of side roads when it is not safe to do so.
I could go on, but can only express the wish that such drivers would show the considerations that they are forced to adopt when they are not in their cars.
Richard Thompson,
Birkenhead.
IT IS a sad fact that some people seem to change in personality immediately they get behind the wheel of a car adopting an aggressive and impatient approach where every second seems to count.
You are absolutely right to condemn their actions which are little more than accidents waiting to happen.
A little more patience and consideration on our roads would benefit everyone.
Ravages of recession triggers identity crisis
By Linda Jackson and Gerard McCarthy
THE UK's previously disparate regions are suffering an identity crisis after being ravaged by the recession, a major survey shows today.
Unemployment, the collapse of the housing market and changes in population trends have led to an erosion of famous traits.
A depressing picture of a grey society is revealed for the first time in comparisons of the way people live across the UK.
Regional Trends, published by the Central Statistical Office, compares more than 3,500 aspects of day-to-day living to build up a snapshot of the nation.
Some 200-plus pages of charts, tables and maps contain a wealth of information from vital data to the trivial and inconsequential.
Unveiling the 28th edition, associate editor Alison Holding said: ‘The recession has been quite a leveller.
It has affected different parts of the country in very different ways.
‘Only time will tell whether things will change back to the way they were.’
The narrowing of differences is revealed most obviously in a comparison of unemployment rates over the last decade.
While the proportion of people out of work in 1981 stood at 11.7pc in the North compared with 5.5pc in the South East, at the beginning of this year the figures were 12.1pc and 10.5pc respectively.
On the housing front, the gap between the number of owner-occupiers has increased in all regions over the last decade, averaging at 68pc.
However, the largest increase is recorded in the North, where the number of home-owners has risen almost a third from 48pc in 1981, to 61pc in 1991.
In contrast, the proportion of homeowners in the South East has risen by less than 20pc from 59pc to 70pc.
A comparison of birth rates over the last 20 years also shows a there are fewer regional variations.
Rates have fallen in all regions but the biggest drops have been in regions with the highest rates.
In 1971 the South West had the lowest number of births with 13.9 per 1,000 women, compared with Northern Ireland which recorded 20.7 per 1,000.
Figures for 1991 for the South West show the rate had fallen to 12.2 whereas for Northern Ireland it had dropped to 16.5pc.
Storm-tossed…the scene of devastation at a housing development in Helston, Cornwall, after hours of torrential rain
THE number of mature students at both universities in Liverpool has rocketed in recent years.
At Liverpool John Moores University, the figure has doubled since 1989.
A third of all their enrolled students are now ‘mature’.
More than half its students are from Liverpool and the surrounding areas.
For details about courses for mature students, contact the university on .
At Liverpool University, almost 1,600 of the 9,000 students are over 21.
For more details, contact Dr Rhian Lynch on .
Grants for mature students are income related, but special allowances are available.
Contact Liverpool's education authority for more details.
THE city of Liverpool rose to a great occasion for the Battle of the Atlantic commemorations.
People of all ages from small children to those who lived through the campaign came to the city for a week to remember.
Letters of thanks have been flooding into our offices.
Here we print the last selection.
By Joe Riley
‘THERE'S nothing in the world equivalent to an English summer's day,’ insists Bob Hoskins, bob-bob-bobbing his way into the confines of a comfy armchair.
‘That's why I intend to try and stick in this country.
‘Now I work mainly in America,’ says the cube-shaped superstar, ‘but I bring a lot of money into the UK.
And while I'm not too happy giving it to John Major, that's the way it is.
‘I want my kids to know their grandparents, aunts and uncles and I want to keep them English.’
All this despite the fact that many Yanks now solemnly believe that Hoskins is one of their own.
‘They're convinced I'm American.
Especially as I get the accents right.
In Mermaids, for instance, I had to have a Boston accent.’
For the purposes of our interview, however, Bob is his ordinary self and proud of living in Camden Town.
Not for him the boulevards of Hollywood, nor the slender, sultry looks of Renaissance Screen Man.
Somebody's got to play ordinary people should anyone call New York plumber Mario ordinary.
For this is Super Mario the most popular character in the world if you're into Nintendo.
Which most kids are, with 82 million of the games in global circulation.
Hoskins has landed the job of bringing the video hero to life on the big screen up against a strange breed of dinosaur-like terrors and partnered by John Leguizamo (Hangin' With the Homeboys etc).
‘We all grew up with American films, but looking like me there was no way on earth that people would think I was an actor.
Actors don't look like I do.’
Or they didn't.
Hoskins reckons that his pal Michael Caine had a lot to do with changing things.
‘I saw Michael playing Horatio in Hamlet and thought ‘If he can do it, so can I.’
‘He was a bloke with a Cockney accent and glasses.
He broke all the moulds, and then people like me were in.’
But not until he was 25 (and he's now 51) did Bob even dare to tread the boards.
Indeed, his first part in a play called The Feather Pluckers was by chance.
He went along with a friend who was auditioning for the lead and landed the part himself, playing a thug hanged for murder.
Yet although often seen as a tough guy, Bob Hoskins has tried to avoid typecasting.
Continued on next page
SO you think Beatles cover versions begin and end with Cilla, Gerry and Joe Cocker?
Think again.
You can add to the list Star Trek actor William Shatner, Labour MP Derek Enright, bandleader Edmundo Ros and The Metropolitan Police Male Voice Choir.
They are among the performers on a new LP titled The Exotic Beatles.
The 26 tracks also include versions from Japan, Brazil and Madagascar.
And there are some non-human participants.
One track is by The Beatle Barkers.
It's a version of We Can Work It Out…by cats and dogs.
And there are three tracks credited to The 52 Key Verbeek Fairground Organ.
This bizarre collection is the brainchild of Mike Alway and Jim Phelan of Exotica Records.
The two have been working on the wackier areas of the music biz for many years ‘dabbling in whatever takes our fancy’ as Jim puts it.
Mike is a label boss, founding cult indie labels like Cherry Red, El and Blanco Y Negro.
His biggest claim to fame is introducing Ben Watt and Tracy Thorn and giving the world Everything But The Girl.
Jim is a record sleeve designer by profession.
The Beatles record is their third release on the label.
The previous two were football albums.
The second which reached number two in Tokyo, between Michael Jackson and Madonna had a whole sequence devoted to Liverpool.
That included the Kop singing She Loves You and Anyone Who Had A Heart and the Vernon's Girls singing We Love The Beatles.
The tracks were interspersed with dialogue, which gave the duo the idea for the new album.
Between the songs you get talk by and about the Beatles.
‘We didn't want to take the obvious Beatles quotes which most serious Beatles collectors will have,’ explains Jim.
‘So we went a bit further afield.
There's Paul McCartney doing a kids broadcast and a record about the BEETLES on this weird Australian label which is Australians doing impersonations of a Liverpool accent.’
Some of the oddest cover versions also involve the spoken word.
MP Derek Enright a last minute addition to the list does Yellow Submarine and Eleanor Rigby.
In Latin.
Art critic Brian Sewell analyses I Wanna Be Your Man and Her Majesty in posh but enthusiastic tones.
And then there's William Shatner's spaced-out version of Lucy In The Sky With Diamonds.
‘It's the cornerstone of the LP,’ says Jim.
‘I've known and loved it over the years, and always wanted to put it on an album.
Fantastic
‘When you're sitting in a pub and discussing the merits of the Beatles, you mention that and people look at you sideways.
But the people who know it say it's a fantastic track.’
Mike and Jim actually take all this very seriously.
‘It's a labour of love.’
And they've got good reasons for what they do.
‘Everybody's following everybody else at the moment; everybody's got very serious and safe.
We want to do something a bit different.
We both love things that are a bit off the wall, and we love pure pop.’
None of the tracks were actually intended as jokes.
Not even Edmundo Ros's version of El Dondo Sur La Collina (The Fool on the Hill to you and me), nor the Met men's When I'm 64.
And some of them are good fun pop in their own right they just happen to be done in a foreign language and with different cultural influences.
One of Jim's favourites is Yellow Submarine Ondo by Akiko Kanazawa done in Japanese folk style.
There are French, Malayan, Indian and Spanish versions too, and some of them do sound good.
After all, the 26 tracks on the album have been whittled down from a huge figure.
‘A while ago I said I'd listened to a thousand, but the figure's probably closer now to 2000,’ says Jim.
They have built up a list of people all over the world who have been sending them football songs and now send Beatles covers as well.
They've already got five tracks earmarked for the next album.
And they're still looking for more.
The criteria is that the songs have to have character.
‘People send you things that they think are exotic or bizarre, but when you listen to them a lot of them are just band copies of hits people just trying to sound like the Beatles.
‘You can watch so much stuff on the TV and forget it, but if you watch something like Plan 9 From Outer Space there's something about it slightly missing the mark that just becomes remarkable.’
So how many more Beatles songs can Jim and Mike possibly listen to?
‘When I started to listen to all the stuff, I thought I'd be sick of everything.
But I was surprised because the songs are so good that even when they're getting massacred by cats and dogs or Germans or Russians they still stand up.
‘I listened to three new versions of Yellow Submarine yesterday and they range from the sublime to the ridiculous and they were great.
I could listen to them all day long.’
‘I can imagine how people at home feel now.’
Princess and the pooch
PRINCESS Alexandra toured a veterinary centre in Liverpool yesterday — and met a very special pooch called Lassie O'Neill.
The nine year-old collie cross was one of several ‘patients’ seen by the princess during a visit to the Peoples' Dispensary for Sick Animals, Richmond Terrace, Liverpool.
Earlier she unveiled a plaque at the Field Lane Hostel for homeless men in Kirkby before visiting Acorn Venture Farm in Kirkby where she opened a sensory garden.