

Port stick to a winning formula
By David Bassett
SOUTHPORT will not be making wholesale squad changes as the Haig Avenue club prepare for their move into the GMV Conference next season.
That is the pledge of club chairman Charlie Clapham, who insists the Sandgrounders are only looking to add strength to the side that lifted the HFS League championship trophy last term.
‘The majority of the squad that won the title have the ability to play in the Conference,’ said Mr Clapham today.
‘And obviously, it would be nice if we could start our first game with 11 players who were part of that championship success.’
And the chairman added: ‘While we will have to strengthen the squad to compete at the higher level, we are certainly not looking for a lot of new players.
There will not be a wholesale squad change.’
Manager Brian Kettle has been having talks with several players with a view to signings and is hopeful of progress within the next week.
Meanwhile, the Sandgrounders are not anticipating major problems over players' work commitments for next season's longer trips in the Conference.
‘It appears that the Conference endeavour to provide fixtures to suit the distance, and there are enough North West-based teams to give us most of our midweek games,’ said Mr. Clapham.
The HFS League has reverted to its original title of the Northern Premier League following the withdrawal of their sponsors.
It's Botham at Bootle!
LIAM BOTHAM, 16-years-old son of former England all-rounder Ian, was expected to make his debut for Leyland at Bootle this afternoon.
The Rossett School pupil has joined the Northern League outfit and was lined-up to face Ian Cockbain's side in the Abbot Ale national knockout.
But Bootle were preparing to spring a surprise of their own by including Jimmy Lewis, from Norfolk, who opens the bowling for the Minor Counties side.
Play at Wadham Road was due to start at 3.00pm.
Royal Ascot rescued by Levy loan
THE Queen's showpiece meeting at Ascot next week has been rescued by a £1 million loan made up of money deducted from betting shop punters.
The cash, provided interest-free by the Government-run Levy Board, has helped to fund urgent fire and safety improvements at the track.
Royal Ascot would otherwise not be able to go ahead next Tuesday unless huge crowd restrictions were introduced.
Clerk of the course Nicholas Beaumont said: ‘The number of people per box would have been limited to six, the top floor of the Royal enclosure to 435 instead of over 5,000 and the stalls seats to 300 instead of 2,000.’
Meanwhile, Francois Boutin's bid to pull off a clean sweep of the French Classics rests with Accommodating in the French Oaks at Chantilly on Sunday.
Third to English Oaks winner Intrepidity last time out, Accommodating aims to emulate Kingmambo, Madeleine's Dream and Hernando who have carried off France's 1,000 Guineas, 2,000 Guineas and Derby for Boutin and jockey Cash Asmussen.
Sole English challenger Dayflower, now registered with Henry Cecil having begun the season in Dubai, is the sole British representative.
Lyric Fantasy is now 2–1 favourite (from 5–2) with William Hill for the King's Stand Stakes at Royal Ascot tomorrow week.
There was also support for Paris House who was the subject of a bet of £11,000-£2,000 and cut to 5–1.
They now bet: 2–1 Lyric Fantasy, 3–1 Wolfhound, 5–1 Paris House, 11–2 Zeiten, 10–1 Gharah, 14–1 Surprise Offer, 16–1 bar.
Sir John Sparrow has been reappointed as chairman of the Levy Board for another three years.
He was granted a second term by Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke in a move that effectively guarantees the existence of the Board for the foreseeable future.
Sparrow said he did not expect to be the last chairman of the Levy Board, which assesses and collects contributions from bookmakers to finance racing.
by Hannah Stephenson
MEETING Volkswagen ad girl Paula Hamilton the top model famed for her volatile behaviour as well as her looks is a daunting prospect.
Beforehand, her PR people urge me not to ask her about Eric Clapton (with whom she has been seen dining on at least one occasion at San Lorenzo's in London), but that she would be willing to talk about her alcoholism.
I arrive at the venue to find that it has been changed at a whim to another hotel across the road (’ It's much cooler and we've got a cosy corner in the lounge,’the PR man assures me).
Finally I meet Miss Hamilton, warm, smiling, friendly and wary.
After all, she's hit the headlines on numerous occasions, what with smashing up the inside of a taxi a couple of years ago and then being done for speeding twice in the space of about 15 minutes.
But Paula says the Press haven't been fair she explains she actually went through two speed traps without knowing it.
‘They made me out to be a hooligan, which I'm not.’
Self-assured, positive and verging on bossy, Paula Hamilton is a tough cookie.
She calls the shots and the people she meets have to dance to her tune if they are going to get on with her.
Paula, 30, is a fighter and is back with a vengeance, looking fantastic with a shorter hairdo, body toned to perfection and for once, she's feeling fit.
She has been involved in three new workout videos entitled The Shape Series, which she presents.
For someone espousing the virtues of fitness it is surprising to learn that she smokes between 15 and 20 cigarettes a day.
It's something she may give up or she may not.
‘I believe that by doing sports, eventually I won't want to smoke,’ she predicts.
This new-found health regime has, she says, changed her life.
‘I have more energy and I'm thinking clearer.
I can organise my time rather than panicking ‘Have I left this here or have I left that there?’’
She says she also sleeps better and wakes up with a clearer head which is not the sort of image she portrayed a couple of years ago when all the pressures she was facing caused her to hit the bottle again.
She points out that after battling against the booze for some years it only took a short relapse to destroy much of what she'd worked for.
Solid drinking ‘Two years ago I had a one-day relapse after a very long time of being sober.
It was eight hours of solid drinking which lost me my charity, my film company, my reputation and my dignity.
I lost an enormous amount in one day.’
Paula had been dry for almost a year before the taxi fracas.
‘And before that six months and before that nine months.
I could never go longer than a year before I sabotaged everything I built up.’
So what pushed this self-destruct button?
‘I could not accept in my heart that I had a problem,’ she explains.
‘I was running a film company, a charity, modelling and doing the BBC Good Sport I had four careers going.
I just kept working harder and harder as I didn't want to let anyone down and I didn't believe I would pick up a drink again.
‘And the sad part was I wasn't putting that as my priority.
I wasn't saying, no I can't do another television show, no I can't make another public appearance.
‘I wouldn't listen when people would say to me, ‘Paula, you need to slow down’.’
Success came early for Paula who, at 19, was being flown on modelling assignments to exotic locations all over the world: ‘But I was alone, with other models and we drank and drank and drank.
Some are alcoholic friends who are with me in my recovery.’
Simple life Nowadays she admits to enjoying the simple pleasures in life.
She walks her West Highland White terrier Titch and tends her rose garden at her home in Brixton.
Paula says that she would love to have children but hasn't yet found the right man to have children with.
She has a few men friends at the moment: ‘They're all special’, she smiles.
Paula has never had any hesitation in making the initial approach to men.
She recalls that she met her ex-husband, cameraman Danny Mindel, on a plane going to the Seychelles and, after chatting for ages, asked if she could kiss him: ‘And when I kissed him I knew I was going to marry him.’
But she says that alcoholism led to their divorce.
‘It ruins everything.
It ruins your health, ruins your marriage, ruins your social life.’
Is she confident that she will never drink again?
‘I won't today, I don't know about tomorrow,’ she says.
Festival of fun salute to Les
PAULINE Daniels paid tribute to Les Dawson last night as she launched the Liverpool Festival Of Comedy.
‘Laugh and have fun for the next two weeks because it's what Les would have wanted,’ she told the assembled guests at the launch at St George's Hall.
Pauline was crowned Festival Queen taking over the honour from Margi Clarke, who held the position last year amid singers, stiltwalkers and members of the British Music Hall Company.
Her shows during the Festival include The Battle Of The Sexes with Tom Pepper, a show with radio personality Peter Price and a new one-woman show titled Making A Show Of Sex, a tribute to performers like Mae West, Sophie Tucker and Barbra Streisand.
Jo Brand, Ennio Marchetto and Thea Vidale are among other performers appearing during the festival, which runs until June 24.
Festival Queen Pauline Daniels takes a breather at yesterday's launch Picture: EDDIE BARFORD
US Cup 93 Soccer Tournament (ITV)
SURELY it was too much to expect.
After making us laugh so much in Norway, almost everyone assumed Our Boys would beat the mighty USA.
But incredibly, Graham Taylor's all-star cast proved they were more than capable of providing two classic comedies in the space of a week.
Who needs sitcoms?
And it all meant another marvellous morning of wonderfully over the top tabloid headlines.
Bliss!
As our heroes trooped dejectedly from the field, commentator Alan Parry said: ‘We've seen a sad, sad night in English football history.’
What's he talking about?
There's no better entertainment than seeing a bunch of over-paid, pampered prima donnas getting their comeuppance.
Even the Granada announcer got in on the act.
After the debacle, he told us there would be ‘extra comedy’ on Friday night.
I didn't realise England were playing again so soon.
The only disappointing aspect of the evening was the fact that we were denied our customary postmatch interview with Mr Taylor.
It's always a good laugh watching him getting increasingly irritated with the interviewer after a humiliating defeat.
But, in one respect at least, our glorious leader deserves rich praise.
He has obviously taken the Echo's Fun Fortnight very seriously indeed…perhaps a little too seriously.
Sin With Bruce Morton (C4) IF it wasn't for Graham Taylor, Bruce Morton could be hailed as the funniest man on TV.
Fears that the fast-talking Glaswegian may have used up all his best material during last week's opener soon proved unfounded.
The format is straightforward.
It simply involves Morton, a small studio audience and the cameras.
Few of today's comedians could sustain such a stand-up act on the box.
Morton's brief involves talking about the seven deadly sins, but he is talented enough not to need such an obvious vehicle.
This week's sin was lust but the comic, as usual, veered off in many different directions with a whole host of weird and wonderful off-beat observations.
On the face of it, a routine about The Art of Spitting as a Teenager doesn't seem likely to raise many laughs…but Morton makes it all look so simple.
Classic final on the cards at Mere
By Dave Houghton 004-000 08
FISH are lining up to be caught at Moreton Mere and look set to provide great fishing in Saturday's Octoplus Echo Spring Classic Final.
The bream appear to be ravenous as they recover from spawning activities and have been joined by tench, carp and roach to give several outstanding catches.
Among the best were 50lb hauls for Paul Jones from Birkenhead and Ted Stanley of Rock Ferry, both fishing in front of the car park at the Moreton lake.
Paul had one tench in a net of bream up to 2lb 8oz and two roach both over 2lb while using pole and maggot bait.
Ted Stanley used up two pints of bronze maggots while loose feeding at the opposite end of the car park bank and finished with a heavy mixed net of fish.
Norman Smith, match secretary of Irby Angling Club, reckons that with perfect conditions the Classic champion might even have 80lb of fish.
‘Besides roach, bream and tench, the lake has also been stocked with common, mirror, fantail, grass and crucian carp, rudd, perch, gudgeon, dace, chub and even two goldfish,’ said Norman.
‘Now it is up to the match fishermen.’
Simple tactics will catch most fish and all around the lake it will be possible to locate the shoals with five metre pole tackle, but with open-ended swimfeeder tackle on the bank as an optional method.
Bronze maggot is best right now, but sweetcorn, bread and caster, will also catch plenty of fish.
There is plenty to fish for with the winner guaranteed £1,000 from co-sponsors, Octoplus.
There is £600 for second, £400 third, £300 fourth, £250 fifth and £150 for sixth, with £100 for each of the four section winners.
It is the biggest single prize ever offered in North West match fishing.
Liverpool & District Anglers Association stage the Trophy Cup match on the Leeds-Liverpool Canal at Maghull on Saturday.
The draw time is 10am at the Coach & Horses.
Tickets cost £7 all-in from Jim Brown on .
On Sunday AP Products Angling Club are off to Orrell Lake and will take visitors.
Details from .
Football frustration
WHILE Mr Major seems unable to run a government, Graham Taylor appears incapable of running the England soccer team.
The side's shaming defeat by the no-hopers of the United States will increase the calls for the manager to quit.
Mr Taylor must shoulder much of the blame.
But the dismal performance in Boston will make many fans think our top players are overvalued and overpaid.
There is understandable disillusionment with ludicrous transfer fees and exorbitant wages, and a feeling that some players are not trying hard enough.
There is a limit to the knocks loyal supporters can take.
Merv the man to fire up the Aussies
IT'S THE first time I've faced Shane Warne.
He spins the ball well, and is very impressive indeed.
Like Pakistan's Mushtaq Ahmed last summer, Warne doesn't bowl many bad deliveries.
But I never felt that he was going to get me out in the second innings.
Of course, I looked more confident than earlier in the Test, but then everyone did once the ball had stopped turning a yard.
Warne has a good armoury, with plenty of good variation.
I gather that he's got himself together over the last 18 months and it has certainly paid off.
He has played a major part in Australia's last four Test victories.
But for all Warne's good work, my man of the match was definitely Merv Hughes.
The Mobile Moustache — as Ian Chappell calls him — was the bowler who won the match for Australia.
The loss of Mike Gatting with the last ball on Sunday night was crucial, because Mike is such a good player of leg spin.
Then Hughes induced me to make that error, and then removed Graeme Hick.
Those were telling contributions, but then Merv's a never-say-die bowler — a captain's dream.
He may not look the fittest man on the field, but he has the biggest heart.
He'll bowl all day and bowl well, as he showed in Manchester.
Big Merv is always trying something new.
He'll rough you up, then spear in a yorker.
He will come round the wicket to start probing the rib cage and looking for the catch as the batsman tries to fend off the ball.
But in the final analysis I thought it was such a shame we didn't hang on.
That would have been like a win to us and I'm sure a draw would have felt like a failure in the Australian dressing room.
But there are no ifs and buts, especially in an Ashes series.
We need that one performance to get us over this losing streak.
It nearly happened in the first Test.
It didn't.
Now we have to rebuild our team spirit again.
We have to improve.
The Australians won't be giving us anything now they have their noses in front.
Merv Hughes…influential
Clough named in soccer ‘pay-off’
FORMER Nottingham Forest manager Brian Clough was accused yesterday of liking a personal pay-off to help transfer deals go through.
The claim was made by Tottenham Hotspur chief Alan Sugar who told the High Court about soccer's behind the scenes transfer market wheeling and dealing and alleged that former Nottingham Forest manager Brian Clough liked a ‘bung’ a personal payment.
The allegations came as Spurs chairman Sugar met the club's chief executive Terry Venables in court in the latest round of their battle for control of the club.
It was in an affidavit from Sugar booed and hissed at by fans as he entered court that Martin Mann QC, for Venables, named Clough.
Venables is pleading for a continuation of a court injunction preventing his removal from Spurs.
The evidence related to Tottenham's selling of Gary Lineker to Japanese club Grampus Eight last year and the £2.1m signing of Nottingham Forest striker Teddy Sheringham.
Sugar, in his sworn statement, claims Venables told him Clough liked a ‘bung.’
‘He said what usually happens is that people would meet Clough in a motorway cafe somewhere, and that Clough would be handed a bag of money,’ said Sugar.
Clough responded furiously from his home yesterday, saying: ‘Not a penny was passed between Terry Venables and me and the last time I was in a motorway service station, I went for a wee.’
And Venables said in a sworn statement: ‘These allegations are unfounded.
I find all of it bizarre.’
The hearing was adjourned until today.
‘Somehow I don't think this Blandford chap has got the hang of being in jail’
Taylor in Dumbo land
ENGLAND entered the realm of Disneyland with the defeat that has turned Graham Taylor into a Mickey Mouse figure.
His team is like Dumbo: no-one seriously believes it can fly all the way back here for next summer's World Cup finals after losing 2–0 to an American side that chortled with disbelief.
Bora Mulitonovic's side had won just once in their last 16 games and they had not scored for 389 minutes.
But their unlikely mix of mercenaries and Walter Mitty college boys still brought the luckless England manager's world crashing down.
Tom Dooley and Alexi Lalas scored the goals that open the trap door under England boss Taylor.
Unless they pick themselves up quickly, England will not even beat Poland at Wembley in September, let alone collect the minimum draw in Rotterdam they will need to return to America in 12 months.
Alfie's super show to beat challenge
TOXTETH kick boxer Alfie Lewis was nursing his bruises back in Liverpool today after winning his transAtlantic challenge match against the previously undefeated world heavyweight champion Steve ‘Nasty’ Anderson of the United States.
Lewis has held the world light heavyweight title for the last four years and was conceding five stone to an opponent rated highly by the Americans.
The contest, staged at Granby Hall in Leicester, attracted a sell-out crowd of 5,000, and topped the bill during an evening featuring a number of kick-boxing clashes.
Although the contest was labelled semi-contact, it was still a bruising affair.
‘Steve was a real powerhouse,’ said Lewis.
‘He was much bigger than me and very fast, so I think I did well to get a 14–9 points verdict over the three rounds.
‘I am still nursing some bruised ribs, though nothing has been broken, and I've also broken a tooth.
He has some pretty sore ribs too, I imagine, and he also suffered a couple of cuts round his eyes.
‘He hadn't been beaten for a long time, and was very confident so I think defeat came as a bit of a shock.
He has already asked for a return match and when I have had a rest I shall try to accommodate him.’
Lewis, who runs a martial arts centre in Toxteth, recently retained his Europa Cup title in Italy.
In addition to kick boxing, Alfie is a karate international.
A funny old game
RON Atkinson got it wrong during England's humiliation in the USA: the result DOES matter.
It matters to every soccer supporter in the country.
And Graham Taylor's argument that we played a reserve team is as leaky as his defence.
We should be able to field five, even 10, teams capable of beating the USA at our own national sport.
Festival's US theme
THIS year's Festival in the Park in Frodsham will take on an American theme to mark Independence Day.
The annual summer event, held in Castle Park, normally takes on a Victorian theme but organisers decided to change it to coincide with July 4.
Attractions include jazz bands, a punch and judy show, craft workshops and an outdoor display of visual arts.
Three exhibitions by local groups will be held in the Castle Park arts centre.
Moffatt back in style
By Syd Dye
IN his first contest for nine months, Liverpool lightweight Joey Moffatt kept up his winning run by beating Norman Dhalie (Birmingham) at the Devonshire House Sporting Club last night.
Moffatt, whose long lay-off was due to a facial injury, made it eight wins in a row (five inside the distance) by forcing Dhalie into retirement at the end of the fourth round with a damaged shoulder.
The Midlander took Moffatt out of his stride with his fast, unorthodox boxing and before the first round was out Moffatt was sporting a cut over his left eye, which later needed stitches.
Dhalia produced some effective, speedy long range punching but also incurred the wrath of referee Ron Hackett for frequent clinching.
Gradually Moffatt assumed command and softened Dhalie up with two cracking left hooks in the third with the Birmingham fighter coming off second best in the fourth before retiring.
In the chief support Andrew Jervis (Liverpool) outpointed Chris Mulcahy (Rochdale) over six rounds.
After dominating for four rounds, he suddenly found himself up against it when he shipped a series of right hand shots in the final two sessions.
But he was still there at the bell to collect a tight decision (58–58).
Completing the card Liverpool light-welter Charlie Paine made a winning professional debut, beating Del Panayiotiou (Swansea) over six rounds by a decisive 60–57, doing all the chasing and producing all the best right hand work.
Puppeteers
PRESTO puppeteers are giving a demonstration to children of manipulation and puppet making at Winsford Community Arts Centre at 10am tomorrow.
Bookings, which are essential, can be made on .
Catering call
SANDWICH makers are needed to help Mothers' Union members with catering at next week's Sutton Weaver Carnival.
Volunteers should contact Vera Jones on .
Connolly to see out his contract
By Nick Walker ST HELENS' international centre Gary Connolly will stay at Knowsley Road until his contract expires in November at least.
Saints' chairman Eric Latham said today: ‘Nobody at St Helens has been offered a better contract than Gary Connolly and we hope he will sign it, but that is up to Gary.
‘If Gary wishes to resign, that will be marvellous.
If not, then he will be out of contract by the end of the year.
But my information is that Gary wants to stay with St Helens.
‘He remains under contract until the end of November/early December with us.
I hope this will put an end to the endless speculation about his future.’
Connolly is playing for Canterbury-Bankstown in Australia's Winfield Cup and refused to commit himself to a new contract before going Down Under.
Rumours were rife that Wigan were poised to swoop for the 22-year-old Great Britain star and Saints were lining up Featherstone Rovers' international Paul Newlove as a replacement but Mr Latham adds: ‘There have been no enquiries for him he is contracted to us.’
This latest development in a saga which has been running for many months represents a change of heart by the Saints' board.
They were anxious to get a definite indication from the player regarding his future, but are now content to wait for Connolly's decision.
But the club have made their final offer and will not be improving it.
Paul Loughlin has agreed a new two year contract.
His testimonial year starts soon.
It's Echo Karaoke time again!
FANCY a night in the limelight?
Now's the time to dust off your song sheets and oil your vocal chords as the great Echo Karaoke Challenge gets underway.
The competition was a big hit last year when talented songsters from all over Merseyside took pubs and clubs by storm with their versions of old and new favourites.
Now we're on the talent trail again in the build-up to the grand final in September at Liverpool's Kiss nightclub, and we want to hear from any pub or club that wants to hold an Echo Karaoke Night.
All you have to do is ring the Karaoke hotline on…
Gaerwen: Messrs Morgan Evns & Co Ltd report an entry of 265 Store Cattle, 52 Barren Cows, 19 Breeding Cows, 2 Bulls and 638 Store Sheep.
All classes of stock met an excellent trade.
Steers selling to £905, barren cows to 143.0p.
Charolais nurse cows and calves to £1000, Belgian Blue cows and calves to £1000, Wesh Black cows and calves to £805, Limousin Cows and calves to £892, Hereford cows and calves to £868.
Highest price barren cows per kilo and overall 143.0p (£1093.95) to Mr J G Jones, Llecheiddior Uchaf, Garndolbenmaen.
Hereford barren cows to 125.5p, Limousin barren cows to £134.5p, Charolais barren cows to 143.0p, Friesian barren cows to 119.0p, Welsh Black barren cows to 108. op, Belgian Blue barren cows to 124.5p, Limousin bulls to 127.5p Charolais bulls 127.0p.
18 month old Charolais steers £612 to £950, 12 month old Charolais steers £510 to £650, 18 month old Charolais heifers £506 to £735, 12 month old Charolais heifers £410 to £570, 18 month old Limousin steers £584 to £830, 12 month old Limousin steers £480 to £664, 18 month old Limousin heifers £510 to £774, 12 month old Limousin heifers £412 to £584. 18 month old Hereford steers £538 to £710, 12 month old Hereford steers £430.00 to £520.00, 18 month old Hereford heifers £490.00 to £532.00, 12 month old Hereford heifers to £433.00.
Belgian Blue steers to £905.00, Simmental heifers to £672.00.
Welsh Single Couples to £50.50, Welsh Double Couples to £54.00, XBred Single Couples to £114.00, XBred Double Couples to £122.00.
Entries of 2,056 lambs and ewes with a steady trade throughout.
Highest price pen of lambs 128.3p, Pritchard Brothers, Ynys Fawr.
Market prices: Light lambs up to 115.6p (109.5p), standards up to 124.3p (112.9p), medium up to 128.3p (114.4p), heavy up to 108.4p (107.5p).
Hoggets, average 97.1p, ewes and rams up to £57.75 (£23.16).
Mold: J Bradburne Price & Co report entries of 93 cattle, 921 sheep and 179 pigs.
Prices-Cattle.
Steers: Lt Char to 164.5p av 156.2p.
Med Char to 160.5p.
Heavy Char to 160p.
Medium Lim to 158p.
Heavy Lim to 163p. av 155.6p.
Medium Here to 146.5p. av 137.5p.
Med Friesn to 144p. av 141.2p.
Heavy Friesn 142p.
Heifers: Lt Char to 149p.
Medium Char to 160p. av 151.2p.
Heavy Char to 148p. av 146.2p.
Medium Here to 138.5p. av 132.8p.
Bulls: Heavy Char to 152.5p.
Light Ayr to 138p.
Medium B/B to 147.5p.
Heavy B/B to 159.5p.
Light M/R/I 148p.
Medium M/R/I 149.5p.
Cows: An excellent entry of quality Cull Cows met very keen demand selling to 135.5p. with best cows averaging 121.3p.
Steaker sorts sold to 111p. av 106.7p.
Boner sorts sold to 100.5p. av 93.6p.
Weekly prize for highest price cow:-W R Martin, Small Holding, Kinnerton, Chester £851.
Sheep: Light Lambs to 124p. av 118.4p.
Standards to 126p. av 117.3p.
Mediums to 120p. av 115.6p.
Ewes to £39.50p. av £30.94p.
Pigs: Porkers to 96.6p. av 86.8p.
Cutters to 96.6p. av 86.8p.
Baconers to 87.2p.
Oswestry: Fat Cattle (99): Light Steers 146.5 av 144.8, Medium Steers 157.0 av 144.9, Heavy Steers 159.5 av 145.0, Light Heifers 144.0 av 142.5, Medium Heifers 152.5 av 143.0, Heavy Heifers 166.0 av 145.8.
Young Bulls (62) 172.0 av 155.0.
Fat Lambs (3066): Super Light, Light Lambs 122.91 av 108.94, Standard Lambs 123.94 av 112.31, Medium Lambs 119.49 av 109.82, Heavy Lambs 85.11 av 85.11, Overweights 74.07 av 74.07.
Hoggetts (Shorn): Medium 74.42 av 74.42.
Hoggetts (Unshorn)(55): Light 101.05 av 95.22, Standard 77.84 av 77.84, Medium 78.05 av 72.61, Heavy 73.91 av 72.05.
Fat Ewes (717): £42.00 av £21.07.
Cast Cows (60): 139.0 av 106.0.
Nap king
The Marquis has been in tip top form again this week with Tuesday's selection Lyphard's Delta winning at 4/6 and Ajdayt following up yesterday at 5/4.
LAUGHTER IS THE BEST MEDICINE
Fighting cartoons
A DOCTOR who was made redundant from ICI last month is using a collection of 1,700 cartoons as aids in a private occupational health company.
Dr John O'Sullivan worked at ICI's Northwich and Merseyside sites for 15 years before he was made redundant.
He immediately set up his own company, called Ashling, the Irish for A Dream, in recognition of his national roots.
Dr O'Sullivan, who lives in Chester, has built up a collection of 1,700 cartoons he can use as part of his occupational health treatment.
‘I use the cartoons as an aid to raise the levels of awareness in the workplace,’ he said.
‘A lot of it is a way to deal with stress and the management of stress and cartoons are the perfect way around it.
‘Over the years I have built up a collection of around 1,700.’
Now from his base on the Brunner Mond site in Northwich he provides services for companies, and his clients also include the army.
Later this month he will be a guest at the Irish national occupational safety awards with the national Minister for Labour Affairs Mary O'Rourke.
‘That is a great honour for me as an Irishman,’ he said.
Dr John O'Sullivan and his cartoons
Pat signs on in style
TRANMERE striker Chris Malkin is proud as punch to show off the latest ‘signing’ for the Prenton Pups Rover's junior supporters club.
Patrick Greg Malkin was the centre of attention when Chris and his wife Christina had their first child Christened at Holy Name Church, Oxton, Birkenhead.
Patrick was born in January but with the hectic promotion battle under way at Prenton Park, Chris and Christina left his baptism until after the soccer season so they could stage a big family party.
YOU can get a fuller forecast of what the stars have in store for YOU today by calling Russell's Horoscope Hotline for YOUR Star sign.
Each call costs 36p a minute cheap rate, and 48p at other times.
A fine weekend for reviewing inner thoughts and feelings.
If it's hard to find time to think, take yourself off for a solo stroll or encourage a loved one to discuss and debate issues that affect you both.
Watch out for complications and misunderstandings Saturday.
Don't joke about serious issues or say things you don't mean or it could be held against you later.
This weekend could transform your future plans and prospects.
Saturday you have to convince a partner or boss of the value of an action plan.
Bounce your thoughts off a friend or relative Sunday.
Saturday you won't admit you've made a mistake or that you're in the wrong, while Sunday you will be hurt and offended by someone who doesn't show you the respect you feel you deserve.
Get this restful and relaxing weekend off to a tranquil start by sharing a creative or imaginative vision with a loved one and working out how it can be woven into your future together.
Consider the needs and requirements of others Saturday.
Then you can spend all day doing nothing but enjoying every minute of the Sabbath with those you love.
You've an escapist need to get away from anyone or anything that's worrying you or getting you down.
If you need inner strength talk to a loving partner or close friend Sunday.
If you're planning the holiday of a lifetime or aiming to spend fortunes on a new hobby or faddish craze you'll have to cut back on other expenses Saturday.
A health issue comes to the fore Sunday.
You have plenty of good ideas about how things can be changed for the better or how your home can be improved, modernised or beautified.
Unless you live alone it's absolutely imperative you discuss a plan or theory with loved ones.
Saturday finds you still in the throes of sorting out a financial/ professional issue and you won't be able to really relax until you've cleared up all unfinished business.
Relax on Sunday.
I'm afraid going on an economy drive is easier said than done.
You can justify the most absurd extravagance to yourself Saturday for your line of reasoning defies logic and is a law unto itself.
The whimsical mood continues Sunday with more strange notions.
So many problems, worries and woes can be sorted out if only you'd take the time to sit down and talk things through.
Share a professional concern with a close confidante or intimate Saturday, but come Sunday you must get on your soapbox.
You have to sell yourself and your ideas this year so don't expect people to automatically recognise your merit and worth.
A boss, backer or banker needs to have ideas spelt out and you must be ready to explain your plans and projects to anyone who's ready to listen.
King of road!
APPRENTICE car technician Craig Wilson, 18, of Stow Avenue, Prescot, has been judged third in the 1993 Trainee of the Year awards for his work at Superdrive's Warrington centre.
YOU can get a fuller forecast of what the stars have in store for YOU today by calling Russell's Horoscope Hotline for YOUR Star sign.
Each call costs 36p a minute cheap rate, and 48p at other times.
Don't expect everything to be crystal clear, or cut and dried for Monday's one of those times when you have to take the lead and not wait for folk to spell things out in words of one syllable.
An important cash advantage or money making opportunity can be seized.
Steer clear of complicated issues or sensitive subjects or you're sure to put your foot in things and make a tense situation even worse.
Trying to say the right thing to calm things down or protect people's feelings only brings more upset and confusion.
Somehow you can put up with and even smile at a stranger or workmate's silly antics and daft behaviour, but when someone close to you starts rubbing you up the wrong way you'll explode.
Your judgement's warped and clouded Monday, but that won't be any real problem unless you have to make important assessments and decisions.
If you do have responsible or professional choices to make be sure to get all the facts.
Monday's a good day for getting the broad brush strokes of your intentions and meanings across, but it's a terrible time to try to explain the fine detail of a plan.
Stick to the grand design for the time being.
Asking you to make your mind up is asking the impossible Monday for you can appreciate every alternative view and idea that comes your way.
If you can't make a straightforward decision you'd be wise to put things off and wait until certain issues settle themselves.
You can expect ructions at home if you have been taking a partner for granted recently.
Alternatively it could be you who's cutting up rough because you think you're being neglected and ignored.
A process of change begins now that filters through into every aspect of your personal life.
Slow down, marshal your thoughts and don't start speaking before you've got your brain in gear.
Monday's an enthusiastic, ebullient and exuberant day when you could get totally carried away and end up saying or doing something silly.
Beware of carrying a subtle ploy too far today or of letting a loved one get away with playing emotional games.
Whether it's you or one of your kith and kin who's been too clever for their own good you can bet your bottom dollar it'll end in tears.
You might be bursting with ideas and talking fifty to the dozen Monday, but less robust souls need a quiet place or at least a breathing space to assimilate and appreciate what you have to say.
Don't lose the initiative by overwhelming people with words.
Do you like the sound of your own voice so much you have to go on and on and on today?
Take it easy for you're in danger of going overkill and boring people rigid with your long winded tales.
Worse still people might come to resent you monopolising the conversation.
Make sure you're looking your best.
You should be feeling confident, bold and assertive now making this an ideal time for meeting your boss or bank manager and getting support for a new idea, concept or venture that you're sure is a winner.
It's important to keep yourself intellectually active and alert this year for if you let your brain relax it'll get flabby and flaccid!
Leisure studies, interests and hobbies will keep you on your toes so if you're a couch potato or telly addict you'd better change your ways.
Beware of letting tiresome types get a foothold in your world or they'll exploit your friendship and play on your easy going and generous nature.
Professional and pecuniary plans meet with success so long as you know what you're aiming for and don't let others undermine you.
Reds' star Rosenthal is wanted by Turks
RONNY ROSENTHAL is a target for Turkish side Besiktas.
I can reveal the Istanbul-based club is keen to sign Liverpool's Israeli star and boost its strike force after losing the League title on goal difference to city rivals Galatasaray.
It looks certain that out-of-contract Rosenthal, who moved to Anfield from Standard Liege three years ago, will leave the Reds, having refused to sign a one-year deal.
However, a move to Besiktas, where he would earn big money, would prolong his Liverpool connection, for they are coached by ex-Reds midfielder Gordon Milne, who has been highly successful since joining the club.
Milne has guided Besiktas to title success in 1990, 1991 and 1991, plus Cup triumphs in 1989 and 1990.
His team re-wrote the Turkish record books in the 1991/92 campaign by becoming the first to be undefeated in an entire League programme, joining Trabzonspor and Galatasaray as the only ones to win the championship three seasons running.
Last term Milne's men came so close to grabbing more silverware, finishing second in the table and losing the Cup final to double-winners Galatasaray.
French side St. Etienne have also been linked with Rosenthal, who will consider all offers this summer.
Besiktas hope the lure of a lucrative contract and European Cup Winners' Cup participation will attract the player.
But if no offer proves satisfactory to Rosenthal he will remain at Anfield on a week-to-week contract.
Telling a tale…professional storyteller Liz Weir is surrounded by enthralled pupils of St John's School, Bebington, as she gives a demonstration of her skills.
Liz, from Northern Ireland, was visiting the Wirral to pass on the art of storytelling to librarians, who had travelled from all over the country Picture: FRAZER BIRD
The star of this summer's long-awaited movie talks to the Echo
Under pressure…
Graham Taylor in Boston
Blaze hits top chippy
THE ECHO'S champion chippy has taken a battering from a fire.
The Parkgate takeaway was declared the region's top chip shop in a competition we ran in 1990.
But it suffered severe smoke damage last night after its frying range caught light.
Firefighters from Heswall raced to the shop in The Parade, which overlooks the Dee estuary.
Two staff were servicing the frying range and changing the fat when the fire started at 8.30pm.
The power and the glory comes to Mersey festival
By Geoff Barnes Daily Post Staff
NEW Brighton plunges into the excitement of the European powerboat scene with a showpiece festival next weekend.
And hopes are high that the Mersey could soon be the scene of a world championship powerboat event.
Rob Yates, spokesman for New Brighton Power Boat and Ski Club, explained: ‘Britain has been awarded the four litre world championship next year, but no venue has yet been decided.
‘We will be putting in our bid and we will pull out all the stops to get it here.’
New Brighton has been the setting for seven British championship events, but next week's spectacle will be the first with European involvement.
Superpowered craft with engines up to eight litres in capacity and capable of surging across the water at 120mph will compete for the class two championship of Europe.
Powerboats bigger than anything seen on the Mersey will form part of the multinational fleet, which features drivers from Europe, America and all parts of Britain.
Mr Yates said: ‘It is the biggest event we have handled in terms of prestige.
‘There will be a Euro commissioner from the sport's governing body present so we will all be on our toes to make sure everything goes off just right.’
The European championship will be run in two heats over the weekend and the Sunday racing will include the British national championship for classes one, two, three and cruiser.
The powerboats will start arriving at Fort Perch Rock car park on Friday, June 18, and they will be on show for public inspection on the Friday and Saturday evenings.
The event is being backed by Wirral Council and the MDC.
A twin-hulled powerboat speeds along the Mersey during a previous New Brighton championship event
Bar visit
THERE'S a transatlantic flavour this evening at Grange Country CLub's Jazz Bar.
Wirral-born Ron Minshull, who emigrated to Canada over 30 years ago, is appearing with the Merseysippi Jazz Band who have been performing in Sacramento.
Pond project
SIXTH form students at Birkenhead College received a cheque for £350 from British Gas for their conservation work in preserving a sunken garden at Birkenhead Park.
Using a blueprint drawn up by student Kate Williams, the group are digging a pond with viewing platforms for wheelchair users.
Study duo
BIRKENEAD College design students Lisa Keenan, 17, of Oxton, and Lisa Hudson, 18, from Claughton, have been offered direct entry on university courses to study textiles.
Hall opening
THE Duke of Westminster will visit Avalon School in Caldy Road, West Kirby next Wednesday to open a new school hall.
Festival
A ROSE queen festival and June fair will be held tomorrow in the church hall and grounds of St Luke's Church in Mill Lane, Wallasey.
Blossoming future ahead for annuals
OUR flower gardens are full of blossom at the moment, carried on plants that will not survive beyond the first few frosts of autumn.
The majority of plants unable to withstand a British winter are, of course, annuals, Impatiens, Tagetes and Begonia semperflorens.
Others behave as annuals in our climate but are true perennials in their native countries.
Gazania and Osteospermum, Pelargonium and Helichrysum from South Africa; Dahlia, Salvia and Rhodochiton from Mexico; Brachsycome and Calocephalus from Australia.
From the United States of America, however, comes a genus which will survive all but the coldest of winters and provide that long season of colour which makes the half hardy perennials such a popular group of garden plants.
It is this ability to produce flowers throughout the summer and early autumn that ranks them with the true annuals when it comes to creating the most colourful and long lasting planting schemes.
The genus Pentstemon is only found in the USA and will be well known to alpine gardeners who grow the sub-shrubby species in troughs, screes or rock gardens.
The herbaceous forms are quite different producing flowering stems some 60cms to 1 metre in height.
Closely allied to foxgloves they carry their spikes of tubular flowers for many weeks as the individual blooms open in succession from base to tip of the spikes.
If the old flower spikes are removed they will be replaced by others thus extending the season.
The flower stems are abundantly produced above evergreen foliage somewhat reminiscent of willow leaves and of a light green colour.
Loosely grouped under the name Pentstemon gloxiniodes an increasing number of varieties are now available and are well worth looking out for.
The colour range is generally pink or mauve but there are some colour variations about, namely ‘Midnight’ with very deep blackcurrant purple flowers.
‘Sour Grapes’ a mid-purple with the suggestion of a reddish bloom to the flower and ‘Raven’with the same colour scheme but darker and shot with colour like the great birds plumage.
White is represented by ‘Snow Storm’ whilst ‘Apple Blossom’is white suffused with pink.
The vigorous ‘Alice Hindley’ carries large violet and white trumpets and apart from size is much like the variety ‘Charles Rudd’.
Red is found in the varieties ‘King George’ and ‘Schoenholtzeri’whilst ‘Southgate Gem’is red with a white throat.
The well known ‘Garnet’ is arguably hardy and produces reddish mauve blooms and the pinks are found in two smaller clones, ‘Evelyn’and ‘Pink Endurance’.
Planted in groups, the massed effect is quite stunning and rivals any massed Herbaceous border for elegance and appeal.
I prefer to avoid mixing varieties in the same group and to plant lower growing Felicia pappei with them, especially the pink forms.
They tolerate most soils so long as they are well drained and do not lie wet in winter and would prefer a sheltered position away from the worst of the winter's cold winds.
Patio, terrace, base of wall or building, front of shrub border are all suitable places.
After a couple of years the clump, will be looking a little shaggy so in March cut hard back to the developing basal shoots and feed as new growth develops.
Their numbers may be easily increased by cuttings taken either in October and kept in a frost free cold frame or in a propagator in March.
They resent disturbance so do not respond well to division.
Given a little thought as to siting the Pentstemons will provide a lot of interest over a long period and should prevent the need for annual replanting, which can be expensive and labour intensive.
Why not try a selection and see for yourself.
Gearing up
CYCLING organisations in Wales are gearing up for National Bike Week, which begins on Saturday.
Police forum
BRITISH Transport Police are holding a community forum at St Michael's Church Hall, Pendyffryn, Valley, Holyhead, on June 15.
Information on .
Potter's art AN exhibition of stoneware pottery by Stephen Roberts, the Wrexham based craftworker, is being staged at the Ucheldre Centre, Holyhead, until July 2.
Charity sale
THE Holyhead Lions Club will be holding a charity auction at Holyhead Church House from 11am tomorrow.
Child's play
MORE than 300 registered childminders and their children from all over Clwyd had a day out at Bodelwyddan Castle yesterday as part of National Childminding Week.
Caldicot tees up municipal crown
Golf Scene by Michael Charters
ARROWE Park and Bootle players dominated the Merseyside Municipal Championship at Hoylake, hosted by the Irby club who play over that municipal course.
John Caldicot (AP) won the title with a one under par 71, followed by Ian Burnett (Bootle) 73, Dave Ball (AP) 74, Frank Willis (Bootle) 74, John Sondegaard (West Hoyle) 74, and Ken Smith (Dudley) 75.
Best nett was by Dave Hollingwood (Dudley) 67 and Colin Smethwick (Irby) 67.
Team championship winners were Bootle with 303.
Meanwhile, the quality of golf from Cheshire's youngsters when they only lost 9–8 to the experienced Bromborough seniors was testimony to the coaching they are receiving from the county's two professional teachers Alan Thompson (Heswall) and Peter Barber (Didsbury).
Against a side containing ‘greats’ like Gordon Edwards and Phil Jones, the county boys gave every indication of good results to come.
Jones, the county's junior team captain, said: ‘Cheshire officials were delighted with the way the boys played in technique as well as team spirit.
It augurs well for the future of Cheshire golf.’
For example, Matt Parsley (Caldy) came up against an inspired show by Edwards.
Parsley was level par at the turn but found himself five down yet he never gave up.
Mrs Cathy McHale, a 15-handicap member of Childwall, had her first hole in one at the 13th (136 yards) in a holiday greensome.
Come on Rod, give us a smile you have been officially crowned the Most Miserable Man on Merseyside!
Crying Scotsman and former police officer Rod Mackay, 67, has out-grumped dozens of doom merchants to take our coveted title.
And his reaction?
‘What do I win, then?’
Well, what else would you expect from a man who could moan for Britain.
‘I was quietly confident and, to be honest, I deserved to win,’ said Rod, of Calderstones, Liverpool.
We are sending great Fun Fortnight T-shirts to Rod and the two women in his life who nominated him stepdaughter Christine Johnson and wife, Margaret.
The eternal pessimist will also be receiving tickets for a future show in Liverpool.
And, as a special bonus prize, Rod will be in the audience on Monday evening for a recording of Billy Butler and Wally Scott's hit Radio Merseyside show, Hold Your Plums.
DELIGHTED: Mr Misery Champion Rod is plainly over the moon about his new title
P. 1 with tone
THE glum look on the face of England Manager Graham Taylor says it all…but he has no intention of quitting.
Following last night's 2–0 defeat by the USA he said: ‘This is a battle for me, but I've been brought up to battle.
‘I've been taught that if things aren't going your way, and they never do all the time, when times are tough and you're a bit low in confidence, it's up to you to pick yourself up off the ground.
‘You get in there son, and you work.
That's what my mum and dad told me and I believe them.’
See Back Page.
IT'S the one big incentive to get yourself into shape that holiday abroad by the sea.
But however much you promise yourself to lose that stone or firm up those flabby thighs before you brave the beach, that summer diet and exercise programme is always going to start ‘next week’.
And before you know it you're packing your case and ironing your spotty frocks, ready for jetting off into the sun.
Before you think it's too late to do those sit-ups, though, think again.
Because when the boredom begins to set in as you lie motionless under the sun, you can do your exercises then!
Rosemary Conley she of the hip and thigh diet now wants you to Shape Up For Summer.
And if you leave it until the last minute, so what?
You can work out on the beach.
Rosemary has devised a Five-Minute Beach Workout (try to follow it in the shade so you don't collapse in the heat!) so you can tone while you tan.
‘Spending hours lying in the glorious sunshine needn't be as idle as it looks,’ she says.
‘There are some simple ideas to help you discreetly shape up while you tan.’
And you don't even need to warm up.
‘The usual warm-up routine is not necessary as your body will be warm from lying in hot sun.’
So here's what to do: 1.
Sitting with your hands supporting you on either side, cross you ankles and, keeping your legs straight together, attempt to separate them by pushing your ankles together.
Hold the position for two counts and then relax.
Repeat five time.
2.
Still sitting, bend your knees and place your hands as far behind you as possible with your fingers pointing forwards, towards your feet.
Bending your arms, lower your upper body backwards towards the ground and then straighten them without locking the elbows.
Repeat as many times as possible without discomfort.
3.
Prop yourself up on your elbows and place a beach ball between your knees.
Squeeze the ball as many times as possible.
4.
Lying on your left side, propped up on one arm and with the left leg bent back, raise and lower the right leg while pressing down on your thigh with the ball.
Roll over and repeat on the other side.
5.
Lying on your left side, resting your head on one arm, bend your right leg and rest it on the ground in front of you.
Place the beach ball onto your left leg inner thigh and raise you leg.
Repeat as many times as you can, comfortably, then roll over and repeat on the other side.
6.
Lie down, knees bent with your back pressed flat against the ground.
Place the ball between your elbows and squeeze them together.
As you do so move your arms backwards over your head, then forward, and repeat as many times as is comfortable.
7.
Sitting propped up by your arms, place the ball between your bent knees.
Simultaneously squeeze your knees together and dip down, with your bent elbows behind you, and repeat.
8.
Sitting crossed legged place the beach ball between your elbows at shoulder level and squeeze 20 times.
9.
Sitting cross legged place a towel behind your neck and hold it taut at each end.
Sitting as straight as possible, raise and lower the towel and repeat as many times as is comfortable.
David in six of the best
DEPUTY HEAD boy at Welshpool High, David Morgan, is the envy of his school pals after landing a travel bursary to America as a result of his work in the Young Enterprise initiative.
Sixth former David, 16, is one of six UK students to win the award and will represent Wales at the International Student Forum in the US next month.
More than 16,500 students sat the Young Enterprise Europe examination.
David worked closely on the school's Scribbles project, which produced headed notepaper and stationery as part of a nationwide project to encourage business development.
The Development Board for Rural Wales' education industry development officer, Keith Harding, has been at the forefront of developing the project in rural Wales.
David Morgan representing Wales
Simon cycle
FALKLANDS war hero Simon Weston is to tackle an 800-mile journey in America on a £2,000 cycle specially designed for him by the Lotus car company.
He will be part of a 12-man relay team, mostly members of the armed services, and the money raised will go to charity.
River Queen THE Queen has travelled on board a London River Bus for the first time.
She went from Lambeth Pier to Chelsea Harbour yesterday to visit an exhibition by the Royal Society of British Sculptors.
Wine bar cooks up a top award
A WINE bar, at the Anglesey end of Thomas Telford's historic Menai Suspension Bridge, yesterday picked up a prestigious award.
Jodie's was named as Wales' Restaurant of the Year by Egon Ronay in their ‘Just a Bite’ Guide.
Handing over a commemorative plaque to delighted restaurant owner Peter Stobart, the publication's managing editor Andrew Eliel said the award was well deserved.
Mr Stobart, who has run Jodie's for nine years his first venture into the catering business said he knew, after six unannounced visits by Egon Ronay testers, that the restaurant was going to be included in this year's edition.
‘But I never dreamed that we were in line for this award,’ he admitted.
And his secret for success?
‘We try to give our customers a combination of good food and good atmosphere.’
The 13th edition of Just a Bite guide lists 900 of the best places in which to eat without breaking the bank.
Of Jodie's it does note that parking might be a problem but stresses it's worth the walk to find bar food of refreshing quality offering both variety and value.
Andrew Eliel, left, presents the award to Jodie's manager, Sandra Maggs, and Peter Stobart
Stage is set for Alinova
MICHAEL Roberts has certainly gone a long way towards silencing his critics in the past week.
The ink was hardly dry on his contract as Sheikh Mohammed's retained rider before the envious knocking began.
When he struggled to find winners at the start of the season, the cries of gleeful recrimination reached a crescendo.
But the Derby meeting was a personal triumph for Roberts, who rode Opera House to win the Coronation Cup and then partnered Intrepidity to take the Oaks.
A win for Alinova in tomorrow's Merchant Adventurers Maiden at York might not be in the same class but any success could prove vital in the battle for the champion jockey's title.
Alinova's claims are hard to fault.
She needs only to run close to the form which saw her finish second to multiple scorer Kassab over course and distance last month to turn this contest into a procession.
The Harcros Timber & Building Supplies Stayers Handicap looks a great deal more competitive, but firm preference is for Dreams End.
Jon Scargill's five-year-old has been in good spirits this year, finishing fourth to Night Clubbing on his reappearance at Newbury and then chasing home the well handicapped Azhar at Doncaster.
Only a thunderbolt will stop A Smooth One from taking the University of York Turf Club Conditions Stakes, judging from the youngster's debut.
Richard Hannon's filly was slowly away on that Haydock run, handing a significant advantage to her main market rival Floating Trial.
However, such was A Smooth One's superiority that she quickly made up the lost ground to score by four lengths.
Michael Roberts
…on form
Tea-time back on BR menu
A GREAT British tradition, afternoon tea, returned to InterCity trains yesterday after an absence of 18 months.
TV chef Glynn Christian was at London's Paddington station to launch the return of the welcome cuppa.
He has helped with the menu for the new £6.95 tea service, which includes sandwiches and varieties of fruit cake.
‘A decent fruit cake is far more appetizing than cream cakes and French patisserie,’ said Mr Christian.
Better late than never!
OXTON are in championship form with their recent run of success almost enough to have landed a Weightman Rutherfords Liverpool Competition title.
The Wirral club, without a championship success in over 40 years, have already won seven of their nine games this season.
But if their record was added to last season's run-in, which yielded five wins from the last six, then their 12 victories amount to the number Neston secured to win in 1992.
Skipper Malcolm Gamet is delighted with the start.
‘Last Saturday was the best we have played all season.
We fielded well, bowled tightly and produced good batting.
‘We have won games in the 19th, 21st and 22nd overs this season and have an in-built belief we are going to win matches.’
He highlighted the displays by Mark Wilkie, Gavin Rennie and Matthew Roberts, as one reason his side are top, adding:’ John O'Brien is bowling better than ever, too.’
YOU can get a fuller forecast of what the stars have in store for YOU today by calling Russell's Horoscope Hotline for YOUR Star sign.
Each call costs 36p a minute cheap rate, and 48p at other times.
Watch out for a fair- weather friend or a back stabbing buddy Wednesday and don't be too disappointed or upset if someone you like and admire turns out to be a real rotter with feet of clay.
If you can't get your own way or what you want by openly and honestly asking for it, don't use sly or surreptitious methods because they could backfire and land you in the soup.
Be especially wary of using emotional blackmail.
Beware of the clandestine manoeuvrings of jealous colleagues or covetous rivals Wednesday.
If you're caught off balance by a particularly audacious act or challenge you must bounce back and not let on how you feel inside.
You'll be overjoyed to see a child or youngster living life to the full and getting every ounce of pleasure out of every moment of the day.
Why not try to follow their carefree example and shrug off your worries and woes?
You could be surprised by the strength and intensity of your own feelings and emotions Wednesday.
Apart from the potent drives and desires surging through you there's a loved one's wants and wishes to be considered as well.
Having your suspicions is one thing, proving them is another.
Don't be too quick to condemn or criticise people you think are up to no good or are getting special treatment for one reason or another.
Be patient, tolerant and bide your time.
Things aren't so clear cut and straightforward as you think Wednesday and that message is best illustrated by looking at your financial affairs.
Joint accounts and shared monies need urgent attention.
Find out what's going on.
You might be just a wee bit too clever for your own good now.
At home you may get away with a subtle plan to mislead and manipulate trusting relatives, but people at work or in your community won't be so easy going.
Understanding yourself is your biggest battle Wednesday.
You must come to terms with the fact that some dreams and desires are never going to be fulfilled while other equally wonderful wants and wishes will take their place.
Just when you think you have got your finances whipped into shape something or someone comes along to upset the apple cart.
Wednesday brings surprise news affecting future cash decisions.
People have to earn your respect and just because they have a big desk, long title or an impressive uniform it doesn't mean you should automatically give way to their judgements and decisions.
Your mind's got a life of its own Wednesday and it will keep taking you off on flights of fancy and imaginative excursions.
It'll be specially hard to concentrate or focus your thoughts today.
There are lots of new opportunities coming your way in the year ahead, but you must move quickly to take advantage of them or unscrupulous colleagues and rivals will get there before you.
A loving partner's selfless support gives you the extra edge you need to succeed.
Cut-price taster trips
IF you have ever wondered whether or not you would enjoy a canal holiday, a Cheshire boat operator is offering the opportunity to find out on short cut-price ‘taster’ breaks.
Middlewich Narrowboats  will arrange two and three-night mini-holidays afloat from £38 per person on a six-berth boat.
The company also offers longer holidays on canals in Cheshire, Staffordshire and North Wales on boats with accommodation for up to 12 people.
Mike's labour of love for his local eisteddfod
WELSH Water is this year's main sponsor of the Chair competition at the Vale of Conwy Chair Eisteddfod, being held at Llanrwst later this month.
The Chair has been crafted by Mike Rayner, of Llanddoged, a woodwork teacher at Ysgol Dyffryn Conwy, Llanrwst.
It is not the first Chair that Mike has made.
His creations have been seen at many eisteddfodau in North Wales.
The Chair was officially handed over to the eisteddfod's organisers yesterday and will go on display at the West Bromwich Building Society in Llanrwst.
The eisteddfod will be held at Ysgol Dyffryn Conwy on June 19.
Mike Rayner hands the Chair over to Tudur Hughes and Meryl Metcalfe.
Welsh Water's Dave Morris is on the left
Friends recall Les the laughter-maker
COMEDY genius Les Dawson died suddenly yesterday.
Les, 59, had gone to a Manchester BUPA hospital for a check-up but collapsed and died shortly after arriving.
Staff made frantic attempts to revive him but he is thought to have suffered a massive heart attack.
His wife Tracey, who gave birth to their daughter Charlotte only last year, is said to be devastated and is being comforted by family and friends today.
Tributes flooded in from comedy colleagues stunned at the loss of one of Britain's favourite entertainers.
Roy Barraclough, a long-time friend and colleague, joked with Mr Dawson less than 24 hours before his death.
The comedian had gone backstage at the Grand Theatre, Blackpool, after Wednesday night's performance of Sherlock Holmes: The Musical.
Paying tribute to him before last night's show, Mr Barraclough said the best thing about working with Les Dawson was the laughter.
‘Les was the same off-stage as on a very funny man,’ he said.
Norman Wisdom, a good friend of the comic, said: ‘I am totally devastated.
We all thought he had got over his illness.
‘I admired him for so many years and was very proud to count myself among his close friends.
‘He will be a huge loss to show business and to his millions of fans.’
Bernard Manning commented: ‘This is a terrible shock for everyone; he was a classic.’
Les had a health scare two years ago and was ordered to cut down on drinking, stop smoking and reduce his weight from 15 stone.
He managed the first two but his love of a big fried breakfast at his home in Lytham St Annes, meant he never managed to lose much weight.
He had been working on a new series for BBC Radio 2 which is due to be broadcast next spring.
No funeral arrangements have yet been made but it is likely to be in Lytham and show business friends are bound to stage a memorial service later to mark the passing of one of the greats.
Additional reporting by Sue Cocker
World-apart twins in special birthday reunion
By Anne Harrison TWINS Keith and Brian Simmons are raising their glasses for a special birthday toast.
They are 60 today and celebrating their first birthday together in more than 30 years.
It really is many happy returns for Brian who has travelled thousands of miles from his home in Tasmania to wish his twin happy birthday.
Bachelor Brian left Wirral in 1965 to emigrate to New Zealand and later moved to Tasmania where he works as a college caretaker and security officer.
He has been back to Wirral once since then, in 1988.
This time Brian plans to spend seven weeks here, staying with Keith and his wife Jean, 58, at their South Wirral home in Birkett Avenue, Little Sutton.
Urge
He is keen to catch up with family and friends, especially his 91-year-old mum Dolly Simmons who lives in Bebington.
Also living on the Wirral are brother Stanley, 72, and sisters Dorothy Jones, 68, and Audrey Duncan, 66.
The Simmons have another brother Michael, 55, who lives in Australia.
Brian got the urge to come home as his 60th birthday approached.
‘Although I emigrated in 1965 it must be more than 30 years since Keith and I celebrated our birthdays together,’ he said.
Keith, a general operator at Associated Octel's plant in Ellesmere Port, is thrilled to see his brother back home.
Cheers brother…twins Brian and Keith Simmons celebrate their big 6–0 their first birthday together in 30 years
Soccer day
WREXHAM FC Junior Reds will hold a coaching session between 6 and 8pm on June 23 at the Racecourse for boys and girls aged five to 15.
Group launch
WOMEN managers from colleges all over Wales will gather at the St David's Park Hotel at Ewloe today for the launch of the Network for Women Managers in Further and Continuing Education in Wales.
Five-a-side football invitation
YOUNG footballers are invited to compete in a five-a-side tournament organised by police at Warrington.
Cheshire Constabulary youth five-a-side contest is open to teams of seven, including substitutes, from under-10s to under-16s.
The competition for a week from July 12 is at Victoria Park, Warrington.
All teams must register by June 20.
Entry forms and information from Sergeant Sarah Hill at the community affairs department, Arpley Street police station, Warrington.
Sprint power in Liverpool after a Pennine slog
Kazak attack
Report by Ken Matthews
ALEXANDRE NADOBENKO of the Kazakhstan team powered up the cobbled William Brown Street for victory at the end of the 116-miles 10th stage of the 1,150-mile Milk Race from Sheffield to Liverpool yesterday.
Big crowds turned out around the 1.46 mile city centre circuit, covered eight times after the international field had already done 105 miles over tough territory in Yorkshire and Lancashire.
An early break after only seven miles saw Australian Grant Rice and Dutchman Marc Lotz go clear and stay out front for more than 80 miles.
Their maximum lead was two and a half minutes and on the descent of Blackstone Edge Rice broke a spoke and had a wheel change as the Dutchman eased until they were together again.
The brave duo's bid ended at Orrell but Rice did well to finish the stage in 10th place but Lotz came in 78th on the stage at 13 mins 25 secs.
Nadobenko, Gary Beneke of South Africa and John Charlesworth of the Britannia team broke clear on the circuit and with three laps left they were joined by Norwegian Ole Simensen.
Strength
As they crossed in front of the Queensway Tunnel for the final sprint up William Brown Street, 23-year-old Nadobenko was going so fast he mounted the kerb and bounced back but still had the strength to cross the line in first place.
Race leader Chris Lillywhite came in 31 seconds behind to keep hold of the yellow jersey.
Lillywhite leads by 20 seconds over Ole Simensen of Norway who also leads the Under 22 classification.
Norway lead the team class overall from Denmark and GB-Manchester 2000.
Today's stage 11 is 86 miles from Liverpool's King's Dock starting 11am and ending in Salford Quays.
The final stage is a 50-mile circuit in Manchester city centre on Saturday.
Pedal power!
THE chasing bunch have their eyes on the bend (top) while Alexandre Nadobenko takes the applause as he crosses the finish line
Barnet's fortunes on the brink
CRISIS club Barnet's future was balanced on a knife edge last night after Football League officials rejected their request for £91,000 withheld in lieu of fine payments and commission costs.
That means a £250,00 consortium survival loan offer is likely to collapse and Barnet have been ordered to give the League an assurance by 11am today that they can fulfil their fixtures next season.
‘They can set as many deadlines as they like and there is nothing we can do about it,’ commented Barnet company secretary Stanley Beller.
‘All our directors have commitments.
It remains to be seen whether the board can get together and be in a position to give an answer in the time set.’
Barnet sent the League documents confirming a £250,000 loan conditional on aid from Lytham St Annes.
But League secretary David Dent told Barnet chairman Robert Woolfson: ‘The Football League Board considered your request at some length but are unable to accept your proposals.
‘The League has a duty to support and encourage every club but lending any club money is clearly outside its remit.’
Dent followed up with a request for Barnet to meet the 11am deadline an hour before the League's annual meeting at Walsall.
If Barnet, who admit debts of £1.3 million, go out of the League there could be a reprieve for Halifax and Walsall could go up to Division Two in their place.
Barnet won promotion to the Second Division after finishing runners-up to Cardiff City last season.
Woolfson estimates the League could benefit by around £2 million if Barnet collapse.
In that event the players' registrations would be taken over by the League and transfer fees payable to Lytham.
Sail away
RECORDS are not expected at Tranmere Sailing Club's Isle of Man midnight race this evening.
Around 50 yachts will set sail from Rock Ferry at 5pm when the Mayor of Wirral will fire the starting cannon from the esplanade.
The faster craft should be within sight of the finish at Douglas by mid morning Saturday.
This is the 74th running of the popular race, started in 1907.
Wirral AC women see promotion prospects
Athletics round-up
by Phil Thomas
AN eight point victory by Wirral AC over Thurrock has put the Bebington Club at the top of Division Four of the UK Women's League with one match of the season left.
Bethan Fallon set a personal best of two minutes 15.6 seconds in the 800 metres, Joanna Mahoney scored a double in the 300 metres flat and hurdles.
Helen Wilding won the shotput with 12.09 metres and threw the discus 37.24 metres while Jayne Christian continued her come-back with victory in the 100m.
Sophie Cocker picked up winning points in the 100 metres and long-jump, while Rebecca Murphy and Suzanne Batty won the Junior jumping events.
The intermediates made their contribution with victories by Helen Lawrence and Helen Wallace in the 1500 metres and sprinter Lisa Spriggs in the 100 metres.
Wirral have 12 points and are 2.5 points clear of second place Thurrock.
The Bebington Club can clinch promotion at the final fixture in Wales in August by finishing in the top three.
Liverpool Harriers' match at Coventry, scheduled for last weekend, has been postponed until July 25.
In the National Young Athletes League, Liverpool Harriers maintained their five-year unbeaten record with a 40 point victory over Middlesbrough.
Rome
Danny Graham collected a man-of-the-match award with 1.73 metres in the highjump and Kevin Holligan added winning points in the hammer with 41.63 metres.
Other winners included Ian Lothian in the Colts 100 and 200 metres, Paul Lamb in the 800 and 1500 metres and Phil McGuiness in the 1500 and 3000 metres.
Steve Smith's 2.33 metres high jump in the British League match at Havering and Dave Grindley's 45.44 seconds over 400 metres in Rome on Wednesday have placed both youngsters in line for selection for the British team to compete in the Europa Cup in Rome at the end of the month.
The selectors will also consider Curtis Robb who competes in the championships over the metric mile alongside Club mates Lee Cadwallader and Chris May.
Locally the main track event is tomorrow's Merseyside School Championships at the Bebington Oval.
by Peter Jardine
TURKISH club Besiktas are showing an interest in Liverpool striker Ronny Rosenthal.
Besiktas lost out on the Turkish title on goal difference and want the Israeli striker to boost their squad for next season's bid for honours in Europe and at home.
Rosenthal, 29, has failed to sign a new one-year contract offered to him by Liverpool even though he has expressed his desire to stay at Anfield.
Tranmere failed to secure Rosenthal's services on loan last season and his name has now been circulated to Premier League clubs.
Besiktas are coached by ex-Liverpool midfielder Gordon Milne and have qualified for the European Cup Winners' Cup.
They lost in the final to champions Galatasaray who will compete in the European Cup.
Agassi's Wimbledon aim
ANDRE AGASSI's agent revealed yesterday that the player will start practising tomorrow.
Bill Shelton told organisers of next week's grass court tournament in Halle, Germany, in which Agassi is due to play, that the American star's injured wrist was now free of pain.
Agassi, who is scheduled to launch his Wimbledon defence on Monday week, has suffered from tendonitis of the right wrist since he was last in action at Barcelona in April.
Noel's non-stop fun pledge
HOUSE Party host and unashamed telly addict Noel Edmonds deserted his Crinkley Bottom home last night for a whistle-stop visit to Merseyside.
Noel, making the trip to promote his Daily Post-backed Garden Party, promised North West families a feast of fun.
‘The Garden Party will feature most of the House Party favourites and a few surprises,’ he said.
‘It will be a real fun day out for everyone.
Seven hours of non-stop entertainment.
‘Mr Blobby will be flying in aboard his helicopter which we have had painted in his own yellow and pink colours, and we have organised the Crinkley Bottom Olympics,’ he smiled.
Noel's Garden Party will be packing them in at Haydock Park for two days over the August Bank Holiday.
Noel Edmonds promising ‘a day of fun for everyone’
Cruel blow to McKenzie
DUKE McKenzie suffered the cruellest of body blows to his career and pride last night the loss of his third world title on a split decision in his home country.
In such a close encounter it surely could never have happened to the local hero in Italy, San Juan or other more volatile boxing outposts.
But in the cosy environment of the Lewisham Theatre, his 8st 10lb championship slipped into the grateful arms of Puerto Rico's Daniel Jimenez.
Crueller still is the fact that a loss to 16 fight challenger is likely to rob McKenzie of his last chance to make the big money he richly deserves after 10 years of sterling service.