

Farmers force NRA U-turn
THE National Rivers Authority last night scrapped controversial plans to charge owners who have river banks on their land.
The proposal, to help fund fisheries work, had been widely condemned by farmers and landowners.
The Farmers' Union of Wales had said it was fishermen who should be made to pay.
Now, a backlash from a public consultation exercise has convinced the NRA's board to drop the proposal.
Head of fisheries David Jordan said: ‘It was clear from the responses that opposition to the proposed scheme was widespread.’
Hiss Royal Highness
THE Prince of Wales was hissed at yesterday but it made him laugh.
The prince was given the bird during a visit in Dorset.
He was being shown round the Abbotsbury Swannery and was talking to swanherd John Fair near a swan and her cygnets when the swan took exception.
Mr Fair said later: ‘I told him they don't like the staff.
They recognise us and don't like us.’
The prince unveiled a plaque to mark the 600th anniversary of the swannery, which was founded by Benedictine monks.
It is the only colony of mute swans in the world that is open to the public.
The swannery has 600–700 swans.
It attracts up to 100,000 visitors a year.
Tragic boy in petition to the PM
By Daily Post Correspondent
THE parents of a two-year-old boy suffering from a rare genetic disorder delivered a petition to the Prime Minister yesterday, in their battle over the controversial closure of a bone marrow transplant unit.
Barry Daniels, 34, of Epping, Essex, and his wife Carmen went to Downing Street with supporters to urge Mr Major to intervene.
Their son Rhys suffers from Batten's disease, which will cause blindness, dementia and death by the age of seven if he is not treated soon.
Mr and Mrs Daniels asked two High Court judges on Wednesday to rule that the closure of the unit at Westminster children's hospital was unlawful.
A judgment is expected soon.
Rhys was to receive the potentially life-saving operation at the unit before its closure.
He has now been accepted for a transplant operation at the Bristol Royal Hospital for Sick Children and the search is on for a suitable bone marrow donor.
Plea to PM Rhys Daniels at Number 10 yesterday
A Jaguar strike aircraft Bosnia mission
Dream: Anglers watched in disbelief as a shoal of bream over 100 metres long swam along the Leeds-Liverpool Canal at Melling.
Many of the fish were estimated at 5 to 6lb.
But anglers in the Peter Walker Open couldn't persuade the fish to eat and the match was won by a mere 4lb 14oz.
Top man was Ray Thompson.
Judge likely to cut Blandford jail term
By Peter Beal Daily Post Correspondent
THE Marquess of Blandford is expected to have his 112-day sentence for maintenance arrears reduced when the judge who imposed the term reconsiders the case today.
The Marquess was sent to Pentonville prison on Tuesday for failing to obey a High Court order to pay arrears of £10,534 to his estranged wife Becky and their son George.
However, Mr Justice Johnson asked for permission to relist the case because he ‘became concerned that the length of sentence imposed may have been excessive’.
The new hearing will be at Manchester Crown Court, where the judge was already due to sit on other cases.
The judge has not asked for the 37year-old Marquess, heir to Blenheim Palace, to attend.
But Blandford could travel to the court if his lawyers wish him to be present.
The Marquess was arrested at his flat in west London on Tuesday and taken to prison for failing to pay the maintenance arrears within the stipulated two weeks.
Yesterday, legal sources indicated that because the Marquess had appeared on a judgment summons under the Debtors Act, which carries a maximum sentence of six weeks, the judge was not in any case entitled to impose the term that he did.
Marquess of Blandford
David Broster
Happily pregnant have hung herself’
By Lynda Roughley Daily Post Correspondent
A YOUNG wife happily looking forward to her first baby was hung by her cheating husband just two weeks before the child was due, a court heard yesterday.
And Eddie Gilfoyle, who had been having an affair, tried to make it appear that she'd committed suicide, it was alleged.
But later police reconstructions, one involving a heavily pregnant woman officer, revealed the victim would have ‘found it virtually impossible to maintain her balance.’
And in her condition there was no way that she could have tied the rope around the beam, claimed prosecuting counsel, Rodney Klevan, QC.
Gilfoyle, 31-year-old auxiliary nurse at a private hospital, has pleaded not guilty to murdering his eight-month pregnant wife, Paula.
The body of the 33-year-old victim was found hanging by a rope from a roof beam in the garage of the semi-detached home in Grafton Drive, Upton, Wirral, Merseyside, on June 4 last year.
Opening the prosecution case at Liverpool Crown Court, Mr Klevan alleged that Gilfoyle, a former private in the Royal Army Medical Corps, ‘took her life and thereafter made it look as if it were suicide.’
He met Paula, described by workmates as popular and outgoing, in 1988 the year that he divorced his first wife.
They married the next year and in the summer of 1991 bought their home in Upton.
The same summer Gilfoyle began an affair with a colleague, Sandra Davies, although they maintain it was not a physical relationship, and he told her he was separated.
‘In April last year he gave her a letter to read.
This letter had purportedly been written by his wife to him saying that he was not the father of the child and she had been having an affair with a man called Nigel,’ said Mr Klevan.
‘We say that the letter was written by Paula Gilfoyle but it was written at the defendant's request and dictation and no such person as Nigel existed.
DNA profiling tests established that the defendant was the father of the child Paula was carrying.’
On the day of her death a neighbour heard unusual noises at 4am and Paula's mother was mystified to receive a pointless telephone call from Gilfoyle.
He arrived at work at 12.30pm and he was so hyped up that he appeared to be drunk.
He asked a senior nursing sister, who a few weeks earlier he had told that his wife had left him, for time off and left at 4.30pm.
At 7pm he telephoned his brother-in-law Paul Caddick, a police sergeant, and when he arrived, after eventually finding the key to the garage door under a mat, he discovered Paula's body hanging from a rope which was wrapped four times around a beam.
The case continues.
Carers step up campaign
CARERS meet at the Queen's Hall, Widnes, tonight in the campaign against Cheshire County Council's £25-a-week charges for mentally handicapped people attending day centres.
Spokesman Sylvia Rigby said: ‘They seem to think we are only objecting to the level of the charge but we are against it all together.’
Kidnap may be linked to IRA bombings
A BIZARRE night-time kidnapping emerged yesterday as a possible link with two successive nights of IRA explosions 100 miles away on Tyneside.
A security guard at a British Gas depot in Wakefield, West Yorkshire, was kidnapped by a gunman and made to drive him about 40 miles, it was disclosed.
The revelation came as the IRA admitted responsibility for the Tyneside blasts.
West Yorkshire police said the 26-year-old guard was on duty at the depot in Jacob's Well Lane early yesterday when he was confronted by the armed man.
The gunman forced him to drive him to a stretch of the A61 near Thirsk, North Yorkshire.
He was met by a motorcyclist who drove him away.
A spokeswoman said there was no apparent motive for the kidnapping nothing was stolen but detectives were ‘conscious of current events elsewhere’.
One possible link between the Wakesfield and Tyneside incidents stems from the Gateshead gas depot explosion late on Tuesday night, a year and a day after an IRA killing in Yorkshire.
Special Constable Glenn Goodman was shot dead and PC Sandy Kelly badly wounded.
Terrorist Paul Magee was later arrested at Pontefract 14 miles from Wakefield.
Meanwhile, Tyneside is braced for more explosions after the blasts at Gateshead and at a disused Esso oil terminal at North Shields.
Northumbria's Assistant Chief Constable David Mellish warned: ‘We could have one again tonight or any time.’
By Sue Ormesher Daily Post Staff
RSPCA under fire over ‘home alone’ cases cost
By Daily Post Correspondent
THE RSPCA has been criticised for bringing two ‘home alone’ court cases, only one of which resulted in a successful prosecution.
David Sharod said yesterday, after being cleared by magistrates on a charge of abandoning his tropical fish: ‘It's been a total waste of time and money.’
He walked free after embarrassing the RSPCA by producing a book written by one of its own experts that said it was safe to leave fish home alone for up to two weeks.
Legal experts put the cost of bringing the case to court at more than £8,000 and Mr Sharod admitted his own legal fees topped £2,000.
The 37-year-old electrician said: ‘I am totally sick for myself and my family.
The case has caused us a lot of grief.’
The RSPCA decided he had abandoned the fish when he left his home in Alwyn Road, Maidenhead, Berkshire to run a pub for a friend.
He denied two charges of abandoning the pets in circumstances likely to cause them unnecessary suffering on October 23 last year.
He claimed the fish ate algae in the tank and did not need feeding every day.
RSPCA Insp Mark Turner said later: ‘I am very disappointed, of course.
But is our role to bring the case to the court and it is the magistrates’ role to decide if someone is guilty.
‘They decided at the outset of the hearing that there was a case to answer.
It hasn't been a waste of time and money.
I don't regret bringing the case at all.’
In a separate case, jobless waitress Lisa Chapman was fined over her pet rat Ziggy and afterwards the RSPCA defended its actions in bringing the case and running up a £600 bill.
Chapman, 23, of Norwood Road, Herne Hill, south London, was fined £80 and ordered to pay £50 costs by magistrates at Streatham, south London, for leaving Ziggy for six days without water and only a tiny piece of cheese to eat.
Later RSPCA Chief Insp John Paul, who had asked the court for £600 costs against Chapman, defended the society's actions.
‘As far as I and the society is concerned that was a warm-blooded animal that can suffer pain and starvation, just like any human being, and we will not apologise for bringing it to the court's attention,’ he said.
Chapman had been convicted in her absence at an earlier hearing of abandoning the rat and causing unnecessary suffering to a domestic pet between October 23 and 29 at her former home in Streatham.
David Sharod yesterday
BR worker's rail shock
A BRITISH Rail supervisor was taken to the Royal Liverpool University Hospital with leg injuries yesterday after he touched a live rail while working on the track.
The 29-year-old man suffered 20pc burns to his right leg after a piece of wire he was removing from the line at Moorfields underground station, Liverpool, touched the live third rail.
Rough ride for BR's cash pledge
MERSEYRAIL'S ‘cash pledge’ really is so naive as to be almost beyond belief.
The offer is, apparently, to refund 20% of a fare if a train is more than an hour late.
If, as I am confident is the case, the average fare is less than £2, then the average refund would not exceed 40p.
If and again I probably overestimate the average journey time does not exceed thirty minutes, it is difficult even with Merseyrail to conceive trains being delayed in excess of an hour.
The delay would be twice the duration of the original journey time.
Finally, from the 40p would be deducted the cost of the telephone call or postage stamp to make the complaint.
I fail to see how this derisory ‘cash pledge’ can do anything but further damage the image of Merseyrail.
It surely just underlines that Merseyrail is prepared to accept delays of up to 59 minutes.
Neville Goldrein, Blundellsands.
‘Old Jack’: Two charged
A MAN and woman charged with the murder of 80year-old John Goult appeared separately before Huyton magistrates yesterday.
Jayne Naylor, 26, of Wimborne Road, Huyton, and Gary Blower, 22, of Chillerton Road, Deysbrook, are both charged with murdering ‘Old Jack’, as Mr Goult was known, at his home in Woolfall Heath Avenue, Huyton, on Friday.
Prosecutor Francesca Devine, read the charges at both hearings.
Valerie Lamont, for Naylor, and James Benson, for Blower, made no bail applications.
Both accused were remanded in police custody until June 17, when they will reappear before Huyton magistrates.
Reporting restrictions were not lifted.
Stating the obvious
HELL hath no fury like a Norman scorned!
Prime Minister John Major found that out to his bitter cost as his sacked Chancellor and one-time buddy Norman Lamont made his devastating Commons speech.
The most humiliating thing for Mr Major was not the fact that it was Mr Lamont who made the blistering attack.
The real discomfort was that much of what he said was so obviously true.
Even some of the most loyal Tory MPs would not dispute Mr Lamont's claim that the government has been giving the impression of being in office, but not in power.
The person most to blame for the appearance of shambles is the man who is supposed to be in charge
Mr Major himself.
The Prime Minister is clearly now on the ropes and doesn't seem able to fight back.
He has so far shown himself incapable of a knockout punch witness his feeble reply in the Commons yesterday to the onslaughts from his former Chancellor and from Labour leader John Smith.
But Tory backbenchers are desperate for him to end the drift.
Most of them are in no mood for another leadership contest and, in any case, there is no plausible challenger outside the Cabinet.
But if the Prime Minister does not get a grip soon, even those who have staunchly backed him up to now will conclude that there is no alternative but for him to go.
The country, too, needs a government which shows confidence, competence and a sense of purpose.
So far, Mr Major has appeared lacking in all three.
And it didn't need Mr Lamont to tell us.
Business as usual?
THE Tories' reaction to the crisis threatening to engulf John Major was predictable.
The Cabinet closed ranks behind him and a sizeable proportion of his back-benchers followed suit.
Conservative MPs cheered when he entered the chamber of the Commons yesterday and cheered again when he borrowed a phrase from Harold Macmillan to dismiss Norman Lamont's vitriolic attack on his governance as a ‘little local difficulty.’
Macmillan used the comment to shrug off the resignations of Peter Thorneycroft, his Chancellor, Nigel Birch and Enoch Powell, over public spending.
That was in 1958.
In 1959 Macmillan won a general election.
So it is to be business as usual.
Mr Major looks set to soldier on as if nothing has happened, trusting that the improvement in the economy will restore his own, and his party's, sagging popularity.
As for his would-be assassin, the Tories took turns yesterday to plunge the knife into Mr Lamont.
Just what are we to make of it all?
Before being welcomed to the Cabinet by Mr Major, to resounding ‘hear hears’ from his colleagues, new Welsh Secretary John Redwood told the cameras outside Number 10: ‘We are all behind him.’
And so they are — until he — or in the case of Lady Thatcher — she, sacks them.
Then they turn against the Prime Minister with a viciousness and a bitterness that suggests that previous talk of unity was nothing more than a charade.
Strike a chord Until two weeks ago, Mr Lamont was a trusted ally of the Prime Minister, always present when he took the big decisions.
According to him, Mr Major is irresolute, obsessed with his image, and shifts according to the latest opinion poll.
Not so, say other ministers.
But the charge will strike a chord with the increasing number of voters who hold Mr Major in such low regard that he ranks bottom of the alltime premiership popularity league.
If Mr Major is to avoid the men in grey suits seeking a meeting to discuss his future, he needs to do more to restore his authority than slapping down Mr Lamont.
Tough decisions await the Government, not least over public spending.
Tough decisions require a tough man at the top.
Yesterday's stage-managed show of Tory loyalty do not remove the widespread doubts that Mr Major is simply not up to the job.
‘Yellow card’ for Tories over ticket touts law
By David Rose Political Editor
A NEW row erupted around the Government last night after it signalled it would go slow on new laws to outlaw ticket touts.
Action was first promised after the Hillsborough disaster.
But four years afterwards, the Government has admitted that there will still be no room in its programme next session to ask Parliament to act.
In a letter made public yesterday MP Robert Key, until recently National Heritage Minister, said: ‘The Home Office has a number of higher priorities and I understand that in the light of these it will not be possible to introduce the measure on touting into the Criminal Justice Bill.’
The Home Office confirmed that it was still looking for a ‘parliamentary opportunity’ to fulfil the promise.
The Government has vowed to outlaw the sale by touts of tickets outside grounds on the day of matches.
In his report on the Hillsborough disaster, Lord Taylor, now Lord Chief Justice, said: ‘The presence and activities of touts have a grossly anti-social effect, leading both directly and indirectly to disorder.’
Last night, Shadow Minister for Sport, Tom Pendry, hit out at the Government's lack of action.
He said: ‘This broken promise is a kick in the teeth for football and all those who are striving to achieve safety at our football grounds.’
Robert Key
Major sweats in the torture chamber
Commons sketch by Mark Davies
IT WAS a sticky session in the Commons chamber.
MPs shifted around, loosening ties and wiping brows in the uncomfortable heat.
Then Norman Lamont turned the temperature up to boiling point.
Shaking a little at first but gradually warming to his theme, the sacked Chancellor dealt John Major a devastating blow.
Within 15 minutes, the Prime Minister was facing his biggest political crisis for…well, about a week.
When Mr Major was bidding to become Tory Party leader, Mr Lamont was his campaign manager.
Yesterday, the former chums fell out in a big way.
Lurking four rows back in the Conservative backbenches, Mr Lamont was in a perfect position to stab the Premier in the back, and then twist the knife.
It was not a mortal blow in the style of Lord Howe who brought about the downfall of Margaret Thatcher.
Yet it packed a big enough punch to send Mr Major reeling yet again.
His timing was impeccable attacking his old boss on the day he was making a big speech on the economy.
For some it was the beginning of the end of the Major Premiership.
This morning Mr Major was like England soccer boss Graham Taylor, desperately trying to regain his authority after another public humiliation.
If the two men are to win through, Taylor must take England to the World Cup Finals next year and Major must show his determination to lead the Tories to the next election.
This morning, both scenarios seem increasingly unlikely.
Norman Lamont…warming to his theme
Mersey bid for EC cash gets boost
By Malcolm Handley Daily Post Staff
MERSEYSIDE'S bid for massive EC cash aid received a treble boost last night.
Ken Stewart, MEP for Merseyside East, has met EC commissioners and has been told that German and French objections to Merseyside gaining a large slice of the European structural fund are no longer a problem.
In addition, a newly-formulated strategy for the North West, which was submitted to the EC yesterday, drives home the case for Merseyside.
And this is supported by recently-appointed Employment Minister David Hunt's statement in which he said British Government backing is unconditional.
‘Merseyside has the full backing of the Government and we have made the position clear to the EC,’ he said.
Doubts had been growing over Merseyside's ability to gain Objective One status and the estimated £1bn package of EC grants it could bring.
German officials had sounded concerns over cash available for areas within former East Germany.
The French were concerned about the Hainout bid in neighbouring Belgium.
But Mr Stewart said his talks with Bruce Millan, the EC commissioner heading regional affairs, had shown a great deal of support for Merseyside.
‘It was clear from discussions that the Germans and French will not be allowed to stand in the way of Merseyside's bid,’ Mr Stewart said.
‘I have tabled questions for the European Parliament in an attempt to build on these assurances and I am now more confident than ever that Merseyside will get the cash it deserves.
‘In addition, I have asked for a timetable of progress.
If we get the go-ahead Objective One could be a reality for Merseyside in time for implementation in 1994,’ he said.
Mr Stewart added his voice to other MEPs in the region in stressing that Objective One was not an indication of failure nor poverty but an opportunity for Merseyside to build on the initiatives which were beginning to take shape.
‘This will be the boost this region is badly in need of,’ he said.
Hunt for cafe raid knifeman
THIS is the face of a man who threatened two female cafe workers with a knife before snatching £90 from a till.
Police issued the photofit of a man who burst into the Alpine Cafe in Marine Drive, Southport, and vaulted over the counter.
The women were uninjured but shocked by the incident.
The man escaped with an accomplice and they are both described as white, aged about 19, and 5ft 8ins tall.
Anyone with information can contact the CID on , extension 3085.
Victim choked on soil, murder trial jury told
By Daily Post Correspondent
ALCOHOLIC Linda McMullen had been savagely beaten but the main cause of her death was the soil, debris and vegetation that had been packed into her mouth and choked her, a jury at Mold Crown Court was told yesterday.
A pathologist said that Mrs McMullen may have been alive but was probably unconscious when the material was stuffed into her mouth.
Remnants were found in the throat and gullet, as some of it had been swallowed.
Defendants Sharon McLean, 43, of no fixed abode, and Lisa Burgess, 21, who lived in a caravan near the Plas Madoc housing estate at Acrefair, near Wrexham, both deny murdering Mrs McMullen on the evening of Thursday July 9 last year.
Home Office pathologist Dr Donald Wayte, of Bangor, told the court yesterday that it would probably have been impossible to get so much material into Mrs McMullen's mouth if she had been conscious, as she would have been fighting for her life.
Mrs McMullen's face and neck had been covered in a thick layer of mud and Dr Wayte suggested that an attacker had sat astride her, possibly grabbing soil and pushing it along the body and into her mouth.
‘There was no way this lady could breathe because the air way was totally blocked because it was so packed with this material,’ Dr Wayte said.
Associated reasons for her death were the severe injuries to her nose and mouth, which was broken and swollen, the multiple attempts that had taken place to strangle her and the fact that she also had a large quantity of alcohol in her body about six times the legal level for drivers.
She had been ‘savagely beaten’ and there were diffuse bruises throughout the area of the hair on the skull with about 15 areas of trauma, possibly caused by kicks or stamps.
There was a series of fingernail marks on the neck, and someone had applied central pressure.
The prosecution alleges those marks were caused by McLean.
Defending barrister John Rogers QC, for Burgess, put forward another alternative vagal inhibition, in which pressure is applied to the vagal nerve in the neck.
Dr Wayte said that death could occur that way.
And he agreed with Mr Rogers that the kicking or stamping injuries to the body had not been life threatening.
The jury was previously told by John Griffith-Williams QC, prosecuting, that the two defendants had been in the Wrexham Peace Gardens with Mrs McMullen on the evening of her death, where McLean later claimed to have found her body.
The prosecution alleges that after being beaten, a sherry bottle was used on the body of Mrs McMullen to make it look as if she had been a victim of a sexual attack.
The case continues.
Man ‘faked his pregnant wife's suicide’
A HOSPITAL technician killed his heavily pregnant wife by hanging her from a garage roof beam, it was alleged in court yesterday.
Eddie Gilfoyle is accused of murdering Paula, 33, at their home last year and then attempting to cover his tracks by making her death look like suicide.
He pleads not guilty to murder but opening the prosecution at Liverpool Crown Court, Rodney Klevan QC said: ‘Paula was found hanging by the neck from a rope.
The Crown says and will establish that she was murdered by Edward Gilfoyle.
‘We say he took her life and then made it look as if it was suicide.’
Mrs Gilfoyle's body was discovered in the early evening of Friday, June 4, 1992 at the family home in Upton, Wirral, two weeks before she was due to give birth to her first child.
An apparent suicide note found in the house on the day she died claimed the child had been fathered by another man.
However, Mr Klevan said that subsequent DNA analysis had established that the baby was Gilfoyle's.
The case continues.
Residents call in the vermin squad
TOWN INVADED BY MARSHRATS
By Echo reporter
AN invasion of rats has hit Frodsham from nearby marshlands.
Householders and shop owners in the town have been put on standby because of the influx of vermin.
The alert was raised after dozens of the large rodents were spotted on Main Street and by the railway line.
Complained
Environmental health officers have been called in and are now treating the problem.
Frodsham hotelier George Harrison, who runs the Queens Head, is one who has complained to Vale Royal council about rats on the railway behind his business.
He said: ‘They are coming off the railway line and I am worried about it.
‘They are not the kind of thing we want in this town and certainly not near my hotel.’
Frodsham councillor Frank Pennington also fears the town is being overrun by rats.
He said: ‘In the last three months they have been breeding and there are lots of them all over the place.
‘I have seen some myself on Main Street around the bins and even on window sills.
It is disgusting.’
He said there was a similar problem in the town 12 years ago with rats coming from the marshlands.
Environmental Health officer Richard Hallows admitted yesterday they are facing a problem and called on the public to help them.
He said: ‘There are rats in Frodsham.
It is a limited infestation on some parts of council land and railway land adjacent to Main Street.
‘It is an area that potentially could have a minor infestation for a long time.
‘As fast as we are reducing the population arriving from the marshland and canal they are expanding.’
He called on the public to report any rat sightings to the Pest Control Unit on .
Manhunt after licensee found strangled
POLICE last night were hunting for a 31-year-old man after his former girlfriend was found strangled and their toddler son missing.
The search for David Ashworth began after pub licensee Denise Johnstone was found dead yesterday morning in the living quarters of the Lion Pub in Moorfields, Liverpool.
The couple's 20-month-old son, Gareth Johnstone, was missing.
Later, the boy was found abandoned, unharmed, at a citizen's advice centre in Hamilton, near Glasgow.
He was in a baby buggy and beside him was holdall containing clothes, bottles and baby wipes.
Attached was a note giving his name.
Murder squad detectives have warned that Mr Ashworth should not be approached.
There is concern about his mental state.
The body of 35-year-old Ms Johnstone was discovered by police who forced their way into her pub shortly after 11am yesterday after a cook arriving for work could not get in.
‘No-one ever calls me Mr’ says man in boy attack
By Daily Post Correspondent
A SIMPLE natured man who had suffered years of taunts and attacks by vandals lost his temper and beat an 11year-old boy, a court heard yesterday.
Peter Catherwood finally snapped when the child referred to him by his second name.
He later told police: ‘No-one ever calls me Mr’.
The prosecution at Hawarden magistrates court said that it was concerned for the defendant's safety if the case was being adjourned and he was bailed, because of the strength of feeling generated by the attack.
But defending solicitor, Nic Parry, said that the court should not allow the ‘law of the jungle of Holywell’ to rule and if the case had to be adjourned for reports, then Catherwood, who admitted assault, should be allowed home.
However, magistrates agreed with Mr Parry to deal with Catherwood, of Strand Walk, Holywell, who was fined £40 and ordered to pay £30 to his victim, who suffered injuries to his face, head, neck and chest.
Crown prosecutor, Mrs Susan Duncombe, said that at 6pm on Wednesday, June 9, the boy was in a go-kart being pushed by his friend when he saw Catherwood near the Bell and Antelope public house and called out ‘Alright Catherwood’.
But as he pulled alongside the defendant, he grabbed the boy by the neck and began to punch him.
The boy said he was sorry but the attack continued and the defendant said: ‘It's Mr Catherwood to you’.
Mr Parry said that it was a very sad case.
His client was not a bad man but he was simple and it was a sad reflection on society that because of his affliction he was picked on.
He tried to keep himself to himself but for years and years he had windows broken, excrement and rubbish was dumped in his garden and he would be woken in the early hours by children as young as 12 and 13 throwing stones at his window.
His police interviews consisted of an impassioned explanation by a man at the end of his tether.
‘No one ever calls me Mr Catherwood,’ he told police.
Mr Parry said that his client had respect for society but felt that society had no respect for him.
Following the incident with the boy a Dig Daddy style man had gone to his door and beaten him up.
Catherwood was in breach of a conditional discharge following a common assault.
Mr Parry said that his client had been unemployed for 13 years, unbelievably he had been sent on a computer course to Wrexham, and he could not even switch the computer on.
A 17-year-old youth made a remark and the offence was committed.
Mary on the mend
MARY Reveley is making good progress in South Tees Hospital at Middlesbrough after being admitted last weekend with severe stomach pains.
The trainer's son Keith, assistant at Mrs Reveley's Saltburn stables, said: ‘The doctors have found an abscess.
Mum has started to give us hell again, so she is obviously a lot better and, with luck, she will probably be home again at the weekend.’
Boost for town hall rebuild plans
THE Welsh Office could back plans to rebuild Llangefni's fire-damaged town hall with cash aid.
It emerged last night that Ynys Mon's MP Ieuan Wyn Jones has met new Welsh Secretary John Redwood to discuss the future of the hall.
Mr Jones said he was pleased with the minister's response.
Now Ynys Mn Borough Council, already involved in deep negotiations with several parties to restore the hall for both community and commercial use, is to be asked to prepare detailed costings for the scheme.
‘Then they can discuss a bid for funding with Welsh Office officials,’ said Mr Jones.
He added: ‘I am now convinced that there is considerable support for restoration of the building.’
‘I would urge all those involved to come to an early decision to ensure that work can start quickly.’
Cockles…and muscles
POLICE have had to keep rival groups of Welsh cockle pickers apart after fist-fights over the right to farm the seafood delicacy.
Local pickers at Ferryside, near Carmarthen, declared war against ‘invaders’ who turned up with lorries to ‘muscle in’and harvest the same mudbank at low tide.
The bizarre confrontation yesterday saw punches thrown and claims that a shotgun was produced before police arrived to calm things down.
Sixty angry pickers, whose families have earned a living down the centuries, vowed to defend the 30-acre site.
They complain that a 40-strong gang of mechanised pickers from Connah's Quay and Deeside are wiping out beds conserved to prevent over-fishing.
Fireball quiz for ex-town crier
POLICE were waiting to interview Chester's former town crier yesterday as he recovered from burns after setting himself alight.
Mike Chittenden was said to be ‘comfortable and stable’ in the special burns unit of Whiston Hospital on Merseyside.
He suffered burns to his upper body after dousing himself in flammable liquid and setting himself alight outside the offices of former girlfriend Sandra Sturgiss.
‘We will be interviewing him about what happened but obviously he is in no fit state for us to talk to him yet and we will be waiting until he is well enough,’ a police spokesman said.
Mr Chittenden set fire to himself outside the United Friendly offices in Clemence House, Werburgh Street, Chester, where his ex-girlfriend works.
However, he did not enter those offices but staggered into a neighbouring office where staff smothered the flames and administered first aid.
He was taken to Countess of Chester Hospital, but was later transferred to Whiston.
Mike Chittenden
By Ian Hargraves 002-000 02
Pensioners' roof could fall in
A COUNCIL is to make an old people's home safe following the discovery of dangerous faults.
The problems are in the roof structure of the sheltered housing in Meadow Court, Frodsham, and are so serious that if the building were subjected to stress it is feared the roof could collapse.
An inspection also found that the housing's cold water tanks were of a type associated with Legionnaire's Disease, so the council has decided to improve the tanks as well.
The roofing work will mean strengthening the trusses.
The water tanks will be covered and their insulation improved to bring them up to the latest standards.
Boy, 9, ‘almost killed’ by dog
By Jules Stenson
A BOY was ‘almost killed’ after being savaged by a rottweiler while playing with his pals in the street.
Doctors feared nine-year-old Anthony Jones might not the survive the horrific attack outside his home in Delamore Street, Walton, Liverpool.
Neighbours beat the dog with a metal bar to make it release its grip.
Anthony lost a lot of blood and is likely to be scarred for life after injuries to his face, arm and leg and foot.
He was rushed to Alder Hey Children's Hospital where he was said today to be ‘doing fine’.
The attack happened when the dog got loose near Anthony's home on Sunday, but details were only released today.
The dog was restrained by police officers with a noose and was destroyed.
Inspector Dave Wright of Merseyside Police said: ‘It was an horrific attack and the boy was seriously injured.
They thought he was going to die he was in such a bad way.’
The court won't bow ‘to law of the jungle’
‘No-one ever calls me Mr’ says man in boy attack
By Daily Post Correspondent
A SIMPLE natured man who had suffered years of taunts and attacks by vandals lost his temper and beat an 11-year-old boy, a court heard yesterday.
Peter Catherwood finally snapped when the child referred to him by his second name.
He later told police: ‘No-one ever calls me Mr’.
The prosecution at Hawarden magistrates court said that it was concerned for the defendant's safety if the case was being adjourned and he was bailed, because of the strength of feeling generated by the attack.
But defending solicitor, Nic Parry, said that the court should not allow the ‘law of the jungle of Holywell’ to rule and if the case had to be adjourned for reports, then Catherwood, who admitted assault, should be allowed home.
However, magistrates agreed with Mr Parry to deal with Catherwood, of Strand Walk, Holywell, who was fined £40 and ordered to pay £30 to his victim, who suffered injuries to his face, head, neck and chest.
Crown prosecutor, Mrs Susan Duncombe, said that at 6pm on Wednesday, June 9, the boy was in a go-kart being pushed by his friend when he saw Catherwood near the Bell and Antelope public house and called out ‘Alright Catherwood’.
But as he pulled alongside the defendant, he grabbed the boy by the neck and began to punch him.
The boy said he was sorry but the attack continued and the defendant said: ‘It's Mr Catherwood to you’.
Mr Parry said that it was a very sad case.
His client was not a bad man but he was simple and it was a sad reflection on society that because of his affliction he was picked on.
He tried to keep himself to himself but for years and years he had windows broken, excrement and rubbish was dumped in his garden and he would be woken in the early hours by children as young as 12 and 13 throwing stones at his window.
His police interviews consisted of an impassioned explanation by a man at the end of his tether.
‘No one ever calls me Mr Catherwood,’ he told police.
Mr Parry said that his client had respect for society but felt that society had no respect for him.
Following the incident with the boy a Dig Daddy style man had gone to his door and beaten him up.
Catherwood was in breach of a conditional discharge following a common assault.
Mr Parry said that his client had been unemployed for 13 years, unbelievably he had been sent on a computer course to Wrexham, and he could not even switch the computer on.A 17-year-old youth made a remark and the offence was committed.
Fire cover pressure
HOME Secretary Michael Howard was urged yesterday to cancel a review of fire cover in Wales.
The pressure came from the Assembly of Welsh Counties, who said a shake-up was unnecessary.
The counties' fire service committee chairman, Tom Jones, said that the review would be a ‘complete waste of time and money’.
‘We suspect the review will be used as an excuse to split at least one of the eight fire brigades up.
‘This is pure madness, the current structure in Wales has achieved a standard of fire cover which is the envy of the rest of the UK.’
Challenge committee members and civic leaders outside the Moat House Hotel with:(left to right) Tom Cleator, chairman of Merseyside Macmillan Nurses Appeal, Tony O'Donnell, Dutch Consul on Merseyside, and Tom Payne of Boddington Pub Company who won last years Challenge trophy.
Going Dutch?
MERSEYSIDE Challenge ‘93, which is being backed by the Echo, got off to a flying start this week when details of the ‘Go Dutch’ motoring run to Holland were revealed to business and civic leaders.
All five Merseyside local authorities had representatives of mayor or lord mayors present at the launch at Liverpool's Moat House Hotel.
Although the Challenge is only a year old it has established itself as the biggest single charity fund raising event in the region.
Last year more than £61,000 was raised for Macmillan Nurses and this year it is hoped to raise between £75,000 and £100,000.
Debbi Jones of Radio City Gold, who are also supporting this year's event, was the MC at the launch.
I am off next week to Holland by North Sea Ferries to check the route and start making detailed arrangements for this year's run in October.
Anyone interested in taking part in the event should contact Nick Hards at the Blundellsands Hotel on .
By Philippa Bellis, health reporter
Lightning kills cattle
TWELVE pedigree cows sheltering under an oak tree were killed by lightning in a violent thunderstorm yesterday.
The storm, which cut power for a time, hit the Wimboldsley area near Nantwich, Cheshire, at about 4am.
The Friesians, two of them due to calve shortly, were part of a group of 36 cattle grazing in a 15-acre field owned by George Yoxall, 57, of New Farm, Occlestone, near Middlewich.
‘I've never seen a scene like it and never want to again,’ said Mr Yoxall as he surveyed the carnage.
‘They were worth about £18,000, but are almost irreplaceable, as some were young cattle due to join my milking herd.’
Axe clue in search for couple's killers
By Caroline Storah, crime reporter AN axe, sledgehammer and petrol can have been recovered from the scene of a woodlands fire by detectives hunting the killers of Liverpool couple Gary Pettitt and Jean Larkin.
Blue polythene sheeting, believed to have been used to carry coal to stoke up the massive blaze, was also found at the secluded site in Coppull, near Chorley.
Police believe the items are a major breakthrough in the six-week-old inquiry.
They are thought to have been bought locally by two men with Liverpool-sounding accents at the time the couple disappeared.
Gary, 25, and Jean, 24, are believed to have met their deaths in the woods after being lured to Chorley by a phone call to their flat in Jericho Farm Walk, Aigburth, on Tuesday, April 27.
Appeal
The axe was buried in deep undergrowth near where the fire was lit.
It was newly-bought and had the words USA Hickory on it.
The 7lb sledgehammer was found nearby.
Detective Superintendent Jack Leyland, leading the investigation, today appealed for help from shopkeepers who may have sold the items.
‘We believe the items are a vital breakthrough in the hunt for the young couple's murderers.’
Detectives are linking Gary's and Jean's disappearance to the discovery of ecstasy tablets worth £100,000 in the North-East.
The police incident room in Leyland is on .
Volunteers get to work on footpaths
VOLUNTEERS are carrying out footpath maintenance work in Runcorn today.
Last year Halton and Warrington Midweek Conservation Volunteers completed 1,022 work days on projects including dry stone walling, hedge planting and pond digging.
The group works on Wednesdays and Fridays.
New members are welcome and details are available from Richie Cormack on .
RSC coming to town THE Royal Shakespeare Company has put Ellesmere Port on this year's national tour.
The company will present five evening and two matinee performances at the Epic Leisure Centre from October 4.
NSPCC brass FIVE young brass players will be appearing in the Long Room of Eaton Hall next week to raise money for the NSPCC.
The Nemo Brass Quintet was formed three years when all its members were students at the Royal Northern College of Music, Manchester.
Tickets are £7.50.
Court told of cash paid at M-way services meetings
CLOUGH IN ‘BAGS OF MONEY’ CLAIM
FORMER Nottingham Forest manager Brian Clough received ‘bags of money’ at motorway meetings as personal payments during transfer dealings, a High Court hearing involving the Tottenham Hotspur management row was told today.
Mr Clough was named in court when Martin Mann QC, for Spurs chief executive-manager Terry Venables quoted from an affidavit by his rival and club chairman Alan Sugar.
Mr Venables is pleading for a continuation of a court injunction preventing his removal from White Hart Lane by the board.
The evidence related to Tottenham's selling of Gary Lineker to Japanese club Grampus Eight last year and the £2.1m signing of striker Teddy Sheringham from Nottingham Forest.
Mr Sugar, in his sworn statement, claims Mr Venables told him Mr Clough liked a ‘bung’ personal payment if deals were to go smoothly.
‘I told Mr Venables it was out of the question.
I had never heard of anything like it.
Mr Venables mentioned it once more to me.
‘He told me that what actually happened was that people would meet Mr Clough in a motorway service station and that Mr Clough would be handed a bag of money.
‘I told Mr Venables I wanted nothing to do with this.’
But Mr Venables, in his own sworn statement, said: ‘These allegations are unfounded.
I find all of it bizarre.
It had nothing to do with Sheringham wanting to come to London.
I thought he was a good player, who would be good for the club.
I did my best to sign him.’
Mr Venables went on: ‘A figure was mentioned of £2m.
I made contact with Sheringham through an agent and met him at a hotel.
He said that Forest were willing to let him go.
There was a period of uncertainty.
I tried to speak to Brian Clough but he would never take my calls.
‘It was not until we were into the season that the transfer went through and then the price was £2.1m.
Forest wanted their money back.
‘I had no direct contact with Mr Clough.
All the negotiations went through the Forest chairman, Mr Reacher.
I reached agreement with him.
‘The allegations that I told Mr Sugar that Mr Clough liked a bung are untrue.
I have never used those words or words to that effect.
‘As to the allegations that Mr Clough would be met in a motorway cafe with a bag of money, they are untrue.’
On the Lineker transfer, quoting from Mr Sugar's sworn statement, Mr Mann said: ‘Another example of Mr Venables’ so called mastery of the transfer system was when I realised Tottenham were only receiving £850,000 for Lineker, as opposed to the £4m that I understood we were to get.
Cash payment
‘Venables laughed and said that the deal was worth over £4m to Lineker but no one could be expected to believe Tottenham would get more than £1m.
‘He said Tottenham were receiving over £1m for Lineker.
In fact we were receiving £850,000 and the balance was being made up by Lineker waiving a cash payment Tottenham would have had to pay to him.’
Venables, in his sworn statement, replied: ‘The allegations Mr Sugar makes on the sale of Lineker are ludicrous.
Lineker's agent came to me and told me that Lineker wanted to go to play in Japan.
The club would get £850,000 and he would waive his £150,000 fee.
‘I thought the deal was very attractive.
Tottenham would retain Lineker's services for another year.
Lineker's agent Jonathan Holmes said in a sworn statement: ‘I cannot understand how Mr Sugar could mention a sum of £4m.
It must have been his personal estimation.
‘If Lineker had stayed, Tottenham would have not have received any fee for him.’
Mr Mann accused Mr Sugar of behaving in a ‘reprehensible’ manner, which was unfair and prejudicial to Mr Venables and his company.
Mr Venables had been ‘harassed’ ever since his purported sacking on May 14.
Brian Clough…court told of ‘bags of money’ Denial…
Spurs chief executive Terry Venables denied saying the former Notts Forest manager ‘liked a bung’ during transfer deals
Scheme to breathe new life into waterways launched
By Richard Williams Daily Post Staff
A HUGE plan to breathe new life into Chester's waterways will be unveiled next week.
European Community funding is being sought for the scheme to upgrade the city's rivers and canals and nearby land.
It will include development of canal and river banks and extensive landscaping.
The plan has been drawn up by the city council, British Waterways and the National Rivers Authority after months of negotiations.
It will be put to city councillors next week at the information and leisure committee meeting.
The brief for the scheme will be to identify areas of land by rivers and canals which can be developed.
They will be looking at areas which are under-utilised or derelict.
Land by the Shropshire Union Canal in Boughton and further down by the Tower Wharf could be among the prime sites.
Environmental improvements to land by the River Dee are also under consideration.
Conservation officers also want to improve and vary the uses of the river and have plans for a river bus.
‘It will focus on areas which are currently under-used and look at development opportunities and guidelines,’ conservation officer Tom Walker said.
‘It is an eight-page booklet and is basically a plan to improve the canal and river corridors.’
The group have been told that European funds are available for the next stage, which will be a further and more detailed study.
Should they decide to push ahead with the scheme they will then seek more EC funding.
In the garage Mr Carbert said he noticed an old rope hanging down from one of the beams.
He said to Gilfoyle:
‘You could hang your torso, seeing that you have been a paramedic.’
Mr Carbert said Gilfoyle just smiled.
Cross-examined by David Turner, Mr Carbert said the rope may have been left there by the previous owner.
Mr Carbert said that previously Gilfoyle had told him he had been a paramedic in the Falklands and had treated casualties on the battlefield.
Open verdict on solicitor's death
AN open verdict was recorded yesterday on a solicitor found dead of carbon monoxide poisoning in his car, which had a tube attached to its exhaust.
At the inquest into the death of Neil Lighten, 55, of Belgrave Park, Chester, deputy coroner for Cheshire, John Pollard, said there was insufficient evidence to record a verdict of suicide.
Mr Lighten ran his own practice in Grosvenor Street, Chester, and was highly successful until the last two years.
Mr Pollard said: ‘After that time, it seems there were financial difficulties…
Mr Lighten was concerned about his business and had been to meet his bankers.’
Mr Lighten's wife Anne, 53, told the inquest: ‘When I got into the house I smelt gas and noticed a noise in the garage.
I thought he was working there, but when I opened the door I saw Neil sitting in the driver's seat.
I turned the engine off.
He appeared to be unconscious.
I felt for a pulse but I couldn't find one.’
The death of moped rider Harry Hughes, 59, of Green Lane, Ellesmere Port, following a collision with a car was accidental, an inquest decided.
Heartbreak note found on little Debbie, 2
By Ann Todd
POLICE are appealing to the mother of an abandoned, blonde-haired little girl called Debbie to contact them immediately.
The toddler, aged about two, was found wandering inside the maternity unit of Arrowe Park Hospital, Wirral, with a heartbreaking note pleading for ‘a new mummy’ to be found for her.
The note says ‘her mummy loves her’ but cannot look after.
The youngster, who had obviously been well cared for, has said her name is Debbie but is unable to give her surname or address.
It is believed the little girl was taken to the hospital by her mother, where she was left.
Phone call
The mother has made a phone call to the hospital asking after her daughter's safety but she has not called back as promised.
The youngster is two feet 10ins tall and weighs just under two stones.
She has collar-length curly blonde hair, brown eyes and a fair complexion.
A distinguishing feature is a small red birthmark 1cm long, half-way up her back.
When found, she was wearing a pink floral dress, lilac tights, a white cardigan and black patent leather shoes.
The girl has been temporarily placed with a foster family until she can be reunited with her mother.
Police, social services and hospital staff stress the youngster is in excellent health and unharmed and it is obvious her mother has looked after her very well.
They appeal for her to contact the hospital staff on a special telephone number  so that they can offer her help and support.
Newsagents' law call
By Ian Lang Daily Post Staff
THE Government has to reform the ‘draconian’ legislation which can make newsagents innocent victims of the law which bans the sale of tobacco to children under 16.
The call came yesterday from Peter Seaman, the new president of the National Federation of Retail Newsagents, which this week has been holding its annual conference in Llandudno.
Mr Seaman said the onus of the law was too heavily placed on newsagents.
‘We have no desire to break the law, as a federation we have always advocated that we observe the law of the land.
I would emphasise that we do not support in any shape or form the selling of tobacco goods to children under the age of 16.
‘But when you look at the legislation, which has been in many ways draconian for the situation which exists today, you have great difficulty in saying who is and who is not under the age of 16.
‘We have in some cases, I certainly have experienced situations, where the parents are actually buying the cigarettes for their children.
The parents tell us they have given the children permission to smoke.
‘The main message of this conference is that the Government has to get to grips with the legislation and put the blame firmly where it lies that is with the people who go out and break the law buying cigarettes.’
Meanwhile, newsagents throughout Britain and Ireland have hearts of gold and that is official.
Last night the NFRN presented a cheque for £169,871 to Terence Regan of the Variety Club of Great Britain.
The federation's 29,000 newsagents raised the cash by agreeing to sell ‘hearts of gold’ badges for the club.
Last night the cheque was handed over by Alan Scott, the federation's retiring president, during a banquet and ball at Llandudno's Aberconwy Centre.
Peter Seaman
Terence Regan, left, receives the cheque from Alan Scott, watched by Les Bather, chairman of the North Wales and Merseyside Variety Club
Hospital flooded as storm brings chaos to N Wales
Cars swept away in the torrent at Mochdre last night Pictures: GERALLT JONES
By Ian Lang Daily Post Staff
PATIENTS were stranded in their beds as a torrent of flood water swept through a North Wales hospital last night when a freak rain storm brought havoc to parts of North Wales.
Chaos struck Llandudno Hospital as the freak storm resulted in incredible scenes of havoc and distress.
Worst hit were parts of Aberconwy, including Llandudno, Deganwy, Penrhyn Bay, Llandudno Junction, Conwy, Glan Conwy, the Conwy Valley and Mochdre near Colwyn Bay.
Llandudno was marooned, with a housing estate under water.
Hundreds of people were evacuated by boat.
Roads into the Conwy Valley were cut-off with scores of others impassable.
In Llandudno Junction, the water was up to 15ft deep and trains were stopped because of the flooded line.
The driving rain saw streams turned into muddy torrents, blocking roads and forcing some motorists to abandon their cars.
Scores of gardens and houses were flooded with emergency services stretched to the limit.
Some tearful householders whose homes were wrecked just had to cope as best they could.
Blocked roads meant that many motorists could not get home for several hours.
Last night, it was feared that the cost of the disaster could run into hundreds of thousands of pounds.
At Llandudno Hospital patients on the ground floor had to be evacuated upstairs.
A member of staff said that the patients could not be evacuated out of the town as it Continued on Page 5 Continued from Page 1 was cut-off.
‘The ground floor is just flooded out.
It is over my ankles and outside in some places it is waist high.
We are in quite a mess to say the least.’
She said that patients had been evacuated to an upper floor.
‘There is not a lot we can do until the rain stops.’
Last night, three young men were being hailed as heroes after a dramatic rescue of a newsagent from a flooded shop.
The drama unfolded as newsagent Philip Grace became trapped by up to 15ft of rising floodwater in his Llandudno Junction shop.
Mr Grace had recently suffered an injured arm due to a recent car accident and could not swim.
His desperate shouts for help were herd by three local men.
They swam to the shop across a flooded road and were able to get Mr Grace to safety through the smashed shop window.
Last night, he was recovering with relatives in nearby Deganwy.
In Glan Conwy, as in several other flood-hit areas, there were scenes reminiscent of the blitz as villagers turned out to clear-up the devastation.
In Station Road, Mochdre, witnesses said that a wall of water at least five feet high had swept down the narrow street, washing away cars like matchsticks.
‘I have never seen a rain storm like it — it must have lasted more than 30 minutes.
It was so heavy I could hardly seen more than a couple of feet in front of me.’
‘There was chaos everywhere, unbelievable scenes it was like another Towyn.
Last night, emergency services were still at full stretch and a full picture of the disaster had not yet emerged.
The A55 Conwy tunnel was closed for more than an hour.
Three cardiac arrest patients had to be flown to hospital by the North Wales police helicopter because ambulances could not get through the floods.
Women's pit protest
TWO women are continuing their protest after barricading themselves in Parkside Colliery in a campaign to save the pit.
The unnamed women, both from Merseyside, are members of Women against Pit Closures.
Sylvia Pye, Chairwoman of Women against Pit Closures, said today: ‘The women are in good spirits and they barricaded themselves in the cabin.
They intend to carry on their protest indefinitely.’
Women on the protest nightshift Page 6
A good deed became tragedy
A FATHER and son died in a fire which reached temperatures of up to 1000C after a good deed for a friend went tragically wrong.
Johnathan Whitley, nine, suffered 98pc burns in the inferno in the garage of the family home at Mill Lane, Great Sutton, at 8.30pm on March 4 this year.
He died immediately.
Jonathan's father, Stephen Whitley, 38, who had been draining petrol from the friend's car, died nine days later.
Fire investigation officer Alan Haddock told an inquest yesterday that he believed the fire had been caused by a butane gas heater or a portable lamp igniting a mixture of petrol vapour and air.
‘In general terms, this accident could have been avoided had the petrol vapour not been exposed to a source of ignition,’ Mr Haddock added.
The first Mr Whitley's wife, Cindy, 34, knew of the tragedy was when, through her kitchen window, she saw her husband running towards the house, his clothes ablaze.
She said: ‘I heard Stephen shouting and I knew there was something wrong.
‘He ran into the kitchen.
His clothes were on fire and he was screaming ‘put me out.’’
After dialling 999, Mrs Whitley checked that her three daughters were safe and rushed outside.
She found the garage well alight.
She said: ‘It was a mass of flames.
I heard what sounded like fireworks coming from the garage and I then realised Johnathan was in there.
‘I shouted for someone to get him out, but I knew instantly that he couldn't be saved.
‘Stephen put his arms round me and said ‘I'm sorry, I just couldn't get him.’’
Mr Whitley was a motor mechanic.
Recording a verdict of accidental death on Johnathan and his father, Cheshire's deputy coroner, John Pollard, said: ‘This is one of the few occasions when we can genuinely describe something as a tragedy.
‘A man doing a favour for someone was killed along with his young son.’
Jonathan Whitley
Murder police in appeal to shops
POLICE are appealing for shopkeepers to help them trace an axe and a sledgehammer thought to be the weapons used in the murder of Liverpool couple Jean Larkin and Garry Pettitt.
The weapons were found buried in deep undergrowth near the murder scene along with a petrol can and blue polythene sheeting, believed to have been used to carry coal to stoke the massive blaze where Mr Pettitt's body was burned.
They are thought to have been bought in the area of Coppull, near Chorley, where the couple met their deaths after being lured from their flat in Jericho Farm Walk, Aigburth, Liverpool, on April 27.
Miss Larkin, 24, and Mr Pettitt, 25, went missing for five weeks before forensic experts discovered human remains in the remnants of a fire in a secluded spot.
Two men, possibly with Liverpool accents, are believed to have bought the weapons locally at the time the couple disappeared.
Det Supt Jack Leyland, heading the investigation, said: ‘We believe the items are a vital breakthrough in the hunt for the young couple's murderers.’
Bypass protesters seek Welsh Office showdown
By David Greenwood Daily Post Staff
THE Welsh Office has come under attack for refusing to hold a public meeting into their controversial choice for a bypass around an Anglesey village.
Now villagers at Caergeiliog, on the A5, claim they have been snubbed by former Welsh Secretary, David Hunt, and are planning to hold their own meeting with the backing of the island's MP, Ieuan Wyn Jones.
And an action group set up to fight the route looks set to demand a meeting with Mr Hunt's successor, John Redwood.
Three routes had been proposed by Welsh Office planners.
Two of them, the Red and Blue routes, run to the north of the village.
The third, the Orange route, runs to the south, passing close to a primary school and houses.
At a public meeting called by the Welsh Office almost three years ago, happy villagers were told that the preferred route was the Red one.
However, a few months later it was officially announced the Orange route had been chosen as part of a £100m plus scheme to dual the A5 across Anglesey.
Action group chairman Gareth Owen said: ‘This route is the worst option for Caergeiliog and will seriously and unnecessarily effect the quality of life in the village.’
He said a petition containing 500 names over 95pc of households in the village had been sent to the Welsh Office calling for a second public meeting.
But now the Welsh Office has told the group that they see little purpose in holding another meeting on the proposed route, which will run from the Stanley Embankment to Dalar crossroads.
Dr Owen said any delegation sent to meet Mr Redwood would be briefed to spell out the village's disappointment and dissatisfaction with the WO bypass plans.
He warned the preferred route would isolate the small community of Llanfair-yn-Neubwll, pass near wildlife conservation areas and cut across several public footpaths.
He said: ‘In contrast, both the other routes are well to the north of the village and away from residential areas, including the school.’
Dr Owen said the Welsh Office should re-examine their selection before going to the expense of appointing consulting engineers to draw up detailed designs.
Ransom messages ‘link kidnapper to killer’
MESSAGES left by the kidnapper of a Birmingham estate agent and the killer of a Leeds teenager had similarities, a murder trial jury was told today.
Michael Sams, 51, has already admitted kidnapping 25-year-old Stephanie Slater but denies murdering 18year-old Julie Dart.
Richard Wakerley QC, prosecuting at Nottingham Crown Court, told the jury on the second day of the trial that one of the messages left by Sams for Stephanie's ransom courier was stencilled and underlined.
It used the phrase ‘60 secs allowed’ and referred to a sensor where the money was to be left.
Admitted
Five months earlier, on a bridge only a few miles away, Julie Dart's killer had also left a stencilled message and used the phrase ‘2 mins allowed’ and also a reference to a detector at the drop-off point.
Mr Wakerley reminded the jury that Sams had already admitted leaving the message for Shipways' branch manager Kevin Watts, in January 1992, who was carrying the £175,000 demanded for Stephanie's safe release.
Mr Wakerley said: ‘Are we to believe there is another kidnapper, the kidnapper of Julie Dart, the killer of Julie Dart, who by the purest coincidence used the bridges across the Dove Valley Trail to collect ransom money three miles apart, who stencilled his messages and who thought of using detectors to try to see if police had bugged the money so they could follow?.’
Mr Wakerley said when police later went to Sams' workshop, in Newark, Nottinghamshire, they found there a set of stencils capable of producing both messages.
(Proceeding)
Pedalling to break chain of poverty
A CHARITY which helps the poverty-stricken in Third World countries is appealing for people to take part in a fund-raising bike ride.
ACTIONAID is celebrating its 21st anniversary this year and to mark the event a bike ride from Manchester to Blackpool has been organised by supporter groups in the North West.
Each group hopes to find 21 riders to take part.
An ACTIONAID spokeswoman said: ‘We are urging people to help break the cycle of poverty through pedal power.
‘For 21 years we have immunised 93,000 children in Bangladesh, planted 1.1m tree seedlings in Ethiopia, provided clothing and food for 400,000 people in Mozambique and helped over 100,000 children in India gain literacy skills.
‘For every £21 raised during the bike ride we will be able to provide 10 people in the Gambia with clean water or educate five children in Bolivia.’
Among the local groups involved in fund-raising are Crosby, Southport, Chester, Warrington, Wigan and South Wirral.
MP's plea for wrecked school
AN MP has called for improved security at a school following a spate of vandalism.
Liverpool Liberal Democrat MP David Alton has written to the Home Secretary asking for a night watchman and better policing around the grounds of St Anne's School in Overbury Street, Edge Hill, Liverpool.
Mr Alton's call follows two petitions signed by more than 700 parents demanding a security guard for the school and the renovation of a derelict bungalow on the site for use by a caretaker.
Staff and parents at the infant and junior school were devastated when the buildings suffered 14 vandal attacks in the space of two weeks during the Easter holidays.
Fiona Chambers, head of the parent/school partnership, said: ‘We're not a rich school and can't afford the continuous cost of vandalism and theft.
‘Because of concern about the future of the school our parents decided on the petitions, which we hope will improve the situation.’
A Liverpool City Council spokeswoman said: ‘We're working with the school to help their particular needs and improve security around the site.’
Passengers evacuated
MOORFIELDS station evacuated after passengers waiting on platform two for Northern line service to Southport saw sparks erupt from track as train approached.
Understood supervisor slightly hurt after falling onto line.
Train services expected to be back to normal by rushhour.
Man assaulted sisters at party
A TRANMERE man who attacked two sisters at a party told police he remembered little or nothing about it because of the quantity of drink he had consumed.
Kenneth Grant, defending at Wirral Magistrates Court, said 30-year-old Philip Cornthwaite of Larch Road, Tranmere, was mortified to hear one sister had to pay £300 for treatment to teeth damaged in the assault.
Cornthwaite admitted assault occasioning actual bodily harm on Beverley Birss at a house in Maybank Road, Tranmere, and common assault on Sharon Birss.
Mr Grant said Cornthwaite remembered lunging at Sharon Birss but had no recollection of punching Beverley Birss.
He had not been in trouble before and acted totally out of character.
Cornthwaite was ordered to pay £500 compensation to Beverley Birss and to serve 150 hours community work.
Voice clue on Stephanie abductor
TV CRIME WATCH LED TO KIDNAP ARREST
By Echo reporter
THE former wife of kidnapper and alleged murderer Michael Sams recognised her ex-husband's Yorkshire accent from a tape played on the Crimewatch TV programme, a court heard today.
Sams, 51, has already admitted kidnapping 25-year-old Birmingham estate agent Stephanie Slater, but denies murdering 18-year-old Julie Dart.
During the nationwide hunt for Stephanie's kidnapper the case was featured on Crimewatch on February 20 last year.
Viewers were asked if they could put a name to the voice of the kidnapper, a fairly distinctive voice with a softish Yorkshire accent.
Richard Wakerley QC, prosecuting at Nottingham Crown Court, said Sams's first wife, Susan Oake, had videoed the programme.
Immediate
When she watched it she immediately recognised the voice and rang the police.
Mr Wakerley said police went to Sams's home in Barrel Hill Road, Sutton-on-Trent, Nottinghamshire, the next day and spoke to his wife, Teena.
‘Of course, they didn't want him warned if possible of their coming.
They told Teena not to worry and they would return that night when Sams got home.’
But Mr Wakerley said police went straight to Sams's workshop, in Newark, Nottinghamshire.
Teena had phoned her husband, warning him police would be coming to see him that night.
‘But no sooner had he put the phone down than the police had arrived.
‘On what the police saw, everything fitted and he was arrested.
‘His game was up,’ said Mr Wakerley, who has told the jury that Sams was both Stephanie's kidnapper and Julie's murderer.
Sams has pleaded guilty to kidnapping Stephanie, unlawfully imprisoning her and demanding a £175,000 ransom.
But he has denied murdering and kidnapping Leeds girl Julie in July 1991, two charges of demanding £140,000 with menaces from Leeds city police and he has also pleaded not guilty to demanding £200,000 with menaces from British Rail in October 1991.
Mr Wakerley said Sams denied any knowledge of the kidnap and murder of Julie and in a confession to the Stephanie plot admitted making ‘one huge error’ by discussing his ransom plans as a joke with another person.
Sams told police: ‘You have got the wrong man.’
Mr Wakerley told the jury: ‘You may think he soon realised his position was hopeless.’
(Proceeding)
Kidnapped…estate agent Stephanie
Father and son died in double fire tragedy
A FATHER and son died in a fire which reached temperatures of up to 1000C after a good deed for a friend went tragically wrong.
Johnathan Whitley, nine, suffered 98pc burns in the inferno in the garage of the family home in Mill Lane, Great Sutton, at 8.30pm on March 4 this year.
He died immediately.
Jonathan's father, Stephen Whitley, 38, who had been draining petrol from his friend's car, died nine days later.
Fire investigation officer Alan Haddock told an inquest yesterday that he believed the fire had been caused by a butane gas heater or a portable lamp igniting a mixture of petrol vapour and air.
The first Mr Whitley's wife Cindy, 34, knew of the tragedy was when, through her kitchen window, she saw her husband running towards the house, his clothes ablaze.
She said: ‘I heard Stephen shouting and I knew there was something wrong.
‘He ran into the kitchen.
His clothes were on fire and he was screaming ‘put me out’.’
Mrs Whitley rushed outside to find the garage an inferno.
She said: ‘It was a mass of flames.
I heard what sounded like fireworks coming from the garage and I then realised Johnathan was in there.
‘I shouted for someone to get him out, but I knew instantly that he couldn't be saved.
‘Stephen put his arms round me and said ‘I'm sorry, I just couldn't get him’.’
Mr Whitley was a motor mechanic.
Recording a verdict of accidental death on Johnathan and his father, Cheshire's deputy coroner, John Pollard, said: ‘This is one of the few occasions when we can genuinely describe something as a tragedy.
‘A man doing a favour for someone was killed along with his young son.’
Jonathan Whitley
MP gets post office sale promise
A NORTH Wales MP says he is disappointed that Flint post office is to be sold off, only nine months after it was franchised to the private sector.
‘There has been much concern in the town that the post office counter business is to be sold,’ said Delyn MP David Hanson.
‘However, I have received an assurance from the Post Office that in the event of the present franchisees not being able to find a buyer for the business, then the Post Office will step in and take over the running of the counter service again.’
Town tunes up for top brass THE sound of music will take over at Rhyl's seafront New Pavilion Theatre when 36 top brass bands compete in the second annual Rhyl Festival of Brass, on the weekend of June 19–20.
Promoted by Rhyl Town Council, the festival has attracted leading London band Hillingdon, who will be competing in the top section along with a record 140 soloists.
Sailing chance
THE public are being invited to try their hand at sailing by the Llyn Brenig Sailing Club on Sunday, starting at 11.30am.
Information on .
Ecstasy agony death warning
By Geoff Barnes Daily Post Staff
A MAN'S ecstasy-related death the first in the district provoked a stark warning from coroner Christopher Johnson yesterday.
Andrew Venables, 20, of Lilac Grove, Whitby, Ellesmere Port, was found to have taken 11 times the toxic dosage of the drug.
He died at a friend's flat in Rock Ferry after going into convulsions and frothing at the mouth.
Recording an open verdict on Mr Venables' death, Mr Johnson said at an inquest yesterday: ‘Anyone contemplating taking ecstasy should read and re-read the terrible and agonizing way in which Andrew Venables met his death and say ‘this fate could befall me’.’
Home Office pathologist Dr Alan Williams told the inquest that the dead man could have taken one rogue tablet, or tablets from a highly-concentrated batch.
He said: ‘Ecstasy is a designer drug, made illegally, with no guarantee of what individual tablets contain.’
The toxicity level found in Mr Venables was 2.25mg per litre 11 times the minimum toxic dose.
Robin Mark Davies told the inquest that he had gone with Mr Venables to the Central Park Hotel in Bromborough and that his friend had started to ‘freak out’.
He was scared and shaking and was begging Mr Davies not to leave him.
They had gone to Mr Davies' flat in Highfield Road, Rock Ferry, where Mr Venables had started sweating and breathing rapidly.
He then started frothing at the mouth and had a fit.
Mr Davies said that Mr Venables was not a frequent user of drugs, but to his knowledge he had taken LSD, ecstasy and amphetamines.
Three-way bid to solve problems of the Dee
A SPECIAL group of farming, conservation and water authorities is to investigate how to manage a ‘problem’ section of the River Dee.
Welsh and English farmers whose land borders the Dee between Holt and Worthenbury are concerned about proposals to designate the section of river as a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI).
National Rivers Authority was also worried because once the section is designated its legal protection would make flood maintenance work difficult.
Conservationists believe the section of river has a particular geomorphological importance and want it to be allowed to meander naturally and not controlled by artificial flood defences.
But left to its own devices, the river will inevitably erode the banks and the border between Cheshire and Clwyd not to mention farm land.
Following intervention by Dee and Clwyd flood defence committee, the Countryside Council for Wales decided to defer notification and to carry out a study of the site.
A draft report on that study, by Southampton University, will be ready this month, while the NRA will carry out their own survey.
Mother to be reunited with girl she abandoned
Nurses in moving note
By Carmel Brown Daily Post Staff
POLICE last night called off a search to find the mother of a two-year-old girl who was abandoned in a busy hospital.
Nurses who found her were reduced to tears when they read a heart-rending note pinned to her dress.
It said: ‘I am a very good little girl.
My Mummy loves me but cannot look after me any more.
Please find me a new Mummy who can love me a lot and look after me.’
But this morning the child, with curly-blonde hair and sad brown eyes, who only knew her name was Debbie, is expected to be reunited with her mother.
More than 24 hours after leaving her tiny daughter with the staff at Arrowe Park Hospital, Upton, Wirral, the mother returned to reclaim her baby late last night.
It is not known why the mother, who is comes from Clwyd, North Wales, abandoned her daughter.
But police officers hope the reunion will bring a smile to the face of the toddler who has cried for her mother since she was found wandering the corridors of the hospital's maternity unit early on Wednesday evening…
Debbie did not know her surname nor her address and when police were called to the hospital the little girl was too distressed and confused to help them with their inquiries.
Wirral Social Services Department temporarily placed her with foster parents and a case conference will take place this morning.
Supt Bernie Holmes who was heading the search said last night that this was one of the saddest cases he has ever had to deal with.
‘When we met her she was getting very distressed and confused and frightened that she was not with her mother,’ he said.
‘You just wanted to put your arms round her and hug her and tell her everything would be all right, that we would find her mummy soon.
‘It is so very tragic and it really does tug at your heart to think of the state that her poor mother must be in that she feels she can no longer look after her child.’
Supt Holmes says there is no question of any charges being brought against the mother for abandoning her child.
At 11.20pm last night, the baby's mother returned to the hospital to claim the child.
A police spokesman said: ‘We will be talking to the girl in the morning.
She came to the hospital and gave her details.
‘There is no indication why she did it.
The child is still with social services and there will be a case conference held tomorrow morning.’
The note which nurses found with abandoned toddler Debbie
Charged with murder
A LIVERPOOL teenager accused of murdering a 76year-old man last August has appeared before Manchester city magistrates.
Karl Gibson, 19, of Maintree Crescent, Speke, was remanded in custody for a week.
Eldon Henry was found asphyxiated and badly beaten in his home in Grosvenor Road, Whalley Range, Greater Manchester.
deal launched
MERSEY Docks and Harbour Company is moving into the Irish sea ferry business after clinching a £15m deal.
It has bought a 50% interest in Merchant Ferries Ltd, which operates daily roll-on, roll-off services between Heysham, Fleetwood and Warrenpoint, Northern Ireland.
Tory chief backs knife-edge Premier
‘NASTY’ RAP FOR LAMONT
By Mark Davies, Echo political correspondent TORY Party chairman Sir Norman Fowler today launched a stunning attack on former Chancellor Norman Lamont's bitter resignation speech, as John Major's survival balanced on a knife-edge.
Sir Norman slammed Mr Lamont's ‘nasty’ Commons statement.
The battered Premier was today desperately trying to reassert his authority after Mr Lamont's devastating attack.
He was facing stormy Commons scenes this afternoon as he came under more pressure during Prime Minister's question time.
Labour leader John Smith said Mr Lamont's speech, in which he accused the government of seeming to be ‘in office but not in power,’ undermined Mr Major's credibility.
But Sir Norman and Trade President Michael Heseltine rallied around the Prime Minister saying his survival had not been threatened by yesterday's dramatic speech.
Sir Norman, in a vicious attack on Mr Lamont's claim that Mr Major was only influenced by opinion pollsters and party managers, said: ‘The party stood by him.
What he has not done is remotely stood by the Prime Minister.’
Question
Mr Heseltine aimed to play down the impact of Mr Lamont's comments.
As question marks over Mr Major's future grew at Westminster, Mr Heseltine said Mr Lamont's speech would be forgotten very quickly and Mr Major would win the next general election.
John Major is slightly more likely to keep his job than England football manager Graham Taylor but both are odds-on to quit or be sacked, bookmakers William Hill said today.
Hills make Mr Major 8–13 to be out of office before the next general election, while Graham Taylor, whose team was beaten 2–0 by the United States last night, is 4–7 to go before the World Cup finals.
Kenneth Clarke is even money favourite to replace Major with Hills, who make Kevin Keegan 5–1 favourite to become England manager.
John Major…under pressure
Drama at the work place of his ex-girlfriend
FORMER TOWN CRIER IN FIREBALL HORROR
By Jason Burt
FORMER town crier Mike Chittenden turned himself into a human fireball outside the office of his former girlfriend.
He was said to be in a comfortable condition today, as he recovered in a hospital burns unit.
Earlier, horrified office staff were confronted by the man who staggered, in flames from the waist up, into their building.
He had telephoned a warning to the Chester office of the Echo's sister paper, the Daily Post.
Sounding calm, he told staff to go the United Friendly office's in Chester's St Werburgh Street.
Doused
As they were doing so, Mr Chittenden had already doused himself in a flammable liquid and set himself alight.
He did not go into the United Friendly office, where his ex-girlfriend, Sandra Sturgiss, was working.
Staff at a neighbouring office smelled the vapours and opened the door to see Mr Chittenden go up in flames.
He then staggered into their office, ablaze from the waist upwards and tore off his burning jacket.
Office worker Bryan Johnson managed to knock Mr Chittenden to the floor, tearing off his own shirt to smother the flames.
Fellow worker Hazel Goff, who has St John's Ambulance training, then administered first aid, cutting away Mr Chittenden's burnt clothing and sponging him with water.
Mr Johnson said: ‘To be honest, I thought he was going to get hold of one of us.
‘He came round the desks and I kicked him in the back of his legs to get him to the floor and I used my shirt to put out the flames and Hazel gave him first aid.’
Inspector Steve Clapham, of Chester Police, said: ‘His action appeared to be over a former girlfriend.’
Mr Chittenden was rushed to the Countess of Chester Hospital by ambulance with a police escort.
He was later transferred to the specialist burns unit at Whiston Hospital on Merseyside.
Mr Chittenden was replaced as Chester's town crier last year after he resigned.
Mike Chittenden…recovering in the burns unit of a Mersey hospital
New police warning after second night of blasts
BOMB BLITZ EXPERTS ACCUSE IRA
By Echo reporter
IRA terrorists were probably responsible for the two successive nights of blasts on Tyneside, a police chief said today.
David Mellish, Northumbria Police Assistant Chief Constable said: ‘At this stage it appears to be IRA activity, but no claim has been made.’
Mr Mellish disclosed that investigations after the incidents at Gateshead gas depot just before midnight on Tuesday and at a disused Esso oil terminal at North Shields late last night involved explosives.
Pipes
Asked if the two incidents might be of a diversionary nature as a prelude to a major attack, Mr Mellish replied: ‘We are dealing with each one as it comes we could have another again tonight or any time.’
Referring to last night's incident, he said there were two explosions, one next to an empty petrol tank and one next to a series of nearby pipes.
In both instances there was no fire, damage was minimal and there were no injuries.
No warning was given.
‘From the evidence gathered at the scene, it was very similar to incidents which have occurred elsewhere in the country,’ Mr Mellish added.
Mr Mellish said it was believed relatively small explosive devices were used and the aim of the bombers was damage to property and to achieve publicity, rather than to cause injuries.
But in view of the nature of the installations the implications to public safety were ‘potentially tremendous it is fortunate no one has been injured.’
Detective Chief Superintendent Barry Stewart, head of Northumbria CID, disclosed that video cameras were in operation at the Gateshead gas depot and as a result: ‘We have some video evidence’, which was being examined.
Man's body found in slate quarry
CRIME has been ruled out after the discovery of the body of a man in a slate quarry on a North Wales mountain yesterday.
Workmen alerted police after noticing a red car apparently abandoned in the quarry on the Horseshoe Pass between Llangollen and Ruthin.
The body of a 30-year-old man thought to be from the Accrington area was found when police arrived to search the floor of the steep-sided quarry near the Ponderosa Restaurant.
A Clwyd Search and Rescue mountain team helped recover the body and carry it to a waiting vehicle.
Insp Alan Cronin, of Ruabon police, said the man's name would not be released until relatives had identified him.
He said the man had no official connection with the Milk Race which crossed the Horseshoe Pass on Tuesday, but may have been a spectator.
Police said it was not known how the man had died.
Hospital pay-off talks
By Philippa Bellis, health reporter
UNION chiefs are seeking talks with management over redundancies at Mill Road Maternity Hospital.
In-patient services are due to transfer from Mill Road to Liverpool Maternity Hospital, Oxford Street, in October and November.
The move includes transferring 25 gynaecology beds from Mill Road to the Women's hospital in Catharine Street and moving 38 obstetric beds and some delivery beds to Liverpool Maternity Hospital.
Liverpool Obstetrics and Gynaecology Trust are looking for voluntary redundancies.
A letter sent out by Keith Haynes, Chief Executive of the Trust, says: ‘There will be the opportunity to offer a limited amount of voluntary redundancy to staff.’
A spokeswoman said letters were going out inviting people to apply for voluntary redundancies although the exact number was not yet known.
Bob Gregory, area officer for Nupe, said: ‘I am seeking urgent talks with management about this.
My concern is whether there will be compulsory redundancies if not enough people come forward for voluntary redundancy.’
Outpatient and antenatal clinics will continue to run at Mill Road along with the Community Midwifery service.
Right move
CONSIDERATION is being given by Powys' highways department to providing a right turning lane for traffic on the A483 trunk road in Newtown, following concern expressed by Newtown and Llanllwchaiarn Town Council for the safety of pedestrians crossing the road between the Do It All superstore and the Safeways supermarket.
Euro guest
NORTH Wales Euro MP Joe Wilson will be the guest speaker at the annual meeting of the Machynlleth and District CAB on Thursday evening of next week.
For the birds
POWYS councillors are being recommended to approve the installation of a cattle grid at the Lake Vyrnwy Reserve, Y Gadfa, following representations from the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds, but only on condition that the RSPB is responsible for all the costs involved in the construction of the grid.
Green man
CEREDIGION and Pembroke North MP Cynog Dafis has been given a Greenhouse award by Green Magazine after being voted the best newcomer to Parliament.
Keep it going
OFFICERS are recommending that Montgomeryshire District Council continues to hold food hygiene training courses.
Roundabout way to ease traffic
By Gareth Hughes Daily Post Staff
THE Welsh Office has given the go-ahead for a road scheme which could result in up to five roundabouts on a 600-yard stretch of one of the main routes to a Welsh resort.
Clwyd highways officials have admitted that the number ‘is not ideal’ but Welsh Office Inspector Peter Floyd said the scheme for Rhyl was the best.
He has approved compulsory purchase orders and side roads orders connected with the proposed Rhuddlan bypass, work on which is due to start during the coming year.
The scheme, aimed at removing the traffic bottleneck in the village of Rhuddlan, will include a new crossing over the River Clwyd.
A public inquiry was held in January, during which it was revealed that there could be as many as five roundabouts within half a mile in future.
Apart from the existing roundabout near Rhuddlan Golf Club, another is nearing completion outside the Sainsbury's store.
The county council scheme provides for another roundabout at the junction of the new bypass and the existing A525 Rhyl Road, and another at Bryn Cwnin crossroads.
The proposal for a Rhyl relief road could mean yet another where it crosses the A525.
Mr Floyd has rejected an appeal by the Ramblers' Association for an underpass or footbridge to be provided over the bypass where a footpath will be cut in two.
HONEYMOON MAN KILLED BY A SHARK
Great white spits out torso and escapes net
By Echo reporter
PROFESSIONAL hunters called in by police were today searching for a great white shark that killed a scuba diver on his honeymoon.
John Ford, 31, was killed yesterday in Australia's second fatal shark attack in five days.
Last Saturday, British-born Therese Cartwright, 34, was killed by a great white while diving near a seal colony off Tasmania with her husband and five children.
She was attacked by a 12ft shark.
The great white that killed Ford was 16.5ft.
Warned
He was diving with his wife Deborah they had been married 15 days off the resort town of Byron Bay, 400 miles north of Sydney.
Scientists warned hunters not to kill other sharks indiscriminately, saying the creatures were crucial to the marine environment.
The shark which attacked Ford was later caught by fishermen but escaped.
It dragged their small boat for several miles and as it struggled to get free it spat out a human torso, some pieces of wetsuit and a face mask.
It then thrashed its way to freedom and has not been seen since.
Great whites, also known as white pointers, are the biggest and most dangerous shark species found in the waters around Australia.
German officers on patrol
TWO German police officers were given an insight into the workings of their Welsh counterparts yesterday.
Detlef Starck and Ralf Nielebock, both from Dusseldorf, are in North Wales on a visit arranged through the International Police Association and aimed at improving links between different forces.
Acting Chief Inspector John Hughes-Jones showed them around Rhyl police station and they also paid a visit to the helicopter unit at Bodelwyddan.
Dusseldorf lawmen Ralf Nielebock and Detlef Starck try on British police helmets Picture: JEFF PITT
He selects the squads.
He picks the team.
He decides on the pattern of play.
If we don't, the knock-on effect will be felt by EVERY club in the land, from the Premier through to the Third Division.
Taylor must recognise this fact now…and act.
Gun held at head of bank customer
A MAN accused of an armed bank raid was involved in a series of robberies on Merseyside, a court heard.
James Walker, 35, formerly of Edinburgh Towers, Everton, denied conspiring to commit robberies in April and May last year.
Henry Globe, prosecuting, said that another man not in the dock at Liverpool Crown Court, Thomas White, has already pleaded guilty.
Shots
Mr Globe alleged that in one incident a woman customer was seized in the National Westminster Bank in West Derby Road, by White who held a gun to her head as he ordered the cashier to hand over money.
Shots were fired at the ceiling before White and an accomplice ran out empty handed.
Mr Globe said the first raid was at Satterthwaite's confectioners in Crosby when they threatened two women with a screwdriver and stole £513.
In other incidents a security officer was attacked leaving a betting shop in Scotland Road and a social security employee was attacked at Lloyd's Bank, Huyton.
(Proceeding)
Fireman to the rescue
OFF-DUTY fireman Peter Dann came to the rescue when a 52year-old man collapsed on Moreton shore after an asthma attack.
Fireman Dann, 37, who was cycling along the promenade, saw the man collapsed in the water.
He dragged him out with help from another passer-by, and gave him resuscitation.
The man was treated by paramedics before being taken to Arrowe Park Hospital.
MAJOR IS PLANNING A RETORT
Top Tories set to savage Lamont
A BATTERED John Major was today planning a fight back as senior Tories rallied round to turn on Norman Lamont after his fierce Commons resignation speech.
Party chairman Sir Norman Fowler ripped into Mr Lamont with a stunning attack on the sacked Chancellor's ‘nasty’ speech.
And the Prime Minister aimed to reassert his authority as he prepared late changes to a big speech to be delivered to Welsh Tories tomorrow.
He is set to tackle Mr Lamont's criticisms head on and reject his claim that policies are presented for 36 hours of good publicity.
But Downing Street sources said it was ‘business as usual’ at the Premier's office.
Mr Major was reported to be resolute after Mr Lamont's attack.
Trade President Michael Heseltine aimed to play down the impact of that speech.
But Mr Major was expected to face stormy Commons scenes as he came under more pressure during Prime Minister's question time this afternoon.
Labour leader John Smith said Mr Lamont's speech in which he accused the government of seeming to be in office but not in power had ‘gravely undermined’ Mr Major's credibility.
But Sir Norman and Mr Heseltine rallied around the Prime Minister, saying his survival had not been threatened by the bitter speech yesterday.
And Sir Norman viciously attacked Mr Lamont's claim that Mr Major was only influenced by opinion pollsters and party managers.
He fired: ‘I am not going take any criticism from Mr Lamont on that particular area.
‘The party stood by him.
What he has not done is remotely stand by the Prime Minister.’
Mr Heseltine said Mr Lamont's speech would be soon forgotten.
He said: ‘We are in the high passion of politics.
If you sack your Chancellor you know there will be a price to pay.
‘Norman Lamont's speech will fade within a very short period of time.’
Call to move cylinders from IRA blast site
GAS TANKS WORRY FOR RESIDENTS
By Echo reporter
BRITISH GAS has been urged to remove high-pressure gas cylinders targeted by the IRA at Warrington.
A special meeting of Warrington Borough Council's emergency committee called for the cylinders to be removed to give local residents peace of mind.
Councillor Michael Hannon, deputy mayor, who represents the Orford area where the bomb attack took place in February, said: ‘I intend to do everything in my power to help relocate these tanks.
‘My sympathy goes out to the people of Gateshead who have suffered a similarly sickening attack and I believe the government must now ensure that there is a positive and rapid response to meet the concerns of local residents.’
Four devices were planted at the Warrington works in February.
Three detonated.
Destroyed
Two were placed on huge gas holders, completely destroying one.
Another was attached to a high pressure gas cylinder.
Experts said that if the bombs had penetrated any part of the cigar-shaped cylinders they would have gone off like a rocket, smashing into nearby homes.
Since the attack, the gas cylinders have remained out of use.
Cllr Hannon added: ‘I know from talking with residents they are still frightened by the prospect of another attack.
‘They will not be satisfied until the cylinders are relocated elsewhere.
‘The emergency committee has unanimously decided to press British Gas to commit itself to the relocation of this installation at the earliest possible date.’
A British Gas spokesman said: ‘We have not yet received any communication from the emergency committee.
‘When we do we will give it our full consideration.
‘Meanwhile, site security has been strengthened.’
Council jobs reform pledge
By Ian Lang Daily Post Staff
THE interests of 40,000 Welsh council employees haunted by the spectre of local government reform will be safeguarded, Welsh Secretary, John Redwood has pledged.
The Welsh Secretary's announcement came in response to a question from Clwyd North West MP Rod Richards.
He had asked what measures were being taken to protect the interests of staff in the run-up to reform in Wales in 1995.
In a statement, Mr Richards said it was very important that the interests of the thousands of people employed by councils in Wales should not be forgotten.
‘I have been contacted by a number of my constituents, who work for Clwyd County Council, expressing their concerns about the way they will be represented during the period of local government reorganisation.
‘I am delighted to report that the Secretary of State recognises these fears and is committed to establishing a Staff Commission to safeguard the interests of council employees during the reorganisation process,’ said Mr Richards.
He said that in the interim period Mr Redwood had decided to establish an advisory committee to issue advice on specific issues which need to be tackled in advance of the Commission.
Yesterday, Martin Eaglestone, chairperson of the North Wales Local Government Committee which represents 8,000 workers, said that Nalgo welcomed any serious attempt by the Welsh Office to meet the aspirations of staff.
But he said the union was concerned at the delay in setting up a Staff Commission.
They were also uncertain as to the status, role and purpose of the advisory committee.
John Redwood
Cat and mouse game for TV rivals
COMIC CAPERS
By Ann Todd
ECHO chief photographer Stephen Shakeshaft found himself in the middle of a real cat and mouse game right in the heart of the city as he caught up with cartoon characters Tom and Jerry.
The comic TV rivals otherwise double act Flying Thing (Russ Edwards and Sam Heald) were going through their routine for tonight's show at the Unity Theatre as part of the Liverpool Festival of Comedy.
The longest and funniest unresolved TV chase in history is brought to life through the clowning and acrobatic skills of Russ and Sam with their ribtickling grown-up version on stage tonight and tomorrow.
The Liverpool Festival of Comedy is launched with a bang tonight at St George's Hall with an event involving comedians and can-can dancers.
And the new Festival Queen, Liverpool actress Pauline Daniels, will be crowned in a special ceremony.
Major hits back at Delors over push to EC single currency
THE Prime Minister's claim that a single currency for Europe might never come about was firmly rebutted by EC Commission president Jacques Delors yesterday.
Mr Delors admitted that economic reality had to be taken into account, but he said the timetable of January 1, 1999, at the latest was on course.
Mr Major told the Commons yesterday the EC economies ‘are not remotely ready for one currency and I believe they will not be ready if they every will be for many years.’
He warned that if some EC partners went ahead prematurely it would be a big mistake and Britain would not join them.
Mr Delors told a news conference in Brussels he was determined to apply the Maastricht Treaty on time, including full economic and monetary union.
‘You must take account of the economy, but for a single currency only seven countries have to accept,’ he pointed out.
He is convinced the necessary seven member states whichever they may be can still meet the criteria for economic convergence which has been set as the minimum to permit a single currency in a majority of member states.
But he stressed yesterday that the commission is likely to alter requirements if necessary to match the needs of a Europe-wide recession.
Teenager demanded cash from schoolgirl
A TEENAGE boy demanded cash from a schoolgirl and punched her in the face, a court heard.
Jackie Lamb, prosecuting at Warrington Youth Court, said the girl, 13, and two friends were walking home from Penketh High.
A 17-year-old youth blocked the girl's path and said: ‘Give us some dosh.’
Punching
The girl pushed past, but the youth again demanded money before punching her hard in the face.
She suffered severe headaches and her face was tender.
Frank Howard, defending, said: ‘The defendant made a stupid act of bravado, but things got out of hand.’
The boy admitted assaulting the girl and was remanded on bail for reports.
Argentina reaffirms claim to Falklands
ARGENTINA last night reaffirmed its claim to the Falklands, but added that it intended to recover the islands peacefully.
Argentina also claims the Southern Georgias and the Sandwich islands belong to it.
The country's foreign ministry issued a communique on its Sovereignty Reaffirmation Day.
This commemorates the creation in 1829 of a political and military post to govern the islands.
In 1833, a British naval force expelled the administration appointed by Buenos Aires.
‘On this occasion, the Argentine government and its people, who never consented to that act of force, reiterate their permanent will to recover by diplomatic means the exercise of its territorial sovereignty over the Malvinas, Southern Georgias and Sandwich islands and the surrounding waters,’ the communique said.
It added that Argentina's claim rested on resolutions of the general assemblies of the United Nations and the Organisation of American States, which have asked the Argentine and British governments to resume negotiations to try to settle the dispute.
Girl who spurned boy burned
A GIRL aged 14 was burned alive in Bombay after she rejected the advances of a young boy, the Press Trust of India reported yesterday.
The girl was doused with petrol and set alight after complaining that she was being subjected to ‘Eve-teasing,’ the Indian euphemism for sexual harassment, rife in a culture in which dating is unusual.
Cairo clamps down on zealots
EGYPT has imposed travel restrictions which will make it harder for Islamic militants to cross the border with Libya.
The government has also sacked the three main police brigadiers who were in charge of security in the area in which a bus bomb killed one Egyptian and injured five British tourists.
Banana smugglers' fatal slip
CUSTOMS officials had seized 170 tons of bananas, worth £150,000, which were being smuggled into Portugal in foreign-registered vehicles, police in Lisbon said yesterday.
Snake's embrace blows fuses
DIPLOMACY was plunged into darkness and officials were stranded in lifts after a snake coiled itself round power cables and blew all the fuses in a government conference centre in northern Tanzania.
Biter bit for police attacker
A MALAYSIAN was jailed for five years in the capital, Kuala Lumpur, yesterday for biting off the finger of a policeman who had prevented him stealing a motorcycle.
£14m aid for bombed gallery THE Italian senate has approved £14m for repairs to Florence's 400-year-old Uffizi art gallery, badly damaged by a car bomb last month.
State sticks to N-promise KAZAKHSTAN, one of four nuclear-armed states to emerge from the break-up of the Soviet Union, had reaffirmed its commitment to nuclear disarmament, an official newspaper reported yesterday.
French ID checks plan ‘racist’ FRENCH human rights groups have condemned a draft law sanctioning random identity checks, saying that it would heighten racial tension and cast suspicion on anyone who was not white.
Ex-Lord Mayor honoured as ‘shining light to others’
OUR ROSIE IS WOMAN OF YEAR
By Ann Todd, religious affairs reporter
LIVERPOOL'S former Lord Mayor, Councillor Rosie Cooper, was in London this afternoon to receive her award as a national Catholic Woman of the Year.
The panel which selected Cllr Cooper described her as ‘a shining light to others’ and ‘a woman who has done a lot for Liverpool.’
Congratulation
Cllr Cooper, who finished her term as Lord Mayor last month, was being presented with her award in a silver anniversary lunch at the Russell Hotel.
The ceremony was being attended by Princess Margaretha of Luxembourg and three other award winners, all from the south of England.
The Archbishop of Liverpool, Derek Worlock, sent a warm letter of congratulation to Cllr Cooper, saying her honour was ‘very well deserved.’
Mrs Anthony Wheatley, committee member of the Catholic Woman of the Year awards, said: ‘Cllr Cooper was one of 73 people nominated.
‘When we discussed it, we all said how marvellous she was and came to the conclusion that Rosemary Cooper really was somebody special.
‘She seemed to us a shining light, who did a lot for Liverpool.
‘She also used her Catholicism in a good, ecumenical way.’
Mrs Wheatley said Cllr Cooper was the unanimous choice of the panel for public-spirited Catholic Woman Of The Year.
Before she left for London, Cllr Cooper said: ‘I am astounded to have been chosen.
It is an honour I never dreamt of.
I hope I can live up to it.’
Cllr Rosemary Cooper
…‘somebody special’
Forged notes charge
TWO men were remanded on bail by Rhuddlan Magistrates yesterday on a charge of passing two counterfeit £10 notes.
James Cochrane, 22, of Edward Henry Street, Rhyl, and John Wayne Foulkes, 25, of Maes Stanley, Bodelwyddan, pleaded not guilty.
They were remanded on unconditional bail until June 24 for a pre-trial review.
Ex-Lord Mayor honoured as ‘shining light to others’
Farewell to king of comedy
By Daily Post Reporter
WITH his broad, malleable face, his gruff northern voice and razor sharp humour, Les Dawson, who died yesterday, was a king of comedians.
He was a natural stand-up comic but like all clowns, buried deep in his psyche was the need to be taken seriously.
Unlike many others, he achieved success in that respect as well through his work as a writer.
However, it was the hangdog expression and the endless mother-in-law jokes for which he was best-known.
Born on February 2, 1934, in Collyhurst, Manchester, the young Les Dawson was known as Dossy.
Dossy's earliest ambitions were to be a writer after he was told at school that he had literary talent.
But there were not many opportunities for the son of a bricklayer to take up writing and at 14 he began work in the parcels department at the local Co-op.
He also had a stab at writing for a living, becoming a reporter on the Bury Times, but he soon lost that job after trying to inject some of his flowery prose into a report on the funeral of a civic dignitary.
After completing his national service in the Army, the youthful Dawson decided to go to Paris in search of literary inspiration.
But, as he revealed later, it did not take long for him to realise that Paris was no more inspirational to him than Barnsley, so he returned to northern England and entered show business as a singer and pianist.
His career as a musician failed to take off and in a fit of depression one night he got drunk before he was due to on stage at a trawlermen's club in Hull.
It proved a turning point in his luck and his career.
He started fooling around on stage and brought the house down in the process, the tough audience quickly warming to his gritty humour.
A source of constant support during the lean years was his wife Margaret Plant, known as Meg, whom he married in 1960.
Seven years later it was Meg who got him the audition on TV's Opportunity Knocks which was to give him his big break.
But despite this success, Les could never resist the lure of the stage, continuing to do live variety shows.
His drag double act with Roy Barraclough (Coronation Street's Alec Gilroy), harked back to Norman Evans and was used for a television commercial for the Post Office.
On a more serious side, he wrote an acclaimed autobiography A Clown Too Many and his first serious novel Time Before Genesis.
In later years, the 15-stone comedian faced health problems, both of his own, and through his wife who fought bravely against breast cancer.
He became seriously ill with a blood infection after a routine prostate operation and soon after recovering faced a greater trauma when Meg died in 1986.
In September, 1988, just two months after he announced his engagement to 36-year-old Tracey Roper, he suffered a minor heart attack.
But despite his personal problems, in true show business style Les Dawson always carried on working, hiding his own sadness and suffering to make others laugh.
LES gives his cheeky grin after his marriage to Tracey Roper
DIPLOMATS were stranded in lifts when a snake coiled itself round power cables and blew the fuses at a conference in Tanzania.
ACTORS dressed up as Vikings for a Welsh S4C documentary were challenged by local people in Swansea and accused of being New Age travellers.
High dole town to lose a lifeline
By David Greenwood Daily Post Staff
A TOWN which has one of the highest unemployment levels in Wales is about to lose a vital unit which handles income support claims.
The Benefits Agency, an executive arm of the Department of Social Services, has announced that it is switching its operation from Holyhead to Llangefni, 16 miles away.
But the move, due to be introduced next Monday, has been condemned both by Holyhead town councillors, who are fighting it, and the island's MP, Ieuan Wyn Jones.
Last night, Mr Jones said he was involved in a last-ditch effort to save the unit.
After meeting staff he has made a plea to agency chiefs to delay the transfer so that full consultations can take place.
These, he said, would involve local authorities.
Mr Jones added: ‘These plans have been roundly condemned in Holyhead and I've urged the agency to think again.’
Mr Jones said the agency had to have regard to the need to provide a full service to claimants in the area.
Holyhead councillor Jimmy O'Toole described the situation as diabolical.
‘They're not going to get away with this,’ he said.
Coun O'Toole, chairman of the Holyhead Unemployment Workers Centre management committee, said that last year welfare rights workers at the centre had dealt with 542 income support enquiries, which represented 15pc of the 3,518 cases handled.
The agency says the switch will not result in a deterioration of the service currently provided at Holyhead, and that customer services staff in the town will still be able to deal with any enquiries.
‘No angel’ girl attacks judge
A GIRL today hit back at the judge who let her sex attacker walk free because she was ‘not entirely an angel’.
She said the man, who admitted attempting to have sex with her when she was eight, should have gone to prison for two or three years.
Now 12, she said: ‘Its not fair.
I shouldn't get the blame for something I didn't do.’
Ivy better: Coronation Street actress Lynne Perrie, who plays Ivy Brennan, was said to be ‘slightly improved’ today in hospital where she is undergoing tests following her collapse on the set of the series three days ago.
Prince's plea: Prince Michael of Kent has launched an attack on plans to build a car park at Brooklands in Surrey an historic aviation site and the birthplace of British motor sport.
Fire horror: A five-year-old boy died after fire ripped through his home in Crawley, West Sussex early today.
His mother, who escaped with her eight month-old baby, was beaten back by flames when she tried to rescue her son.
Clowes appeal: Jailed financier Peter Clowes, 50, of Wilmslow, Cheshire, is today appealing against his conviction for cheating investors in the Barlow Clowes investment group of an estimated £113m.
He is serving a 10-year jail sentence.
Judge rethink: The Marquess of Blandford's 112 day sentence over non-payment of maintenance to his wife may be cut by the judge who committed him to Pentonville on Tuesday.
Mr Justice Johnson said he was ‘concerned that the length of the sentence imposed may have been excessive’.
On-trial Major plans defence
By David Rose Political Editor
JOHN Major will go on the offensive today to try and save his job after the Tories virtually put him on probation.
He will use the Welsh Tory conference in Llangollen to dismiss the charge that he is not up to being Prime Minister.
And other top Tories like Michael Heseltine and party chairman Norman Fowler will share the platform with him to show he has the full backing of the Cabinet.
But last night one backbencher, Waveney MP David Porter, said: ‘He is on extended probation.’
Cabinet ministers and Tory backbench leaders yesterday closed ranks behind the PM as he shrugged off the attack by Norman Lamont, which has raised doubts over whether he will survive.
Echoing the words of another Tory Prime Minister, Harold Macmillan, 30 years ago, he told MPs at Question Time yesterday: ‘We have a little local difficulty.
We will get over it and I am getting on with the work in hand.’
And Labour Leader John Smith helped unite the Tories behind Mr Major by demanding an immediate general election.
‘You may have overlooked it,’ Mr Major replied.
‘We had an election last year.
We won it and you lost it.
The score is four-nil.
In due course it will be five-nil.’
Powerful
Mr Major signalled it was business as usual when he welcomed new Welsh Secretary John Redwood at the morning's Cabinet and told ministers they had important issues to deal with.
‘That's what we are here for,’ he said.
‘I am looking forward to working together.
Now let's get down to business.’
Last night the powerful executive of the backbench 1922 Committee also rallied behind Mr Major.
But one or two MPs emerged from behind the public show of loyalty to warn that Mr Major has been given one last chance.
Bill Walker, MP for Tayside North, said: ‘He is living on borrowed time.’
Mr Major's aides signalled he will use Llangollen to show the Government can, and does, face up to tough long-term decisions.
Mr Redwood, the Cabinet's newest member, sprang to Mr Major's defence by denying Mr Lamont had damaged his credibility.
‘The Prime Minister is in a strong position,’ he said.
John Major ‘on probation’
Heartless theft from charity HQ
THIEVES have stolen a fax machine used by a Clwyd based charity to send vital documents overseas.
The raiders broke into the warehouse used by Operation Christmas Child on Wrexham industrial estate.
OCC has dispatched thousands of pounds worth of food and medical aid by road to Romania, the former Yugoslavia and Russia.
Dave Cooke, OCC founder, said he was sickened by the break-in at the depot, the second this year.
Where there's a wheel…
THE managing director of David McLean Homes will get behind the wheel of a limousine to help raise money for St Mary's primary school, in Wrexham, at an auction of ‘promises’ at St Mary's church hall tonight.
Hazel Lynes is offering her services as a chauffeuse with a luxurious limousine for a full day to the person who places the highest bid in the auction.
Cottage raid
RAIDERS who broke into a cottage in Chester Road, Rossett, Wrexham, stole jewellery and other property worth £2,400.
Art show AN exhibition of over 100 paintings by the National Society of Botanic Artists is to be held at Erddig Hall, Wrexham, between June 13–27.
Car horror
A YOUTH was taken to hospital with head injuries following a two-car crash at Pant Du on the Nercwys to Eryrys Road near Mold.
One of the cars overturned into a field.
Man ‘stable’
A MAN who was attacked and left unconscious outside a pub at Buckley two weeks ago is said to be in a stable condition in hospital.
Michael Henshaw, of Rhosddu, near Wrexham, was injured outside the Black Horse in Buckley.
Four people face various charges arising out of the incident.
Briton to admit Thai heroin charge
A 27-YEAR-OLD British woman charged with heroin smuggling in Thailand yesterday said she would plead guilty.
Sandra Mary Gregory appeared in court with her travelling companion and codefendant Robert Frank Lock, but their hearing was put off until July 2 because lawyers failed to attend.
Gregory, from Halifax, West Yorkshire, said afterwards that she would plead guilty.
‘I can't fight the case,’ she said.
‘If I fight…
I will get a life sentence.
I have no choice.’
Gregory and Lock were arrested at Bangkok's Don Muang international airport on February 6 when police said they found a condom filled with 150 grams of heroin.
Gregory, who had been teaching English in Thailand for two years, has said she was acting as a courier for Lock, on whom no drugs were found.
Lock, 29, said his lawyers had advised him not to comment on the case.
Sandra Gregory
A RECORD number of 737 snooker professionals will be competing in next season's nine world-ranking events and that means nearly 5,000 matches will be played.
From next season, the world's top 16 players will automatically be seeded through to the last 32 of the three overseas ranking events the Dubai Duty Free Classic, European Open and Nescafe Asian Open.
Pet shop ‘rescue’
A YOUNG parrot has been rescued from a pet shop by its rightful owner.
The Harry Tuffin Supermarket and Wildlife Centre at Churchstoke, near Welshpool, had offered a £400 reward after the six-month-old African Grey, named Tuffin George, had been ‘parrot-napped’ from the centre by two men six weeks ago.
The centre's manager, Peter Struthers, said last night: ‘Since we lost George, my wife Ann and myself had paid numerous visits to pet shops over a wide area, on the off chance that he had been brought along by the two thieves.
‘We were going past a pet shop in Shrewsbury, where we had been before looking for George, when we decided to have another look around.
And to my amazement, what did I see but our George, and labelled for sale at £395.
‘Although he had not seen us for six weeks, he soon recognised us and started shouting Tuffin George all over the shop.’
The matter is now in the hands of the police, after the shop owners gave them details of the two men.
Reunited: Peter Struthers and George
Bomb-proof bins set to curb threat of terrorism
BOMB-PROOF litter bins, which might have limited the Warrington IRA bomb horror, are being developed by the Royal Ordnance factories.
Bomb-proof cargo holds in aircraft are another vital development in the fight against terrorism.
Bosses and unions have met to identify products suitable for the post-Cold War period.
Dai Hudd, Liverpool based secretary of the union representing ordnance workers, said: ‘The development of bomb blast-retaining metals and containers has considerable potential in the fight against terrorism.
Meeting
‘We are developing liners for bins, which would have contained a bomb blast such as at Warrington and would have reduced injuries.’
The unions recognise this first meeting is unlikely to come up with immediate proposals, but wants to meet workers to develop a product diversification strategy.
Dai Hudd said: ‘We would have much preferred that this initiative happened before the downturn in defence markets, which has seen a haemorrhage of jobs from the North-West.
‘Nevertheless, we will lose no time in trying to secure a future for Royal Ordnance and our members.’
Move clears way for gipsy site
FARMER Alan Sharpe has lost his battle for planning consent for a horse riding centre on a one-and-a-half acre site at Woolston near Warrington.
The Department of the Environment has ruled that the centre which he regards as an indoor riding school would be visually intrusive and inappropriate in the Green Belt.
The decision, following a public inquiry in February, clears the way for a controversial gipsy transit camp which has been the subject of a long-running dispute between Warrington Borough and Cheshire County councils.
Hundreds of residents of the Woolston area, the local parish council and the borough council oppose the gipsy camp plan but Cheshire wants it to go ahead on the site, off Manchester Road, near the junction with the M6.
MP calls for probe into sale of Laird shipyard
By Mark Davies, political correspondent SPENDING watchdogs have been asked to investigate the sale of Birkenhead shipyard Cammell Laird to VSEL.
Labour MP Stephen Byers claims VSEL avoided paying the Treasury £40m for the yard.
Mr Byers, MP for Tyneside constituency Wallsend, wants the inquiry by the National Audit Office to be part of its investigation into VSEL's successful tender for the Royal Navy's new helicopter carrier.
Mr Byers wants to know: Why did VSEL pay only £1 for Lairds?
Who agreed the terms of the sale?
Avoided
He alleges that when Lairds was sold in the 1980s, VSEL agreed to pay £40m to the Treasury if their profits exceeded £100m in five years.
But he claims that VSEL avoided paying the money by introducing ‘extraordinary items’ into its 1990/91 accounts to reduce them below £100m.
He also wants to know whether the £40m saving was used to subsidise the tender for the helicopter carrier.
VSEL won the tender for its Barrow yard, with the decision forcing the Swan Hunter yard on Tyneside to go into receivership.
Mr Byers said: ‘These are important questions which need to be answered.
‘If the National Audit Office inquiry is to be full and fair it must take into account all the relevant factors.
‘The ease with which VSEL was able to avoid paying £40m must be a matter for real concern.’
Rival airports ‘could merge’
LIVERPOOL and Manchester airports could be amalgamated if a high speed rail link was built between them, a planning chief has suggested.
Air traffic control and other facilities could be shared, Coun Mike Hughes, chairman of Warrington's planning committee, said.
He put forward the idea as a means of ending the fierce competition between the two airport companies, which are both putting forward major expansion proposals.
Warrington Borough Council has been given a detailed outline of Liverpool's proposals by airport managing director Rod Hill.
But councillors have yet to decide which airport plan to back.
Mr Hill says Liverpool's plans are more environmentally friendly and less costly.
The airport is currently grossly under-used and could, without any additional runway, cope with up to 12m passengers a year if new terminal buildings were provided on land available to the airport company.
Only 34,000 people live in the area which could be affected by noise, compared with 143,000 who would be affected if a second runway was built at Manchester.
Coun Hughes said an alternative to expanding Manchester might be an amalgamation of the two airports, with a high speed rail link.
Mr Hill said attempts by Liverpool to start discussions between the two airport companies had so far come to nothing.
Teenager charged
A LIVERPOOL teenager appeared before Manchester City Magistrates today accused of murdering Eldon Henry, 76, last August.
Karl Gibson, 19, of Maintree Crescent, Speke, was remanded in custody for a week.
Mr Henry was found asphyxiated and badly beaten at his home in Whalley Range, Greater Manchester.
Car death man remanded
STEVEN Littlewood, 27, of Bridgewater Avenue, Latchford, Warrington, was remanded in custody at Warrington magistrates court yesterday charged with the aggravated taking of a Ford Escort XR3i cabriolet, causing the death of 19-year-old Julian Osborne, of Dorchester Road, Hood Manor, Warrington, causing Osborne's death by dangerous driving and driving without insurance.
FATHER AND SON KILLED IN BLAST
Safer method would have saved pair in petrol tragedy
By Anne Harrison
A FATHER and his nine-year-old son died in an avoidable tragedy while repairing a neighbour's car.
A Chester inquest heard today that Stephen Whitley, 38, a motor mechanic, and son Jonathan, both died from severe burns suffered in a garage inferno at their home in March.
The tragedy happened when petrol was being decanted by Mr Whitley and his neighbour.
The fire officer who investigated the blaze said the accident could have been avoided if a safer method of working had been used.
Jonathan suffered 98% burns and his body was found by firemen in the garage.
Stephen died several days later in Whiston Hospital's burns unit.
Stephen Whitley's widow Constance Whitley, 34, told Cheshire's deputy Coroner John Pollard, how she was in their terrace home in Mill Lane, Great Sutton, on the evening of March 4, when she was alerted to the fire by sounds coming from the garage, a few yards from the house.
Stephen then came through the door of the house on fire, screaming ‘Put me out’, and pulling burning clothing from him.
She dialled 999 and tried to reach a pile of coats in the kitchen to extinguish the flames but could not get past her husband because of the heat and flames.
Stephen had been in the garage with neighbour Keith Dodd, Jonathan, and Mr Dodd's eight-year-old daughter Jennifer, repairing a petrol gauge on Mr Dodd's Vauxhall Cavalier car.
Mr Dodd of Wilmslow Drive, said he had parked the car in the garage for Stephen who had agreed to mend the petrol gauge fender unit.
He told how Stephen began draining petrol from the car, but when he had filled two plastic bowls petrol was still flowing.
Stephen called to his son to fetch a rag to stop the petrol and then to get a funnel from for Mr Dodd to decant petrol into a metal can.
Mr Dodd realised his hands were on fire and ran from the garage.
He was later treated at Whiston for burns to his hands.
Alan Haddock, assistant divisional officer with Cheshire Fire Brigade, said the blaze was an avoidable accident.
Vapours
The cause was either the butane gas heater or the electric lead lamp Mr Whitley had been using under the car, or both, setting fire to petrol vapours.
He said: ‘This tragedy could have been avoided because the method of decanting used in an enclosed space with a direct source of ignition available and the use of an unsuitable type of hand lamp did not constitute a safe system of working.’
A drop of petrol could have fallen on the lamp bulb and shattered it to expose its white hot filament which would have ignited the vapours.
He said there were approved types of lamps available for this type of garage work.
Deputy Coroner Mr Pollard recorded verdicts of accidental death and said he was satisfied what had happened had been purely an accident.
Jonathan Whitley
Crack down on ‘rave’ concert noise
COUNCIL officers are taking action to keep noise down at a ‘rave’ concert tomorrow.
The concert at the Widnes Rugby League ground will feature a number of chart-topping bands as well as top DJs.
However, officers from Halton Borough Council will be on hand to ensure the event goes off with minimum disturbance to residents living around Naughton Park.
The council has also set up a hotline on  for local people to ring if they suffer excessive noise.
The bands taking part in tomorrow's event include The Prodigy, Love Decade, KWS and Terrorize.
‘We expect the control we are exercising over the sound levels at the concert will prevent undue disturbance to residents,’ said assistant director of environmental health Ray Jones.
‘However, environmental health officers will be on duty throughout the concert.’
The concert will take place from 7pm to 11pm tomorrow and the ground will be open to the public from 5pm.
By Caroline Storah and Philippa Bellis
A LIVERPOOL pub landlady was found murdered this afternoon and an immediate search was launched for her missing baby.
Denise Johnson, who was in her 30s, was murdered in the living quarters of her city centre pub.
Police who were called to the Lion Tavern in Moorfields found her body on a settee but there was no sign of her 20month-old son Gareth who was believed to have been in the pub when his mother was killed.
Shocked onlookers, in town to see the Milk Race, watched as detectives broke into the pub.
Police issued a photograph of little Gareth and appealed to the public to contact them urgently if they had any information.
They also appealed to the baby's father, whom they named as 31-year-old David Arthur Ashworth, from Manchester, to contact them.
Murder squad detectives, led by Detective Superintendent Stan Fletcher, sealed off the area while forensic tests were carried out.
Merseyside Coroner Roy Barter was also at the scene along with a Home Office pathologist.
The discovery was made at 11.30am after staff arrived at the pub and found they could not get in.
They called police and an officer climbed up the fire escape and made the grim discovery.
Detective Chief Inspector Frank Thompson told the Echo: ‘We are very anxious to speak to anyone who saw Denise last night.
‘And we are still looking for the child who should have been in the premises, but wasn't.
We are very concerned for his safety.’
Mr Thompson appealed to anyone with information to call the police hotline on .
One pub regular told the Echo: ‘The pub was all locked up and it was obvious that something was wrong.
Two police cars then arrived and shortly afterwards they broke into the pub.
‘This has come as a terrible shock.
Denise has a young baby and she was a very popular landlady, always greeting us with a smile.’
Baby Gareth…missing
Cheshire joy
CHESHIRE won their first National Cricket Association County Championship match when they beat Lancashire by 42 runs at Milnrow yesterday.
Cheshire, who needed a victory to give themselves a fighting chance of winning the North West Group, scored 185 thanks to an knock of 66 from Stockport's Andy Hall.
The points were secured when Lancashire were skittled out for 143.
In a representative match at Cheadle Hulme, Cheshire County League over-40s beat Cheshire over-50s by 74 runs after totalling 223–4 and restricting Cheshire to 149–4.
Planners to visit ‘ghetto fear’ site
PLANNING chiefs voted to visit the site of a proposed major housing estate after hearing the development could become ‘a ghetto of the future.’
Members of Warrington planning committee shared residents' concerns about the lack of open space in the design and fear the estate could attract vandals.
Residents of Grappenhall, near Warrington, submitted almost 100 letters of complaint and a 2,000-name petition opposing the scheme to build 167 houses, a supermarket and a pub in the area.
Resident spokesman Richard Hazlehurst said: ‘This plan has caused a lot of concern regarding the amount of recreational space provided in the area.
We have very little as it is and this plan will just wipe it out.
‘Should this estate be built it will bring nothing but trouble to the area.
The pub will attract extra traffic and unruly youths.
The area will lose it's character.’
But Simon Davies, spokesman for applicants Ashall Group Ltd, replied: ‘We have gone through many months of consultation with all those involved.
We believe this development will be a positive addition to the area and will greatly benefit the community.’
Planning officer John Earle said: ‘There is still real fear about the density of population in the area should the scheme be approved, and we certainly do not want to create a ghetto of the future.
‘But the developers have satisfied our demands; the architectural liaison officer praises the site and the land has passed rigorous tests.’