

Keynotes for sailors
SAILABILITY, the organisation which co-ordinates and promotes sailing for disabled people, has just published a set of Keynotes for handicapped sailors, sailing clubs and other groups offering sailing opportunities for disabled people or those interested in developing facilities.
All who have contributed to the notes have been directly involved in sailing, either as helpers or as disabled sailors for a number of years.
The topics include: clubs and organisations; potential sailors; potential helpers; disability awareness; safety/rescue/special training; boat maintenance/ adaptations and lifting and handling.
Anyone requiring a set of the Keynotes (£2.50) should write to  .
Tel:.
Fast asleep:
Aides said that a 73-year-old Indian guru, lying on slabs of ice and pronounced dead by doctors more than a month ago, is in a state of deep meditation and will wake up in about six months.
Lack of logic
I READ your reply to the £10 letter re medical treatment or the proposed determent of it by some doctors, and I was completely astounded by the lack of logic in the statement ‘have helped themselves to get there.’
Are we then, in fairness to smokers who seem to have become the target of the ‘let's hang 'em brigade’, going to see treatment refused for all ailments which, could be said to have been self-inflicted?
The list is endless, but for starters: liver diseases caused by alcohol; drug-induced illnesses; overdoses; aids developed through promiscuous sexual behaviour; heart disease and circulation problems in severely obese people who cannot control their desire for fattening foods; osteoporosis and other arthritic conditions caused by ‘couch potatoes’ who refuse to take exercise.
Our hospitals would be empty if we tried to discriminate between self-induced or even partially self-induced illnesses, and naturally developed diseases.
This harassment and unfair bias has now got totally out of hand and has become nonsensical.
I hope it stops soon.
Mrs M. McCarthy, Prescot.
Wonderful day TO everyone involved in organising the wonderful day we spent at Anfield on Friday, May 28, our grateful thanks…
The cast of Her Benny, the dancers in their beautiful costumes, the steel band, the police and dogs, the schoolboys who were a credit to their schools showing how football used to be played just for the game.
And the girls and boys who put on such a good show even in pouring rain for the Queen.
And to Gerry Marsden for bringing the whole event together.
We enjoyed every minute, thank you all very much.
F. Morris, Liverpool 13.
I HAVE an Amstrad computer 464K and a green screen monitor.
It is only 12 months old and I now wish to purchase a modulator to convert it to a colour monitor for use with a domestic TV set.
I have been told by computer shops that Amstrad have stopped making this model.
It seems a bit unfair to people who cannot afford to update their computer every 12 months.
Can you find out from Amstrad if there is anywhere I can get one?
Yes, Amstrad have stopped making this model.
However, one of their major local suppliers, B.D.B., are confident they will be able to help.
You can contact them at The Waterloo Centre, Waterloo Road, Widnes (tel:.
Alternatively you can contact Amstrad direct on .
I HAVE a Bali sunlamp made by Hanovia and need a small bulb approximately two inches long.
Where can I get one?
If you take the old bulb into A. Perkins Ltd, 94 Dale Street, Liverpool, they are confident they will be able to match up the bulb for you.
Their telephone number is .
CAN YOU kindly let me know if anyone can repair a Garrard radiogram?
The number is K.G.A. 81015.
Try Jones and Whitehead.
Their telephone number is 
Keeping up with the pace of change
CAN you remember life before the fax machine?
Hardly a profound question, I know, but one prompted by my nine year old daughter's conversational aside this week that her primary school teacher had received a fax from someone in the county's education department.
My daughter thought no more of it than if she had been talking about the delivery of a letter because in her world the fax, like the video recorder, the personal computer and the microwave oven, has always been around.
The pace of change in our lives is growing ever-swifter and that does not apply simply to technology.
The way in which we work, whether it be in an office or on the factory floor, has undergone a major transformation in the past decade.
Attitudes may not have changed as quickly as some of the tools with which we do the job but there are plenty of examples of progress which deserve credit.
Given their reputation in the 1970s, who would have thought that British car workers would match their counterparts in Japan or Germany as they do now, not only for productivity, but for quality as well?
Again on the subject of change, this week a major new survey of British manufacturing industry showed 2pc four companies from the sample of 200 could be regarded as world class.
Not much new about that you might think, given the traditionally British trait of self-denigration, but the survey also found a further 42pc, or 84 companies, were genuine contenders for that elite gathering.
And that less than a generation after British industry was the laughing stock of the world.
Interesting too was the conclusion that BS5750, for so long regarded as the quality benchmark for British industry, is out of date and no longer relevant to the demands of the current marketplace.
The survey, conducted by IBM and London Business School, also discovered that the main obstacle to progress for manufacturers was not government policies or interest rates but the ability to implement change quickly.
Why that should be when we know change is inevitable is something I shall have to ask my daughter.