

Junior show time
HARRY CONNICK Junior at 25 (right) has been hailed as the new Frank Sinatra and tomorrow a packed Liverpool Empire will sit entranced, no doubt, listening to the man and his jazzy style of laid back music.
But did you know the sharp-suited musician from New Orleans has already been tinkling away for more than 22 years!
‘Harry first touched a keyboard at the age of three.
His parents were lawyers and when his father was sworn in Harry played at the ceremony at the age of six!
‘Everyone's wild about Harry,’ said a spokesman.
‘He's really looking forward to this visit.’
John's surprise reminder
By David Bassett
TELEVISION footage of a youth soccer match at Wembley 18 years ago has prompted a search by a former Merseyside non-league player for a permanent record of the game.
Highlights were shown on Cilla Black's Surprise Surprise show last weekend as part of a special presentation to Peter Carlton, who was brought out of the audience to receive a video of the game.
Everton fan Peter, who was presented with the video by former Goodison star Alan Ball, played for Merseyside Youth Association in the 1975 final of the NAYC Cup against Plymouth.
And one-time teammate John Smith has contacted the Echo in an attempt to get in touch with Peter.
Former South Liverpool and Marine defender John said: ‘I was in the clip that was shown on TV and it brought back a lot of memories.
I would love to get in touch with Peter to try and get a copy.
‘I have been trying to get a video of the game for the past four or five years, but I have never had any success.’
John can be contacted on .
Duffield doubles up
GEORGE Duffield is still in hot pursuit of Pat Eddery at the top of this season's jockeys' table.
The Newmarket based Yorkshireman added another two to his total at Hamilton, scoring on Royal Insignia and Velasco.
And reigning champion jockey Michael Roberts was in tremendous form at Chepstow's evening meeting, completing a 215–1 treble on Second Sight (5–1), Haunted Wood (7–2) and Tendresse (7–1).
Patched up
THE ancient craft of patchwork is being highlighted this weekend at Tatton Park.
Today, Jo Ratcliffe, involved in completing the Preston Guild celebratory quilt, will talk about her involvement.
Song time
BRITTEN'S Hymn to St Cecelia and gipsy songs by Brahms are being performed this evening by Chester Bach Singers at Chester Cathedral Refectory (7.30pm).
Tickets are £5, £2.50 concessions.
Last concert
VALE Royal String Orchestra performs its final concert of the season tomorrow evening.
(7.30pm).
The concert is at Fourways Inn, Kelsall.
Band aid
TWO charities will be helped by a concert this evening in Queens Hall, Widnes.
(8pm).
Andy Prior and his Night Owls will be raising money for Halton Meningitis Trust and Widnes Hospice at Home.
By Richard Elias and Lynda Roughley
Carry On films star dies aged 59
BERNARD Bresslaw, famous for his appearances in the Carry On films and many TV and radio roles, died last night.
Mr Bresslaw, who was 59, collapsed in his dressing room at the Open Air Theatre in Regent's Park, central London, and died later in University College Hospital.
Married to actress Betty Wright, from Formby, Mr Bresslaw had been about to play Grumio in the New Shakespeare Company's production of The Taming of the Shrew.
After his collapse the performance had to be cancelled.
A theatre spokeswoman said: ‘An understudy was getting ready to step in before we heard of his death.
It was a great shock.’
Mr Bresslaw had collapsed once before, in October last year, and on that occasion he had to be carried on a stretcher out of a show business dinner.
His wife said the collapse had been caused by exhaustion.
Mr Bresslaw made his name in the TV comedy, The Army Game.
His 6ft 7in frame and deep voice made him a naturally funny man.
In recent years he played a number of Shakespearean roles on stage, having earned enough from comedy to become a serious actor.
Mr Bresslaw as Popeye in The Army Game
The Bresslaws on the day they were married
Bernard Bresslaw, the mature serious actor
RAVING BEAUTIES: Liverpool Playhouse.
Review by Lew Baxter
TIMES may have been tough in recent years but matters have come to a fine pass when this distinguished theatre feels obliged to assemble a posse of actresses and two actors to perform what is basically a rather vulgar sketch and present it as a front length drama.
True in its first incarnation, only last year and at the same venue, it played to packed houses but this is no reflection on its merit, merely an indication of popular appetites for down market products.
It purports to tell the tale of a tacky, tawdry beauty contest featuring comedian and cabaret luminary proper name Duggie Brown as the lewd compere Jack whose line in patter can only be described as lavatorial.
Behind the scenes the ‘gals’ whose fate will be determined by a male judging panel banter and bicker, in various states of undress, unaware that one of their number is a man with a mission to woo an unrequited love who works in the same supermarket and has also entered the contest.
Here the tall and lanky Simon Lay, kitted out in high heels and hip hugging skirt, as Chrissie, the shy lass out for her first contest, evokes some sympathy but the character is merely a vehicle to introduce a stream of smutty dialogue into the proceedings.
Several of the actresses make plucky attempts to inject it with a semblance of artistic integrity: proper name Diane Whitley is convincing as Karen, the girl who is the subject of the lovelorn quest, and Paula Wilcox, as the veteran competitor, has enough experience and talent to gauge the scale of this production and perform accordingly.
But when it's down mostly to wiggling around a stage in clattering heels there is no time for deep analysis of the psyche of folk who engage in such events and despite a doughty effort, director Ian Kellgren simply does not have enough suitable material to mesh this into any shape worthy of the tag theatre.
As you don't like it…
A SHAKESPEARE play which was scheduled to open at the Liverpool Empire on Monday has been cancelled.
As You Like It, starring Jack Smethurst as Touchstone, is currently playing at the New Pavilion Theatre, Rhyl.
The play was to have been performed by the touring company DP Productions as part of the Festival of Comedy.
A spokesman for the Empire said the reason was ‘lack of support’.
MIRTH: The children of Mother Theresa's know how to have fun
Customers in the tea room of the Walker Art Gallery look on as the statue Death of Virginia is cleaned by experts Arlinda Ribeiro, left, and Polina Agapaki, of the National Museums and Galleries on Merseyside Picture: RICHARD WILLIAMS
A BARD MISTAKE
WE'RE sure he would have seen the funny side…
A press release arrived at the office this week promoting a production of As You Like It on Monday at the Liverpool Empire.
It asked us to reserve our seats as soon as possible for this famous work by Shakespeare.
Who's he, then?
A case of the old domestics
BERNARD HILL played a maverick detective in last night's new drama Telltale.
You could tell he was a maverick because he's called Gavin, is articulate and wears black T-shirts for work.
Off duty he wears white T-shirts.
However, Gav's biggest collar is just around the corner.
Local bully Billy Hodge is about to turn supergrass under pressure from his wife.
But Gavin and tie-wearing partner DS Paul Hebert (Nigel Harrison) have domestic troubles of their own.
Gav's under pressure from his missus to be home earlier while Paul's wife is about to walk out.
Can I stand the pressure of two more instalments?
Bernard Hill Joely Richardson and Sean Bean Manager Brian Duffield (Danny Webb) gets to grips with Johnny Lazar (Tim Guinee) in Comics Fifteen minutes and one Harley Davidson later, the funny man was dead funny.
A case of the old domestics
BERNARD HILL played a maverick detective in last night's new drama Telltale.
You could tell he was a maverick because he's called Gavin, is articulate and wears black T-shirts for work.
Off duty he wears white T-shirts.
However, Gav's biggest collar is just around the corner.
Local bully Billy Hodge is about to turn supergrass under pressure from his wife.
But Gavin and tie-wearing partner DS Paul Hebert (Nigel Harrison) have domestic troubles of their own.
Gav's under pressure from his missus to be home earlier while Paul's wife is about to walk out.
Can I stand the pressure of two more instalments?
Bernard Hill
ACTORS will abseil down a quarry as part of an unusual open-air performance of Shakespeare's Macbeth this summer.
Audiences will follow the action from ground level as it switches to different locations in Wirral's Royden Park.
Scenes will take place in remote woodland as well as the disused red sandstone Irby quarry.
The Midsommer Actors perform Macbeth from July 29 to August 7, except Sundays.
Dramas and tragedies
SCATTERED about Merseyside are amateur opera and drama companies, the quality of whose productions and standard of performance would seriously worry many a professional outfit.
There's a fine amateur tradition in
Merseyside — but for how much longer?
Merseyside Opera, a company which has even attracted words of praise from Rita Hunter, is about to stage Carmen at the Neptune.
Maybe for the last time.
Like so many others, Merseyside's only grand opera company relies on the Neptune Theatre as the sole, affordable ‘proper’ showcase for its talents.
They all deserve to enjoy the pleasure of an historic, beautiful, grand old theatre like the Neptune — and so do the theatre-loving public.
So vesti la guibba — on with the motley — and let's hope the final curtain never falls for the Neptune.
It would be a tragedy.
IT'S CLOSE TO THE KNUCKLE
MY party of visitors to the new Museum of Liverpool Life were less than impressed with the Brookside exhibit.
Besides the oafish Ron Dixon and family, the sole other representative of ‘Liverpool Life’ living in the close, my visitors opined, is good old, reassuringly decent and wholesome Frank Rogers.
A reliable little bird tells this column that Frank may not be long for this world either.
You read it here first.
The only other indigenous scousers, Terry, Barry and Sinbad haven't even a house.
I've got it — Frank gives a lift to Bev who gets a timeshare in Spain off Ron after a blackmail job with the naughty snaps.
And the two live happily ever after in a condo named after Ron — El Desperado.
Far-fetched?
Ah well, stranger things DO happen in real life than happen even on Brookie, y'know…
A glimpse of life in black LA
MERSEYSIDERS are being given a chance to see a stunning photographic exhibition.
The photos, now on show at the Open Eye Gallery in Bold Street, Liverpool, and the Great George's Project, give a vivid view of black life in Los Angeles.
The exhibition, called Life In A Day of Black LA, features the work of 10 gifted black photographers.
They walked round the city on Martin Luther King's birthday and for 24 hours, made photo portraits of the black community in action.
The project has been arranged by the Liverpool Anti-Racist and Community Arts Association.
TOP guitarists are helping to put a Merseyside club on the map.
Jazz star Gary Potter has already made an appearance at Crosby Comrades Club and tonight Litherland-born star musician Brendan McCormack is top of the bill.
Ambitious organisers are also hoping to line up the world's top country guitarist, Albert Lee.
Venues
Veteran musician Dennis Conroy who played with Liverpool Express is behind the monthly shows.
He said the guitar nights started in Formby and soon outgrew the venues.
‘The Comrades Club in Crosby is a better location and I think people can see from some of the names that we are looking towards the top acts.’
Pauline's deserved her break
FESTIVAL comedy queen Pauline Daniels was taking time out from her Royal duties today.
But she was not abdicating responsibility for a fortnight of fun and frolics.
The stand-up comedienne was crowned at the opening of the Liverpool Festival of Comedy in St George's Hall.
‘I've always felt like a Queen.
I'm just glad I haven't got the real one's children,’ she said.
Special man
Women are at the heart of the sixth festival, but Pauline had one very special man in mind when it came to the coronation Les Dawson.
She said: ‘Les was an inspiration.
He would want everybody to go out and have the time of their lives.’
Comic genius Les was one of her heroes.
Pauline added: ‘He was a great performer, and worked and worked in the clubs.’
FREE entry to disabled people this weekend at Manchester's Museum of Transport.
Braille notices, ramped access to at least one bus for inspection, tactile displays and a visit to the Heaton Park Tramway to ride on a preserved tram on the park's reconstructed tramway will be available.
Museum of Transport, Greater Manchester Transport Society, Boyle Street, Cheetham, Manchester
Meet TV latest cartoon hero, he's…
Report by Paddy Shennan A NEW children's cartoon show arrives on our screens later this month and, quite frankly, it's a load of rubbish!
Rubbish King of the Jumble!
ITV reckon the fun-loving moggie will be a big hit with youngsters during the show's 13-week run, which begins on June 29.
And, although it may sound unlikely, the fat cat's voice is being provided by Liverpool comedian and actor Alexei Sayle.
‘It was great fun working on Rubbish and he's a great cat,’ says Lex.
‘I was able to get into his character quite easily as I can identify with his overactive imagination and his constant hunt for food.’
Rubbish lives in the attic of a big old house, surrounded by a large garden.
Aided by a wide assortment of weird and wonderful props from his junk-filled home, he becomes any one of hundreds of characters from an astronaut to a deep sea diver, from superhero to secret agent.
But more often than not, his relentless pursuit of food leads Rubbish into trouble.
And it's trouble with a capital T because it often involves tangles with his arch enemy Dinsdale the dog!
Scripts have been written by America's Pamela Hickey and Dennys McCoy and Cardiff-based Nigel Crowle.
Hickey and McCoy have already written episodes for hit series including Tiny Toons, Duck Tales, Rude Dog and the Dweebs, Widget and Beetlejuice.
Nigel Crowle has written for everyone from Russ Abbot to Sir Anthony Hopkins, from Jeremy Beadle to Ben Kingsley.
‘We think Rubbish should prove very popular indeed,’ says executive producer Dan Maddicott.
‘It is the first in what we hope will be a long line of animation series from HTV.
I think the final product is unusual for a British series the visual humour is every bit as important as the verbal, in a classic cartoon tradition.’
WE HAVE in our house two lovely objects a charcoal drawing of two apples with the inscription AR 1901, and a watercolour painting of an industrial town inscribed Bedlam Furnace, Madeley Dale, Shropshire 1803, and signed D.M. Goodman ‘83.
I would be grateful for any details of artists and value.
Not a lot of information to go on, but Bill McMahon, manager of auctioneers Outhwaite and Litherland of Liverpool, says your charcoal drawing sounds typical of Edwardian or late Victorian works.
Probably drawn by an amateur.
Similarly, he thinks the watercolour could be the work of an amateur.
It could fetch between £30 and £40 at auction.
But for an authoritative opinion on either work, Bill really needs to see them.
IF YOU have any questions write to: The A Team, Features Dept., Liverpool Echo, PO Box 48, Old Hall Street, Liverpool L69 3EB.
Please note: We cannot answer queries personally and no correspondence will be entered into.
The editor reserves the right to select and edit questions.
Price of fame
AMERICAN born Lisa Price, now living in Llanidloes, has been appointed sales manager for Radio Maldwyn, and is successfully canvassing for advertisers in time for the independent local radio station's launch on July 1 on 756kHz medium wave.
Bellamy backs appeal
TELEVISION boffin David Bellamy is backing a Welsh fund-raising drive by environmental pressure group Friends of the Earth.
Friends of the Earth Cymru has been campaigning on green issues in Wales for 10 years but relies on donations.
Mr Bellamy, who became famous as a TV botanist, said: ‘Every day in Wales the environment is under attack.
‘From the choking pollution of the atmosphere, to the raw sewage entering our seas, our world faces many threats.’
The group's co-ordinator in Wales, Margaret Minhinnick, said: ‘David Bellamy's support is a tremendous boost.’
Leigh joy
FILM director Mike Leigh gets the OBE, just weeks after his latest film, Naked, picked up two awards at the Cannes festival.
It won Mr Leigh, 50, who has been married to actress Alison Steadman for 20 years, the prize as best director.