

Deadly certainty
NOTCH by notch, the conflict in Bosnia increasingly threatens to explode into wholesale war.
Yesterday's killings of two Croatian snipers by British soldiers escorting a United Nations aid convoy, justified though they seemed to be, added to the tension.
Questions about the forms violence is taking and how it is spreading grow more salient by the day.
What is difficult for citizens of relatively civilised countries to understand is the utter, unreasoning hatred and contempt the various racial, religious and political elements feel for each other.
Humiliation, torture and murder, to an obscene degree, characterise the region's history.
Nothing perpetrated by the wartime Japanese, African despots or vile South American dictatorships has been more appalling than the horrors visited upon each other by this region's factions.
One day women and children are murdered, the next they are the murderers.
This week a man was pitchforked to death by a woman.
His crime?
To have been the driver of a lorry trying to provide desperately needed aid to besieged people.
In that case the beneficiaries would have been Muslims but they could just as easily have belonged to a different group.
Measured Much of the early slaughter was committed by Serbs against Croats.
But all factions have leaped at every opportunity to attack others.
Nothing is sacred the United Nations flag, the Red Cross, and least of all human life.
What can the British and other United Nations troops achieve against this background?
They can and have safeguarded the provision of humanitarian aid.
However, though much gets through, many attempts fail.
The first 24 lorries in this week's 500-vehicle convoy took the chance of travelling without their British escort.
They were stopped, attacked by Croatian mortars and at least seven of the drivers were dragged from their lorries and killed.
The rest of the convoy once the two snipers had been shot by British soldiers manning a Warrior armoured car was able to make progress.
Accomplishments such as these must eventually be measured against the increasing menace to UN forces.
Tragically, it seems a deadly certainty that the region will dissolve into war.
It is vital that the Government is alert, gets its withdrawal timing right and that British troops are not isolated with no hope of survival.
Hospital forced to close for clean-up operation
By Gareth Hughes Daily Post Staff
LLANDUDNO General Hospital will be virtually closed down for the next few days while the scale of the damage is assessed.
It is feared that the total cost could be as much as £500,000, though equipment, furnishings and other items are yet to be checked.
The X-ray and casualty departments on the ground floor were closed during the height of the storm on Thursday evening.
The failure of one of the boilers meant that more patients had to be moved yesterday.
A total of 22 were moved into first-floor wards.
To enable the cleaning-up operation to be carried out, the hospital will not accept casualty out-patients for the next few days.
Anyone in any doubt should call the authority's Helpline on .
In the meantime, patients will be taken to Ysbyty Glan Clwyd, Bodelwyddan, or Ysbyty Gwynedd at Bangor.
Examinations went ahead as usual yesterday for pupils at two storm-hit secondary schools.
Last night much of the ground floor of Ysgol John Bright in Llandudno was still under several inches of water and the majority of children have been told to stay away until at least next Wednesday.
A-level and GCSE exams were moved upstairs and that will be repeated on Monday and Tuesday.
‘The school will be closed until Wednesday to all but those examination students,’ said administration officer Mrs Ann Buerdsell.
Parents in any doubt are asked to contact the school early next week.
OBE for services to medicine
THE man who was Medical Ombudsman for Wales until last year, Professor Robert Owen of Colwyn Bay, receives the OBE for his services to medicine.
He qualified as a doctor in 1946 and became a Master of Orthopaedic Surgery in Liverpool in 1953.
He was made Emeritus Professor of Orthopaedic Surgery by the University of Liverpool and is a Fellow of the British Orthopaedic Association.
He has represented Wales on the Council of the Royal College of Surgeons for England and Wales, and as chairman of the Welsh Board of the Royal College of Surgeons.
His care for disabled children spans work at the orthopaedic hospital in Oswestry, Alder Hey Hospital, Liverpool, and through Riding for the Disabled.
Squadron Leader Archibald Liggat, of RAF Valley, receives a Queen's Commendation for his exceptional diligence and professionalism as a Phantom pilot.
He joined the RAF in June, 1978, on a permanent commission as a university cadet at the University of Glasgow and Strathclyde.
THE man with overall control of the Airbus in Britain, Bob McKinlay, receives the CBE.
Mr McKinlay, chairman of British Aerospace Airbus Limited, was formerly the managing director of BAe (Commercial Aircraft) Ltd.
As chairman of Airbus in the UK, Mr McKinlay has responsibility for the company's Broughton factory.
Professor Robert Owen
Cash books
THE PTA at St Luke's RC Primary School, has turned its fund-raising efforts to build up the stock of books.
Today, the PTA is holding a fair at the school.
Market fun
ENTERTAINMENT in Widnes Market and Runcorn's Shopping City today, as part of Halton Right Up Your Street Festival, features unicycling, juggling and fire illusion.
Woman of 80 battered in gang raid on house
Detectives disgusted at brutal assault
By Richard Williams Daily Post Staff
A FRAIL old woman was battered and then left in agony for half an hour while a gang ransacked her luxury house.
The 80-year-old suffered a broken arm and leg during the attack in upmarket Lache Lane, Chester.
She eventually managed to raise the alarm by crawling out on to the road and stopping a passer-by.
Last night she was still being treated at the Countess of Chester hospital and under sedation.
Detectives spoke of their disgust at the brutal attack.
Det Insp Gary Lawrinson, of Chester CID, said: ‘This is a very old woman and she has been battered.
‘They just burst in, kicked her over and demanded money.
Obviously at her age it is a bit worrying.
‘It is a very nasty incident and the woman has been seriously hurt.’
He appealed for anyone who saw the three youths on the road at 8.15pm on Thursday to contact Chester CID on .
The woman's ordeal started when she answered a knock on the back door of her house and was confronted by the three.
They stuffed a sock into her mouth, pushed her inside and kicked her to the floor breaking her ankle and wrist.
As she screamed in pain they stole a necklace she was wearing.
Then one stood guard over her while the other two searched the house.
For half an hour she lay on the floor in pain before they finally left with a hoard of silverware.
Detectives yesterday carried out house-to-house enquiries in the hope of tracking the gang.
The pensioner, who needed sedation when she arrived at the Countess of Chester hospital, is still not well enough to be fully interviewed by police.
Police believe she will be in hospital for about a week.
But she has been able to provide brief descriptions and detectives are now looking for three youths.
One is 5ft 8in, with short dark hair styled with a fringe.
The second is 6ft, slim, and was wearing a hat and a cream pullover.
The third is 5ft 8in.
A case of the old domestics
BERNARD HILL played a maverick detective in last night's new drama Telltale.
You could tell he was a maverick because he's called Gavin, is articulate and wears black T-shirts for work.
Off duty he wears white T-shirts.
However, Gav's biggest collar is just around the corner.
Local bully Billy Hodge is about to turn supergrass under pressure from his wife.
But Gavin and tie-wearing partner DS Paul Hebert (Nigel Harrison) have domestic troubles of their own.
Gav's under pressure from his missus to be home earlier while Paul's wife is about to walk out.
Can I stand the pressure of two more instalments?
Bernard Hill
Aircraft workers want job security promise from US
By Carl Butler Daily Post Staff
WORRIED planemakers want an immediate meeting with their new American employers to seek assurances that production will continue at their plant.
Loss of skilled jobs at Broughton would be unthinkable, say the unions.
Corporate Jets, the British Aerospace subsidiary which makes the best-selling 125 business jet, recently was sold to the US company Raytheon for £250m.
With much of the finishing work already transferred to Little rock, Arkansas and 269 redundancies already agreed at Broughton, the remaining workforce is worried about the long term.
Yesterday, the joint shop stewards committee of Corporate Jets said a loss of production would be a mortal blow.
In a statement the committee said: ‘The loss of world-leading aircraft production and highly-skilled jobs here at Broughton is unthinkable.’
Senior stewards are angry that Corporate Jets has not said anything to counter speculation that loss of production could put 600 Corporate Jets jobs at risk and also those of 300 who work for BAe in the main factory, making wings and other business jet parts on contract.
BAe has said that deal with the US firm will strengthen Corporate Jets' balance sheet and that the sale was in the best interests of both shareholders and employees.
Shop stewards at Broughton have written to Raytheon's president, Max Bleck, to ask him to meet them.
Jimmy Spriggs, senior steward for the engineers' and electricians' union, said: ‘We don't have any guarantee at all and we want urgent talks with Mr Bleck.’
Raytheon says it will meet the unions when it has checked the business over.
United airport protest
THE management of Tatton Park, near Knutsford, is to join forces with the National Trust to protest against the threat of a second runway at Manchester Airport.
The management fears that the park, the most popular visitor attraction in the North West, would be ruined by an airport expansion.
Yesterday, a management committee, which included members of Cheshire County Council, agreed to work with the National Trust in preparing a protest.
The Mercia area of the Trust already has expressed concern about the effect of any airport expansion on all its properties in the area.
Cheshire county councillor Bert Grange told the committee: ‘The second runway would be environmentally devastating to Tatton Park.
We should make it clear that Tatton is totally opposed to the building of a second runway.’
The park is beneath a major flight path and is already severely affected by aircraft noise.
A second runway would more than double the present number of take-offs and landings.
Chief backs under-fire boss Taylor
GRAHAM TAYLOR woke today to find that he still has at least one friend after the worst week of his life.
Football Association chief executive Graham Kelly squashed speculation that Taylor's bosses will bow to public pressure and sack the England manager in the wake of the USA humiliation.
‘He is still the best man for the job,’ declared Kelly.
But there must still be doubts about his job security.
As Taylor began planning an improbable revival in Washington on Sunday against a Brazilian side that threw away a three-goal lead in a 3–3 draw with Germany last night, FA chairman Sir Bert Millichip emerged as a key figure.
Dismissing the recent vote of confidence by Peter Swales, chairman of the international committee who appointed Taylor three years ago, he said: ‘Ultimately the decision comes back to me.’
In control
Swales is not at the US Cup, though he is expected for the final match in Detroit against Germany on June 19.
In his absence the 78-year-old retired Black Country solicitor has been standing in on Taylor's press conferences, trying to determine whether the England manager is still in control after the 2–0 defeat in Boston and earlier World Cup disaster in Norway.
‘Of course I want to listen to what's going on.
Wouldn't you expect me to do that in the circumstances?’ he said.
‘People should not read too much into every statement, but I now need to know what everybody is thinking, and I will not discuss anything with the media until I have spoken to the necessary people.’
Kelly, however, moved swiftly to give the beleaguered Taylor his full support for the time being at least.
Graham Kelly…supporter
Trunk callers kept quiet
By Sue Cocker Daily Post Staff
A BUILDER is bribing a herd of inquisitive elephants not to move into their new home too soon.
Chris Jones is building an elephant house at Knowsley Safari Park for seven arrivals from the doomed Windsor park and the three tuskers already at Knowsley.
When the Windsor herd arrives in late July they will make up the largest group of African elephants in the country.
But the park's present elephants are eager to inspect their £250,000 living quarters before they move in.
Their disruptive behaviour was proving a headache to Mr Jones until he discovered the elephants could be kept at bay if he fed them with their favourite fruit pears.
Now Mr Jones fills a mechanical digger with the fruit and leaves the elephants to gorge themselves while he continues with his work.
David Ross, park general manager, said: ‘Working with a herd of elephants is obviously fairly unusual for most builders.
However, Chris seems to have found the perfect solution.
‘The elephants are very inquisitive and they like to inspect their new living quarters and play with the piles of bricks.
‘They have taken to all the noise and building work around them better than we hoped and we are looking forward to the arrival of six cow elephants and one bull in six weeks time.’
Chota waits for the next ration of pears from Chris Jones
Anfield legend selling medals
By Andrew Forgrave Daily Post Staff
KOP legend Ray Kennedy has taken the heartbreaking decision to sell his prized collection of soccer memorabilia.
Ray, who suffers from Parkinson's disease, hopes to collect around £70,000 when his lifetime's haul goes under the hammer at Christie's, in Glasgow, later this year.
Two years ago the 41year-old received a similar amount when his former teams of Liverpool and Arsenal met for a testimonial match.
Since 1986, when Parkinson's disease was first diagnosed, he has been battling against the illness which finally ended his illustrious football career.
He has been undergoing expensive treatment and is trying to raise cash for the Ray Kennedy Trust Fund to help sufferers of the disease.
Ray was Liverpool boss Bill Shankly's last buy and he stayed with the club for eight seasons, playing 384 games and scoring 72 goals.
Three European Cup winners medals from his playing days at Liverpool will be among the 60 lots on sale on October 20 and are estimated to fetch £7,000-£9,000 each.
The FA Cup/League Championship ‘double’ set he won as a 19-year-old forward with Arsenal will be sold together and is likely to make up to £8,000.
Ray's five League title medals with Liverpool are rated at £3,000 apiece.
His trophy cabinet also includes winners medals from the UEFA Cup and Super Cup at £5,000 each, four Charity Shield plaques worth £700 each and a FA Cup runners-up medal from 1977, along with his Wembley shirt, at £2,500 the pair.
Eight England caps at £600 apiece and several jerseys will swell the financial haul for Kennedy, who will be 42 next month.
Grant McDougall, of Christie's, said: ‘Ray approached us and asked us to value the items.
Later he said he wanted to sell everything.
‘I don't know the reason behind the sale.’
Ray, who went to Highbury as an apprentice in May 1968, was bought by Shankly for £180,000 in July 1974.
He moved to Swansea for £160,000 before finishing his career as a coach at Sunderland.
Shortly afterwards he was diagnosed as having Parkinson's disease, but still became part-time coach with Sunderland before he was forced to quit the game as his condition deteriorated.
Ray Kennedy:
Faithful Champ is put to sleep
By Sue Cocker Daily Post Staff
A FAITHFUL dog who pined after his master died was put to sleep by a vet yesterday.
Champ, a 17-year-old terrier-cross, was discovered lying by his owner John Goult's body on Saturday afternoon.
A post mortem showed 80year-old Mr Goult, known as ‘Old Jack’, had been stabbed many times in the chest at his home in Woolfall Heath Avenue, Huyton, Liverpool.
Officers at Huyton police station were inundated with offers to give Champ a home.
But a vet who examined the dog at the Halewood RSPCA home said he was too ill to be rehoused with a new family and it was kinder to put him down.
A 22-year-old man and 26year-old woman have been remanded in custody, charged with the murder of Mr Goult.
Talk to friend 24 hours before death
PAULA ‘TOLD OF HORROR AT HANGING’
By Val Woan and Harry Dean MUM-TO-BE Paula Gilfoyle expressed her horror at the thought of someone hanging themself just 24 hours before she was found hanged, Liverpool Crown Court was told today.
Close friend Christine Barber told the court that the conversation occurred at Paula's home in Grafton Drive, Upton, Wirral, on June 3 last year.
The following day Paula's body was found hanging from a beam in the garage.
Her husband, former hospital technician Eddie Gilfoyle, 31, denies her murder.
Miss Barber told the court she had worked at Champion Spark Plugs for 16 years and was a close friend of Paula's.
She went to see Paula, 33, at her home just after 2pm on June 3 last year which was the day before her death.
Paula seemed to be her usual cheerful self.
She brought up the subject of an inquest on a man who had hanged himself.
He was the brother-in-law of someone she knew.
Miss Barber said the inquest had been a couple of days before.
She said Paula asked her ‘how could someone hang themself?’
Paula said that the man had hanged himself because his wife would not go back to him.
Paula said the reason she would not go back was she was frightened of him because he used to beat her.
‘Fed up’
Miss Barber added: ‘Paula said the wife who was being left behind is going to feel guilty for the rest of her life.’
Miss Barber said that shortly afterwards Paula's husband Eddie came in.
It was obviously unexpectedly because Paula said: ‘You're early.’
Eddie Gilfoyle replied: ‘I was fed up in work.’
Presbyterian church minister Barrie Redmore, told the court that Paula had asked him to baptise her baby three months before she was found hanged.
He told the court that he had known Paula for more than 25 years and married her to Eddie at his church in Moreton.
He said: ‘I met her in the March.
She told me she was pregnant and asked if I would baptise the baby.
I said I would.
‘I would say she was radiantly happy at the prospect of giving birth.
‘A few weeks later she came to the church with her mother.
She repeated the request about the baptism and reminded me of my promise to baptise her baby.
I said I would be happy to keep it.
Again she was happy and full of life.’
Earlier, a workmate of Paula's told the court that she was ‘the best friend I could ever wish for.’
Janet Bush said: ‘I'd known Paula for many years.
She was a close friend at work and socially.
‘She was lively and a person who you could always talk to about your problems.’
Miss Bush said that Paula was very happy when she became pregnant.
She was then shown a picture taken at the farewell party at Champion Spark Plugs just before Paula went on maternity leave.
Paula was found hanged by a rope in the garage of her home.
The prosecution alleges that Gilfoyle killed her and tried to make it look like suicide.
They also allege that a suicide note written by Paula, 33, was not genuine, and that Gilfoyle had a relationship with a woman works colleague.
For sale: One Des.
fire station!
A FIRE station is to be put up for sale, a council report has revealed.
Cheshire County Council is planning to sell off its fire station on Tarporley High Street after a new station replacing it was completed.
The new Tarporley station became operational on April 16 and an open day was held for local residents a week later.
An official opening of the new station is now being arranged and the old station is to be declared surplus to requirements.
Members of the Cheshire County Council's fire brigade and emergency planning committee are being asked to approve disposal of the old station at their meeting on Wednesday next week.
RED LADY
BEFORE Margaret Thatcher came along, Barbara Castle was the first lady of British politics.
She may be 82, but the woman who gave us the breathalyser is still going strong.
Now in the House of Lords, she has written her biography and given it a title which could well sum up her life, Fighting All The Way.
Before the Lords, she spent years as a Euo MP and before that, of course, she was one of the liveliest Labour people in the House of Commons, a member of Harold Wilson's Cabinet and one-time Minister of Transporteven though she could not drive!
She gave us the breathalyser, and at Employment, challenged the trade unions with her document In Place of Strife.
In fact before the advent of Margaret Thatcher, Barbara Castle with her red hair and chic sense of fashion was probably the Commons' leading lady.
But Mrs T's arrival changed all that!
Years on Barbara Castle writes in her autobiography of Mrs Thatcher realistically but generously.
Recalling Thatcher fortunes when they were at a low ebb, Baroness Castle of Blackburn, as she now is, reminds us that Margaret Thatcher was at one stage rated the most unpopular Prime Minister in history a tag now attached to John Major.
Barbara Castle herself?
Well she is prepared to admit to more human frailty than we have heard attributed to Mrs T!
After she married her husband Ted, she underwent as did he tests and medical treatment for their childless state.
None of it worked and Barbara and Ted decided to let life takes its course.
Though she had wanted children, Barbara was free to pursue her political career.
Before she married Ted Castle, Barbara had an affair with William Mellor, a married man who had helped form the Socialist League.
Nothing was to come of it and in 1942 William died.
As a life-long Socialist, Baroness Castle admits that politics has been the breath of life to her for over the last 50 years.
‘As I look at the shabby, commercialised and demoralised society in which I write I am more convinced than ever that the political analysis on which I was brought up was right.
‘I have always believed that the only way to increase wealth is to share it more equally, both globally and nationally.
‘Without corrective action, Britain will remain in a vicious circle of decline.’
Fighting All The Way by Barbara Castle: Macmillan: £20.
ABOVE: Fighting from the podium in 1969; LEFT: Dancing with husband Ted; RIGHT: As she is now, aged 82, and still fighting By Diana Pulson
Patients and staff set for hospital move
By Jane Gallagher
FINAL preparations are taking place today for the transfer of 100 patients to a new state-of-the-art hospital.
Extra staff have been drafted in to take patients the few hundred yards from the hutted wards of Ormskirk Hospital which were originally built to house Canadian forces during World War II.
Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley dug the first turf for the new £36m hospital back in November 1990.
The building was finally completed in March and on April 1 more than 5,000 people visited the flagship of the newly-created Ormskirk Hospital Trust during an open day.
Assistant Chief Executive Paul Ewart says tomorrow's move will mark a significant day for the people of West Lancashire.
Pride
He said: ‘The staff and the patients are very much looking forward to the move.
‘We were granted ownership of the building in March and in just three months we have been able to get it ready.’
Taking pride of place is a £400,000 CAT Scanner bought as a result of a local three-year fund raising drive.
The hutted wards, built more than 40 years ago with a life expectancy of 10 years are to be demolished.
All departments apart from the maternity and psychiatric wards which will remain in the Victorian brick-built building will be transferred to the new hospital by Sunday lunchtime.
A short ceremony to mark the move has been organised for 9am on Saturday morning when the first patient to cross the threshold of the new hospital will be handed a bouquet of flowers.
Drive ban
VAUXHALL car worker Eileen Frances Hewitt, 30, of The Esplanade, New Ferry, was fined £585 and banned from driving for 12 months by Wirral magistrates yesterday after admitting drink driving.
Jazz night
WIRRAL born trombonist Ron Minshall, who emigrated to Canada 30 years ago, is on stage at Grange Country Club's Jazz Bar this evening.
Music in the New Orleans style will be played by a small band.
Cash quest
THE British Red Cross and St John Ambulance, Wallasey Divisions, will hold their ‘Mile of Pennies’ collection on New Brighton promenade on Sunday, June 20.
Troops shoot Croats after convoy slaughter
BRITISH troops shot dead three Croat gunmen after they had opened fire on a huge Muslim aid convoy near the town of Vitez in central Bosnia today.
It is the first time British soldiers have killed gunmen in the conflict.
An Army spokesman said gunmen from the HVO Croatian Defence Force attacked the 500-lorry convoy taking aid to the town of Tuzla.
‘Fire was returned by a Warrior from the Prince of Wales’ Own Regiment.
Three HVO gunmen were killed,’ said the Army official.
The convoy drama unfolded after more British troops were sent to help guard the lorries following the massacre of eight civilian drivers by Croatian gunmen.
Four Warrior armoured vehicles spent the night guarding the convoy and 12 more joined it today to help negotiate its safe progress through Croatian-held territory.
Journalists said about 50 soldiers of the HVO gathered at a strategic road junction on the convoy's route north and threatened to blow it up.
Croat forces riled by a Moslem offensive in central Bosnia shot the civilian drivers.
The British troops were powerless to stop last night's shootings after the convoy was held up near the Bosnian town of Novi Travnik by a crowd of women and children.
‘I saw drivers being dragged from their vehicles,’ said a British corporal.
‘I then heard a series of shots and I saw a number of bodies being dragged away.’
Ceasefire
But he could not give supporting fire to protect the civilian drivers because women and children were in the way.
The attacks on the convoy came only hours after a general ceasefire signed by Croats and Moslems.
The Army spokesman added: ‘It was pointed out to the convoy that it would be madness to try to drive through that particular part of the road, but they pushed on.’
Hotel refuges for tenants
TENANTS of a housing association will probably be rehoused in hotels until their flood damaged homes are habitable.
Two of Clwyd Alyn Housing Association's developments were affected by the floods which swept through Llandudno.
Elderly residents at Llys Ednyfed, a development of apartments for the retired at Mochdre, were trapped by the rising waters and had to be evacuated by boat.
At Jackson Court in Llandundo, 12 families, some with young children, suffered the full force of the floods.
Peter Davies, the housing association's chief executive, said all the families were evacuated by boat and taken to the Aberconwy Centre.
He said the association was trying to find accommodation for the residents.
This would probably be in hotels along the coast, although not necessarily in Llandudno where many of the hotels had been inundated.
‘I am proud of the efforts made by our staff who worked throughout the night in the most appalling conditions, to bring comfort and safety to residents affected by these frightening flood conditions,’ said Mr Davies.
‘I can assure residents that we are doing everything that is possible to ensure their comfort in the short-term.
‘We have already begun the task of bringing their homes back to order.’
Housing association staff said few of the affected residents appeared to be covered by property insurance.
Extended dining room
THIS attractive three bedroom semi has been extended to provide a large rear dining room.
Situated in Church Road, Litherland, the property benefits from gas fired central heating and partial secondary glazing.
Gardens to front and rear and there is a garage.
Accommodation: porch, hall, front living room, dining room, kitchen, three bedrooms, bathroom and separate w/c.
Agents: Bailey & Neep PRICE: £59,950
DETECTIVES investigating the murder of pub landlady Denise Johnston today appealed for the father of her child to get in touch.
They now believe David Ashworth could be back in the Liverpool area after leaving the couple's 20-month-old baby Gareth, in Scotland yesterday.
Mr Ashworth contacted his family in Skelmersdale last night telling them he was in Liverpool although extensive inquiries are also continuing in Scotland.
Detective Superintendent Stan
Fletcher, leading the inquiry, said:
‘We appeal for him to get in touch.
We are now concerned for his safety because he is so distressed.
‘His family are also desperate to hear from him again and urge him to make contact with them.’
Police want to speak to Mr Ashworth after the discovery of the body of Denise, 35, in the upstairs lounge above the Lion Tavern in Moorfields, in the centre of Liverpool.
He telephoned relatives in Skelmersdale at 9.20pm last night, saying he was in Liverpool again.
The little boy was discovered in his buggy at a citizens advice bureau in Hamilton, near Glasgow, with a note pinned to him.
The note said simply: ‘My name is Gareth Johnston.
This is for the best.
I love him, very very much.’
Clothes, bottles, books and baby Turn to Page 3 From Page 1 wipes had been left with him.
Police believe the child was left there by his father, Mr Ashworth, 31, who took him to Scotland yesterday morning.
Mr Ashworth was seen in the Moorfields area of the city at around 5.30am yesterday.
Police believe he could then have taken the train from Lime Street station.
Detectives were today travelling to Scotland with Denise's parents, who are to take care of little Gareth.’
A murder inquiry was launched yesterday after Denise's body was discovered at about 11.30am after staff had arrived to find the pub locked up.
Police forced entry and discovered her body on the settee.
A postmortem later revealed she had been strangled.
Three times yesterday morning at 10am, 11am and noon a man contacted the Samaritans telling them where Gareth was.
Gareth spent the night with foster parents and was due to be reunited with his grandparents, who live in Bebington, Wirral, later today.
Rest of country suffers
LAST night Dyfed-Powys police said floods were subsiding, but warned of more rain today.
On the areas worst hit, John Williams, northern divisional director of Welsh Water, said: ‘There's no system that can cope with that.’
He said fresh water pumping stations had been knocked out but powerful temporary pumps were brought in and there was ‘no cause for alarm’ about the safety of drinking water.
The Welsh were not suffering alone: A stockpile of sandbags was being prepared in north Devon last night after it was badly hit by flash floods.
In Essex, firemen received more than 400 calls after flooding in the Harlow, Ongar and North Weald area.
The West Country, Shropshire and Midlands counties to the Humber were also hit by the severe weather.
In Cambridgeshire there were several minor accidents on flooded roads and driving conditions were difficult in Suffolk and Sussex, with many roads awash with water.
Tributes flow for rescue operation
By Emyr Williams Daily Post Correspondent
EXTENSIVE damage expected to run into hundreds of thousands of pounds was caused by floodwater to properties in the West Wales market town of Cardigan following Thursday night's heavy rain.
The storm also caused a landslide in the Tywyn and Bryncrug area of South Meirionnydd, where there was damage to property and part of the track of the narrow gauge Tal y Llyn Railway.
Last night as the clean-up of properties got under way in Cardigan, community leaders paid tribute to those who helped in the rescue operation, particularly at a nearby caravan park.
‘It was quite frightening to see the extent of the flooding, and a tribute must be paid to the emergency services for the part they played in rescuing quite a number of people,’ said a Dyfed County Council spokesman.
‘It all happened so quickly, and there was a tremendous build up of water which has caused extensive damage.
As a result we saw human nature at its best, with so many people rallying around those in need of help.’
Within minutes a ten foot wall of water built up causing devastation in the centre of Cardigan and washing away everything in its path as the Mwldan tributary of the Teifi burst its banks.
More than 40 homes were flooded, valuable shop stocks were ruined, and the local theatre turned into a swimming pool.
Firemen took to boats to reach those trapped in their homes as water rose up to door-top level.
On the outskirts of town, the Cardigan Leisure and Caravan Park suffered extensive flood damage, with the parts of the site swept away.
Holiday homes were reduced to firewood, and the emergency services could only reach the site by helicopter.
Five people were airlifted to hospital after they had feared they were going to die.
‘We thought we were never going to make it,’ said one of the rescued people recovering in hospital afterwards.
In the centre of Cardigan an earth mover used to try to reach a trapped mother and child overturned, and the occupiers eventually scrambled to safety.
The mother and child were brought to safety shortly afterwards.
At Cwm Pandy, near Bryncrug, occupiers of property escaped ahead of what one person later described as a ‘wall of water.’
‘We saw this wall of mud and water sweeping everything ahead of it,’ said Morris Jones.
‘It brought with it tree branches and all sorts of rubbish.’
Workmate's tears at mum-to-be murder trial
By Val Woan and Harry Dean A WORKMATE of hanged mum-to-be Paula Gilfoyle sobbed today as she told a murder trial jury about the ‘best friend I could ever wish for.’
Janet Bush was giving evidence at Liverpool Crown Court where Eddie Gilfoyle denies murdering his pregnant wife in June last year.
She told the court: ‘I'd known Paula for many years.
She was a close friend at work and socially.
‘She was lively and a person who you could always talk to about your problems.
She was a real good friend, honest, loyal, the best friend I could ever wish for.’
Farewell party
Miss Bush said that Paula was very happy when she became pregnant.
She was then shown a picture taken at the farewell party at Champion Spark Plugs just before Paula went on maternity leave.
Fighting to hold back tears Miss Bush added: ‘She was very happy, she was so very happy.’
Paula was found hanging by a rope in the garage of her home.
The prosecution alleges that Gilfoyle, 31, of Grafton Drive, Upton, killed her and tried to make it look like suicide.
They also allege that a suicide note written by Paula, 33, was not genuine, and that Gilfoyle had a relationship with a woman works colleague.
(Proceeding) Earlier evidence: Page 10
Cash appeal for uninsured
A COUNCILLOR has launched an appeal to help villagers whose flood-damaged homes were uninsured.
Five people living in Llewelyn Terrace, Glan Conwy, had to be evacuated on Thursday night.
Aberconwy councillor Graham Rees praised the ‘Dunkirk spirit’ which emerged and paid particular tribute to youngsters who helped the elderly.
‘Teenagers are much maligned but the support they gave was tremendous,’ he said.
Coun Rees said he had learned of several villagers who were not fully insured.
‘I hope to launch a public appeal to help them and to open a Post Office account.
We shall have collection boxes in the shops,’ he said.
Coun Rees also praised the staff of Grwp Aberconwy for their response to the emergency.
Ex-soldier jailed for bombing
A FORMER soldier who blew up a motorist with a home-made bomb because of a £140 debt was jailed for 12 years yesterday.
Gary Jones, 29, strapped the device to the exhaust pipe of Phillip Redmond's van and when he drove off it exploded.
Mr Redmond, 39, received only minor leg injuries, though a hole was blown in the floor and part of his seat ripped away.
The explosion shook nearby homes, said Geffrey Lowe, prosecuting at Liverpool Crown Court.
It was feared that the bomb had been planted by terrorists and residents of Fairfield, Liverpool were evacuated.
Jones, of Kremlin Drive, Tuebrook, Liverpool, pleaded guilty to causing an explosion likely to endanger life.
Jones attached a piece of string to the bomb's detonator pin and a breeze block.
When the vehicle moved off the pin was pulled out and the bomb detonated.
Michael Wolff, defending, said Jones used to live in a flat owned by Mr Redmond's wife and there had been a dispute about £140 in rent allegedly outstanding.
He had not intended to cause serious injury to Mr Redmond.
Brothers sold ‘clocked’ vehicles
TWO brothers running a second-hand car business had ‘clocked’ vehicles, Warrington Crown Court heard yesterday.
Moira Billington, prosecuting, said the brothers had advertised cars in a newspaper and sold them from their home.
But the readings on the vehicles' mileometers had been reduced by between 30,000 and 60,000 miles and MOT certificates showing the false mileages obtained.
Colin, 32, and Geoffrey Newton, 26, both of Myddleton Lane, Winwick, Warrington, admitted applying false trade descriptions to three cars and supplying three others with false trade descriptions.
Each was ordered to do 120 hours' community service and pay £850 costs.
Heather Lloyd, defending, said they had committed the crimes more out of ignorance than malice and that their customers had not been unhappy.
Although they had made high mileage cars look like low mileage ones, they had sold them at high mileage car prices.
Miss Lloyd said that the brothers had issued receipts bearing a disclaimer which stated to the customer that a car's mileage could not be guaranteed.
They had been staggered to learn that the disclaimer did not cover them.
Massive security operation for surprise visit
RAINY ULSTER GREETS QUEEN
By Echo reporter
THE Queen flew in to Northern Ireland for a surprise one-day visit today.
It was only her third visit in more than two decades of terrorist violence.
A massive security operation was mounted by police and troops against terrorist attacks.
Cordons, already tight around scores of Ulster towns and cities, were stepped up overnight in a bid to prevent any headline grabbing bombing.
The Queen flew into RAF Aldergrove in County Antrim, where she was met by Northern Ireland Secretary Sir Patrick Mayhew, Army GoC Lt General Roger Wheeler and the RUC Deputy Chief Constable Blair Wallace.
She was flown immediately by helicopter to Hillsborough Castle in County Down where she was carrying out the only engagements of the visit, a lunch party and a garden party for 1,200 people on a day Ulster was swept by torrential rain.
On arrival at Hillsborough she was given a boisterous welcome by 150 children given time off school to greet her.
The Queen was last in Northern Ireland in June 1991 when she presented colours to the then Ulster Defence Regiment during a ceremony at Army headquarters in Lisburn, County Antrim.
Before the 1991 visit she had not been in Northern Ireland since she spent two days in the province in August 1977 during her national jubilee tour.
Licence fine
WILLIAM CITRINE, 60, of Raleigh Road, Leasowe, was fined £80 and ordered to pay £35 costs by Wirral magistrates after he admitted dishonestly receiving a stolen excise licence and fraudulently using it on his vehicle.
Quiz plea
TRANMERE fans are invited to support their team in the quarterfinals of the Go for Goal TV quiz competition.
Rovers, represented by Chris Malkin and Steve Mungall plus Stan Boardman, face Preston in Manchester tonight.
Anyone interested should contact Linda on  (ext 2740).
TWO KILLED: Two people believed dead, others seriously hurt, in accident involving coach and lorry on A82 Tyndrum to Bridge of Orchy road in Highlands.
DAF SALE: Sale of Leyland DAF truck plant in Lancashire to management buy-out team completed today, securing 700 jobs, said company.
TRUCK HORROR: A truck smashed into a bus in Sao Paulo state, killing at least 33 people, Brazilian television reported.
African mission for zoo scientist
ZOOLOGIST Kristy Bird's love affair with Africa resumes in a few weeks when she embarks on a special project to study the impact of poaching on Kenya's elephant population.
Kristy, 22, began her studies last year at Maru National Park.
She will be accompanied on the year-long exercise by colleagues from Bristol University, where she has just completed her final examination for a zoology degree.
The expedition is being backed by the Royal Geographical Society and is one of 80 visiting 50 countries.
They have been selected for the quality of their objectives and will involve working in partnership with geographers, conservationists and ecologists in the countries they visit.
Kristy, of Park Road, Barnston, was born in Jamaica and spent 10 years in Malawi before coming to Britain.
She said: ‘I really love Africa it has a special place in my affections.’
Kristy's studies will concentrate on the social structure of the elephants with special emphasis on how calf mortality is affected by poaching.
She leaves for Africa on July 25.
Kristy Bird
Patio break-in
BURGLARS forced patio doors at a house in Aldridge Drive, Burtonwood, Warrington, and took a cheque book, guarantee card and electrical goods worth £742.
Crunch day for stranded Briton
Jane Gallagher
STRANDED photographer Ian Bennett is set to learn his fate at a Middle East court hearing tomorrow.
The Merseyside father-of-three has been unable to leave Oman after his passport was confiscated in a picture row two months ago.
Mr Bennett, 46, had taken a photograph of a 22-year-old woman for a beauty book.
But her father, a local businessmen, claimed the portrait revealing his daughter's face was an insult to Islam.
Speaking from the family home in Southport before leaving to join her husband in Oman for the hearing, Mr Bennett's wife, Janet, said the family was being held to ransom.
She said: ‘This man is just after the money.
He is demanding £10,000, leaving us penniless.
‘My husband has a new job but he is unable to start work because he cannot leave Oman.
‘I just want my husband home.’
A relative who is staying at the Bennetts' Liverpool Road home stressed today that they were not building up their hopes.
She said: ‘We will just have to wait and see.’
Ian Bennett…hearing
Robbery attempts
A MAN of 41 has appeared before magistrates charged with attempting to rob two shop assistants in Chester.
Geoffrey Street, of Leahurst, Coronation Drive, Widnes is alleged to have attempted to rob shop assistant Rosalind Hughes at Hatchards bookshop, Watergate Street, Chester, on Thursday.
He faces a second charge of attempting to rob assistant Elizabeth Walsh at the nearby Grotto card shop on the same day.
Street is also charged with two counts of theft.
Magistrates bailed him for eight weeks on conditions which included not venturing out alone from the Leahurst residential home for the mentally disturbed.
Detention for PC knife-attack man
A POLICEMAN was slashed with a knife when he tried to arrest a man who had just set fire to a £9,000 Volvo car, Liverpool Crown Court heard yesterday.
John Dunsheath, a 20year-old food packer, had been seen trying the door handles of cars parked outside a Renault dealers in Weld Road, Southport.
When officers arrived he had climbed into the back yard and the Volvo was seen to be on fire.
The window of a van had also been smashed, said John Lever, prosecuting.
The two officers gave chase but Dunsheath suddenly turned round and brandished an open Lock Knife at one of them, PC Adams.
He lashed out and cut PC Adams's hand in three places.
He became abusive and violent and there was a struggle and the injured officer's colleague managed to arrest him.
Dunsheath, of Elmridge, Tanhouse, Skelmersdale, pleaded guilty to wounding with intent to resist arrest, destroying the Volvo which was written off, and attempted theft.
He was sentenced to 12 months detention.
Woman attack victim's £300 dental treatment
A MAN who attacked two sisters at a party told police he remembered little about it because of the amount of drink he had consumed.
Kenneth Grant, defending, at Wirral magistrates' court said Philip Cornthwaite, 30, of Larch Road, Tranmere, was mortified to hear one of the sisters had to pay out £300 for treatment to teeth damaged in the assault.
Cornthwaite admitted assault causing actual bodily harm on Beverley Birss at a house in Tranmere, and common assault on Sharon Birss.
Mr Grant said Cornthwaite had been to a pub before going to the party with his girlfriend.
He remembered lunging at Sharon Birss but had no recollection of punching Beverley Birss.
Cornthwaite was ordered to pay £500 compensation and to serve 150 hours' community work.
‘I've lobotomised myself’ he tells friend in pub
ECSTACY VICTIM DIES ‘IN A PANIC’
By Anne Harrison
A YOUNG man went into a mad panic and told a friend he had ‘lobotomised’ himself by taking too much ecstacy, shortly before he died.
An inquest in Wirral heard how Andrew Venables, 20, suffered an agonizing death after having an adverse reaction to the drug.
Mr Venables of Lilac Grove, Whitby, Ellesmere Port, collapsed at a friend's flat in Rock Ferry after going out for a drink in May.
The friend, Robin Davies, told Wirral coroner Christopher Johnson he had met Andrew in the Central Park pub in Bromborough on Friday evening, May 7.
Freak out
They both ordered soft drinks, but Mr Davies noticed his friend seemed dazed and complained of feeling unwell.
Then Mr Venables began to panic and ‘freak out’, Mr Davies told the court.
He talked about being scared, started shaking and then begged Mr Davies not to leave him.
He told Mr Davies that he had ‘overloaded himself’, taken too much of the drug, and had ‘lobotomised himself’.
Mr Davies put his friend in his car and took him back to his flat in Highfield Road and called for an ambulance.
By then his friend was sweating, breathing rapidly and foaming at the mouth, and finally had a fit.
Poisoning
An ambulance crew tried to resuscitate him before taking him to Arrowe Park Hospital where he died soon afterwards.
Home Office pathologist Dr Alan Williams said Andrew had died from ecstasy poisoning and that blood samples taken from his body had revealed a massive amount of the drug.
Dr Williams said the drug would have affected Andrew's brain and heart, causing convulsions and fits.
Mr Johnson recorded an open verdict because it was not clear whether Mr Venables took the ecstasy himself, whether it had been placed in his drink or how many tablets he had taken.
Woman, 89 in lipstick quiz
POLICE were today questioning an 89year-old woman about a series of lipstick attacks on clothing in shops at Taunton.
More than £5,000 of damage has been caused to women's clothing since March.
Atlantic event magnificent says PM
BATTLE CITY'S MAJOR SALUTE
By Mark Davies political correspondent
JOHN Major has heaped praise on Liverpool after the city hosted the Battle of the Atlantic commemorations.
The Queen congratulated the city in a letter from an aide to Lord Mayor Mike Black last week.
Now the Prime Minister has described the event's organisation as magnificent in a reply to a Commons question from Garston MP Eddie Loyden.
Mr Major said: ‘I am grateful for the opportunity to congratulate Liverpool on the remarkable way in which it arranged and organised the celebrations concerning the Battle of the Atlantic.
‘I was privileged to be there for a day and the whole thing was handled magnificently.’
Mr Loyden had asked the Premier to ‘acknowledge the fact that it is time to repay the debt that we owe to the Merchant Navy, which lost 30,000-plus seamen during the war years’.
He added: ‘Will he now take action to reactivate our shipyards so that the nation may once again fund the sort of merchant fleet that should be the priority of a maritime nation, and put the seamen back to work?’.
Mr Major replied: ‘I would be delighted to see a stronger and more successful Merchant Navy.
‘But that depends on the capacity of the British Merchant Navy to obtain the orders that are there throughout the world.’
John Major…impressed
£48m system only partial success
REPORT SLAMS ‘RISKY’ PROJECT
THE government spent £48m on a computer system for the Training and Enterprise Councils which has been only a partial operational success, according to a report today by the National Audit Office.
It also said that the system had been a source of friction between the Employment Department and the TECs.
‘Weaknesses in the staffing, management and control of the project contributed substantially to its shortcomings,’ the report said.
‘Action by the department improved matters to the benefit of the project in its later stages.
‘Nevertheless, in our view by then, these weaknesses had done much to undermine the credibility of the system in the eyes of TECs.’
The report said the department had acknowledged that this was a technically high-risk project.
‘The decision that the project should proceed for the purpose of meeting the needs of TECs brought new risks,’ it added.
‘These additional risks were likely to have implications for the success of an already challenging project.
‘We could find no evidence that these risks had been explicitly recognised by the department when they decided in 1988 to proceed with the system.
‘In our view, a proper analysis of the risks attached to the project would have allowed it to proceed with a greater appreciation of likely achievement.’
Hotel waiter denies teenager's murder
GIRLFRIEND KILLED IN STAB ATTACK JURY TOLD
WAITER Timothy Harris stabbed his teenage girlfriend through the heart when she refused to sleep with him, a jury was told.
Harris, 33, from Wallasey met Faye Whitehead at Ifracombe's Imperial Hotel.
Paul Chad, QC, prosecuting told Exeter Crown Court how Faye died after being stabbed 20 times with a 9in kitchen knife on which Harris had written ‘Faye sorry’ in pencil.
Mr Chad described the murder as premeditated.
Harris has pleaded not guilty to murder.
Sexual
Mr Chad told the jury that Faye Whitehead, 17, of Torrs Park, Ifracombe, Devon, had met Harris at the Imperial Hotel where they both worked.
They had gone out together but there had not been a sexual relationship between them as Faye had been unwilling to sleep with Harris, said Mr Chadd.
Mr Chad said that police had found an epitaph for Faye written on the back of an envelope at Harris's lodgings.
Harris had written: ‘Faye Joanne Whitehead RIP June 1992, Murdered on 30.6.92 by her boyfriend.
The Lord is my Shepherd.’
Mr Chad explained how Harris had tried to burn the envelope but police had later pieced it together.
Love notes written by the accused to Miss Whitehead were also found which showed how he was consumed with a jealous sexual obsession after she had refused to sleep with him, the court heard.
The ‘fatal attraction’ started when Faye took a job at the hotel during the summer season.
Harris allegedly became besotted shortly after they met and told friends he could not live without her.
She may have been flattered by his attentions but was unwilling to sleep with him, added Mr Chad.
By June she no longer wanted the relationship to continue and was trying to avoid him.
Wounds
They heard from two different witnesses how Harris had told how he could not live without her and if he could not have Faye, then no one else could.
Until the morning of Tuesday, June 30, last year, after he had left messages on her answerphone saying ‘Faye I have got to see you.
Faye I have got to see you’, he met her on her way to work around 7am.
Harris is said to have lain in wait and struck next to the Lynchgate at the Parish Church.
Faye was stabbed 20 times in the body and one of the stab wounds pierced her heart.
Alan Slade told the court how he had been approaching a road junction when he saw a man and a woman arguing.
The man then pulled out a kitchen knife from under his coat and allegedly repeatedly stabbed the girl.
(Proceeding) Timothy Harris
…‘obsessed’ Faye Whitehead
…stabbed
Nursery staff are shocked at murder
DENISE JOHNSTON was a delightful and popular landlady, her boss said today.
Tim Hill, managing director of Peter Walker, which runs the Lion Tavern, said: ‘She was a delightful persona highly respected and very popular publican.’
Mrs Johnston had been in the licensed trade for 10 years and was in her second spell at the Lion.
She had originally run it with first husband Stephen and then went to work at the Midland pub opposite Central station.
She returned to the Lion two years ago.
Her daily routine included running son Gareth to the Babycare Nursery in Rodney Street each morning.
Staff at the nursery described Gareth as a ‘lovely little boy’.
They were concerned when his mother did not arrive to deliver him for the day yesterday.
That concern turned to heartbreak when they heard of his mother's grim fate.
Pauline Humphries at the nursery said: ‘We were appalled when we heard what had happened.
‘Gareth started coming here in October and was a lovely little boy.
He seemed to be very happy.’
MP's office attacked
ARSONISTS have attacked the Liverpool offices of Mossley Hill MP David Alton.
One floor of the building at the corner of Smithdown Road and Garmoyle Road was completely gutted.
Staff were mopping up today as Mr Alton held his usual surgery.
Dog who pined for his master was too ill to be saved
A FAITHFUL OLD FRIEND IS PUT TO SLEEP
Ray Kelly
CHAMP, the faithful terrier who pined for his dead master, has been put to sleep by a vet.
The beloved cross-terrier, found sitting next to his master's dead body on Saturday afternoon in Woolfall Heath Avenue, Huyton, was judged to be too ill by animal experts.
A vet who checked family records discovered he was 17 to 18 years old when he examined him at the Halewood RSPCA shelter yesterday evening.
Arthritic and near blind, he found he was also suffering from cancer and in human years would have been aged around 90.
His tragic owner John Goult, or ‘Old Jack’ as he was known to neighbours, also knew the pet he adored was very sick but had tried to spare him from being put to sleep.
Unfair
Derek Hampson, assistant manager of the RSPCA home, said: ‘The dog was much older than we had at first been informed and he was very sick.
‘He would have had very little life left anyway.
‘It would have been terribly unfair to him and any possible new owners to find him a new home when he was in such a terrible state.
‘We told the family how bad he was and won their permission for the vet to do the kind thing.’
Champ had pined for his master since police took him from his old home.
A man and a woman have been charged with the murder of Mr Goult.
Pining away…faithful Champ with WPC Pat Southern
SISTERS FREED
LISA and Michelle Taylor, detained for life for the murder of bank clerk Alison Shaughnessy, freed by the Court of Appeal.
Cheering, shouting and clapping from public gallery as sentences on Michelle, 22, and Lisa, 19, quashed as ‘unsafe and unsatisfactory’.
Murder hunt police in plea to man
By Caroline Storah crime reporter THE search for a man police want to interview in connection with the murder of a Liverpool pub landlady today switched back to Merseyside.
Police are anxious to talk to David Ashworth after the discovery of the body of 35-year-old Denise Johnston in the upstairs lounge above the Lion Tavern in Moorfields yesterday.
Mr Ashworth telephoned his family in Skelmersdale about 9.20 last night, saying he was in Liverpool.
Earlier, the couple's 20-month-old son, Gareth, had been found in Hamilton, near Glasgow.
Note
The little boy was discovered in his buggy at a citizens' advice bureau with a note pinned to him.
The note said simply: ‘My name is Gareth Johnston.
This is for the best.
I love him very very much.’
Clothes, bottles, books and baby wipes had been left with him.
Police believe the child was left there by his father, 31-year-old Mr Ashworth, who took him to Scotland yesterday morning.
Today they urged Mr Ashworth to get in touch with them.
He was seen in the city at around 5.30am yesterday.
Police believe he could have taken the train from Lime Street.
Detectives are travelling to Scotland with Denise's parents, who are to take care of little Gareth.
Detective Superintendent Stan Fletcher, leading the inquiry, said: ‘Mr Ashworth must be in absolute turmoil.
’ From the information we are getting he is beside himself.
We think he is so distressed that we fear for his own safety and are now very concerned for him.
‘We urge him to contact his family or us so people can help him.
He says he is in Liverpool but we are also keeping up inquiries in Scotland.’
Denise's body was discovered in the lounge above the pub at about 11.30am yesterday after staff had arrived to find the pub locked.
Police forced entry and discovered her body on the settee.
A post mortem later revealed that she had been strangled.
Three times yesterday morning at 10am, 11am and noon, a man contacted the Samaritans telling them where Gareth was.
The youngster spent the night with foster parents and was due to be reunited with his grandparents, who live in Bebington, Wirral, later today.
Turn to Page Three.
From Page One.
Denise Johnston…strangled
MOTHER SOLVES RIDDLE OF TOT
Vic Gibson
A MOTHER who abandoned her child at a Merseyside hospital has come forward.
But the south Wirral woman has not yet been reunited with the two-year-old girl she left at Arrowe Park Hospital.
The toddler is to remain with temporary foster parents in Wirral pending a court hearing next week.
Social services chiefs were meeting today to discuss the case.
The child, with curly blonde hair, was found wandering in the hospital's maternity unit on Wednesday night.
A note attached to her read: ‘I am a very good little girl.
My mummy loves me but cannot look after me any more.
‘Please find me a new mummy who will love me a lot and look after me.’
She told nurses her name was Debbie but did not know her surname, address or any other details to identify her.
Phone call
Her mother phoned the hospital at 7.15pm last night in response to press appeals and arrived there soon after.
By then, the girl had been put into the temporary care of foster parents by Wirral Council.
The case is now being handled by Cheshire County Council.
By Harry Dean and Val Woan
MUM-TO-BE Paula Gilfoyle expressed her horror at the thought of someone hanging themself just 24 hours before she was found hanged, Liverpool Crown Court was told today.
Close friend Christine Barber told the court that the conversation occurred at Paula's home in Grafton Drive, Upton, Wirral, on June 3 last year.
The following day Paula's body was found hanging from a beam in the garage.
Her husband, former hospital technician Eddie Gilfoyle, 31, denies her murder.
Miss Barber told the court she had worked at Champion Spark Plugs for 16 years and was a close friend of Paula's.
She went to see Paula, 33, at her home just after 2pm on June 3 last year which was the day before her death.
Paula seemed to be her usual cheerful self.
She brought up the subject of an inquest on a man who had hanged himself.
He was the brother-in-law of someone she knew.
Miss Barber said the inquest had been a couple of days before.
She said Paula asked her ‘how could someone hang themself?’
Paula said that the man had hanged himself because his wife would not go back to him.
Paula said the reason she would not go back Turn to Page 10 From Page 1 was she was frightened of him because he used to beat her.
Miss Barber added: ‘Paula said the wife who was being left behind is going to feel guilty for the rest of her life.’
Miss Barber said that shortly afterwards Paula's husband Eddie came in.
It was obviously unexpectedly because Paula said: ‘You're early.’
Eddie Gilfoyle replied: ‘I was fed up in work.’
Presbyterian church minister Barrie Redmore, told the court that Paula had asked him to baptise her baby three months before she was found hanged.
He told the court that he had known Paula for more than 25 years and married her to Eddie at his church in Moreton.
He said: ‘I met her in the March.
She told me she was pregnant and asked if I would baptise the baby.
I said I would.
‘I would say she was radiantly happy at the prospect of giving birth.
‘A few weeks later she came to the church with her mother.
She repeated the request about the baptism and reminded me of my promise to baptise her baby.
I said I would be happy to keep it.
Again she was happy and full of life.’
Earlier, a workmate of Paula's told the court that she was ‘the best friend I could ever wish for.’
Janet Bush said: ‘I'd known Paula for many years.
She was a close friend at work and socially.
‘She was lively and a person who you could always talk to about your problems.
She was a real good friend, honest, loyal, the best friend I could ever wish for.’
Farewell party
Miss Bush said that Paula was very happy when she became pregnant.
She was then shown a picture taken at the farewell party at Champion Spark Plugs just before Paula went on maternity leave.
Fighting to hold back tears Miss Bush added: ‘She was very happy, she was so very happy.’
Paula was found hanging by a rope in the garage of her home.
The prosecution alleges that Gilfoyle killed her and tried to make it look like suicide.
They also allege that a suicide note written by Paula, 33, was not genuine, and that Gilfoyle had a relationship with a woman works colleague.
Paula told of hanging tragedy
Speke airport Manchester
By Echo reporter
LIVERPOOL and Manchester airports could be amalgamated if a high speed rail link is built between the two, a planning chief has suggested.
Air traffic control and other facilities could be shared, according to Cllr Mike Hughes, chairman of Warrington's planning committee.
He put forward the idea as a means of ending the fierce competition between the two airports.
Both are putting forward major expansion proposals designed to cater for the NorthWest's rapidly expanding demand for air travel.
Warrington Council has been given a detailed presentation on Liverpool's proposals by airport managing director Rod Hill.
Costly
But councillors have yet to decide which airport plan to back.
Mr Hill says Liverpool's plans are more environmentally friendly and less costly.
The airport is currently grossly under-used.
It could, without an additional runway, cope with up to 12 million passengers a year if new terminal buildings were provided.
Only 34,000 people live in the area which could be affected by noise compared with the 143,000 who would be affected if a second runway was built at Manchester.
Warrington councillors are concerned about the noise impact on the borough particularly the Burtonwood area.
They have welcomed the scrapping of Manchester proposals which could have led to more aircraft noise over the Lymm and Grappenhall areas.
Cllr Hughes said an alternative to expanding Manchester might be an amalgamation of the two airports, with a high speed rail link.
Three to face trial on Aldridge charges
Jason Burt
THREE people appeared in court following an alleged attack on Tranmere goal ace John Aldridge and his wife.
Clinton William Carlin, 28, of Field Lane, Litherland, and Hugh Peter Brennan, 29, of Gleneagles Road, Childwall, face charges of assaulting John and Joan Aldridge and a further charge of affray at the Village Inn pub in Woolton, Liverpool, on January 17 this year.
Witnesses
Margaret Nolan, 31, of Peckmill Green, Netherley, is charged with assaulting Mrs Aldridge.
All three elected crown court trial and the cases were adjourned by Liverpool magistrates until June 24.
Brennan and Carlin were granted bail on condition that they keep away from witnesses and Nolan was granted unconditional bail.
Man stabbed in hospital
A MAN seriously ill in hospital was stabbed to death on a general medical ward.
Another male patient at Doncaster Royal Infirmary, arrested after last night's incident, was today being interviewed by police.
Sick car worker fights back
By Jane Croft
A CAR worker has made a remarkable recovery from the nervous disease Gullan Barry syndrome.
Peter Jones, 44, from Childwall, Liverpool, was struck by the disease of the nervous system last Christmas while working at the North-East Nissan car plant.
Mr Jones, whose son Ryan Millen, six, lives with his mother in South Liverpool and has an older brother Jeffery in Broadgreen, was in intensive care for three months, unable to speak.
North-East people raised almost £12,000 and Peter is now back at work.
Town hall launches cash package probe
By Barry Turnbull
AN incentive scheme to attract senior officers to Sefton is under review.
Councillors have called for a report on a perks package which eases the burden of moving home.
The current aid-to-recruitment scheme includes: 100% of removal costs plus storage expenses for up to six months.
Legal fees up to £2,295.
Up to £575 for curtains, carpets and other fixtures and fittings.
£80 a week for temporary accommodation while a home is in the process of being sold.
Councillors on the policy and resources personnel sub-committee are to examine the scheme.
New tests have been introduced for candidates who apply for top council posts in Sefton.
As well as being interviewed, prospective chief officers will also have to give a presentation on a given topic, analyse financial data for non-experts and solve a practical problem.
Court powers boost
MAGISTRATES are to be given wide powers to fine criminals according to what they believe they can afford.
They will have a statutory duty to inquire into offenders' means and take these into account in sentencing, but they will be free to scale fines up or down at their discretion.
The change, which could come in this autumn, follows the scrapping of the controversial unit fines system, which led to public outrage after a number of cases where huge fines were imposed for trivial offences.
Open verdict on money troubles
AN OPEN verdict has been recorded on a solicitor found dead in his car with a tube attached to the exhaust pipe.
John Pollard, Cheshire deputy coroner, said there was insufficient evidence to record a suicide verdict on Neil Lighten, 55, of Belgrave Park, Chester.
The hearing was told how Mr Lighten, who ran his own solicitors in Grosvenor Street, Chester, had been highly successful until the last two years.
Mr Pollard said: ‘After that time, it seems there were financial difficulties.’
Mr Lighten's widow, Anne, said that on March 25, Mr Lighten left for work.
Came home
‘At lunchtime he came home and we had a brief discussion before I left the house,’ said Mrs Lighten.
When she returned later she found her husband's body in the car in the garage.
Cause of death was given as carbon monoxide poisoning.
Jobless trio set to help orphans
Ray Kelly
THREE unemployed Merseysiders are going back to work to help Romanian orphans.
John Murray, Robert Kindley and John Parry were moved by TV pictures of the children's plight.
They will leave their homes and friends in Kirkby for a month on a mission to build better homes for the youngsters, who live in appalling conditions.
The three have already obtained lorries and are looking for builders to donate materials.
They leave for the city of Prejmer on July 2.
Knockout
They have also planned a sponsored five-a-side football knockout competition at Kirkby Sports Stadium to help fund the trip.
Project co-ordinator Margaret Murray said: ‘The lads wanted to do something to help and will put their skills to helping these unfortunate children.
‘Kirkby boasts lots of football teams of all ages and this seemed a good way of drumming up cash.’
Entry fee is £10 per team and all applications must be received before June 17.
The competition will be from June 21 to 25, and Kirkby stadium bosses have donated the facilities free.
Anyone who can help with building materials should ring .
Pay day bungle at town hall
THOUSANDS of council workers got their pay late after a computer bungle.
The problem affected all Liverpool City Council workers who were due to be paid yesterday.
Gardener John Tobin, of Speke, who had to wait an extra day for his £160-weekly wage, said: ‘It's a disgrace.’
A council spokesman said: ‘The payments were made a day late.
‘Any bank charges incurred because of the delay will be refunded.’
The Milk Race comes to town as riders vie for position on the Liverpool city centre circuit after an exciting chase from Sheffield.
Alexandre Nadobenko (top) held off the challenge to win the stage
BA93 organisers fired on by Labour MPs
By Mark Davies and Will Rolston
BATTLE of the Atlantic veteran and Garston MP Eddie Loyden should have been given a greater role in the recent commemorations.
That is the opinion of 48 Labour MPs who say in a Commons motion that Mr Loyden was in a ‘unique position’ to play more of a role in the event.
The MP attended the march-past, lunch and fly-past but was not invited on board the Royal Yacht or to the memorial service.
Mr Loyden's constituency covers Garston docks the main supply depot for battle convoys.
The MP who went to sea at 14 did not know about the motion and said he appreciated the gesture.
BA93 press officer Ann Fleming said: ‘It is hard to see what more we could have done.’
Chamber of Shipping spokesman Andrew McNeil said a number of events involving the merchant navy had been held.
MP Eddie Loyden
Nursery staff are shocked at murder
DENISE JOHNSTON was a delightful and popular landlady, her boss said today.
Tim Hill, managing director of Peter Walker, which runs the Lion Tavern, said: ‘She was a delightful persona highly respected and very popular publican.’
Mrs Johnston had been in the licensed trade for 10 years and was in her second spell at the Lion.
She had originally run it with first husband Stephen and then went to work at the Midland pub opposite Central station.
She returned to the Lion two years ago.
Her daily routine included running son Gareth to the Babycare Nursery in Rodney Street each morning.
Staff at the nursery described Gareth as a ‘lovely little boy’.
They were concerned when his mother did not arrive to deliver him for the day yesterday.
That concern turned to heartbreak when they heard of his mother's grim fate.
Pauline Humphries at the nursery said: ‘We were appalled when we heard what had happened.
‘Gareth started coming here in October and was a lovely little boy.
He seemed to be very happy.’
Medal insult
I AGREE with P.K. of Liverpool (Letters, Friday 4 June) over his remarks regarding the National Service commemoration medal.
I served for two years, 18 months of which where in Egypt, during the so called Middle East Crisis, where it was not unusual to be sniped at, almost daily, by an unseen enemy who didn't always miss.
We accepted this as just one of the hazards of being on active service.
However, 40 years on I find it extremely difficult to accept a charge of £23.50 plus for a medal to commemorate your service to your country.
It's an insult to all who served, especially the unlucky ones, who didn't return home.
W. Smith ‘Atlantic’ tragedy WE WOULD like to thank the Speke Ambulance Station for their very speedy call out to attend our late N.U.S. President Mr James Henry Slater after his collapse during the celebrations for the 50th anniversary of the Battle of the Atlantic.
The ambulance and paramedics crew consisting of Dave Seddon, Keith McKevitt and Jason Sefton were swift and professional.
We would also like to extend our heartfelt thanks to the medical staff at Broadgreen Hospital.
Tragically, Jim failed to recover from the stroke he had suffered on the Saturday morning (28th May) and died the following morning.
He will be sorely missed.
Yours fraternally, W.J. Anderson, Asst.
Shipping Organiser, On behalf of the North West Shipping Grades Branches.
Motability moan IF A disabled driver requires a car under the Motability scheme with a manual transmission then there is little or no deposit required.
On the other hand a more disabled driver who needs an automatic gearbox is heavily penalised by being required to pay from £850 excess of £2,000 depending on the vehicle!
The explanation for this is that an automatic car is not always immediately available and they are more expensive to produce.
Surely the whole idea of the Motability scheme is to help those with disability to be able to get about and be able to integrate more fully in society.
This scheme seems to do the opposite by putting a vehicle way out of reach of those most in need.
Mr J. Wrigley, Halewood, L26.
Railman in track horror
A BRITISH Rail supervisor was taken to hospital with leg injuries after he was electrocuted on the track.
The 29-year-old man suffered 20% burns to his right leg after a piece of wire he was removing from the line at Moorfields underground station, Liverpool, touched the live third rail.
The man was taken to the Royal Liverpool University Hospital.
Couple's chat ended in blows
A MAN assaulted his girlfriend after a discussion turned sour, magistrates were told.
Donna Preston was admitted to hospital with severe bruising as a result of Lee Taylor's attack, the Warrington court heard.
The couple have since split up.
Taylor, 27, of Cabul Close, Orford, Warrington, pleaded guilty to assaulting Miss Preston and was fined £60, and ordered to pay £105 compensation and costs.
Dennis Tighe, prosecuting, said Taylor had visited Miss Preston to discuss their relationship but he attacked her when they began arguing.
Miss Preston suffered muscle pain and stiffness after the attack.
The police were told and Taylor admitted the offence.
Watch-dogs blasted
By Echo reporter
TWO ombudsman schemes came under strong criticism today for being too slow dealing with complaints.
About half a sample of consumers who had used the Building Societies Ombudsman or the Insurance Ombudsman felt their schemes were not fair enough and nearly a third questioned their independence.
The survey by the National Consumer Council among almost 1,000 consumers found widespread dissatisfaction with the time it took the ombudsmen to settle disputes.
There was also criticism of the internal complaints procedures of both building societies and insurance companies, which almost half the respondents described as a ‘complete waste of time’.
The survey called for new powers and responsibilities for the two schemes and a new body to oversee the ombudsmen's work.
Major goes on the offensive
By Mark Davies
JOHN Major today launched a fresh bid to heal Tory Party wounds as a new row hit the government.
The Prime Minister was aiming to reassert his authority after sacked Chancellor Norman Lamont's dramatic attack on his leadership.
But as Mr Major prepared to speak to Welsh Conservatives, Labour demanded an urgent Commons statement over reports that cuts in invalidity benefit are being considered.
A leaked letter from the Social Security department revealed that the benefit could be taxed.
And in a bid to prevent bogus claims, Social Security Secretary Peter Lilley wants tougher medical tests for those saying they are unfit to work.
Incapable
The move is aimed at saving more than £1.3bn by the year 2000 as ministers look to ways of slashing the massive gap between income and spending expected to be £50bn this year.
Mr Lilley said: ‘We want to make sure that invalidity benefit goes to people who are genuinely incapable of working.’
Birkenhead Labour MP Frank Field, chairman of the all-party Commons social security committee, said: ‘It's hardly the way to run a whelk stall, let alone a welfare state or country.’
FERGIE SET TO HELP
Duchess's new job with refugees
By Echo reporter
THE Duchess of York has been talking about her new job roving UN ambassador to express the plight of refugees.
She has been appointed a ‘Goodwill Ambassador’ by the UN High Commissioner for Refugees after her work to help children caught up in the conflict in Bosnia.
The Duchess said: ‘I'm not just going to be a letterhead.
I am very, very serious about it I want to do much more to help.
I am good at talking about things.
‘For a long time, I have been very interested in women, children and everybody in refugee camps they need to be given the dignity and self-respect they are due.’
Her new role will include regular overseas visits.
She said she would go wherever the UNHCR wants.
The Duchess has started her own charity aimed at children in need, particularly in Bosnia.
She will be involved in fundraising and increasing understanding of a growing problem.
Her first duty was to collect an award in London last night on behalf High Commissioner Sadako Ogata from refugee charity, WomenAid.
The Duchess said: ‘There are very few people who can fail to be moved by the tragic plight of the refugees around the world.
‘That the number of refugees is increasing so dramatically is a major cause for concern.
I am honoured and delighted to offer my support to their cause but also my help to raise public awareness about the importance of their needs.’
The Duchess…helping refugees
Caldicot tees up municipal crown
Golf Scene
by Michael Charters
ARROWE Park and Bootle players dominated the Merseyside Municipal Championship at Hoylake, hosted by the Irby club who play over that municipal course.
John Caldicot (AP) won the title with a one under par 71, followed by Ian Burnett (Bootle) 73, Dave Ball (AP) 74, Frank Willis (Bootle) 74, John Sondegaard (West Hoyle) 74, and Ken Smith (Dudley) 75.
Best nett was by Dave Hollingwood (Dudley) 67 and Colin Smethwick (Irby) 67.
Team championship winners were Bootle with 303.
Meanwhile, the quality of golf from Cheshire's youngsters when they only lost 9–8 to the experienced Bromborough seniors was testimony to the coaching they are receiving from the county's two professional teachers Alan Thompson (Heswall) and Peter Barber (Didsbury).
Against a side containing ‘greats’ like Gordon Edwards and Phil Jones, the county boys gave every indication of good results to come.
Jones, the county's junior team captain, said: ‘Cheshire officials were delighted with the way the boys played in technique as well as team spirit.
It augurs well for the future of Cheshire golf.’
For example, Matt Parsley (Caldy) came up against an inspired show by Edwards.
Parsley was level par at the turn but found himself five down yet he never gave up.
Mrs Cathy McHale, a 15-handicap member of Childwall, had her first hole in one at the 13th (136 yards) in a holiday greensome.
Drink-drive ban
JOHN Joseph McGinn, 31, of Hillside Avenue, Huyton, was jailed for 120 days by Wirral magistrates after admitting driving while disqualified at Wallasey, having consumed excess alcohol and having no insurance.
He was given a three-year driving ban.
Man stabbed wife in face
A MERSEYSIDE man who stabbed his common-law wife in the face with a kitchen knife has been jailed for five years.
Liverpool Crown Court heard that there had been a history of domestic violence involving 30-year-old Anthony Redmond and his wife Carla Sergeant.
Miss Sergeant, 26, obtained an injunction to keep Redmond away from her and she moved out with their three children to stay with relatives, said Robert Atherton, prosecuting.
Two days later she returned to their home in Silton Road, Huyton, to collect fresh clothing for the children and Redmond was already there.
When she went upstairs he dragged her to the ground and after sitting on her stomach, he twice stabbed her in the cheek with a knife.
The victim tried to grab the knife to stop him stabbing her again and received a cut finger.
Redmond denied attempted murder but admitted wounding with intent.
Defence counsel Brian Hicks QC said that Redmond's wife had forgiven him.
Waitress wins after tribunal is told of staff party fight
NIGHT PIES FLEW AT THE CASINO
By Jason Burt
TWO members of staff at a Merseyside casino were sacked after pork pies were thrown during a late-night party.
It was alleged that the manager of Soames Casino in West Derby Road, Liverpool, hit a waiter over the head with a bottle during a brawl.
An industrial tribunal in Liverpool heard that Fiona Shearer, 23, and her boyfriend Kenneth Dodd, 29, were dismissed five days after the private bash on August 28 last year.
The party was meant to have been a thank-you to the casino staff from the management.
But Miss Shearer said she was accused of starting a food fight and leaving a trail of food and debris down the casino stairs.
Mr Dodd, a waiter, of Helmingham Road, Tranmere, then confronted John Maguire, the casino's manager, and they fought.
Miss Shearer and Mr Dodd allege unfair dismissal against the casino's owners Grosvenor County Clubs Limited.
Mr Dodd's case failed but Miss Shearer was successful although tribunal chairman Lionel Brown said she had contributed 50% to her dismissal.
Assistant general manager Tony Vulcan had told the tribunal: ‘Ken ran at John with his arms flailing, he got hold of him and even managed to rip his T-shirt off.’
He said that he and two other members of staff tried to restrain Mr Dodd who shouted that he would kill Mr Maguire.
He was eventually calmed down when a doorman sat on him.
Miss Shearer, who was assistant head waitress at the time, said she had earlier been sworn at by Mr Maguire.
She added: ‘I told him I did not know who had thrown the food.
He said he had seen me and he swore.
‘I was upset and raised my voice.
The situation exploded because John was so abusive.’
Tribunal chairman Lionel Brown said: ‘The cause of the trouble is free alcohol.
If people had to put their hands in their own pockets and had to pay for it they would not drink so much.’
A settlement in Miss Shearer's case has to be formalised by July 20, Mr Brown said.
Protest over dead ducks
ANGRY protestors chanted ‘killers’ as wildlife officials in California started rounding up hundreds of diseased ducks for extermination.
The round-up followed a court decision to lift an order barring wildlife officials from killing about 350 of the birds on the picturesque canals in the town of Venice.
Croats killed:
British UN troops shot dead three Croat gunmen who fired on a Muslim aid convoy near Vitez in central Bosnia today after Croat forces had shot and killed eight of the convoy's drivers.
Gay pledge:
The Israeli army said there would be no restrictions on homosexuals joining its ranks after claims of discrimination led the army to re-examine its position.
Finger biter:
A Malaysian was jailed for five years for biting off the finger of a policeman who stopped him from stealing a motorcycle.
Fruit seized:
Customs officials have seized 170 tonnes of bananas worth £150,000 being smuggled into Portugal via the Spanish border in foreign-registered vehicles.
Koala toll:
Around 4,000 koala bears are run down by traffic, killed by dogs or die from disease and lack of food in Australia every year, preservationists said.
Soldier freed:
A Pakistani soldier seized by Somali gunmen in a battle which killed 23 of his colleagues has reportedly been handed over to his commander.
Chemical blast:
Four firemen were killed and three seriously injured by a series of explosions at a Russian chemical plant in the Urals.
Free Blandford orders judge
A HIGH COURT judge today ordered that the Marquess of Blandford be freed from jail, where he has served three days of a 112-day sentence for maintenance arrears.
Mr Justice Johnson, who jailed the 37year-old Marquess for failing to pay £10,534 to his estranged wife Becky, said he had been acting in excess of his powers when he imposed the sentence.
Sitting in Manchester, the judge said after listening to two hours of legal argument from counsel for Blandford, his wife and the Official Solicitor, that he now had no power to rectify his error made on May 17 when he ordered the Marquess to be jailed if he failed to pay the money in two weeks.
Arrears
The judge said: ‘I regard it as my duty at the earliest possible moment to order the discharge from prison of Lord Blandford.
I shall make an order to that effect.’
Blandford was sent to Pentonville on Tuesday for failing to comply with the High Court order to pay the arrears.
The judge said he had asked for the case to be re-listed because he had anxiety about the sentence he imposed.
CASINO STAFF IN PORK PIE FIGHT
Free booze party led to sackings
By Jason Burt
TWO members of staff at a Merseyside casino were sacked after pork pies were thrown at a late-night party.
It was alleged that the manager of Soames Casino in West Derby Road, Liverpool, hit a waiter over the head with a bottle during a brawl.
An industrial tribunal in Liverpool heard that Fiona Shearer, 23, and her boyfriend Kenneth Dodd, 29, were dismissed five days after the private bash last August.
The party was meant to have been a thank-you to the casino staff from the management.
But Miss Shearer said she was accused of starting a food fight and leaving a trail of food and debris down the stairs.
Mr Dodd, a waiter, of Helmingham Road, Tranmere, confronted casino manager John Maguire and they fought, the tribunal was told.
Miss Shearer and Mr Dodd allege unfair dismissal against the casino's owners, Grosvenor County Clubs Limited.
Mr Dodd's case failed, but Miss Shearer was successful although tribunal chairman Lionel Brown said she had contributed 50% to her dismissal.
Assistant general manager Tony Vulcan had told the tribunal: ‘Ken ran at John with his arms flailing.
He got hold of him and even managed to rip his T-shirt off.’
He said that he and two other members of staff tried to restrain Mr Dodd.
Miss Shearer, assistant head waitress at the time, said Mr Maguire swore at her.
She added: ‘I told him I did not know who had thrown the food he said he had seen me.
‘I was upset and raised my voice.
The situation exploded because John was so abusive.’
Tribunal chairman Mr Brown said: ‘The cause of the trouble is free alcohol if people had to pay for it they would not drink so much.’
Tribunal appeal…
Kenneth Dodd and girlfriend Fiona Shearer
Brave Anthony, nine, needed 100 stitches
ROTTWEILER ATTACK BOY RECOVERING
A NINE-year-old boy is recovering today after being mauled by a rottweiler.
Anthony Jones needed 100 stitches to his face, arm and leg.
Doctors say he is lucky to be alive.
He will need plastic surgery after the horrific attack outside his home in Delamore Street, Walton, Liverpool.
Today, the plucky youngster was sitting up in bed and said to be ‘improving’ at Alder Hey Childrens' Hospital, Liverpool.
He was surrounded by cards and playing with toy cars donated by police officers.
Neighbours and friends held a whip round.
His father, Keith, said: ‘He was in terrible shock for a while but he seems to be getting back to his normal self.’
Anthony was riding his bike behind the house when the dog escaped from a back yard and pounced.
Attacked
A neighbour heard his screams but was driven back into her house when she tried to intervene.
Anthony's mother, Stella, 44, threw bricks at the dog which was only dragged off the screaming youth after two neighbours attacked it with an iron bar.
Police officers later captured and destroyed the dog.
Attack victim…
Stella Jones with her son Anthony as he recovers in Alder Hey Hospital from the rottweiler ordeal
Mum is reunited with abandoned toddler
A MOTHER who abandoned her child at a Merseyside hospital has returned to be reunited with the youngster.
Social services chiefs were meeting today to decide what should be done with the twoyear-old girl, who was left at Wirral's Arrowe Park Hospital.
The toddler, who told nurses her name was Debbie, was put into the care of foster parents yesterday.
Her mother lives in south Wirral and Cheshire social services are handling her case.
The heart-rending note attached to her read: ‘I am a very good little girl.
My mummy loves me but cannot look after me any more.
Please find me a new mummy who will love me a lot and look after me.’
Her mother telephoned the hospital at 7.15pm yesterday.
A spokesman for Cheshire County Council said this afternoon: ‘The child will remain with Wirral social services in the care of foster parents pending a court hearing next week.’
Workmate's tears at mum-to-be murder trial
By Val Woan and Harry Dean
A WORKMATE of hanged mum-to-be Paula Gilfoyle sobbed today as she told a murder trial jury about the ‘best friend I could ever wish for.’
Janet Bush was giving evidence at Liverpool Crown Court where Eddie Gilfoyle denies murdering his pregnant wife in June last year.
She told the court: ‘I'd known Paula for many years.
She was a close friend at work and socially.
‘She was lively and a person who you could always talk to about your problems.
She was a real good friend, honest, loyal, the best friend I could ever wish for.’
Farewell party
Miss Bush said that Paula was very happy when she became pregnant.
She was then shown a picture taken at the farewell party at Champion Spark Plugs just before Paula went on maternity leave.
Fighting to hold back tears Miss Bush added: ‘She was very happy, she was so very happy.’
Paula was found hanging by a rope in the garage of her home.
The prosecution alleges that Gilfoyle, 31, of Grafton Drive, Upton, killed her and tried to make it look like suicide.
They also allege that a suicide note written by Paula, 33, was not genuine, and that Gilfoyle had a relationship with a woman works colleague.
(Proceeding) Earlier evidence: Page 10
TUNNEL BLAST: Two workmen were injured today after electrical equipment exploded in a Mersey tunnel ventilation station.
One victim suffered burns to his arms and slight facial injuries in the accident in Sidney Street, Birkenhead.
Five held in murder probe
FIVE people were being questioned by police yesterday in connection with the murder of trainee accountant Martin Jacks.
Mr Jacks, 23, whose parents live in Welshpool, bled to death after he was shot in the thigh when three masked men burst into his flat in Putney, south-west London, on June 5.
Three men and two women, arrested in raids in Kingston upon Thames and Chessington in south-west London, were being held at police stations in southeast London, Scotland Yard said.
Police recovered a black Opel car, believed to have been used as a getaway car in the attack.
Sale of a family's fortunes
AN IRISHMAN who sold his family furniture for £600 was counting the cost today after Christie's this week auctioned the same furniture for £230,000.
John O'Sullivan, 25, of Pallaskenry, Co Limerick, sold the three pieces of furniture to pay an outstanding bill for inheritance tax.
This week Christie's auctioned the writing desk, oak buffet and washstand, designed by the Victorian designer Edward William Godwin, for £230,000.
Mr O'Sullivan said he was forced to sell family property to pay an inheritance tax bill.
‘It wasn't even nice-looking furniture,’ he added.
‘I found out the following day how much it was worth when a dealer offered me £40,000.’
The three pieces were originally bought in 1934 by Mr O'Sullivan's grandfather, Michael, at a public auction at Dromore Castle for £49.
‘Saddam armed by MoD firm’
By David Mason Daily Post Correspondent
A COMPANY owned by the Ministry of Defence helped build a weapons facility in Iraq which could be used to support Exocet missiles, the Scott arms-to-Iraq inquiry heard yesterday.
International Military Services, the British Government's arms sales company, went ahead with a construction consultancy in the face of Foreign Office opposition at a time when exports of defence-related equipment to Iraq were banned.
The project was approved at ministerial level because it had been decided that the contract either did not significantly enhance Iraq's military capability or that it had been signed before December, 1984.
In that month the Government decided to impose a ban on exports which could worsen the conflict between Iraq and Iran, said Alan Collins, a Foreign Office official at the time.
In a minute dated 30 August, 1985, Mr Collins wrote: ‘We need to keep a close eye on this project…it could be used to support Exocet missiles.’
IMS had a construction consultancy for the project.
This involved British workers laying concrete near the war zone at the time of the Iran-Iraq war, the inquiry was told.
‘We were concerned about the safety of the personnel and about the presentational aspect,’ Mr Collins wrote on 4 July, 1985.
The inquiry continues.
Mersey hopes crash in county challenge
By Geoff Clare
MERSEYSIDE'S hopes of some sort of compensation following their opening defeat at the hands of Yorkshire came to nothing last Sunday.
The local hopefuls lost the second of this year's preliminaries in the Martell Cognac County Crown Green Bowling Championship against Warwick and Worcester.
The choice of the superb BRNESC green in Melling Road, Aintree, looked capable of giving the Merseysiders a useful home advantage.
But although the away side did well in the Midlands, there was disappointment at Liverpool, where the locals went down by 31 shots.
With 21–7 and 8 returns in the opening set it was hardly surprising that Warwick and Worcester went on to take seven of the 12 cards.
On scores, Colin Martlew's 21–12 was the best that Merseyside could manage, and there was a 21–13 from Roy Lussey, but on the day, the visitors were always in command.
While Merseyside did well to restrict the opposition to 22 at Smethwick, the Midlanders were too strong for our local bowlers and an overall deficit of 53 shots speaks for itself.
Two down from two played.
That is how the seniors stand, but that position could be reversed in junior circles tomorrow (3 p.m.) when the youngsters take on Lancashire in the Drakes Pride Junior Inter County Championships.
The opposition might be a little stronger than North Lancs and Fylde, who were beaten overall in May by 22 shots.
The sides are:
At the Gardners Arms: J Mills, S Pickering, E Yates, N Burridge, A Carr, L Brocklebank, K Mitchell, P Draper, M Robinson, I Turner Bone, A Thomas, M Gilmore.
At Atherton: P Robinson, J Harrison, P Rennie, A Trimnell, A Kays, M Bradshaw, A Aspinall, D Barwise, D Frodsham, S Holmes, M O'Callaghan, J Strain.
Despite two good performances to date, Wirral Ladies are still looking for their first win in the Ladies County Championship.
They take on Warwickshire at Sparks Lane, Thingwall, tomorrow (2.30) and the team is:
J Gardner, M Bresnen, B Smith, E Grisdale, J Dewhurst, J Pepper, G Smith, T Roberts, L Mountford, S Astles, P Gorman, M Browning.
Bobby Leyland, of the Circular Club, won the Sefton and District's Silcock Cup at the Sandon when he defeated Keith Sherbrooke of Kirkdale 21–16.
The Bebington and District League's Barnes Pairs went to the Stork couple of Roy Varney and Brian Hanlon, who beat Peter and Don Favager of Thingwall 15–7 on the Bromborough Pool green.
Fire chief's summer safety warning
DYFED'S chief fire officer, Ronnie King, urges those visiting the countryside not to leave the area littered with rubbish that could lead to a fire.
Drawing attention to the Countryside Fire Code, he also urges people not to light fires unless it is safe to do so.
Fires and camping stoves should, he said, be kept clear of tents and any dry grass and undergrowth, crops, hedges and trees.
Exploring gas works site AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL investigation has been commissioned by Powys County Council into the site of the former Builth Wells gasworks.
Consultants have also been instructed to proceed to detailed design and tender with a view to having the site cleared.
A separate contract involves the early removal of the contents of tar tanks discovered on the site.
Toy loss is hard to bear
A SPECIAL day out was marred for a toddler yesterday.
Harriet Evans, two, went with her mother Karen to Bodelwyddan Castle for a fun day to mark National Childminding Week.
But on her way to catch the bus to Bodelwyddan little Harriet, from Bryn-y-Baal, near Mold, lost her favourite cuddly toy Winnie the Pooh.
‘She thought the world of him, as he had been brought back specially from Florida by a friend of mine,’ said Karen.
The 12-inch tall toy was lost somewhere on the hill between Mynydd Isa and Mold and though Karen retraced her steps she could not find it.
Anyone finding Winnie should call Karen on .
But Harriet's tears were eased at Bodelwyddan when she met Huggy Bear, the mascot of Clwyd's Playsafe campaign.
The campaign and touring roadshow aims to promote playtime safety after figures revealed that 1,500 children under four from North Clwyd ended up in Glan Clwyd Hospital last year with head and face injuries.
Huggy Bear helps cheer up Harriet Picture: JEFF PITT
Man named
POLICE have named the man found dead in a slate quarry on the Horseshoe Pass, near Llangollen, as Shaun Edward Donnelly, 30, of Dill Hall Lane, Church, Accrington.
Foul play has been ruled out.
House theft
A THIEF who broke into a house in New Broughton, near Wrexham, stole money, hi-fi system and other items worth in total £1,000.
Office swoop
POLICE are stepping up patrols on Wrexham industrial estate after a spate of factory break-ins in which office equipment and other property was stolen.
Off-shoulder A SHOULDER bag containing £400 cash, cheque book and cheque cards was stolen from a house in Bath Road, Wrexham.
Road deaths
FIVE people died on the roads of North Wales last month, two more than in May last year, Chief Constable David Owen has announced.
Oil prize
HAMILTON Oil, who are developing a gas and oil terminal at Point of Ayr, are sponsoring a prize at a major conference of fisheries scientists to be held in Conwy next month.
The £200 prize will go to the best presentation by a post graduate student.
BURGLARS BRING SADNESS TO VILLAGE SCHOOL
Heart-broken pupils' computer plea
By Gareth Hughes Daily Post Staff
PUPILS at a village school were broken-hearted when thieves stole two of their computers.
Not only were they upset that some of their own work had been wasted but they appreciated the efforts their parents and teachers had put in to buy the equipment.
Now the children at Ysgol Llawrybetws, Glanrafon, between Corwen and Bala, have made a heartfelt plea through the Daily Post for the property to be returned.
In a letter to us, seven-year-old Cerian Prysor, said: ‘Our parents have worked very hard to raise money and there's only 26 children in the school.
Please help to find these men.’
Catrin Gwynfor, 8, wrote: ‘The parents try their best to raise money to buy the computer and the teachers, too.
If you know anything about the robbery, please help us.’
And in a direct plea to the burglars Danielle Gibson, 10, wrote: ‘Please, if you are reading this letter give up now because you will get caught sooner or later.’
Headmistress Mrs Enid Edwards said the youngsters were genuinely upset by the break-in.
The two computers taken were valued at £2,000.
‘I really do feel sorry for them because they know how hard their parents have worked to raise money for the computers,’ she said.
‘Many parents are unemployed and the children have learned to go without many things that are taken for granted in other areas,’ she said.
‘We have been told that we will receive only £1,000 back from the insurance,’ she added.
The youngsters put the upset behind them temporarily last week when they came third in the unison party competition at the Urdd National Eisteddfod.
The sad pupils of Ysgol Llawryetws with all that is left behind after the computer thefts Picture: PHIL MICHEU
Ex-soldier's attack sparked terror alert
MAN JAILED FOR ‘DIY’ VAN BOMB
A MAN who blew up a motorist with a home-made bomb, has been jailed for 12 years.
Former soldier Gary Jones, 29, strapped the device to the exhaust pipe of Phillip Redmond's van which exploded when he drove off.
A hole was blasted in the floor near Mr Redmond's feet and part of his seat was ripped away but he only received minor leg injuries.
The explosion shook nearby homes, said Geffrey Lowe prosecuting at Liverpool Crown Court.
The victim still had a small piece of metal from the van in his leg, he added.
It was at first feared that the car bomb had been planted by terrorists and nearby residents in the Liverpool suburb were evacuated while Army bomb disposal experts examined the scene.
Detonated
Jones, of Kremlin Drive, Tuebrook, admitted causing an explosion likely to endanger life.
Mr Lowe said the van blew up at 6.10am on January 11 after Mr Redmond, 39, a plasterer, started to drive off from Geneva Road, Fairfield.
Jones had strapped the device to the van and attached a piece of string to the military detonator pin and a breeze block.
When the vehicle moved off the pin was pulled out and the bomb detonated, said Mr Lowe.
Jones was arrested the next day and admitted responsibility.
Defense counsel Michael Wolff said that Jones used to live in a flat owned by Mr Redmond's wife and there had been a long running dispute over £140 rent allegedly outstanding.
He had not wanted to put the device beneath her car because her children might be in it so he instead targeted her husband.
He had not intended to cause serious injury.
No entry
MOVES are afoot to prevent drivers using a narrow road which leads from Bangor High Street into Kyffin Square.
Roads toll Five people died on the roads of North Wales last month, two more than in May last year, Chief Constable David Owen has announced.
Three of those who died were pedestrians, one a driver, one a car passenger.
Young artists
CHILDREN from Llandudno schools have been doing their bit to help soften the impact of a massive building project on Llandudno's promenade.
They have been using their artistic talents to brighten up hoardings around the site of the resort's new £4m arts, leisure and convention centre complex.
Liverpool FC theft charges
A FORMER ticket manageress at Liverpool FC appeared at Liverpool Crown Court yesterday on theft and false accounting charges.
Mary Fone, 35, of Bebington Road, Birkenhead, Wirral, will stand trial on November 1 and the case is expected to last two weeks.
Fone is charged with three offences of theft involving a total of more than £40,000 and two offences of false accounting.
Fone, who is on bail, sat at the side of the court yesterday and did not enter the dock.
Prosecutor Geoffrey Lowe told the court that it was ‘an extremely complicated and serious matter.’
Foster body
By Daily Post Correspondent
TEENAGERS who were at school with alleged foster parents' cruelty victim Paul Llewelyn Jones told a court yesterday they remembered seeing marks on his body.
The Mold Crown Court jury also heard that children would share their school dinners with him and he would go looking for food in bins.
But the defence accused some of the teenagers of conspiring against foster parents, Norman and Evelyn Roberts, of Gwalchmai, Anglesey, and of planning to share any compensation Mr Jones might receive.
The defence branded one witness ‘the Godfather of Gwalchmai’ and claimed a campaign had been launched against the Roberts family locally.
It was alleged that one of their foster children had recently been threatened with a knife.
The jury has heard prosecution allegations that Mr Jones, 19, of Holyhead, was, as a child, treated as a slave.
It is alleged he was beaten with a horse whip when tied upside down in a barn, went hungry and was fed dog food from a bowl.
Norman Roberts, 59, denies cruelty by ill-treatment and assault, Evelyn Roberts, 59, denies cruelty by neglect, and their son Ian Roberts, 34, denies common assault.
The court heard the social services department received complaints of Mr Jones' ill-treatment and photographs were taken of the injuries.
Investigation
But while he was placed on the ‘at risk’ register he was allowed to remain at the foster home at Ysgubor Esgob, a smallholding near Gwalchmai.
Police were not informed and the matter only came to light last year during a police investigation into the running of children's homes in North Wales.
Prosecution witnesses, brothers Oswyn and Orwel Williams, told the jury they remembered seeing line marks on Paul Jones' legs.
Oswyn Williams said they were ‘big purple, brown marks six inches long and half an inch wide’ on the back of Mr Jones' legs and the bottom of his back.
Mr Williams claimed they used to feed Mr Jones at school dinner time.
‘The boys from our village used to call him over.
We knew he was hungry and gave him our leftovers.
I used to see him getting food out of the bin,’ he said.
He denied allegations by barrister Thomas Teague, for Norman Roberts, that he had come to court to tell lies against the Roberts family.
Mr Williams also denied he was part of a gang who had targeted the couple by causing damage to their property and had been chanting ‘Norman's going to get 10 years’ at Mrs Roberts.
Mr Teague accused him of taking a sheath knife to one of the Roberts' foster sons and saying ‘no body messes with the Godfather of Gwalchmai.’
Mr Williams, 19, denied the allegation.
The trial, before Judge Gareth Edwards, has been adjourned until Wednesday.
Brothers in arms
Parkonians keep it in the family for Cheshire Cup
THERE is a brotherly look about the Old Parkonians side facing an important cup date tomorrow.
The North Cheshire Leaguers, who travel to Tattenhall in the third round of the Cheshire Cup, are captained by Mike Beckett who will be aided by his brother Richard.
Also heavily represented are the Hitchell family, with brothers Mike, Chris, Nick and Tim in the line-up.
Meanwhile, Bromborough Paints Merseyside Competition teams Caldy and Port Sunlight face a double bill this weekend.
Both are engaged in regional semifinals in the Village Cup tomorrow.
Senior game
Caldy give batsman Greg Watterson his first senior game of the season for today's Competition game at Wirral.
Port Sunlight welcome back batsman Chris Whale away to St Mary's College Old Boys.
They go to Mellor 24 hours later when Ian Wallbank and Mark Tighe come in.
The Old Boys are back to full strength against Sunlight with the return of allrounder Paul Callaghan, batsman Tony Brookman and bowler Paul Eddy.
Leaders Birkenhead St Mary's expect to be at full-strength away to Bromborough Pool.
Second placed Sutton also name their most powerful line-up at home to Wavertree, for whom skipper Ian Morley returns.
Aigburth call in all-rounder Dave Knight at home to Prescot and Odyssey.
Chris Hackett is also available.
Irby include Phil Green for their home clash with Liverpool Nalgo.
Dave Birkett has relinquished the Rainhill captaincy.
Ray Ford takes over at Ainsdale.
Fixtures:-Saturday: Aigburth v Prescot & Odyssey, Ainsdale v Rainhill, Bromborough Pool v Birkenhead St Mary's, Irby v Liverpool Nalgo, St Mary's College OB v Port Sunlight, Sutton v Wavertree, Wirral v Caldy.
Sunday:-Village Cup regional semi-finals: Mawdsley v Caldy, Mellor v Port Sunlight.
Cheshire Cup third round: Tattenhall v Old Parkonians.
IAN MORLEY has withdrawn from the Merseyside Competition side to meet the Liverpool Competition in the President's Trophy at Northern tomorrow.
Malcolm Cockbain, who has been in fine form for Birkenhead St Mary's, fills the vacancy in a side to be led by Peter Mercer because of the unavailability of regular skipper Jeff Spence.
Merseyside Competition XI: P Mercer (Rainhill), D Newman, P Green, P Coles (Irby), J Ford, L Roberts, M Cockbain (Birkenhead St Mary's), K Brookman (St Mary's College OB), C Wadkin (Wavertree), C Hackett, N Ingram (Aigburth).
The ‘forgotten victims’ block road in protest
By Gareth Hughes Daily Post Staff
A GROUP of Llandudno Junction residents yesterday claimed they were the ‘forgotten people’ as they struggled to clean up their homes.
People living in Marl Drive staged a demonstration after waiting more than 18 hours for council workers to come to their assistance.
To draw attention to their plight, they blockaded the road in the hope that it would get them priority for repairs.
Leading the protest was mini-skip operator Bob Morris who said much of the damage caused in Marl Drive and other streets could have been avoided had warnings about the nearby River Wyddan been heeded.
‘For 30 years we have asked for it to be culverted and we have been promised that it will be done.
When the Conwy tunnel was built we were told that money would then be available,’ he said.
Mr Morris, whose own house suffered relatively little damage, said he realised the potential danger early on Thursday evening when he asked for the river to be kept clear of debris before the level grew too high.
He tried to clear the rubbish himself and stayed up all night in the hope that workmen would tackle the job.
‘We have had no response from Aberconwy Council because they say their priorities lie elsewhere,’ he said.
‘In the meantime, there are mothers with young babies who do not have hot water and two children with special needs,’ he said.
‘The only way we can draw attention is by blockading the road.
At least that has brought the police here.’
A driver finds his way blocked by protesting families in Marl Drive yesterday
Redwood push on shake-up
NEW Welsh Secretary John Redwood is to press ahead with plans to cut Welsh councils down to size.
A Bill will be presented to Parliament next session to pave the way for the new ‘shadow’ councils to be elected next year so they can take over on April 1, 1995.
Welsh bodies still have until the end of June to air their views on former Welsh Secretary David Hunt's plan to replace the Welsh counties and districts with 21 new single-tier councils.
But Welsh Local Government Minister Gwilym Jones told the Welsh Tory Conference in Llangollen yesterday: ‘While we shall be listening very carefully, we see no case at present for departing from the main thrust of our proposals.
‘Unitary authorities provide the best means for securing local services at the lowest cost.’
But Mr Jones signalled Mr Redwood was ready to make one compromise following protests at the decision to retain Powys.
He said the Government was considering allowing councillors from each of the three districts within Powys to play a part in local services.
Ambassador writes of sorrow at killing
By Daily Post Correspondent
THE Brazilian ambassador to Britain has written a letter of sympathy to the family of a young North Wales adventurer shot dead by robbers in Brazil.
Patrick Martin Furse, 27, of Nerquis Hall, Nercwys, near Mold, was cremated yesterday following a private family service.
He died of a single gunshot wound to the left side of the head following the attack at the ancient tourist town of Parati.
Now the family has received a formal letter of condolences from the Brazilian ambassador in London, his Excellency Paulo-Tarso Flecha de Lima.
In a letter to Patrick's father Mr Anthony Furse, the ambassador expresses on behalf of is government and himself personally his sorrow and regret at what has happened.
A spokesman at the Brazilian Embassy in London said the ambassador himself was a father of five and had two grand-children and could identify with the family's grief.
Patrick, a former soldier, was alone on an around the world adventure when he was shot as he resisted two men who tried to take his cash and camera.
He had been making his way past the beach from the tourist information centre to a hotel which they had recommended when he was murdered.
The killing is said to have stunned the little town, 150 miles west of Rio de Janeiro.
Police have arrested one man and are still hunting another.
Wife blaze man freed
A JILTED husband who set fire to his wife's home walked free from Chester Crown Court yesterday.
Julian Shaw, defending, said William Hegerty suffered a breakdown and mistakenly thought the fire in Thistle Down Close, Rostyllyn, Wrexham, would bring his wife back to him.
Hegerty, 62, of Park Street, Ruabon, gave himself up after confessing to a priest, but had since tried to kill himself.
Pleading guilty to arson, he was given two years' probation.
Downpour was a 500-year freak
By Harold Brough Features Staff
THE torrential rains which flooded homes and roads were a one-in-500 years freak, according to weather experts.
As, yet again, Britain started its mopping up operation, tired rescue workers, tearful home owners and others were asking the same question: Whatever caused the heavens to open?
The answer in this case was the arrival of warm air and its combination with an area of low pressure over Britain.
Mostly our air arrives from the west which is why we sit up and take notice of the weather in America, although actually it can change a great deal on the way over here.
This time warm air came from the south, hotting up as it passed over warm land.
As it warms so it expands, moving higher as bubbles of water vapour, each one hundreds of metres across.
The bubbles condense into droplets which attach to salt crystals and other particles in the atmosphere and eventually form clouds.
As the clouds rise higher, the air temperature falls below freezing and some of the droplets freeze into crystals.
As frozen crystals come into contact as water droplets they fuse together forming even bigger crystals.
Heavy now, the crystals start to come down, moving faster, picking up more droplets on the way.
When they pass the freezing level they thaw and fall as rain.
It could have been even wetter.
In August, 1952, more than nine inches fell in a few hours at Lynmouth, Devon.
Three years later Martinstown, Dorset, had the highest amount of rainfall ever recorded in 24 hours, 11 inches.
Suicidal children ‘face aid delay’
SUICIDAL children in Ellesmere Port who turn to counsellors for help are being told there is a 50-week waiting list, it was claimed last night.
Two headmasters have been told by staff at the Child and Family Therapy Unit in Ellesmere Port that children face almost a year's wait.
Local Labour councillor Peter Shephard is warning that the delays are putting children's lives at risk.
He is calling for more funds to reduce waiting lists.
However health officers say they have already slashed the waiting list and that children now face a maximum eight-week delay.
But Coun Shephard, who is chairman of the district's environmental health committee, said he had spoken to two families who were told only last month they would have to wait 50 weeks.
The centre offers advice and counselling for suicidal children, those with emotional difficulties and parents who seek help.
Coun Shephard said: ‘I have a letter from a headmaster and have spoken to families who have been told this.
‘I have it on good authority that there is a waiting list of up to 50 weeks despite what the health authority says.
‘These are children that need care now.
They have already reached the end of their tether.’
He is asking Chester Health Authority to carry out an investigation of need in the area and to respond to it.
Health authority assistant chief executive Alison Farquharson confirmed that children had been forced to wait up to 50 weeks.
But she said that since a new centre had opened in Chester in January delays had been cut.
Children could now expect to be helped in two to eight weeks depending on the seriousness of their problems, she said.
‘There was an unacceptably long waiting list before we appointed a second consultant in Chester but since then there has been a big improvement,’ she said.
Two cleared in the case of flying curry powder
TWO men accused of starting a brawl at an Indian restaurant were cleared yesterday when a jury heard how staff blitzed them with red hot curry powder.
Builder Paul Sharp, 27, and joiner David Sweeney were left choking and with tears streaming down their faces when a kitchen hand bombarded them with burning chilli and curry powder.
The men were forced to cover their mouths as the powder was flung into their faces at the Step-In Restaurant, in Chester.
They were also hit with a mop and a chair leg by some of the staff during the brawl on September 25 last year.
Sharp, of Rhuddlan Road, Chester said outside Chester Crown Court: ‘The pain was unbearable.
I could barely breath.
One of the staff had the chilli and curry powder and was running around throwing it all over us.
‘I admit I had a bit to drink and was being verbally aggressive but that was all.’
Sharp denied one charge of assault causing actual bodily harm and was cleared by the jury but was convicted of affray and conditionally discharged.
Sweeney, of Hatton Road, Chester, denied one charge of assault causing actual bodily harm and another of affray and was cleared.
Judge Mr Recorder Peter Rees told Sharp: ‘I agree with the verdicts.
it is clear justice has already been meted out to you.
You were both badly injured in what was a brutal attack.’
Tourists killed in road crash
TWO German tourists died and two soldiers were badly hurt yesterday when a coach and an Army truck collided almost head-on along a straight stretch of road.
By macabre coincidence, the truck was from an Army unit based in Dortmund, only 70 miles from the German town of Hofgeismar, where many of the injured tourists came from.
The two to die in the accident, on a remote part of the A82 route from Fort William to Glasgow, north of Bridge of Orchy, were both male coach passengers aged 65 and 66.
The collision left the area looking like a ‘battlefield,’ according to witnesses who saw the injured taken from the scene.
The injured soldiers were the only people on board the 14-tonne Bedford workshop truck, on its way to Benbecula in the Western Isles.
Both were from the 16th Air Defence Regiment of the Royal Artillery.
The soldiers' names were not being released.
One, said to be aged 18 and from Lincolnshire, was in ‘critical’ condition and was transferred to the Western Infirmary in Glasgow.
The other, a 27-year-old from Surrey, was said to be in ‘serious’ condition.
Whisky thieves jailed
THREE warehousemen stole whisky worth nearly £2,000 from their employers, a court heard yesterday.
But the management at the Christian Salvesen warehouse at Warrington had received a tip-off and police were keeping watch.
David Perry, 35, of Buttermere Avenue, Orford, Gary Toony, 25, of Kendal Avenue, Orford, and Steven Lea, 27, of St David's Drive, Callands, all Warrington, admitted the theft of cases of whisky at the town's Crown Court.
They were each jailed for eight weeks.
The court heard all three men were in financial difficulties.
Royal visit boosts morale in Ulster
By Ian Graham Daily Post Correspondent
THE Queen made a morale-boosting visit to Northern Ireland yesterday to meet members of the security forces and public.
A huge security operation was mounted throughout the province for the five-hour visit, especially around Hillsborough Castle in County Down, where she carried out all her engagements.
Nevertheless, the IRA managed a mortar bomb attack on the Crossmaglen Army base, some 50 miles away on the south Armagh border.
No one is reported to have been injured.
The Queen met members of the police, Army and prison services at a reception in the castle and attended a private luncheon party, hosted by the Northern Ireland Secretary Sir Patrick Mayhew.
The high point of the day came when the Queen mingled with more than 1,200 guests invited to the Secretary of State's annual garden party.
Torrential rain put a damper on the event, sending bedraggled guests squelching across lawns to seek shelter.
But the Queen, well protected by raincoat, hat and umbrella, smiled through the deluge as she chatted with those brave enough to stay out in the open under a gaily-coloured sea of umbrellas.
The Queen also stood briefly with politicians including Democratic Unionist leader the Rev Ian Paisley.
Mr Paisley, the politics of Northern Ireland never far from his mind, joked: ‘Her Majesty mentioned the rain; I said that was why the grass was so green I couldn't get the word orange in.’
Tories silent on benefit plan
LABOUR were furious yesterday over the Government's refusal to come clean about plans which they suspect could cut the number of people entitled to invalidity benefit.
Social Security Secretary Peter Lilley fiercely denied during media interviews that the genuinely sick would be affected by Government proposals.
‘We want to stop in future anyone swinging the lead,’ he stressed.
However, there were no signs of any abatement of the political storm after the mysterious appearance on a Press Association fax machine of a draft letter due to be sent by Mr Lilley to the Prime Minister.
Medical tests
This letter, and 22 more pages of background material, suggested tough new medical tests to assess how many people should qualify for the benefit.
Meanwhile, the Department said later that the documents were not illegally leaked but were inadvertently sent to the Press Association because the two fax numbers were similar and the operator had mistakenly hit a wrong key.
Shadow spokesman Donald Dewar angrily raised the issue in the Commons, and protested there was a ‘yawning gap’ between the assurances and the ‘reality of what is happening.’
But Mr Dewar, despite his impassioned pleas to the Speaker, Betty Boothroyd, was unsuccessful in forcing a statement out of Mr Lilley.
Plea to Charles for community centre
THE Prince of Wales has been asked to intervene to help residents campaigning to have part of a fire damaged former school to be turned into a community centre.
The school is now a regular target of vandals.
People living near the former English Martyrs School in Poplars Avenue, Orford, Warrington, say they desperately need a centre for the young, elderly and disabled of the area.
Now, John McFadyen and his girlfriend Elizabeth Woodey, of Bexhill Avenue, have started a petition calling on the borough council to help provide a centre.
They have also written to the Prince of Wales, asking for his support.
Mr McFadyen said: ‘We've already been pledged financial support by several organisations if we can get part of the old school building as a community centre.’
He added: ‘We've asked the council to help, without success.
So I'm hoping Prince Charles might be able to step in and help.
‘There's nowhere for local children to play.
They hang around street corners, facing the dangers of speeding traffic.
One young girl was knocked down recently.
She had a lucky escape.
The next child might not be so lucky.’
Although the planners refused an application for a retail development on the site this was allowed on appeal.
A spokesman for the site's owner, Isle of Man-based Anglo International said the residents' views were being considered and that a community centre might be included in future development plans.
The Prince of Wales asked for help
Mopping-up misery: Terry and Alison Roberts, of Llandudno Junction, with some of their sodden possessions after the storm
Knighthood for airport chief
By Malcolm Handley Regional Affairs Correspondent
A NUMBER of North West names figure prominently in the Birthday Honours List with one leading personality elevated to the knighthood.
Gil Thompson, chief executive of Manchester International Airport, who has been a tireless supporter of North West economic regeneration, has been knighted for his services to air transport.
He has been a staunch advocate of the open skies policy which has helped to open up regional aviation.
Mr Thompson has also given his full support to the North West Olympic bid.
He was awarded the OBE in 1985.
Moira Potier, one of the five members of staff who exposed the widespread cruelty and mistreatment at Ashworth Special Hospital, Maghull, has been awarded the MBE.
Ms Potier, a clinical psychologist, of Aughton, Lancashire, was one of the so-called Ashworth Five whose evidence was praised by Sir Louis Blom-Cooper QC, who headed the Government inquiry.
She recently received an award from the Campaign for Freedom of Information.
Her MBE is awarded for services to the National Health Service.
Also included in today's list is Louise Botting, a nonexecutive director on the board of Trinity International Holdings, owners of the Daily Post.
Mrs Botting is awarded the CBE for her services to the Top Salaries Review Body and to Personal Finance Broadcasting.
She joined the Trinity board in 1991 and until recently was a regular financial columnist in the Daily Post.
She has also been presenter of BBC Radio 4's Money Box.
Former Liverpool City Councillor Tony McVeigh has been awarded the MBE for his services to the North West War Pensions Committee, which serves the needs of war disabled pensioners and war widows.
Mr McVeigh, who now lives in Woolton, served on the city council for 22 years.
Other North West OBEs include Harry Marshall Fairhurst, of Cheshire, for his services to architecture, Henry Gilbert, of Formby, for public service, Stanley Hagan, chief clerk at Liverpool Combined Court Centre, and Robert Meadows, managing director of RS Clare for services to industry.
North West MBEs include:
Arthur Addis for services to the community of Culcheth, Warrington; Alan Deakin, of Warrington, for services to fire safety; Muriel Downs, managing director of Daryl Industries, for services to manufacturing industry; and Harold Edwards, of Warrington, for services to the Citizens Advice Bureau.
Edward Fry, of Bebington Sea Cadet Corps; Major Arthur Ritson, of Formby, for services to the Royal Artillery Officers Association; and Constable George Howard, Merseyside Police.
Cammell Laird employees Maureen Masterson and Robert Hunt, both of Merseyside; James Lownsborough and Anne Horton, both of Cheshire, for charitable services; Mary Clough Morris for services to the community in the Wirral; and Elizabeth Smith, of Cheshire, for services to the prevention of alcohol abuse.
Margaret Stanton, headmistress of Robins Lane County Primary School, St Helens, for services to education; Michael Stephenson for services to the youth club movement in Cheshire; and Enid Stevenson, of Ormskirk, for services to the Littlewoods Organisation.
Roy Thornhill, director of Brammer, for services to industry; Irene Whitehurst for political and public service in the Wirral and Margaret Wright, for services to the Ellerslie Court Holiday Home, Southport.
Tony McVeigh
Heroic Bosnia Cheshires earn awards for bravery
By David Banks Daily Post Staff
THE bravery of the Cheshires Bosnia heroes was rewarded in the Queen's Birthday Honours today with medals and citations for their heroism under fire.
Lt Col Bob Stewart, the Cheshires colourful commanding officer whose marital rift hit the headline last month, was awarded the Distinguished Service Order.
Capt Martyn Forgrave, Lt Alex Watts and Colour Sgt John Oram were all awarded the Queen's Gallantry Medal.
Lt Col Stewart's DSO was awarded for his ‘inspired command’ of the Cheshires during their hazardous tour, a position which often placed his own life in danger.
The citation for his award read: ‘Throughout the tour he has led right from the front, exercising all the energy, enthusiasm, charm and courage in his possession.’
The citation said that ‘on all occasions, he demonstrated cool and determined courage and inspirational leadership, never flinching from his duty.’
Lt Watts, of Mold, was the man in charge of the mission when L/Cpl Wayne Edwards was shot and killed by sniper fire.
The QGM was awarded for the ‘outstanding bravery’ he displayed in the most difficult and hazardous situations.
John Manley, L/Cpl Edwards' stepfather, when told of Lt Watts' medal said: ‘That's absolutely brilliant, it's thoroughly deserved.’
Lt Watts' mother, Jane, said: ‘We're very proud, what more could one ask of an eldest son?’
Firing line
Capt Martyn Forgrave, brother of Daily Post journalist Andrew Forgrave, was also awarded the Queen's Gallantry Medal.
Capt Forgrave's citation said he ‘became widely respected by all sides as a courageous, totally honest and highly capable officer.’
Capt Forgrave, 27, of Wrexham, said yesterday: ‘I was only doing what anyone would have done in the circumstances.
‘The medals represent the overall effort of the entire UN peace-keeping force in Bosnia, but nevertheless I'm deeply honoured to have been recognised in this way, I'm just one of the fortunate ones.’
Colour Sgt Oram's Queen's Gallantry Medal was awarded after he placed himself in the firing line time and time again saving the lives of others.
‘Colour Sgt Oram's bravery and dedication were well beyond the normal call of duty,’ his citation said.
Mentioned in despatches were Capt John Donnelly, Capt Matthew Dundas-Whatley, Second Lt Tudor Ellis, Lt Robert Ryan, and Warrant Officer Charles Stevens.
Capt Martyn Forgrave
Man stole from his employer
A MAN stole scrap metal from his employer and sold it to a dealer, magistrates heard yesterday.
Peter Fowers stole aluminium, copper and steel from Stockton Heath Forge, where he had worked for more than six years, the court at Warrington was told.
Fowers, 26, of Windermere Avenue, Warrington, pleaded guilty to two offences of theft and was remanded on bail until July 16 for reports.
Riddle of suicide
By Sue Ormesher Daily Post Staff
A CHEMIST committed suicide leaving his family and friends baffled as to the reasons why.
William Ryder, 57, took a bottle of barbiturate tablets from his pharmacy, went down to the beach and swallowed about 500 of them, an inquest heard yesterday.
His body was found by a coastal ranger in Formby the following day.
The inquest at Southport heard how Mr Ryder ran a thriving business.
He had booked two holidays and had no apparent worries.
Giving evidence, coroner's officer DC Dave Hemes told how Mr Ryder, of Green Lane, Formby, gave no hint that he planned to take his own life.
‘The night of February 27 was a normal one.
Mr Ryder played cards at home with a friend.
‘Later on that evening he was in the bathroom when his wife Betty took the dog out.
‘When she returned her husband was not at home.
She assumed he had gone out for a reason but became worried and phoned a friend.
‘They went out looking for him and reported him missing to the police at 3.30am.
‘Mr Ryder's body was found at 10.20am on Sunday morning by a coast ranger.’
He had taken a container of 800 barbiturates from his pharmacy and 136 tablets were later recovered.
The cause of death was given as a combined overdose of barbiturates and alcohol.
The inquest heard how Mr Ryder was born and brought up in the Huyton area of Liverpool.
He attended the Liverpool School of Pharmacy and began work at a pharmacy in Blackpool where he met his future wife Betty.
The couple were married in 1964 and moved to Maghull, before settling in Formby where Mr Ryder set up as a pharmacist and postmaster.
He was well known in the Formby area and his death stunned the local community.
Coroner Gordon Glasgow recorded a verdict of suicide.
Tories want the return of Thatcher
MANY Tory voters would like to see Lady Thatcher back in charge of the Party, according to an ICM poll published last night.
And, in yet another gloomy survey for the Prime Minister, among all voters Michael Heseltine was the favourite choice to replace John Major at No 10 Downing Street.
In the telephone poll for today's edition of The Daily Mail, 66pc of all voters believed Mr Major had lost credibility as party leader, with only 29pc saying the reverse.
Among Tory supporters 48pc believed the Prime Minister cannot remain a credible leader while 45pc thought he could.
Popularity ratings among all voters were: Michael Heseltine 20pc; Kenneth Clarke and Lady Thatcher 18pc; Douglas Hurd 15pc; Virginia Bottomley and Michael Howard 4pc.
Among Tory voters Lady Thatcher, on 28pc, was far ahead of her rivals.
Mr Clarke polled 20pc, Mr Hurd 13pc, Mr Howard 4pc and Virginia Bottomley 3pc.
ICM interviewed a random sample of 1,028 adults on June 10.
Duke's theatre visit
THE Duke of Westminster was at Chester's Gateway Theatre yesterday to oversee the start of construction work on a new studio.
The Duke has agreed to become patron of an appeal to secure the long term future of the new theatre.
The appeal aims to raise £125,000 to back the theatre, which is to be called the Manweb Theatre, because of the Chester-based company's support.
A host of fund-raising events is being lined up to ensure the new theatre is a great success.
Nurse on poison charge
A NURSE will appear before magistrates in Birkenhead today charged with attempting to administer noxious substances with intent to endanger life.
The male nurse, who is not being named, is alleged to have committed the crime at Arrowe Park Hospital in Wirral.
A spokesman for Wirral Hospital Trust, which combines the Arrowe Park and Clatterbridge sites, said he had no comment to make, and the matter was in the hands of the police.
It is understood that no one has been injured as a result of the nurse's alleged actions.
Flood damage costs ‘will run into millions’
By Ian Lang Daily Post Staff
HUNDREDS were last night facing a second night away from their homes as the true cost of the North Wales flood disaster emerged.
As an appeal to help stricken flood victims was launched last Police set up road blocks in a bid to stop non-essential traffic reaching Llandudno and hampering emergency work.
They also organised ‘antilooting’ patrols in the flood areas.
Last night, emergency services were hoping that the weather would hold so they could begin the massive clean-up operation today.
At the start of the crisis, an emergency centre was set-up at the headquarters of Aberconwy Borough Council, where many staff worked non-stop through the night to cope with the disaster.
The emergency plan was based on the lesson learned during the Towyn floods.
The extent of the damage emerged slowly throughout the day.
Authorities estimated that more than 1,000 homes in a five-mile radius of Llandudno were damaged by the torrential storm, which saw five inches of rain fall in just three hours; Between five and six hundred families spent the night in emergency centres, the main one being the Canolfan Aberconwy.
There were moves yesterday to find them accommodation in local hotels and guest houses.
Many other people who were flooded stayed with relatives and friends; More than 800 calls were received by the emergency services following the floods, with the Territorial Army Continued on Page 2 Continued from Page 1 called in to help cope; It was estimated that the cost of repairing damaged roads alone will run to £1m.
Other costs including finding accommodation for families and repairs to damaged houses.
Welsh Water said the cost of damage to their pumping stations would run to £750,000.
Aberconwy Borough Council said the damage figure passed the point at which they could make requests for financial help to the Government.
Last night there was still flood water in Mostyn Street, Lloyd Street, West Shore, Kings Avenue and Trinity Avenue, Llandudno.
Parts of Deganwy and Craig-y-Don were also still flooded, although Llandudno Junction was clear of water.
Drainage
All those areas were without electricity.
Many telephones were out of order, and rail services were disrupted by damage to the line at Deganwy.
Welsh Water, who brought in extra pumping equipment to clear the water, said that the water supplies in the area had not been contaminated.
The company also stressed that no drainage system could have coped with the amount of rain caused by such a ‘freak’ storm.
Aberconwy Borough Council's director of technical services, Mr Roy Kendrick, said they hoped to start clearing up highways today, providing the weather held.
On Monday, they could start removing damaged property from houses although he stressed householders should contact their insurance companies.
The council would also make arrangements to collect damaged food stuffs from commercial premises.
Murdered mother's baby re-united with grandparents
By Andrew Forgrave Daily Post Staff
ABANDONED toddler Gareth Johnston was last night back on the Wirral with his grandparents as the hunt continued for his mother's killer.
He was flown from Edinburgh to Manchester airport before being taken for a tearful re-union with his mother's parents.
His father, David Ashworth, is wanted for questioning by murder squad detectives but yesterday he was still missing.
His sister Julie Seddon, 28, of Skelmersdale, made an emotional appeal for him to give himself up.
Looking tired and drawn, she said: ‘David, we want you to come forward by any means.
You can phone either the police or your relatives, who wish to speak to you.
The family all want the situation sorted out.
Just make contact.’
Merseyside police launched a nationwide manhunt for Mr Ashworth on the same day former girlfriend Denise Johnston was found strangled at the Lion Tavern, Liverpool.
The inquiry, involving 30 officers, moved to Scotland after Gareth was found abandoned at the Citizen's Advice Bureau in Hamilton, near Glasgow, at lunchtime on Thursday.
Yesterday the toddler was being looked after by his grandparents, May and Rolf Blything, at their home in Bebington.
He had flown to Manchester with his temporary Scottish foster mum and a social worker, who had given Gareth a thorough check-up for emotional problems.
The decision to place Gareth in the care of his grandparents, who have looked after him in the past while his mother was working, was taken by Strathclyde Regional Council's social work department.
Ian Gilmour, deputy social work director, said: ‘He has been through a very bewildering experience in the past 36 hours, and he is not aware of all that has happened, including the tragedy of his mother's death.’
He has been repeatedly calling for his ‘daddy’ thought to be his maternal grandfather.
Murdered Denise Johnston with her toddler son Gareth
David Ashworth
Pilot dies in fireball moors crash
THE pilot of a vintage fighter plane was killed after it ploughed into moorland yesterday afternoon.
The privately-owned Hawker Hunter, which was on its way to Merseyside, exploded in a ball of flames when it hit the ground.
It had taken off from East Anglia and was en route for Liverpool Airport when it crashed on the Derbyshire/ South Yorkshire border shortly after 4pm.
The pilot has not been named.
Hero soldiers head honours parade
CHESHIRES hero Lt Col Bob Stewart was awarded the Distinguished Service Order in today's Queen's Birthday Honours List.
A number of his fellow Cheshires who have been serving in war-torn Bosnia were also honoured for their gallantry.
TV star David Jason, with an OBE, headed the list of celebrities to receive awards while ‘Bodyline’ bowler Harold Larwood, 88, with an MBE, was the surprise package in the sporting world.
Honours reports Page 5 
Lt Col Bob Stewart
Hitting the roof: Tom Roberts outside his home, with the two Fiestas embedded in a pile o f debris swept along by the raging North Wales floodwaters Picture: JEFF PITT