

‘Disabled denied Council Tax relief’
A SENIOR council official says his councillors should protest to Welsh Secretary John Redwood about the many disabled people being refused Council Tax relief.
More than 550 disabled people applied to Alyn and Deeside Council for the relief, but only 18pc qualified.
Because of the restrictions placed on the scheme by the Government only 101 of the 550 are to get relief, even although some of those refused are severely disabled.
The council's director of financial services, Derek Darlington, says that councillors should consider asking Mr Redwood to extend the scope of the scheme.
Under Council Tax legislation, a dwelling can be placed in a lower valuation band if there is a room predominantly used to meet the needs of a disabled person; if there is an additional bathroom or kitchen; or the person is in a wheelchair.
But Mr Darlington says many of the unsuccessful applicants in Alyn and Deeside are people who are severely disabled, yet do not satisfy the criteria necessary for relief to be granted them.
Small firms hit by crime fight back
CRIME-HIT small firms are demanding more powers for the police and courts today after a survey found that almost 50pc of them have been victims of some sort of crime.
The survey of 2,670 firms by the Forum of Private Business, conducted in the first quarter of this year, found that 45pc had been affected by crime in the past 12 months.
And in a follow up poll, the forum, which claims to represent more than 20,000 firms, found that 90pc were in favour of tougher powers for the police and courts.
The Forum has requested a meeting with Home Secretary, Michael Howard, to discuss the findings.
The survey found that burglary was the most common crime, affecting 45pc, followed by vandalism (31pc).
Joy after seven-year housing battle
CHAMPAGNE PARTY FOR NEW HOMES
By Ray Kelly
NEARLY 40 new homes were officially opened today to put a roof over the heads of 180 people.
And the champagne corks were popping as Kirkby's latest housing co-operative celebrated its success.
The opening at noon was due to be followed by children's street parties in Bunter Road and Heskin Road, Southdene.
The festivities mark the end of a seven-year campaign to build the 32 new houses and six bungalows, under the government's Housing Corporation scheme.
Mother-of-two Kathy Dent, secretary of the Park Brow Housing Cooperative, said: ‘It is a great day.
‘This all started in 1986 when a handful of residents got together and decided to take action to get better homes.
‘We saved up the £360 needed to register ourselves for the scheme and it took off from there.
‘It has been a long wait in a queue behind many other people with the same idea who wanted new homes in their neighbourhoods, but it has definitely been worth it.
Kevin Burke, chairman of the cooperative, said: ‘The message to everyone tempted to follow our example must be that if the final homes are worth your time and trouble, they are worth the wait.
Companies ‘saying it with flowers’
A NUMBER of companies have applied to be included in the ‘say it with flowers’ advertisement scheme on Cheshire's roundabouts.
The county council recently agreed that firms and organisations can sponsor displays as advertisements.
Park ponds project VOLUNTEERS can help make two ponds more accessible to the public next month.
A weekend countryside break, organised by the British Trust for Conservation Volunteers, is being held at Wirral Country Park.
Volunteers will help to construct a boardwork around two ponds.
Trust status
THE future of the Countess of Chester Hospital will be debated at Ellesmere Port Civic Hall at 7pm today.
A public meeting is being held about the hospital's application for NHS Trust status.
NOTICE Under the Business Advertisement (Disclosure) Order 1977, it is an offence to seek to advertise the sale of goods in the normal course of business, unless the fact is made perfectly clear in the advertisement.
Advertisers masquerading as private individuals will be liable to prosecution.
Further details may be obtained from your local Trading Standards Department.
Readers are invited to contact the Advertisement Administrative Services Manager at this newspaper in the event of any query from this Order.
President speaks out to spread the word
THE president of the Court of Governors of the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth, Sir Melvyn Rosser, has joined the board of Menter a Busnes, the agency that aims to make Welsh speakers more enterprising in business.
Sir Melvyn is a past chairman of the Welsh Council, the Manpower Services Committee for Wales, and the Training Enterprise and Education Advisory Group for Wales.
He played a leading role in the review of the University of Wales' management.
His first language is Welsh, and he believes the language is well suited to the world of business.
‘There is no reason why the development of a flourishing business and language should not be complementary,’ said Sir Melvyn.
Sir Melvyn Rosser
Rent rise shock for village hall
By Daily Post Correspondent
A NORTH WALES village hall is facing a rent rise of 1,500 times what is now paid.
The trustees of Carmel village hall, near Holywell, have been paying a nominal £1 rent for the last 21 years.
And they could have continued to pay £1 a year for the next 21 years but it is claimed that they failed to act in time.
Cash-starved Clwyd County Council is suggesting a new seven-year lease with a rent of up to £1,500 with the trustees becoming responsible to maintain the building and car park.
The trustees have protested that they cannot afford to do so.
Clwyd councillors will consider the issue this week and director of architecture, planning and estates, Phillip Eyton Jones, says councillors should offer the new lease at a rent the property sub committee thinks fit.
In a report to councillors, he says that the trustees should have served notice on the county council last December if they wanted to exercise the option to continue for another 21 years at the nominal £1 a year rent for the village hall.
Notice had been received but it was after the deadline and therefore not valid.
The trustees claim they did not know anything about the clause, are a voluntary body on low income and would be unable to pay a market rent and become responsible for maintenance.
Protests have been made by the local gardening club, Jubilee Citizens Club, a playgroup and WI over the new increased charges that would be forced upon them if the proposal was approved.
Higher degree
WREXHAM solicitor Tudor Williams has obtained a Master of Science degree from Salford University for research into the effect of European Community law on employment law and sex discrimination law within the Community.
Rural dilemma
ABOUT 80pc of the villagers of Treuddyn, near Mold, have signed a petition calling for guarantees that post offices will be kept in rural villages.
The petition has been handed to Alyn and Deeside MP Barry Jones who will deliver it to Welsh Secretary John Redwood.
Bodelwyddan Castle was the backdrop to a dramatic ‘son et lumiere’ performance at the weekend.
Hundreds of people entered into the spirit of the occasion and enjoyed a picnic before settling down to a concert featuring some of the best known and stirring pieces of classical music, accompanied by a laser and firework show.
The concert, the third of its kind to be held at the castle, was sponsored by the Daily Post Picture: PHIL MICHEU
Tired estate celebrates news of £5.5m facelift
By Richard Williams Daily Post Staff
MORE than 300 houses on a Chester estate are to be given a facelift as part of a £5.5m Government scheme.
Environment Minister Lord Strathclyde has allocated cash from the Estate Action Programme for Blacon.
The money will pay for a three year scheme to improve 334 houses and five bungalows on the 1960s built estate.
New heating systems will be installed along with double glazing and a major brickwork programme.
Security work will be carried out including footpath lighting, new fences and door and window locks.
Play areas and landscaping projects are also planned.
The Department of Environment will give £2.75m towards the scheme, which will be matched by Chester City Council.
Lord Strathclyde, announcing the scheme, said: ‘Work can now start on major improvements to hundreds of homes.
‘The good news means that residents can look forward to better security, more economical heating and an improved environment.
‘I also welcome moves to involve residents in the management of their estate and efforts to use the scheme to bring jobs and training to local people.
‘It shows how the estate action programme is combining with other initiatives to bring comprehensive improvements to run-down estates.’
Blacon has benefited from the Estate Action programme before with £1.5m worth of work being carried out on 80 homes.
Chester City Council and Chester College are currently carrying out an extensive survey to identify skills of Blacon residents.
The results will be used to formulate development plans.
Report by Susan Pape
New tax paid faster
THE people of Warrington are paying the council tax more quickly than they paid the community charge.
Figures produced by the borough's finance director, Jack Clark, show that more than £5.7m in council tax had been paid by the end of May, 20.4pc of the total.
At the same time last year, only 17.1pc of the community charge had been paid.
Unpaid poll tax bills remain a major problem for the council.