

Ups and downs
FLINT and Holywell leisure centres have shared differing fortunes.
Last year, attendances at Flint of 65,931 were eight percent down on the previous year, while Holywell's at a record 123,973 were up by 3.4pc on the previous year.
THE top ten best selling cars between January and May were: 1.
Ford Escort; 2.
Ford Fiesta; 3.
Vauxhall Cavalier; 4.
Vauxhall Astra; 5.
Rover 200; 6.
Rover Metro; 7.
Peugeot 405; 8.
Ford Sierra; 9.
Ford Mondeo; 10 Renault Clio.
Astra offers open-air fun
By Alistair Coull
JUST right for those long, hot summer days.
Vauxhall's new Astra Convertible offers sun lovers wind-in-the-hair driving with convenience, safety and security features designed for the 90s.
The exceptionally clean, uncluttered styling is achieved by basing the convertible on the longer Astra saloon body, while the fully open passenger compartment combines four-seat accommodation with sports car freedom.
Money-back guarantee
ROVER has introduced an industry-leading new scheme for all its retail customers.
If you are not satisfied with your new car for any reason within 30 days or 1,000 miles, you may exchange it or have your money refunded.
The exchange/refund scheme is thought to be the first offered by a major manufacturer in the UK and relates to all new cars sold to retail customers from last Tuesday.
It does not apply to contract hire or contract purchase customers.
Graham Morris, managing director of Rover Europe, said the scheme was further proof of the company's determination to give customers an industry-leading level of care and service, as well as being a measure of the confidence Rover had in its products.
The purr-fect German beater
EIGHTEEN years is a long time in the life of a motor car.
It is twice a car's normal lifespan but that is how long the Jaguar XJS has been around.
During that time it has had numerous facelifts, and in what must surely be the last of its nine lives, the Big Cat has had another.
Two years ago, new owner Ford was encouraged to spend a lot of money on cosmetic changes to make it look pretty…
Now for 1993, the job has been completed with more serious surgery to improve handling and performance and in the case of the convertible model doubling seating capacity.
A brief encounter with the new range last week convinced me the changes have rejuvenated the car and made it the equal of anything from Munich or Stuttgart.
The 5.3-litre engine and 3-speed automatic gearbox have gone replaced by the 6-litre V12 and 4speed gearbox that has already done a lot to transform the XJ saloons.
In the XJS coupe, the result is a 10pc increase in power to 308bhp at 5350rpm, a 0–60mph time of 6.6 seconds rather than 7.8 with the old 5.3 and a spectacular top speed of 160mph with barely any loss in economy.
Equally important are the chassis changes.
Both the 4-litre and new V12 coupes get firmer ‘sports’ suspension (a softer ‘touring’set-up is available as an option), sharper steering and more effective braking systems.
The XJS Convertible was originally built as a two-seater to meet Japanese and Australian safety laws.
That model is still available but for the UK, Europe and most other overseas markets, the standard Convertible is now a 2+2 although the rear seats are plainly not meant to accommodate adults.
As before, the cars carry a full specification ABS, airbags, air conditioning, power operated leather seats et al.
Prices are up slightly.
They now start at £33,600 for the 4.0-litre XJS Coupe but the £52,900 price tag for the range-topping V12 Convertible is still about £43,000 cheaper than its Mercedes SL equivalent.
Behind the wheel, the 6-litre didn't sound as quiet as the 5.3 but there was no doubting its ability.
The slightest touch on the accelerator sent it hurtling towards the horizon.
Gearchanging was excellent the 4-speed box, allied with a decisive kickdown, gave the XJS good sprinting power and not just staying power.
I found the car a lot more nimble, it keeps the driver more in touch with the action, but at the same time still gave a smooth, quiet ride.
The XJS may be an ageing leviathan but it is still a unique car.
Long may it be so!
Manager in the hot seat ‘Demon’ leaves
FOR five long months, Peter Hall had a place of his own in trade-union demonology.
To the sacked Timex workers, many of them middle-aged women with long years of service, he was the embodiment of Thatcherite management at its rawest.
Placards around the Dundee plant gates depicted him as an alien enemy from south of the border.
One placard said ‘Essex con-man go home,’ a reference to Mr Hall's lack of roots in the city.
He was brought to Scotland 18 months ago, but travelled at weekends to his home in Surrey.
Former workers repeatedly insisted there were quality problems with work after they were sacked and replaced by raw recruits.
Mr Hall denied this and maintained his 270 new recruits had been bonded together by the ugly scenes which confronted them each day as they passed picket lines.
Peter Hall
Escapes halved, declares Group 4
THE average number of escapes had halved since Group 4 began its prisoner escort service, the company's UK managing-director claimed yesterday.
Addressing a private meeting of the Conservative Home Affairs Committee, Jim Harrower fiercely defended his group's prison and court escorting contracts performance.
Mr Harrower said: ‘The media have had a lot of fun at our expense, but this is a serious business.
Our prisoner escort and court services contract in Humberside and the East Midlands represents approximately 10pc of all prisoner movements between prisons, police stations and courts in England and Wales.
‘In the first 10 weeks, we have undertaken over 19,000 prisoner movements.
Since we started there have been five escapes for which we accept responsibility.
These were initiated by prisoner action.
‘We have halved the average number of escapes for a similar number of movements by the state sector since our contract began and our work has allowed some 150 police officers to return to their beat duties in the community.’
Mr Harrower also rejected recent criticisms of Group 4's management of the Wolds Remand Prison.
He said: ‘There is no greater hypocrisy than a vested interest masquerading as a moral principle.
The importation and use of drugs in this country is a major problem, nowhere more so than in our prisons.
‘Wolds is not exempt, but there is no evidence at all to suggest, contrary to allegations made by our critics, that the drug problem is worse at Wolds than at other establishments.’
Mr Harrower underlined Group 4's commitment to the Government's policy of seeking a fresh approach to penal policy and practice by encouraging competition, diversity and value for money.
June 14, 1993 Dear Gina,
Please reserve for me a sixteenth of a page space in the August issue of Folk Roots.
The rate I require is as a small trader.
I enclose pre-payment of £20.68 (£17.60 plus the VAT, if I've reckoned it up correctly!), and I will send camera-ready artwork by the 21st of this month.
Many thanks,
Yours sincerely,
Welsh wealth gap ‘is still growing’
By David Jones Daily Post Staff
THE wages and jobs gap between Wales and better-off parts of England was widening, an economist warned yesterday.
Ross MacKay, director of the Institute of Economic Research at the University College of North Wales, Bangor, told the North Wales 2000 Prospects and Opportunities conference in Llangollen that it was much too early for the Government to consider scrapping regional aid to Clwyd and Gwynedd in favour of the South East of England.
Mr MacKay said inward investment into Wales had been the success story of the Welsh economy throughout the 1980s and into the 1990s.
But he warned that, even taking this into account, the Welsh economy's overall record was not outstanding.
Mr MacKay compared family income in Wales, not counting state benefits, with that in what he called the Inner Region Core South East England, East Anglia, the East Midlands and the South West.
He said that family income in Wales had been 87pc of that in the IRC in 1976/77, but had dropped to only 64pc by 1990/91.
This had been due to lower earnings in Wales and lower employment opportunity, said Mr MacKay.
He added: ‘It's possible to overstate the extent to which Wales has solved its problems.
Redrawing the Assisted Area Status map now may be somewhat premature.’
Mr MacKay told the conference, organised by the Institute of Welsh Affairs, that parts of Gwynedd would find it difficult to attract investment even when the upgrading of the A55 had been completed.
But he added that the county's tourism and leisure industries would grow in importance because the local economic base was wider than simply manufacturing.
Mr MacKay said that it was impossible to identify what skills workers in Wales would require by 2000 because of the pace of change.
But he emphasised the need for good education.
THE UGLY industrial dispute at Timex entered a new chapter yesterday with the abrupt departure of company president Peter Hall.
NEW YORK, Monday, 10pm: WALL Street ended narrowly mixed ahead of an important reading on US inflation.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 9.68 points to 3,514.69.
NYSE volume totalled 210.41 million shares, against 253.47 million in the previous session.
The NYSE's composite index rose 0.18 to 246.42.
£2.2m Venables star bid turned partnership sour
By Eric Brown Daily Post Correspondent
TERRY Venables and Alan Sugar were all smiles when, in June 1991, they announced a joint rescue package for financially-crippled Tottenham Hotspur.
Venables raised £2.5m for a 23pc stake, making him the first man to play for, manage, and part-own a major English soccer club.
He later admitted the loan stretched him to his financial limit.
But, more importantly at the time, he brought in Amstrad chief Sugar to help thwart a take-over bid by newspaper tycoon Robert Maxwell and save the club from possible bankruptcy.
It was a remarkable gesture of faith in a club believed to have debts of £16m.
Venables relinquished his managerial role to become chief executive, with Peter Shreeves recalled as manager.
But there were changes after just one season.
Shreeves was sacked and Doug Livermore and Ray Clemence took over responsibility for first-team affairs.
Debts were eased by the sales of Paul Gascoigne to Italy and Gary Lineker to Japan.
By careful husbandry, Venables rebuilt the side with signings such as solid defender Neil Ruddock and promising forward Darren Anderton.
More than £2m was invested in Teddy Sheringham from Nottingham Forest, who responded with 28 goals, which forced him into the England squad.
The emergence of brilliant teenagers like Nicky Barmby, Andy Turner, Stuart Nethercott and Andy Hill were introduced into first-team action and Venables predicted a bright future for the club.
Eighth place in their inaugural Premier League season and an FA Cup semi-final place seemed acceptable return for the evolving Tottenham side.
But behind the scenes, the Venables/Sugar scenario turned sour.
And Sugar, a 46-year-old former barrow boy from Chigwell, made sure there was going to be only one winner when the Tottenham board approved a resolution to sack Venables.
The pair were reported to have been at odds for some time with one major area of disagreement believed to concern a £2.2m Venables attempt to land England defender Des Walker from Sampdoria.
Venables, 50, is the only player to have represented England at every level from schoolboy to full international, and during 15 years in management he has won two major trophies the Spanish championship with Barcelona and the FA Cup with Tottenham.
If anyone was going to make the step from player to puppet master at a club the size of Tottenham, then it was Venables.
Off the field he has displayed other varied talents he co-wrote a TV series and a novel and his chirpy charm won admirers.
Spurs fans give their message loud and clear outside Sugar's conference hotel
Terry Sheringham: Big money signing
‘Crucial week’ for jet deal bid hopes
AN EX-AEROSPACE executive hopes to re-establish talks with British Aerospace this week to keep alive a British bid for the 125 business jet.
This week could be crucial, he says, if there is to be any hope of countering the American deal for the Broughton-made jet.
The Office of Fair Trading is still examining the American Raytheon's £250m bid for Corporate Jets to see whether it complies with EC competition rules.
Former BAe executive Richard Hooke says he has been told Board of Trade President Michael Heseltine is also looking at the deal, along with Welsh Secretary John Redwood and Employment Secretary David Hunt to see if it is in the best interests of the shareholders and taxpayers.
Mr Hooke is hoping he can meet with BAe's finance director this week along with his lead investor.
About 600 are employed by Corporate Jets at Broughton and a further 300 are employed on the Broughton site by Airbus, making wings and fuselages for the 125 on contract.
Airbus has been given a three-year guarantee on that contract.
But unions at Corporate Jets point out they have no such assurances and are anxious to have a meeting with Raytheon to find out their long-term plans.
Raytheon say they are reviewing the entire operation.
Unity Trust, the trades unions' bank, would support an employee share ownership scheme in any bid and its chairman Sir Dennis Landau has urged Mr Heseltine to look at the offer.
Richard Hooke
Boom predicted in shopping on the telephone
By JANET TANSLEY
WHEN it comes to shopping, we in Merseyside are hooked!
Around half the region's shoppers spend more than two hours a week plodding down the High Street in our search for bargains.
But, according to a new survey by BT, most want to follow the American example and shop till they drop from the sofa.
According to the study, Brits generally are addicted to shopping preferring it even to sex!
But they hate the High Street.
A combination of town centre parking hassles, tiresome crowds and queues, frequent bad weather and poor customer service turns them off, yet they are hooked on the thrill of consuming, says the survey.
What shoppers really want, it says, is American-style freephone numbers, so they can shop from home and spend more of their spare time socialising or playing sport.
More than 85% of those questioned say they think stores should have freephone numbers to deal with shoppers' enquiries.
And half say they would be more likely to buy from a shop that provided this service.
John Hand, BT's 0800 marketing manager, says: ‘British shoppers want to beat all the hassles by following the American lead and buying over the phone.
‘Home shopping is not just about calling mail order companies these days.
Anything from groceries to videos could and can be ordered without evening moving from your living room.’
Market researchers predict that within the next two years the High Street will have changed beyond all recognition as customers ‘go shopping’ from their armchair.
Mr Hand adds: ‘Although we have goods and services available here, they need to be made more accessible to the home shopper.
‘If shoppers had their wish, the region could soon see a revolution with empty shops but booming business.’
But David Rushworth, chairman of Liverpool Stores Committee, disagrees.
He says: ‘There have always been mail orders firms and telephone shopping and, at one stage, we were supposed to be on the verge of TV shopping.
‘For those who live in villages and cannot get into town or those who are infirm, it fills a valuable need.
‘But it does tend to be more expensive because of overheads.’
As for freephone lines for shops, he adds: ‘We are actually seeing a return to the High Street at the moment.
People want to see, feel, touch and hear what they are buying and talk to the sales assistants in person.
‘It's part of the thrill of shopping.’
Hassle-free shopping…just pick up the phone
Fund managers' confidence grows
PROPERTY LOOKS TO A REVIVAL
FURTHER signs emerged today that the property market is set to take off as fund managers prepare to increase their stakes in UK property companies.
A balance of 22% of managers, who control billions of pounds of pension funds, questioned in a Gallup survey for brokers Smith New Court, said they intended to increase their property portfolios throughout this year, the highest since the survey began almost three years ago.
The figure compares with a survey in May when 12% said they intended to increase their property holdings.
In February, none of the managers questioned showed any enthusiasm to buy.
The report follows hot on the heels of the move by financier George Soros, the man who is said to have made £1 billion speculating on the collapse of sterling on Black Wednesday, who last month tied up a £500m investment with property giant British Land.
Fund managers remain more optimistic about the long-term outlook for UK shares than any other major market.
Optimistic
The majority, a balance of 75%, are bullish about UK equities over the coming 12 months while a balance of 51% are enthusiastic about Japanese shares.
A total of 48% are optimistic about continental European shares, while only 4% are positive about US equities over the coming year.
The forecasts for earnings per share this year and in 1994 have been revised upwards to just under 15%.
The estimates for dividend per share growth for 1993 and 1994 remain about 4.5% and 6% respectively.
Betting farce hits Chantilly
THE Prix de Diane Hermes (French Oaks) was delayed by two hours at Chantilly when striking Tote workers on the track refused to accept bets.
Angry punters demonstrated on the course after the first race, while negotiations went on between track officials and the Tote workers.
After a two hour discussion between Louis Romanet, director general of the Societe d'Encouragement, and Daniel Caron, director of the Paris-Mutuel, it was agreed that the Prix de Diane Hermes would take place.
There was more drama to follow in the actual race, where Shemaka held on by a nose from Baya.
Shemaka had to survive a stewards' inquiry before the result was confirmed.
She and Baya had bumped each other on the run to the line.
Dayflower, trained in Dubai during the winter and now in the care of Henry Cecil, was only 11th.
Management
UP TO 40 management jobs are to be axed at Unilever Research's Port Sunlight laboratory, the company announced today.
The cuts are part of a major shake-up at the laboratory which employs 1,300 staff and the company says it cannot rule out more job losses.
Fund managers' confidence grows
Liverpool's Steve Smith…reaching for the heights By Paul O'Brien and Ian Chadburn
A THREE-WAY battle has developed between Liverpool athletics star Steve Smith, his rival Dalton Grant, and the British selectors.
And it's all about: Who is for the high jump in Rome?
The selectors today put off deciding Britain's representative in the European Cup contest on June 26–27 until after Smith and Grant meet in a ‘jump off’ at the international meeting in Belfast this weekend.
Spokesman Tony Ward said the selectors were left ‘slightly unhappy’ about Smith's approach to yesterday's British final, where he was soundly beaten by Grant.
‘Steve was suffering a slight twinge, but the selectors found it extraordinary that he should treat the national championship as a kind of training session and jump off just five strides,’ said Ward.
Smith's coach, Mike Holmes, explained in last Thursday's Echo that because he had not competed since mid March, the high jumper would not be using his long run-up until the Belfast meeting.
Neither contender was happy with the selectors' indecision.
‘I've earned the place,’ said double European Cup champion Grant after his win.
And Smith, who has jumped much higher than his rival this summer, responded: ‘They'll be making a big mistake if they don't pick me.’
Smith's Liverpool Harriers club colleague, Curtis Robb, will definitely be making the trip.
His first big senior championship victory over 1500 metres at Crystal Palace yesterday convinced the selectors to give him this job in Rome.
Robb, who will be making his international debut over the distance, said: ‘I had a lot more left at the end and can take several seconds off my winning time of 3 minutes 39.58 seconds in Rome if the race is fast.’
Defending champion Roger Black, chosen only for the relay, sees the individual 400m spot go to Wigan's David Grindley.
Two days after insisting he would not be tempted out of international retirement, Kriss Akabusi was controversially named for the 400m hurdles, ahead of the new British champion Gary Cadogan.
Team captain Linford Christie will lead from the front as he goes for an unprecedented fourth successive 100m crown, while Colin Jackson (110m hurdles) and Eamonn Martin (10,000m) are also selected as defending champions.
Sally Gunnell's women's team includes 18year-old debutante Katharine Merry, who earned her place with a 200m win over the Olympic champion yesterday, as well as Scotland's big two Yvonne Murray (3,000m) and Liz McColgan (10,000m).
Airtours in £25m swoop
AIRTOURS is expanding its chain of travel agents with a £25m acquisition from Hogg Robinson, of Woking, Surrey, it emerged today.
The deal comes just three months after Airtours, the UK's number two holiday company, lost out in a takeover battle for rival Owners Abroad.
Airtours, based at Rossendale, Lancs, will have nearly 550 travel agencies following the purchase of Hogg Robinson's 214 shops, making it the second biggest operator behind Thomas Cook.
The 1,100 staff employed in Hogg Robinson's agencies will transfer to Airtours, which will be allowed to use the Hogg Robinson name until June 1995.
Tax payers quick to cough up
RESIDENTS are paying the new council tax quicker in Warrington than they paid poll tax.
Figures produced by the borough's finance director, Jack Clark, show that more than £5.7m council tax had been paid by the end of May 20.4% of the total.
At the same time last year, only 17.1% of the poll tax had been paid.
However, uncollected poll tax remains a problem for the town hall.
More than £1.2m of the controversial tax remains outstanding from its first year, 1990–912.7% of the total.
Another £1.4m remains uncollected from 1991–924.7% of the total.
A further £2.7m is outstanding from last year 8.9% of the total.
Mr Clark says his department will be collecting poll tax arrears for years to come.
Car firm chief ‘in mammoth fraud’
A NISSAN UK Limited boss was part of a fraud of ‘breath-taking proportions,’ a jury was told today.
It was clear on that Michael Hunt, the firm's number two, swindled the Inland Revenue out of nearly £100m, claimed Peter Rook QC, summing-up for the Crown.
At Southwark Crown Court, he said it was a fraud against the Inland Revenue involving unpaid corporation tax and not, as the defence had claimed, a swindle perpetrated abroad by others against Japanese tax authorities.
Denials
Hunt, 59, of Hove, East Sussex, denies two counts of conspiracy to cheat, and two charges of conspiracy to make use of false accounting documents between October 1975 and December 1991.
When the case, sitting at Chichester Rents in central London's Chancery Lane, opened nearly two months ago, Mr Rook told the jury the fraud involved £219m.
He claimed that Hunt, with others, laundered a huge amount through Geneva bank accounts.
He told the jury the ‘prime mover’ behind the swindle was former Nissan UK chief Octav Botnar.
A warrant has been issued for his arrest.
MORE COST-CUTTING
THE cost-cutting is to continue at East Midlands Electricity which last month axed 300 jobs.
It plans to put a ‘major emphasis’ on trimming costs in its supply business after turning in a 3.4% increase in pre-tax profits for the year to March 31 to £155.1m from £150m.
Discount tempter for small investors
BT3 SHARE SELL-OFF PRICE 150p
THE public is being asked to pay 150p per share in the first instalment of the BT3 £5 billion privatisation, it was announced today.
The second instalment has been set at 140p, but the final instalment has yet to be decided, said Stephen Dorrell, Financial Secretary to the Treasury.
Small investors will pay less than institutions for the first instalment though how much less will not be known until June 29 after the international offer closes.
BT3 marks the sale of the government's final slice of British Telecom.
Two previous privatisations have raised billions of pounds for Treasury coffers.
A 10p share price discount is being offered to tempt small investors on allocations of up to 1,000 shares on the second and third BT3 instalments.
Alternatively, a bonus of one share for every 15 held after three years is being offered on allocations of up to 1,500 shares.
The instalments will be spread over 15 months next month and March and October 1994.
The cut-off date for registration with a share information office or share shop is July 2.
Campaign
The public offer closes at 10am on July 14.
More than a million potential new shareholders have already registered an interest in the sale, promoted by a massive advertising campaign featuring Inspector Morose.
Mr Dorrell said later that by the close of business on Friday more than 1.8 million people had indicated an interest in buying shares.
This compares with three million at the same stage of the last BT share sale in 1991.
Fewer businesses failing
NEW evidence of economic recovery emerged today with a sharp drop in the rate of business failures.
They fell 15% in the first three months of the year compared with the same period of 1992, according to figures from credit insurer Trade Indemnity.
A total of 1,767 businesses went under in the first quarter of this year, as against 2,074 a year earlier.
However, the North West picture was gloomy with a 3% increase.
The danger of an upturn in inflation was highlighted today in figures showing the price of goods leaving the factory gate.
Prices rose at an annual rate of 4% last month, up from 3.8% in April and their quickest pace of increase since March last year.
Timex chief calls time
Peter Hall, head of the Timex factory involved in a five-month bitter dispute with its workforce, resigned today.
Page 12 EC summit
Prime Minister John Major and Danish Prime Minister Poul Nyrup Rasmussen met for talks at 10 Downing Street today on next week's EC summit in Copenhagen.
Pay ballot
The government's 1.5% public sector pay limit faced a major challenge today after it was rejected by leaders of 500,000 local government workers belonging to Nalgo.
The 1.5% will now be put to a ballot.
Priority on bill pay-offs
CREDIT card repayments are being paid off as a priority by consumers, a report claimed today.
Infolink, the UK's leading credit information organisation, said consumers in most regions remain prudent in taking on new credit commitments.
Almost 90% of UK instalment credit accounts were fully up-to-date in the first three months of this year compared with 89.4% in the corresponding period in 1992.
Profits surge: Share dealing and information group ShareLink, which is planning a £30m stock market flotation next month, has announced a profits rise of just over £1m to £3.5m in the 12 months to March 31.
Name switch: Nexus, the electronic payment services group, has changed its name to that of its majority French shareholder and is now trading as Sligos Payment Services.
French move: A large French multi-national, Saur, is planning to expand its water interests in the UK by investing in Scottish water if it is franchised and not sold off.
Market plan
LIVERPOOL councillors are set to approve an application to open a Sunday market in the city centre at Renshaw Hall, Renshaw Street.
Asianbooks LIVERPOOL'S first Asian library service, which includes 1,500 books in Hindi, Urdu, Bengali, Gujarati and Punjabi, has been launched at Wavertree Library in Picton Road.
A Chinese library service is based at Toxteth Library.
Underfed
NO doubt many readers may feel like I do that frozen food manufacturers must employ underweight staff with no appetite and poor eyesight, when deciding the actual weight of food which goes into so-called one and two portion meals.
I recently purchased a frozen meal described as two portions, but it would only do as a meal for one.
A big box with a small meal inside.
Free Euro vote
DURING the 1992 general election the people of the United Kingdom were not given a proper chance to make a decision about the Maastricht Treaty.
The treaty will involve the transfer of extensive powers from Westminster and we should have the opportunity to vote freely on the issue.
The Government will not allow a free vote on the treaty in the House of Commons even on the referendum clause.
Over the past 20 years the principle of a referendum has been accepted by Parliament for membership of the EEC, devolution in Scotland and Wales and maintenance of the Union in Northern Ireland.
A national referendum is now required.
May I urge your readers to obtain and sign the petition launched by the Maastricht Referendum Campaign (MARC) with all-party support.
The petition forms and other relevant material can be obtained by calling: or faxing .
TAX INCREASES MAY BE NEEDED HOWE
Raising basic rate could be only way to deal with £50bn debt, warns ex-Chancellor
by Mark Davies, political correspondent
TAXES will have to go up to help tackle the government's £50bn debt, former Chancellor Geoffrey Howe claimed today.
Lord Howe said increases in basic rate income tax were not unthinkable.
He said spiralling public sector borrowing was the greatest threat to a sustained economic recovery.
On increasing income tax, he said: ‘One would see a change in that with the utmost regret.
‘But the crucial thing is to see that budget deficit coming down on a medium term basis convincingly.
‘It is obviously sensible to look first of all at public spending programmes.
Alternative
‘But if that is not sufficient to reduce the deficit as much as you should, then there is no alternative but to raise taxes.
‘One doesn't raise taxes with enthusiasm, but the alternative is public sector borrowing going through the roof.
‘There is no surer way of destroying the recovery than to run indefinitely into debt.’
Lord Howe is being tipped along with Lord Whitelaw as a possible heavyweight figure who could be brought in to help John Major with the government's presentation of policies.
Speculation that the Prime Minister is looking for an experienced figure to act as an advisor follows Norman Lamont's devastating resignation speech last week.
But Lord Howe today refused to be drawn on the rumours.
Lord Howe…tax warning
Timex chief quits
THE head of the Timex factory involved in a five-month bitter dispute with its workforce has resigned, it was announced today.
Peter Hall was said to have left the Dundee-based firm ‘entirely voluntarily’ and a company spokesman said his reasons for going were ‘private’.
The American-owned company said its position over the dispute would not alter and the outcome would depend on talks with AEEU leaders this week.
Sacked
Britain's ugliest industrial relations dispute since the 1980s began with a row over lay-offs.
That led to a strike, followed by tough new pay and conditions package, before the dispute reached its climax with the sacking of virtually the entire 340 staff.
The firm replaced many of the sacked workers with raw recruits hired in areas of high unemployment nearby.
The AEEU described Mr Hall's departure as the ‘removal of an obstacle’.
Cereal show help for arable farmers
By David Lloyd
ARABLE farmers seeking to optimise returns from their crops will be able to pick up tips at the two-day Cereal ‘93 National Cereals and Combinable Crops Event, which gets under way tomorrow.
A joint demonstration by PBI Cambridge, Bayer and Du Pont will highlight the importance of balancing inputs according to variety, disease incidence and marketability as two feed wheats and two breadmaking varieties are compared.
Cereals ‘93 is being staged at Easton Lodge Farm, Wansford, Peterborough.
FIFTEEN females averaged 720 guineas at the Welsh Black Cattle Society's show and sale at Llandovery, Dyfed.
Top price of the day was 1,250 guineas paid by the AFRC's Bronyddmawr research Centre, Sennybridge, for the four-year-old Rodd Ethel entered by Mr and Mrs J M Beynon, of St Davids.
The champion female Pantyboda Eirwen shown by Mr and Mrs J W Lawday, of Llanelli, sold for 1,220 gns to Brechfa Farms, Clynderwen.
They also bought Neuadd Addawo 83, the top priced maiden heifer, from H M Jenkins, Taliesin, Machynlleth.
JAMES Mitchell's Kennetside heads herd of British Holsteins, based near Kelso, Roxburghshire, has won the BOCM PAULS Gold Cup in the 1993 National Dairy Herds Competition.
Latest costings showed his cows giving 9,595 litres of milk with a margin over purchased feed of £1,545 and a gross margin per hectare at a ‘staggering’ £4,611.
Second place in the competition in which points are awarded for production, economic efficiency and on-farm inspection went to the Linlake herd of Holstein Freisian herd of Richard Linnell and Jim Bryant, of Daventry.
The 180-cow Mileoak Holstein Friesians of J K Smith & Son, of The Mile House, Leighton, Crewe, were third.
The trophy for the cow achieving the highest butter fat and protein records over three years went to the British Holstein Castledon Donfloss 4, belonging to Norman Gotts, of Wickford, Essex.
Born in 1979 her butterfat output was 1,794kg and protein 1,434 and she has recorded a life-time milk yield is almost 140,000 litres.
FARMER John Redwood, of Camp Farm, Swinton, Dudley, in the West Midlands, is planning his eighth mercy mission to aid homeless refugees the former Yugoslavia.
So far John and Jenny Redwood have undertaken their aid work while still running their dairy, arable and fruit farm.
New vice-presidents on parade in Powys
NEW vice-presidents of the Farmers' Union of Wales from North and Mid Wales were both on parade at Hill Sheep ‘93.
Robert John Jones, who has a flock of 660 Welsh Mountain sheep on his 172 hectare hill farm at Llanerchgoediog, Bryncrug, near Tywyn, is no stranger to the FUW head office scene in Aberystwyth.
A former chairman of Meirionnydd FUW, he has been a long-serving member of the union's finance and executive committee and sits on the Meat and Livestock Commission's sheep technical committee and research and development sub-committee.
A former chairman of Amaethwyr Dysynni, he now serves on Eifionnydd Farmers and the Gwynedd committee of the Agricultural Wages Board.
He is also an active member of Meirionnydd Grassland Society.
John L Phillips, the second new vice-president, qualified as a chartered civil engineer, lectured at the Royal Military College of Science and was an assistant county surveyor in Avon before turning to farming in 1972.
He now runs a flock of 250 breeding ewes at Nant-y-Derw, Cwmbach, near Builth Wells, and is also involved in farm tourism.
Chairman of the FUW's farm tourism committee he serves on the steering group of Menter Powys and is vice-chairman of Food From Britain's joint venture steering group for sheep which is currently investigating prospects for marketing quality Welsh lamb.
The FUW's third vice-president is Mrs Swancott Pugh, of Meirionnydd.
SWANSEA butcher Chris Davies has won the British Lamb Display competition at the Meat Trades Fair in Harrogate.
He got to the final by winning the All-Wales competition sponsored by Welsh Lamb Enterprise and proved his skills against the Scottish and English finalists.
Using Welsh lamb he created an eye-catching display in a domed circular cabinet for which he received the Three Countries Gold Medal and a cheque for £500.
Robert John Jones
Europe has saved our sheep industry
By David Lloyd
‘THE sheep industry is buoyant we might as well confess it,’ said Lord Geraint of Ponterwyd, when he opened the National Sheep Association's Hill Sheep ‘93, the first specialist open day to be staged by the NSA's Wales and Border region for three years.
‘Things had changed dramatically over the last few years,’ he said.
‘We all used to talk about guaranteed prices and we had stability over a period of 50 years.
But whether we like it or not now we depend on our European partners.
Experience
‘They have saved the sheep industry during the last 12 months.’
Lord Geraint, the former MP who has had a lifetime's experience as a sheep farmer and dealer, warned however that there were many things to be done again to safeguard the interests of those about to start farming.
Advising each and every sheep farmer to join the NSA, and support Welsh Lamb Enterprise, he said: ‘I know that there are many of you here who have not paid what is due to WLE.
Do it, its your business and its your concern.’
He admitted remaining a staunch supporter of the Meat and Livestock Commission which had done excellent work over the years.
It was a wonderful achievement that over 50pc of Welsh lamb production was going to the European market, of which approximately 380,000 went as live animals.
While the industry's future lay in Europe he also stressed the vital need to retain the auction system.
‘I have been in the trade all my life and I would say that is the way forward for the young farmers of today,’ said Lord Geraint.
‘By taking your stock to the market or to the shows you can compare your stock with others around you.’
Around 70pc of lambs were sold through the auction and the big meat exporters were now buying in the markets as well as the big supermarkets.
With the support of Europe he sees a valid future for the younger generation.
‘If you have a piece of land or a farm make sure that you are a very good shepherd,’ he advised.
‘That is the art of farming.’
Speaking at the opening of the event on a misty morning NSA Wales and Borders chairman Andrew Jones said: ‘We as sheep farmers have been in the mist for some time, but lets hope that the outlook is much better and that there are better days to come.’
As recent as a year ago there had been little confidence about the future for sheep with lambs selling poorly, farmers wondering whether it was worth spending money on good rams or even worth tupping their ewes.
But things had changed despite the HLCA reduction and there is now an export market in Europe ‘calling out for our lamb.’
Mr Jones said the NSA was fortunate in having Mr John Gittins and his family as hosts because they had been a pioneer of land improvement, while recognising the importance of conservation, and had been at the forefront in developing new commercial crossbred sheep which have proved a boon for Welsh farmers and their market awareness.
AMONG companies reporting today are: Finals: Channel Holdings, Bradford Property Trust, FKI, IWP International, Manweb, Porter Chadburn, Volex Group, Wellman, Melville Street, Wessex Water.
Interims: David Lloyd Leisure, Clyde Blowers, London & Clydeside Holdings.
Fishermen are now facing ruin, says MP
FISHERMEN in Ceredigion face financial ruin unless changes are made to the new Fish Conservation Act, according to local MP Cynog Dafis.
He has written on the issue to the new Fisheries Minister, Gillian Shephard, claiming that certain technical requirements in the Act could make it impossible for local fishermen to secure an adequate allocation of fishing days Royal crystal challenge STAFF at Welsh Royal Crystal, Rhayader, were commissioned to manufacture and supply the specially designed bowls which will be presented to each concert winner in the preliminary rounds, as well as goblets for each competitor, in this year's Cardiff Singer of the World Competition at St David's Hall.
BAe workers fight off jobs threats
THE road transport department at British Aerospace in Broughton has fought off competition from contractors to save jobs.
A major transport contractor was asked to quote for carrying out the work, which involves delivering huge wing boxes to Manchester Airport for collection by Super Guppy air transporters.
With internal savings, including voluntary redundancies, the Broughton men, and their colleagues at the Filton factory near Bristol, have managed to keep the work ‘in house’.
So many men volunteered to take redundancy at Broughton that the average age of staff in the department plummeted and five vacancies arose.
A shift system has been introduced at Broughton.
It is estimated that changes at both Broughton and Filton have already saved £100,000 a year in transport costs.
New aid to business
A CENTRE to help people wanting to set up or expand their businesses is to open later this month.
Among the facilities in the Morfa Clwyd, Rhyl, centre will be a video library with viewing facilities and five computer terminals with the latest business software to help clients produce business plans.
Those wishing to improve their image or presentational skills can assess their performance on video in a simulated bank interview or product presentation.
Financial backing for the project has come from Targed, the North West Wales Training Enterprise Council, with input from Businessline Clwyd, part of the county library service.
The second phase of the building project for the centre was completed ahead of schedule.
Civil engineer goes Dutch
STRUCTURAL and civil engineering firm Kenchington Ford has acquired a Dutch consultancy to strengthen its presence in Europe.
The firm, based in Chester for 20 years, is also represented in Berlin, Budapest and Lisbon.
Bob Betts, Kenchington Ford's local director, said: ‘We expect to learn much from our new colleagues in Holland, who will strengthen our experience in such areas as steelworks, tunnelling and harbour works.’
Kenchington Ford has provided engineering and technical services on a number of major contracts in Chester, including the Forum development, council offices and Chester International hotel.
Executive in bid to save jets firm for UK
By Carl Butler Daily Post Staff
A FORMER British Aerospace executive hopes to hold talks with the company this week to keep alive a British bid for the 125 business jet.
This week could be crucial, says Richard Hooke, if there is to be any hope of countering the American deal for the Broughton-made jet.
The Office of Fair Trading is still examining the American Raytheon's £250m bid for Corporate Jets to see whether it complies with EC competition rules.
Mr Hooke says he has been told that Board of Trade President Michael Heseltine is also looking at the deal, along with Welsh Secretary John Redwood and Employment Secretary David Hunt to see if it is in the best interests of the shareholders and taxpayers.
Mr Hooke is hoping he can meet BAe's finance director with his lead investor this week.
‘There are a number of hurdles still to be got over, and a number of issues to be negotiated between BAe and Raytheon.
I think it may be some weeks before completion of the deal.
‘We are pressing hard for a meeting between BAe's finance director and our lead investor as we are aware that time is slipping by,’ said Mr Hooke.
About 600 people are employed by Corporate Jets at Broughton and a further 300 by Airbus, making wings and fuselages for the 125 on contract.
Airbus has been given a three year guarantee on that contract.
But unions at Corporate Jets point out they have no such assurances and are anxious to have a meeting with Raytheon as soon as possible to find out its long-term plans.
Mr Hooke says after talking to trade journalists at the Paris Air Show, he is more convinced than ever that Raytheon will move production of the 125 to America.
Raytheon says it is reviewing the entire operation at Broughton and will notify the workforce of the results in due course.
Mr Hooke says he finds it hard to imagine that a company as large as Raytheon would propose a £250m takeover without knowing how Corporate Jets would fit into its existing operations.
Unity Trust, the trades unions' bank, would support an employee share ownership scheme in any bid and its chairman, Sir Dennis Landau, has urged Mr Heseltine to look at the offer.
Low cost incentive for BT3 investors
By Clive Mills Business Correspondent
MILLIONS of small investors are being lured to the latest £5b sell-off of BT shares with a first instalment as low as £180 plus a package of discounts or other incentives.
The Government announced the first payment in BT3 will be 150p per share with a minimum of 120 shares with the second instalment 140p in a bid to ensure a spectacular success for the sale which closes at 10am on July 14.
Surged
Dealers reacted to the details positively, the telecommunication giant's shares surging 11p to 424p on a buoyant day on the London market where about £3 billion was added to the value of shares as the FTSE index soared 23.7 to 2885.5.
Investors who register with the specially established share shops or the share information office are to be offered a discount of 10p on each of the second and third instalments on allocations of up to 1,000 shares, or a one-for-15 share bonus after three years on allocations of up to 1,500 shares.
Holders of the shares will also be eligible for BT's final dividend for the 1992–93 financial year of 9.45p per share, payable on September 30.
Stephen Dorrell, Finnacial Secretary to the Treasury, said 1.8 million potential new investors had registered to buy shares in the latest sale.
This compares with around three million at the same stage of the last BT share sale in 1991 and has led to criticism of the £15 million advertising campaign.
Early registration figures are also said to be disappointing for the banks and building societies which have set up share shops.
About 1.1 million people have registered with the share information office and only 700,000 with the share shops.
But the total number registered is more than four million if existing BT shareholders are included and the sale organisers believe this is a good performance so far.
Small investors will pay less than institutions for the first instalment, although how much less will not be known until June 29 after the international offer closes.
The third and final instalment payment has yet to be decided.
Timetable details:
Cut-off date to register with share shops or the share information office is July 2.
Instalments must be paid over 15 months next month, March and October 1994.
Public offer closes at 10am on Wednesday July 14.
Dealing in the part-paid shares is expected to begin on July 19.
Special
Existing shareholders and employees will get the same incentives as the public as well as special treatment on allocation.
Employees will be guaranteed 2,000 shares.
The public can also apply for shares in the international offer through, for example, a personal equity plan.
Although they will not qualify for discounts or bonus shares, they will get a larger allocation.
Dock buy-out means new jobs
A MANAGEMENT buy-out at North Wales' only private dock will mean new jobs.
Current management, finance director Ray Risbridger and managing director Jim O'Toole, have bought the docks from Faber Prest plc, which has owned Mostyn Docks since August 1983.
The independently run port provides stevedoring, warehousing, forwarding and agency services and is also the pilotage authority for the River Dee ports.
It caters for vessels in short sea trade and handles mainly steel, timber, animal feedstuffs and aggregates.
The docks currently employ 36 people and this will increase to 51 over the next 18 months as part of plans to expand the business.
Mr Risbridger said they planned to invest and upgrade dock facilities by developing riverside berths capable of handling 8,000 tonnes.
At the moment the dock is limited to 3,000 tonnes.
‘This will enable the company to expand its trading area to extend to the Eastern Mediterranean and the North West African coast and the Eastern seaboard of the US and Canada,’ said Mr Risbridger.
Faber Prest sold Mostyn Docks because it is not part of its core business.
BET slashes record losses
BUSINESS services group BET has taken another stride along the road to recovery by slashing its annual loss.
However, shareholders continue to suffer as the group halved its total dividend for the second year in a row.
BET has been struggling to pay off debts after a period of over-expansion combined with the recession to hit profits.
For the year to March 31 it made a pre-tax loss of £9.8m, compared with a massive £448.4m last time.
The previous result has been restated to fit in with new accounting standards.
Write-offs were reduced to £72.2m from £548.9m.
Before write-offs the group made a profit of £62.4m.
The dividend total has been cut to 3.25p from 6.5p.
In 1991 it was 12.9p.
Profits have fallen from £322m for 1990 as the company, which operates textile, cleaning, security, distribution, plant, personnel, catering, joinery and facilities management businesses, rebuilds.
Chief executive John Clark said the company, which still employs 100,000 people, was in the second year of a three-year plan to return to profitable growth.
Champagne row bubbling
THE LEGAL battle between French champagne producers and a small British vineyard, which markets a sparkling soft drink, ‘Elderflower Champagne,’ fizzed into life again yesterday.
In February a judge ruled the label on Thorncroft Vineyard's drink was ‘calculated to deceive,’ but refused to grant an injunction.
The champagne houses have taken the case to the Court of Appeal.
Environmental watch on bay oil exploration
By Ian Herbert Business Editor
HAMILTON Oil is to extend its oil and gas exploration activities in Liverpool Bay, it was revealed last night.
But it will be subject to stringent new environmental controls, declared Energy Minister Tim Eggar, as he awarded licenses for six blocks off the coasts of Merseyside and North Wales, among 110 blocks in total.
The latest 280sq miles of fields stretch from the Red Wharf Bay area of Anglesey to a point a few miles from Crosby.
Anglesey
Hamilton Oil's consortium, which also includes Lasmo and Monument Exploration and Production, will explore two of the outermost blocks in a new cluster.
They are centred approximately 30 miles north east of Anglesey.
Another consortium headed by London-based Deminex, will drill a neighbouring block, in fields divided up by the Department of Trade and Industry.
The Oryx consortium will drill off Crosby while Marathon Oil and Chevron consortia will drill respective fields close to the Point of Ayr off the North Wales coast.
US oil giant Chevron drilled for oil off the coast of Ireland in the late 1980s.
Marathon was granted a license to drill off Cardigan Bay, two months ago.
A total of 35 blocks were judged too sensitive to mine and excluded from the 14th licensing round.
Fields in bird breeding areas directly to the north and west of Anglesey and Holyhead and bordering on the north west coastline of the Llyn Peninsula were excluded along with fields in breeding grounds of the bottle-nosed dolphin on the Moray Firth in Scotland and in Cardigan Bay, West Wales, were excluded.
Mr Eggar also rejected schemes near bird sanctuaries at Pembroke, Lundy, the east of Scotland, north Norfolk and the English Channel.
Last night, Stephen Eades of Southport-based environmental group Save our Shoreline, which has campaigned for protection of nature amid Hamilton Oil's exploration, said: ‘We are concerned that the exploration does not disturb the environment and would rather these advances were in renewable energy sources.’
But under tough new rules, companies must regularly consult local officials during exploration, discuss plans for seismic testing and drilling before they are carried out, and agree to on-site monitoring by Government officials.
Mr Eggar said: ‘This has been the largest round, in terms of the number of blocks on offer, since the fourth round in 1972.
This provides ample evidence of the high level of continuing interest in UK offshore oil and gas resources.’
‘A full environmental impact assessment will be required before a licensee may develop any find within 25 miles of the coast or in other sensitive areas further offshore.’
The blocks awarded show a drift away from the North Sea, with 59 in other areas.
Kenwood is picking up
KENWOOD Appliances had mixed fortunes during the year in which it joined the stock market, according to annual figures out yesterday.
The early months were marred by the failure of the economy to pick up as quickly as expected after the election.
‘The scale of the shortfall in sales against the group's original plan was serious,’ the Hampshire based company admitted.
However, a policy of introducing new products, expanding in international markets and strict cost control had paid off eventually, it added.
For the year as a whole turnover topped £100m for the first time rising 10.4pc to £101.6m.
The improved performance had outweighed the setbacks in the first half of the financial year to March 31.
Chief executive Tim Parker said sales in the early months of the current financial year had been encouraging and the kitchen appliance maker was cautiously optimistic.
Millwall plans cash injection for shares
FOOTBALL club Millwall Holdings is negotiating for a cash injection through a new subscription for its shares, the company said yesterday.
Talks are at a preliminary stage.
THE government has decided not to refer to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission the proposed acquisition by media group Pearson of Thames Television, part of Thorn EMI, it was announced yesterday.
THE Sunderland-based North of England Building Society will become an appointed representative of General Accident Life from September 1 the seventh society to tie with the life insurance and pensions company.
UNITED Distillers finance director Keith Hamill is to join Forte as chief financial officer and finance director designate in September.
He will replace existing director Donald Main, who is due to retire in 1995.
LEONARD Phillips resigned yesterday as chairman of Hemingway Properties to pursue his private interests.
Non-executive director John Evans will act as chairman until a permanent successor is found.
PETER Lloyd will retire from the chairmanship of insurance broker Lloyd Thompson in November and be replaced by John Lloyd no relation.
ENGINEER FKI, based in Halifax, West Yorkshire, is paying £3.5m for the Forge France group of companies, the market leader in the lifting components market in France.
DAVID Ethelson, managing services manager of Carlsberg Tetley, Wrexham Lager Brewery, has taken the chair of the Training and Enterprise Food and Drink Associate Group.
Formed a year ago the group is one of 14 similar bodies set up by the North East Wales TEC to examine common issues experienced in specific sectors.
Mr Ethelson takes over the chairmanship from Trevor Collins, former Safety and Training Manager for Cadbury at Chirk.
‘Kiss of life’ cash hope for Laird's
WIRRAL Euro MP Lyndon Harrison spoke yesterday of real hope of a last-ditch kiss of life for closure-threatened Cammell Laird.
Mr Harrison said: ‘There's now a tunnel with a chink of light at the end.
‘It requires goodwill on all parts and a genuine attempt by the Government to renegotiate.’
Mr Harrison was at the shipyard yesterday to receive a petition containing 9,500 names from the Cammell Laird Community Group.
The petition calls for the EC to give Cammell Laird a subsidy to make it more attractive to potential buyers.
Mr Harrison said: ‘Following the closure of the Swan Hunter yard the Government has finally agreed to talk to the EC about getting the same subsidies for all British shipyards that we've been giving to our competitors in the EC for years.
‘Shipbuilding isn't a sunset industry.
It's quite clear from papers issued by the EC that in the medium and long term shipbuilding is more than a viable industry it will grow and prosper.
‘In 10 years’ time Cammell Laird could be closed and yards in France and Spain could be on the crest of a wave because they retained their shipbuilding capacity.’
Lyndon Harrison
Business failures show a sharp drop
NEW evidence of economic recovery emerged yesterday with a sharp drop in the rate of business failures.
They fell 15pc in the first three months of the year compared with the same period of 1992, according to figures from credit insurer Trade Indemnity.
A total of 1,767 businesses went under in the first quarter of this year, as against 2,074 a year earlier.
Patchy
But the pattern was patchy.
South-west England recorded a 38pc drop, Wales and south-east England each dropped 22pc while in Scotland where the recession began later failures were up 16pc and there was a 3pc increase in north and north-west England.
All other areas had fewer failures: West Midlands and East Anglia (down 20pc), East Midlands (10pc) and Yorkshire and Humberside (4pc).
Overall, there was a fractional increase between the last three months of 1992 and the first quarter of this year, the second marginal quarterly rise in succession.
Price wars taking toll
DIY price wars are taking their toll at Texas Homecare, shareholders in parent company Ladbroke were told yesterday.
Business at Texas has been disappointing in recent weeks after a good start to the year, chairman Cyril Stein said.
The DIY business has been fiercely competitive with Do-It-All, B&Q and Texas all battling for supremacy through price cuts and heavy advertising.
Mr Stein was unable to take much comfort from the performance of the rest of his company with only the racing division performing well.
Hotels subsidiary Hilton International is only trading satisfactorily while the property business is recovering.
Labroke has seen its interest bill rise because of high continental Europe interest rates and the devaluation of sterling.
Tobacco sellers face tough line
TOBACCONISTS are putting profits before prosecution by selling cigarettes to people under the age of 16.
Council officers in Sefton now plan a clamp-down after a survey in the borough found retailers have been flouting the law by selling tobacco to under 16s and failing to display the statutory notices.
It comes after a national survey revealed one in four 15 year olds smokes regularly and that sales of cigarettes to children are estimated to be worth around £70m a year.
The survey, carried out by the Office of Population and Census and MORI, also found 250,000 children are being sold cigarettes illegally every week.
Warning letters will be sent to every retailer in the borough.
A random survey will follow, using volunteer children and a psychologist counsellor.
Boost for N West as GEC joins Eurorail consortium
By Ian Herbert
HOPES of a £700m investment in the North West's InterCity rail link were revived last night as GEC joined the Eurorail consortium.
The defence to power systems group is to become an equal shareholder with construction companies Trafalgar House and BICC in Eurorail.
Eurorail, British Rail's partner in devising private sector participation in the Channel Tunnel rail-link with London, also aims to capitalise on the Government's encouragement of private sector involvement in developing the UK rail system.
Kickstart
It is hoping to work on the upgrading of the West Coast main line and London's CrossRail link, as well as the Channel Tunnel link.
Last night, Ken Medlock, chairman of the North West Channel Tunnel steering group, said cash-rich GEC may kickstart a vital West Coast line upgrade.
Hopes of work on the line is currently bedeviled by British Rail's inertia, said Mr Medlock.
He added: ‘British Rail has put off its £0.75bn programme and even if it takes private money, the bigger the players the better.
It is something we must achieve.
‘GEC can provide the capital and equipment; traction sets, signalling equipment and electric distribution to serve the system.’
The new Railtrack authority has responsibility for rail infrastructure but how it interlinks with Eurorail and the private sector is as yet unclear.
It does seem clear that Railtrack does not have the borrowing power to finance a major modernisation programme and that the private sector will be called on, ultimately through privatisation.
The West Coast line is currently struggling to shake off a ‘poor relation’ tag.
There has been considerable expenditure on the East Coast line linking London with Yorkshire, Newcastle, Northumberland and Edinburgh.
East Coast 225 trains have modernised track and advanced signalling.
Trains can link Newcastle and London in a few minutes over two and a half hours.
This is the same journey time as Liverpool to London journeys of some three quarters the distance.
It was also announced yesterday that former Cabinet minister Lord Parkinson has been appointed chairman of Eurorail.
He said: ‘The company's resources have been further strengthened by the participation of GEC, which has additional experience of rail-related projects.
‘We are determined to become a major force in private sector infrastructure rail developments and have the requisite expertise and experience to ensure that we shall succeed in this objective.’
Lord Parkinson
Airtours buys travel agents
By Kevin Reilly Business Correspondent
AIRTOURS is expanding its chain of travel agents with a £25m acquisition from Hogg Robinson, it said yesterday.
The deal comes just three months after Airtours, the UK's number two holiday company, lost out in a takeover battle for rival Owners Abroad.
Airtours will have nearly 550 travel agencies following the purchase of Hogg Robinson's 214 shops, making it the second biggest operator behind Thomas Cook.
The 1,100 staff employed in Hogg Robinson's agencies will transfer to Airtours, which will be allowed to use the Hogg Robinson name until June 1995.
Last September Airtours bought the Pickfords Travel Service business in a deal which established it as a fully integrated holiday company with an airline, tour operations and travel agents.
The company, based at Rossendale, Lancs, said then it wanted to build up a chain of about 550 agencies.
Hogg Robinson's outlets made a profit of £47,000 in the year to March 31.
The group, based in Woking, Surrey, will be left with financial services and transport businesses.
It will continue to run a business travel operation.
Airtours chairman David Crossland said later that the acquisition provided ‘substantial’ opportunities for his group.
Increased national coverage would add to the benefits currently provided to the tour operating business by the existing chain.
Analysts pointed out that owning shops gives tour operators other advantages.
It means they have improved access to information on what holidays sell best and what the customer wants.
They can also sell peripheral products such as insurance and can push their own products.
Airtours is expected to reflect an improved climate for the holiday business this year when it publishes first half figures on June 28.
Meanwhile Hogg Robinson chairman Brian Perry said the price paid in the deal was ‘attractive’ and the proceeds would be used to expand his firm's other activities.
Airtours chairman David Crossland
Link strengthens Irish sea trade
By David Hope Business Staff
LIVERPOOL'S Irish Sea trade has been strengthened as the port's Coastal Container Line links in to the most modern container terminal in Britain.
CCL, owned by the Mersey Docks and Harbour Company, has signed a 20-year agreement to use Belfast Harbour's £30m Victoria Terminal 3.
Under an agreement with Belfast Harbour Commissioners, CCL has preferred user status at the terminal.
Its lift on, lift-off operations there will now also be spread across two container terminals and an inland storage site.
CCL's move completes a programme of upgrading undertaken since the line was acquired by Mersey Docks and Harbour Company almost two years ago.
Last January, £1.5m was invested in Dublin, where the former Sealink Terminal was re-opened for the launch of Coastal's new Dublin-Liverpool service.
NEW YORK, Monday 10pm: STOCKS ended narrowly mixed ahead of an important reading on US inflation later today when the Labour Department is due to release data on its US Consumer Price Index for May.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 9.68 points to 3,514.69 and the NYSE's composite index rose 0.18 to 246.42.
SENIOR management at pipeline coatings maker Metrotect Industries will share £2.7m when the company is floated on the stock market, it emerged yesterday.
Eleven managers, who are selling around a third of their shares, will be in line for the windfall.
The 97 employees of the company, based at Cleckheaton,
West Yorkshire, will be able to buy a stake once shares are placed with institutional investors.
Metrotect, formed by a 1990 management buy-out from plasterboard maker BPB, will have a capital value of about £27m when it is floated.
The share placing will raise about £15m.
Some £2.7m goes to the management and around £5.5m to existing institutional investors 3i and County NatWest Ventures, which are selling about half their holdings.
Metrotect, which makes plasticised materials for protecting underground and underwater pipelines, makes about 90pc of its sales overseas and has offices in Singapore, Denver and Sao Paolo, Brazil.
No let-up in trawl for poll tax debts
By Geoff Barnes Daily Post Staff
THE relentless pursuit of potential poll tax dodgers in Wirral is showing no signs of being relaxed.
Deputy finance director Dave Rollins warned: ‘There is no amnesty.
‘We are still out there pressing for collection.
‘We are not letting this drop just because the poll tax is finished.’
With a total of £26.5m still remaining as potentially collectable, the local authority sent out a further 15,000 reminders last month.
More people are now facing committal proceedings and prison sentences have been imposed in a handful of cases.
Finance director Ian Wood said the threat of committal action had led to people paying up in advance of the action in 20pc of cases.
Summons hearings are held fortnightly, and committal cases are held three weeks out of four.
A company which refused to make attachment of earnings deductions against one poll tax offender, was fined £200 by magistrates.
The order is now in place.
Wirral Council achieved an 89.1pc poll tax collection by the end of March and was listed as 22nd out of 36 metropolitan authorities.
Mr Wood commented: ‘After many months of being in one of the lower positions it is gratifying to see the improved collection which, I hope, will be continued in both the old and new taxes.’