

Art show
PAINTINGS by Edward Povey, the man who recently completed a huge mural at Bangor University, are to go on show at the city's Parc Menai Business Park next month.
Car park boost AS part of the Amlwch Rural Prosperity programme Ynys Mn Borough Council, with backing from the Welsh Development Agency, wants to carry out improvements, costing £25,000, at the Parys Square car park near the town's library.
Above, choirboy Arthur Askey.
Below, the Titanic.
Echoes of the past
THE other afternoon I received a telephone call from one of your representatives enquiring whether I read the Echo regularly.
This telephone call made me think back over the years.
I am now in my 93rd year and quite clearly recall having read the Echo when it was pink and cost a half-penny.
I remember reading about the haunting of old Edge Lane Hall and years later of that dreadful disaster the Titanic sinking.
I was a member of the thousand-voice choir that sang at the opening of the Gladstone Dock in April, 1913.
Arthur Askey was also a member.
I still have the programme.
Years before the First World War it was not unusual to see bare-footed boys running from street to street selling the Echo in all types of weathers.
My old friend Robson was head of your organisation during the last war, and I have a run-off of a cartoon dated October, 1939, which he sent to me.
Robby, as he was affectionately known, was Chairman of the Bentley Amateur Operatic and Dramatic Society of which I was a member.
I HAVE a large jug and bowl with tiny pink flowers on both, but no markings on either.
A second bowl is stamped ‘Sark 1790 K & Co.
B late Mayers 1698’.
Can you give me any information as to the age and value?
L. Cotterall, Skelmersdale.
The first description seemed a little vague to us, but Bill McMahon, of auctioneers and valuers Outhwaite and Litherland, made an educated guess.
He thinks you might have a typical jug and basin set of the Twenties to Thirties.
If so, and depending on their condition, the set could make £40 at auction.
Why not take it down to the firm's office and let the experts see it for themselves?
Your second bowl is much easier for Bill.
He identified it immediately as coming from the Sark Pottery.
A 20th century factory, in spite of those dates, it could make between £20 and £25 at auction if it is in good condition.
I HAVE a china cabinet with a small disc on the inside door marked ‘Guaranteed Barget London’.
It is in walnut polished wood, bow fronted with bow legs.
Any idea how old it would be and is it worth anything today?
Mrs G., Wavertree.
Bill McMahon puts its auction value at around £120.
He says Barget was a well known London firm of the Twenties and Thirties.
Much depends on the condition of the cabinet as to whether it would realise this sum at auction.
I read that some Waterman pens are collectors items and worth something.
Can you shed some light on this one?
Sketch enclosed.
From its size the experts think your pen was probably part of a child's set.
It is too small to appeal to many so it would probably make only £10 at auction.
WHILE digging in my garden I unearthed a small metal disc.
It is inscribed as follows: ‘1867 yearly contractor Bread Ferry’.
On the reverse: ‘No 245.
Not transferable and to be shown when required’.
As you can imagine we are intrigued by this and wonder if anyone has any knowledge of the ‘Bread Ferry’.
We had never heard of such a ferry, nor has the local history department at Liverpool Central Library.
However, the staff at Birkenhead Reference Library think they have solved the mystery.
Take a good look at that ‘r’ in ‘Bread’.
Can it possibly be an ‘h’ partially worn away?
They think the disc you have is, in fact, an annual contract disc once used on the cross-Mersey ferries.
In 1860 Birkenhead Improvement Commissioners, who were then operating the ferries, issued metal discs stamped ‘B'head Ferry’ to annual contractors in place of the cardboard tickets that had been in use until then.
At the time the disc cost £2.5s.
Annual contracts continued to be issued until 1955, by which time they had risen to £4.2s.
A funny night out with Jewish magic
The Jewish Comedy Club
UPSTAIRS AT THE PICKET
Review by David Goldman
JEWS are not always renowned for their comedy Woody Allen and Phil Silvers aside but no-one seems to have told Dave Schneider, Leelo Ross and Ivor Dembina.
Together they formed the Jewish Comedy Club appearing Upstairs At The Picket in Hardman Street as part of the Liverpool Festival of Comedy.
The ability to laugh at themselves was never more evident as the three took their audience on a comic tour of Jewish life as we know it today with a smattering of politics, anti-semitism and Zionism thrown in for good measure.
And not to be forgotten was compere Schneider's dabble into Jewish magic Paul Daniels it most certainly wasn't.
Leelo Ross, a large woman who claims Lancastrian origins (although it seemed highly unlikely that black pudding could be blamed on her proportions) gave the audience an insight into among other things the ‘Modern Jewish Woman’ including driving Jewish style; and the laconic Dembina delved deep to prove that even the most serious of subjects could be a source of humour.
Apart from the acts, there were chopped liver, chicken soup and all manner of things which the predominantly Jewish audience devoured with delight.
The show itself contained the sort of comic stuff of which Woody Allen would have been justly proud.
After all, who says religion can't be funny?
In harmony
A CLARINET and piano duo feature at a lunchtime recital today.
Perryn Clement-Evans and Rona Jones will perform at St John's Church, Chester, at 1pm.
Refreshments will be on sale and a retiring collection will be made.
Theatre's festive line-up
A CHESHIRE theatre yesterday raised the curtain on its Christmas show six months before it is due to open and disclosed it has scooped some of Britain's major stars for its pantomime line-up.
Crewe's 600-seater Lyceum Theatre is presenting Puss in Boots for a month's run with veteran panto stars like Peggy Mount, Liza Goddard and entertainer and TV game host Bob Carolgees.
The tiny Edwardian theatre has been completely refurbished and presenting the cast of its festive programme on a warm summer's day at Churches Mansion, Nantwich, the management said it was convinced it would have packed houses every night.
Top of the bill Bob Carolgees will appear with his puppet partner ‘Spit the Dog’.
‘Back to front’ career of sitcom star reading the Playhouse boards
‘People in Liverpool make me laugh a lot’
By Penny Kiley Arts Correspondent
SHE made her name in one of the biggest TV comedies of the era.
But 20 years after Man About The House, Paula Wilcox is appearing in theatre in Liverpool and it is through a deliberate choice.
It's a back to front way of running an acting career.
Most in the profession start off in rep and, if they're lucky, move into high profile TV later.
Paula has managed a balance in recent years.
Her last sitcom, Fiddlers Three, was only two years ago and there is a new TV series coming up as well as a radio series, Unofficial Rosie, set in Liverpool.
But she has deliberately made theatre a priority.
Paula explains: ‘I did make a conscious decision about ten years ago.
I'd done about four sitcoms one after the other, and I wasn't getting much time to do theatre which I really wanted to do.
So I turned down quite a few sitcoms.
In commercial terms that's like committing suicide but in artistic terms it's been much more fulfilling.’
Not everyone can see the appeal.
‘An accountant came up to me once at a party and said, don't you find it boring doing the same thing night after night.’
‘I said you probably know more about that than me’ she laughed.
‘But everybody does the same thing, more or less.
It's how to make it interesting.’
In Raving Beauties, currently running at the Liverpool Playhouse, Paula plays one of those people whose lives do not have much to offer.
The play is set in a seedy northern beauty contest, which gives Paula the chance to use her original Mancunian accent.
Paula plays Diane, the oldest entrant, who finds herself competing against her daughter.
‘She's a real feisty northern woman and that was nice for me because although I've done a lot of different work, because of my television work, I tend to be thought of as the rather middle-class, bouncy, girl next door type.
While I certainly don't mind playing those roles it's fabulous to be offered something meaty.’
She admits the play is funny and vulgar, but it also raises some serious issues.
Paula sees things from the contestants' viewpoint.
‘It's been interesting to see how much a woman's sense of herself comes from how she looks.
For my character that's been her hook on life, she sees it as a way of competing with women who are brighter or have got more of a start in life.
We've all got ways of feeding our self esteem and it's just a way of doing that.’
Paula's own self esteem comes from doing work which is, as she puts it, ‘a bit more searching.’
Shirley Valentine fitted the bill and Paula appeared in it at the Playhouse.
It was her first appearance in a Willy Russell play so she was in at the deep end.
She says, surprisingly: ‘It was easy.’
‘Obviously it's hard work,’ she adds, ‘but it really struck a chord with me and that made it seem easy.
Everything that was written spoke to me.’
On the surface, Paula's life seems very different to Shirley's dead-end existence.
Television stardom (Man About The House is soon to be released on video); holidays in America (her husband is American and they spend a lot of time over there); work in Los Angeles (last year she appeared in Alan Aykbourn's Henceforward.
She played a robot with a costume built in the Star Wars lab.)
Shirley talks about lost opportunities.
And even an actress has regrets.
‘The more I live the more I realise there are things that I'll never do.
‘I'd love to speak languages but you have to live in another country for a certain amount of time and in this job you have to get up and go, so I haven't had much chance to spend time abroad.
‘I've never had children, I've never given myself the time and that's a matter of some regret.
It's something which would be nice to have done.’
And she doesn't forget that Shirley Valentine and Raving Beauties, like the TV shows, are comedies.
So where does Paula get her laughs?
‘At the moment,’ she says, ‘the people in Liverpool make me laugh a lot.’
Flashback 20 years.
Paula, right, in man About the House
Paula Wilcox returning to the theatre in Raving Beauties at the Liverpool Playhouse Picture: EDDIE BARFORD
Star leaves hospital
CORONATION Street actress Lynne Perrie was discharged from hospital yesterday eight days after collapsing during rehearsals.
The 62-year-old actress, who plays Ivy Brennan in the top-rated Granada TV series, has undergone exhaustive tests since becoming ill.
A spokesman at the Oaklands private hospital in Salford, Greater Manchester, said the tests had now been completed and Miss Perrie was ‘fine’.
Miss Perrie said later she was now looking forward to returning to the three-nights-a-week series.
Museum shop
VISCOUNT Leverhulme, president of The Boat Museum in Ellesmere Port, has opened a new entrance and shop at the waterways museum complex.
The shop offers a selection of souvenirs and a selection of books on canal and local history.
Midland Chandlers occupies a large part of the new shop.
Fair time ST JOSEPH'S RC School PTA are holding a summer fair at the school's playground in Wheatland Lane, Seacombe on Saturday.
ARTIST Ian Garland has drawn inspiration from the landscape of the Wirral peninsula for his latest exhibition, Home and Abroad with Garland.
Paintings of Scotland and the Cantabrian country of northern Spain also form part of the collection at Dee Fine Arts, Telegraph Road, Heswall.
Mr Garland, 38, of West Kirby, works full time as an artist, painting buildings and landscapes which capture textures of foliage, stone and sand.
Mr Garland said: ‘I have always lived on the Wirral, and the other paintings reflect places I have visited and admire very much.’
The exhibition runs until June 26.
Picture: JASON ROBERTS
Centre to host arts exhibition
CASTLE Park Arts Centre in Fountain Lane, Frodsham, is to host an exhibition of crafts, among them gilding, marbling, wood-staining and painting.
The exhibition will be on from June 26 to July 31.
Coronation Street/Eldorado
IT'S only June and this week alone you can expect a staggering 130 repeats.
Last night's overall telly certainly left a lot to be desired.
Notably the heavyweight nature of programmes on offer was just what we could have done without on a wet, dreary Monday evening.
Even our soaps, so long the mainstay of our telly diet, are looking jaded.
At Weatherfield, Jim McDonald must be suffering from Lady Chatterley-itis the bad-tempered Irishman called his wife a whore in front of the twins, extremely over-the-top, Jim.
But best storyline of the night was the glint in Dougie's eye as he plans his latest scam…stealing Mike Baldwin's pride and joy no, not his mirror, his car.
Surprisingly Eldorado is doing itself no favours.
As a Save Eldorado Campaign splutters on, the writers seem content to let it fizzle out like a glass of flat Spanish beer.
Shady Marcus at last exposed the soap's Mr Big but it had all the dramatic impact of one of those dated Ealing comedies where George Cole plays a gangster as threatening as a game show host.
The soap is destined for the Beeb's bin so there should be a concerted effort to go out fighting just for their six million fans.
Why not bring in El Tel Venables as a script consultant.
Film ‘93 with Barry Norman AND talking of ‘why nots’…sadly Mondays won't be the same without Uncle Barry.
The cool presenter represents all that is reliable about television.
This final show in the present series left viewers in no doubt about what he thinks of a certain film or its cast.
Of Hollywood's Melanie Griffith he smiled: ‘An actress?
Surely not’.
Barry now parodies himself even better than Spitting Image.
The summer just won't be the same without him, especially as the BBC, in their scheduling wisdom, have put Come Dancing in his place.
Surely not?
I'm afraid so.
PETER GRANT
Dino wait
A DECISION is expected this week on which certificate to give Jurassic Park the Steven Spielberg dinosaur epic Britain's children are already clamouring to see.
Universal Pictures is hoping for the second lowest rating, PG parental guidance.
Political sex taunts
A 2,500-YEAR-OLD Greek comedy last night launched a stinging attack on modern politicians with displays of outsize false breasts and genitalia.
An updated version of Lysistrata branded politicians as fat, limp idiots only interested in turning world problems into a farcical photo opportunity.
The play opened last night, directed by Sir Peter Hall, at London's Old Vic Theatre after an appearance in Liverpool where some of the audience walked out in disgust.
But in London it brought belly laughs with a bawdy display of music hall humour and saucy songs.
Planners to reveal new image for historic town
Scheme is backed by civic society
By David Greenwood Daily Post Staff
PLANNERS are almost ready to go public on a scheme to improve the image of Anglesey's most historic town.
The conservation strategy at Beaumaris, outlined by Ynys Mn Borough Council less than two months ago, has brought a swift and positive response from the town's civic society and the Baron Hill estate.
Council director of planning Arthur Owen says the draft strategy his department has drawn up should be revised to include some of their suggestions.
He will also tell the island's planning committee that it should go forward to public consultation and a public meeting.
The Beaumaris and District Civic Trust has highlighted problems which it says need attention.
These include a lack of public toilets, car parking problems and claims that a narrow pavement from the Castle car park is a danger, particularly to the elderly.
Other society suggestions include: Sending design and information guides to all local builders, as they are often the first point of contact when people want to alter their homes.
Detailing all listed buildings to help the public and building owners.
Meanwhile, Sir Richard Williams has pledged that the Baron Hill estate would be prepared to talk to the council about any schemes to improve the Castle car park, bowling green and allotments, which are owned by the estate.
He says the whole initiative is worthwhile and will be of great benefit but the loss of the Dickensian character of the area would be detrimental.
Mr Owen said the responses received by the council were constructive and supportive.
Ynys Mn is still waiting for reaction from other organisations and individuals including the Wales Tourist Board, North Wales Tourism, Gwynedd County Council and even the Women's Institute.
Play scheme pleads for help after poor turnout
By Emyr Williams Daily Post Correspondent
ONLY four people turned up at a public meeting in Machynlleth to finalise arrangements for the town's summer play scheme for local schoolchildren.
With the Fun Factory play scheme attracting more than 800 attendances by youngsters last year, co-ordinator Angela Evans said yesterday she was disappointed at such a poor turnout.
She said: ‘The play scheme needs helpers to plan the summer holiday event and to take part during the four weeks.
‘The clear message is that unless local people want to be involved with this year's Fun Factory, plans will be shelved.
‘Last year's event will be the first and last unless more people come forward.
We must have more people involved or it cannot run.
‘Not only are people needed during the summer to supervise children and organise activities, there is a lot of work to be done beforehand, planning a timetable, and arranging helpers and activities.
‘This isn't as lot of work if many people are involved, but it cannot be done by just a handful.’
Reaction to last year's Fun Factory, she said, was excellent, with children and parents saying how much they welcomed the event.
The project was financed by The Development Board for Rural Wales, and ran during July and August, offering children activities, games, trips and workshops for just £1 a day.
More than 80 children came along on some days, and many people said they hoped it would become an annual event, she said.
This year the scheme has won a grant from Children in Need but the cheque will be sent back if local people continue to snub the event, she added.
‘The only way we can know that people want to see the Fun Factory becoming a success is if they vote with their feet and come to a meeting to show their support.’
she added.
A second public at the Youth and Community Wing in Ysgol Bro Ddyfi, Machynlleth, at 7.30pm tomorrow will provide local people with their last chance to get the scheme off the ground.
‘Unless people prove they want the play-scheme and come to the meeting on Thursday night, we will have to cancel it this year.’
she added.
Dance meets theatre and comedy in the Fishpool
‘STYLE, wit and green plastic goggles’ is how the Festival of Comedy brochure describes Fishpool's new dance production, Jewel.
The show has summer and autumn tours coming up but its first performances at Liverpool's Unity Theatre this week are under the festival umbrella.
So how do you make dance comic?
I asked Fishpool founders Gaynor Coward and David Waring.
‘Subtlety,’ laughs Gaynor.
And David warns you not to expect gags.
The humour is to do with timing, expectation and the ups and downs of the piece.
Expectations, too, are part of the theme, based on the idea of giving and receiving and the difference between what people expect and what they get.
The company do call themselves ‘dance theatre’.
‘That's theatre as in theatrical rather than theatre as drama,’ explains David.
‘There's more of a performance aspect than pure dance as an abstract art form.’
They recognise that mixture of theatre and dance as a general trend in the dance world.
It also happens to be how David, who is from Wallasey, started his career.
The year he went to college he was in three Wirral Youth Theatre productions.
‘Jesus Christ Superstar, Follow The Star and West Side Story,’ he remembers, pointing out the posters.
Fishpool are rehearsing at Birkenhead's Glenda Jackson Theatre, Wirral Youth Theatre's base, so it's a home from home for him.
‘I wanted to do dance and drama, because I wasn't pulled enough by drama on its own.
And I was really pushed into dance because they always want as many men or boys as possible to be involved in the dance bits.’
David had a role as one of the Jets.
‘I had to spray my hair black every night.
But it was a great show to be in.’
Gaynor, from Neston, had a more conventional dance background: dance classes as a child, lessons in contemporary dance after school, and the Cheshire Dance Workshops.
Fishpool with a collaborative summer production for the last three years is their way of coming home to work.
Both have jobs with London-based companies the Cholmondeleys and Motionhouse.
But they are very much aware that they were forced to train and work in London, with no permanent dance companies in Merseyside to come back to.
Fishpool is a way to provide something for local dancers, and it's also a chance for David and Gaynor to take hold of the creative reins.
‘This is an ideal situation for us,’ says Gaynor, ‘having both been working with other companies mainly as dancers having a home setting for us to be creative in our own right.’
Their productions this year's follows from Rear Door, Split and Warp are in fact a mixture of choreographed and improvised movement.
Their choice of collaborators has ranged from the Wirral Youth Theatre to local professional dancers.
Jewel uses two young professionals and two dancers connected to the youth theatre.
In rehearsal dancers practise their routines Pictures: TRACEY O'NEILL
Back home Gaynor Coward
A world of life sadness
Hooks ‘n’ Eyes
UNITY THEATRE
Review by Philip Key
JENNI Potter's latest play written for the company Sex & Violence is set, as usual for this Liverpool writer, in the homosexual world.
It is a world of high camp comedy and low-life sex, a world in which a drag queen eventually ends up with a rent boy.
Although officially part of the Liverpool Festival of Comedy and while it does boast many a funny line, Potter's piece also has its sad side.
Told in a series of monologues by its five participants, drag artist Lawrence, played in flamboyant fashion by Joe Standerline, is the central creation, a man for whom life seems to be one long joke.
Apart from the final moments, he appears in male attire albeit somewhat wild, a smoking jacket, baggy trousers and slippers in the shape of a bear's clawed feet.
Moving like the late Dick Emery in his ‘Ooh, you are awful’ guise, Standerline eats up the role of the camp gay explaining his troubled yet amusing life in brisk gag-heavy declarations.
He breaks off from his wine-bibbing and sewing activities at the back of the stage to step forward and talk directly to the audience, as do the four others involved in his life.
These are Eric (James McMartin) a no-nonsense bit of rough, drug-taking wacky dentist, Duncan (Nick Birkenshaw), Aids-concerned Clive (Pete Hardy) and rent boy sensualist Karl (Peter Hynds), all of whom wander in from off-stage to make their contributions.
Unlike Lawrence, however, their monologues are poetic, often rhyming and full of both florid imagery and down-to-earth explanation.
It is a curious method of story-telling which makes the five characters seem remote and alone, their lives never quite real.
Indeed, only when the drag queen in sparkly dress and football boots and the rent boy in underwear actually appear together in the final scene does the plot get some impetus.
But director Claire McColgan makes the most of it, getting some fine performances from her cast and much helped by the set of Lotte Buchan and Derek Henenhopher.