

Slate tale
THE story of the North Wales slate industry is told by special audio and video presentations at the Welsh Slate Museum at Gilfach Ddu, Llanberis, and brought to life by the museum's own craftsmen.
Sales chief
DAVID Pearce, 46, of Tywyn, has been appointed sales director of the locally based Halo Foods Limited.
Fiscal racket
OWNERS of motor vehicles are sitting ducks for avaricious chancellors who already screw them for far more cash in fuel and vehicle tax than is spent on the roads.
Now the government is to screw drivers for yet more cash by extending the road network with a toll road.
The first of many?
If the trend grows will the government reduce fuel and vehicle taxes?
Not on our lives.
Excuses will be trotted out to justify increasing the standing taxes and shovelling the proceeds into that bottomless pit beneath No 11.
The Mersey Tunnel and the Severn Bridge are classic examples of cynical fiscal racketeering, obstacles on trunk roads for which extra cash will be extracted forever.
One-and-a-bit pence per mile doesn't sound much, but multiplied into billions, even trillions, of user-miles, it is a rich seam of gold for cash-strapped governments.
A few facts (checkable for truth) on cash from vehicles and cash for roads would inject a bit of realism into this issue.
Corporate Jets workers to seek job assurances
AIRCRAFT unions will this morning seek assurances about their future when they meet American buyers of the 125 business jet.
Raytheon, the American corporation which is buying Corporate Jets for £250m, will visit the Broughton factory, near Chester, this morning to meet management and local union officials.
Alyn and Deeside MP Barry Jones is also believed to be meeting Raytheon's president Max Bleck.
Unions will want to question Mr Bleck about Raytheon's long-term plans for the assembly of the 125–800 and 125–1000 jets at Broughton.
Although Raytheon has guaranteed to purchase the major sub assemblies, fuselage and wings, from the main BAe Airbus plant at Broughton, there is no guarantee of continued assembly by the 600 staff of Corporate Jets.
The fear is that when Raytheon has completed its overall review of the Corporate Jets business, it may move the entire operation to the US.
The finishing work on the 125 jet is carried out at Little Rock in Arkansas.
Completion of the Raytheon deal could still take some weeks to finalise.
The offer is being considered by the Office of Fair Trading.
Former BAe executive Richard Hooke is still trying to pursue a separate bid for the company and wants to meet BAe this week with his financial backers.
BAe has made it clear it did not consider the bid by Mr Hooke as a serious contender and has said it regards the Raytheon offer as best for the company, shareholders and employees.
Shell's show
FAMILIES of Shell employees and members of the public can look around the company's Thornton Research Centre from 2pm-9pm today.
Thank you, sir A TESTIMONIAL fund has been opened for a teacher at Tilston Primary School.
Raymond Tovey, who has been at the school since 1982, is taking early retirement.
Former pupils and staff who wish to make a donation towards a gift for Mr Tovey should send contributions to The Rectory, Inveresk Road, Tilston, before July 20.
Unions seek buyout answers
AIRCRAFT unions will today seek assurances about their members' futures when they meet American buyers of the 125 business jet.
Raytheon, the US corporation which is buying Corporate Jets for £250m, will visit the Broughton factory this morning.
Unions will want to put a series of questions to Raytheon's president Max Bleck about the US company's long-term plans for the assembly of the 125–800 and 125–1000 jets at Broughton.
Although Raytheon has guaranteed to purchase the major sub-assemblies, fuselage and wings from the main BAe Airbus plant at Broughton, there is no guarantee of continued assembly by the 600 staff of Corporate Jets.
The fear is that when Raytheon completes its overall review of the Corporate Jets business it may move the entire operation to the US.
Completion of the Raytheon deal however could still take some weeks to finalise.
At the moment the offer is being considered by the Office of Fair Trading to see whether it complies with competition rules.
Battle to save ‘vital rural chemists’
COUNCILLORS are to fight to save rural chemist shops threatened by new government legislation.
New rules for pharmacy funding mean that any chemist's shop which dispenses fewer than 2,000 prescriptions per month will lose grants and will face closure.
But Cheshire councillors say a vital service will be lost.
County councillor Tony Murphy (Lab) said one in five pharmacies in Cheshire could face closure under the new ruling.
‘Community pharmacists provide a vital service to local people for prescriptions, ancillary services and medical advice, which on occasions can be life-saving,’ he said.
‘The setting of an arbitrary limit of 2,000 prescriptions per month before payment of the new allowances will adversely affect and could even lead to closure of up to one in five pharmacists in Cheshire.
‘Therefore this council calls upon the Government to re-think urgently those proposals for change in the method of funding pharmacists.’
At present there is also a scheme which tops up the income of small pharmacies considered to be in essential positions.
A report to the social services sub-committee says: ‘The elderly and people with mobility problems would be disadvantaged if these proposals led to the closure of small pharmacists in rural communities within the county where there is no convenient alternative.’
Sands of time run out for strife-torn factory
By Joe Quinn Daily Post Correspondent
THE Timex factory in Dundee is to close, after its American management finally lost patience with the unions yesterday.
The closure was announced by Mohammed Saleh, Timex's US-based head of human resources, at a two-hour meeting with the unions in a Dundee hotel yesterday morning after talks on Monday night ended without agreement.
Mr Saleh said the financial position was now impossible to sustain and that the factory had ‘reached the end of the road’.
The unions accused Timex of having engineered the strike and said they would continue to demonstrate outside the plant until the bitter end, which will come at Christmas.
Mr Saleh said the decision had been made against a background of years of heavy losses and ‘unrealistic’ demands for the reinstatement of 343 sacked workers.
The factory had lost £10m in five years and Timex despaired of making it profitable by world standards.
The unions had offered only ‘Band Aid’ compromises.
The closure announcement came the day after the resignation of Timex's British president, Peter Hall, the man who became a hate figure for the 343 workers sacked five months ago in a dispute over lay-offs and cuts in benefits.
Speaking at his home last night, Mr Hall refused to say if he had known Timex had been planning to close the factory.
He said he felt for the staff who had given so much for Timex, then added: ‘I also feel sad for the strikers.’
The 343 workers whose sackings led to Britain's most bitter industrial dispute since the late 1980s are to meet tomorrow to be told by the unions the details of the rundown package on offer.
Val Smith, 35, who worked for the company for 19 years before she was sacked, said: ‘Closure has always been on the cards.
‘I'm sick but I still think I've done the right thing.
We weren't asking for any more wages.
We weren't on great pay as it was.
‘The cuts they were wanting from us were ridiculous.’
Timex has been in Dundee for 47 years.
A mass demonstration being organised by the Scottish TUC will go ahead on Saturday, as planned.
Peter Hall
NEW YORK, Tuesday, 10pm: WALL Street prices ended mixed despite a better-than-expected US government report on inflation.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 22.69 points to 3,492.00.
NYSE volume totalled 226.90 million shares, against 210.41 million in the previous session.
The NYSE's composite index fell 0.51 to 245.91.
Recovery still fragile, says CBI survey
A QUESTION mark still hangs over the strength of the recovery in consumer spending, according to a CBI survey released yesterday.
Shop sales grew again in May, but the upturn was relatively modest.
The rise may have been achieved by shops slashing their prices to attract customers, said Nigel Whittaker, chairman of the CBI's distributive trades panel.
Sales volumes in May were up on a year ago for the fifth month in a row but they remained well below normal for the time of year, he said.
Retailers expect a bigger improvement in June, but their expectations have proved to be over-optimistic in the past two months.
The CBI's distributive trades survey, conducted between May 18 and June 2, covers 15,000 outlets in retailing, wholesaling and the motor trade.
Motor traders reported a small fall in sales in the year to May following five months of growth, but business remained below normal for the time of year.
Workers given news at mass meeting
300 FACING JOBS AXE AT TANNERY
By Barry Turnbull
UP TO 300 workers are facing the axe at a struggling Merseyside firm.
Bosses at the British Leather Company are considering making redundant the bulk of its workforce at factories in Birkenhead and Litherland.
Workers were given the grim news by union officials at a mass meeting.
Staff had been told earlier this year to take a 10% pay cut to try to save jobs.
GMB union official Mary Kenny said today ‘Management have been talking about measures like pay cuts but we never expected anything like this.
‘The company claims there may be room to manoeuvre but they have spelled out the bottom line and that is 229 jobs in Birkenhead and 66 in Litherland.
‘That would leave a handful of people to run two factories which is absolutely ridiculous.’
Owen Patterson, managing director of the family firm, said: ‘We are trying everything possible to save the company in the face of a continuing drop in orders.
‘Proposals for a pay reduction were made but that will not solve the problems we have.
‘I do not want to talk about the number of jobs likely to go because we are currently in discussion with the union.’
The tanning company currently employs 244 people in New Chester Road, Birkenhead, and 86 at Field Lane in Litherland.
Shares slide:
The FTSE top-100 share index slid with investors reluctant to commit money ahead of the CBI's distributive trades survey and tonight's Mansion House speech by new Chancellor Kenneth Clarke.
Leather factory workers face axe
UP TO 300 leather factory workers are facing redundancy.
The workforce at British Leather Company were told on Monday of plans to cut the workforce to 35 from 332 at its two factories in Birkenhead and Litherland.
Birkenhead has 244 workers and Litherland 88.
The proposal is to leave 20 in Birkenhead and 15 at Litherland.
Management workers are currently holding crisis talks with union representatives to see if any more jobs can be saved.
The blow came after staff were asked to take a 10pc pay cut by the troubled firm, in a bid to save posts.
Ironically, the Birkenhead works stands near the doomed Cammell Laird ship yard.
GMB regional organiser Mary Kenny said: ‘We don't see how the company can survive with such a small workforce unless they have a hidden agenda.
‘The tanning process is a complicated business and it will not be possible with so few people.’
Managing director of the family-run firm, Owen Patterson, said: ‘We are looking at rationalising the workforce but it is not fair to talk about numbers until we have completed discussions with unions.
‘We are trying everything possible to save the company in the face of a continuing drop in orders.
‘Proposals for a pay reduction were made but that will not solve the problems we have.’
Jim Oulton, GMB branch secretary, said: ‘We knew the company was in difficulty but we did not think things were this bad or the cuts would be of this magnitude.’
Cash cut threat to Safer City Project
By Geoff Barnes Daily Post Staff
WIRRAL Safer City Project may become a major casualty of financial cutbacks following withdrawal of Home Office funding next spring.
Coun Dave Jackson, leader of Wirral Council's Labour group, said: ‘If the Government says it's going, it's going.
We don't have the money to cough up to maintain the operation.’
The council's chief executive, Alan White, warned that without the catalyst of Safer City funding it was unlikely that organisations involved in the partnership would be willing to continue their efforts on the crime fighting front.
Answering a questionnaire drawn up by Labour MP Alun Michael, Shadow Minister for Home Affairs, Mr White confessed that there would be problems finding alternative sources of local funding.
Mr White added: ‘The unavailability of continuing resources will lead to an inevitable vacuum in co-ordinating efforts to combat crime.
‘Feedback on projects will not be available.’
The Safer City Project, has been operating in Wirral since 1989.
Schemes
Since that time, more than £1.51m has been spent on crime-fighting schemes, with running costs adding a further £100,000-a-year.
High crime areas have been targeted for measures aimed at tightening security at business premises and homes.
Business, shop and home watch schemes have been introduced and youth initiatives have included a Youth Befriending Service in which adults linked up with young people who might possibly get into trouble and the Kontacta Bus scheme, which tours the streets hammering home the crime prevention message.
Police and consultants' assessments indicated that there had been a reduced fear of crime in the areas involved in the project and in 1991/92 there was a 20pc reduction in all recorded crime in the Birkenhead police subdivision.
Among the agencies involved with the local authority were housing associations; voluntary groups; church groups; youth groups; Mersey Travel; business advice units; MDC; Wirral Chamber of Commerce; Wirral Task Force; and Merseyside Task Force.
Capital firm's city success
A FIRM which moved from London to Liverpool and doubled turnover in each of the past three years has moved to a prestige waterfront office block.
Corporate Culture was founded in London in 1986, but countered the North-South drift with a switch to Liverpool a year later.
It now employs 40 people at new offices developed by Liverpool firm Neptune on the Columbus Quay.
Communications director Peter Phelps said: ‘The media and political communications side of the company has shown particular growth and we are working with major clients at the highest levels, helping them to achieve their aims and ambitions.’
Government backs MDC plans for Herculaneum
DOCKSIDE DREAM IS A STEP CLOSER
By Alex Hunt
HOPES for one long Liverpool waterfront lined with thriving shops, offices and leisure facilities came a step closer today.
Inner Cities Minister Sir George Young announced that plans to develop the former Herculaneum Dock in south Liverpool will get government backing.
Included in the proposals from the Merseyside Development Corporation are plans for offices, industry, leisure, car showrooms and a fast food outlet.
The 15-acre area covered is between the Brunswick Business Park and Pleasure Island, two miles from the city centre.
Sir George Young, speaking in Coventry, said that the development would be included in the Private Finance Initiative.
Announced last autumn, the initiative brings together public and private sectors to carry out regeneration.
Various benefits and equity sharing schemes between private developers and the MDC will be available as part of the initiative.
Minister for Merseyside Robin Squire backed the plans.
He said: ‘The former Herculaneum Dock is a prime site on Liverpool's waterfront.
‘It is close to other prestige schemes which should make it attractive to developers.
‘An alliance between the MDC and a private company would be an excellent example of partnership to create jobs and prosperity.’
MDC assistant chief executive Bob Lane said a marketing scheme would now be launched to attract developers.
A rebound in factory output today gave a last-minute boost to Mr Clarke before tonight's speech.
Manufacturing production rose by 0.7 % by April after dipping 0.3 % in March as industry continued to recover unsteadily from the recession.
The pace of improvement in the past three months was the most rapid since November 1988.
Brake stays on shop sales
A QUESTION mark still hangs over the strength of the recovery in consumer spending, according to a CBI survey.
Shop sales grew again in May, but the upturn was relatively modest with sales still well below normal for the time of year.
Car sales are also below normal.
Jobs saved: A £55m North Sea gas and oil rig order won by offshore engineering company AMEC off Aberdeen has saved about 1,000 jobs, sdays the firm.
Cashcall: Property giant MEPC is calling on shareholders for £221.9m to refurbish and re-develop properties, buy new ones and strengthen its balance sheet.
TIMEX SHUTTING:
Timex to close Dundee plant by end of year, unions told.
Timex boss Mohammed Saleh said union demands that 343 sacked workers be taken back ‘not realistic…they did everything possible not to help us keep that plant going’.
Spam campaign set to hit shops
By Alex Hunt
WHAM!
BAM!
Thank you Spam that's the phrase which Merseyside firm Newforge Foods hope will soon have people across the country licking their lips.
For it is the hook of the biggest ever campaign to get people to eat the cans of chopped pork and ham made famous in wartime and by Monty Python.
Sales of Gateacre-made Spam are already 7% up on last year and the new campaign is aimed at increasing them even further.
Throughout the summer adverts will appear in newspapers and magazines reminding people of the goodness of spam.
The firm says its key target is persuading busy young mums that Spam makes an easy meal in minutes.
Marketing manager Rob Lucas said: ‘We are fortunate that everyone knows the brand and it has always been popular, particularly with children.’
Special offers will feature on cans.
More than 100 people are employed at the site in Belle Vale Road.
TESCO DEAL:
Tesco Stores today signed deal to take over former Owen Owen store in Liverpool city centre.
Supermarket chain said it would open the store in Clayton Square in January, creating 200 new jobs.
Owen Owen department store closed 10 days ago.
Booming Volex plugs into ripe overseas market
By Ian Herbert
ELECTRICAL components group Volex has doubled its pre-tax profits after plugging into lucrative overseas markets, it was revealed yesterday.
The Warrington-based electrical components group announced £7.34m profits for the year to March 31, compared with £3.68m for the previous year.
Turnover increased from £81.6m to £106.1m in the same period.
Shareholders, who were asked to fork out £17.5m to fund expansion in the United States, five months ago, were rewarded with a 5pc increase in dividend.
Issue
The final dividend was 11.35p, making a total payout in the year of 17.85p per share.
The rights issue also helped the company to balances of £12.5m with borrowings of £6.6m.
‘This will enable funding of external strategic development should an opportunity arise,’ the Group declared.
Some 53pc of sales were to overseas customers and 36pc of production came from overseas operations, cushioning the company from a depressed UK market.
But Volex's UK Wiring Systems division faces more pain, despite the closure of its St Helens factory last year and transfer of production to Leigh.
‘The division faces another difficult year ahead as it completes its fundamental restructuring and positions itself to become a viable business in niche markets,’ the company declared.
In 1992/3, the crash of Leyland DAF hit Wiring Systems with a bad debt provision of £654,000.
During the financial year, Volex snapped up a 60pc interest in Singapore company Mayor, an established power cable maker which has operations in China, Indonesia and Mexico, and Icontec, in the United States.
Unfavourable
Volex chairman Bill Goodall said: ‘The economic environment remains generally unfavourable to manufacturing industries and the year will not be an easy one in which to operate.
‘Nevertheless, conditions in certain markets of importance to Volex give grounds for optimism and I expect the Group to make further progress in the current year.’
RJB could move for collieries on market
BRITISH COAL launched its first ‘privatisation’ move a few days ago.
It was a very small launch a few discreet advertisements headed ‘Licensing of closed collieries’ and listing five of them.
It is the start of something that could become very big, but only those with mega bucks need apply.
A £10,000 bond has to be posted just to get the details.
Working capital needs for a colliery are likely to be at least £5m to finance the output until you get paid.
Just getting the mine back into working order could cost £1m or even £2m.
One obvious candidate to take over and operate these mines is RJB Mining, which came on the stock market this month and is valued at £100m.
In the float it raised £50m cash, so is in a strong position to make its move.
RJB is run by Richard Budge and its main asset is not coal but its Big Cats huge Caterpillar machines with shovels that can pick up tonnes of coal at a time.
It has used these in its work on open cast sites for British Coal, but it also operates under licence some small, deep mines of its own.
Help
With the mines now being put up for private operation, a great deal will depend on how sincere British Coal is about helping the new licensees to make a go of it.
It is a bit like a householder who moves.
If he takes the lampshades that is fair enough.
If he takes the bulbs that is going a bit far.
But if he rips out all the electrical fittings then he is a nutter.
British Coal has reserved the right to take out what machinery it wants elsewhere.
But the Catch 22 on that, is that it is also the source of much machinery.
Given goodwill on British Coal's part, the first ‘private’ coal could be coming out of these mines by Christmas.
The stock market has so far given the RJB shares the thumbs down.
Coal is not a popular investment area and the shares are 15p under their 250p floating price.
But if RJB can start to make profits on these mines where British Coal could not, then this sceptical attitude could change in a trice.
Zeneca to prove good in long term
MANY shareholders in ICI's spin-off company Zeneca must by now be tempted to walk away from the 600p a share rights issue.
After all, they have their stake already through a 1-for-1 free basis for every ICI share held.
The Zeneca shares started at 700p in the ‘grey’ market, but now are in danger of slipping right back to the 600p price before the closing date of June 21.
As this slide goes on, small investors get nervous.
If the shares fell below the 600p price the offer would be declared a ‘flop’ even though all the money is safely secured due to‘underwriting’by the big institutional investors.
These big investors are putting a bold face on it and saying ‘I wish the small investors would walk away, as then we can have more.’
Value
Their argument is that the Zeneca shares have excellent underlying value at 600p.
I do not doubt that.
But share prices are about supply and demand, and not underlying value.
If someone puts the Black Spot on Zeneca, nothing is going to make the price perk up in the short term.
The main problem remains Hillary Clinton, and what she might do to clobber the prices charged by drug companies in the USA, the world's largest market.
True, drugs are only 40pc of Zeneca, but they are the fast growth 40pc.
My advice?
Be brave, pay up.
Be sure at some future date you will regret it if you don't.
I bet Zeneca will prove better than BT long-term.
Wimpey strike optimistic note
RECENTLY the two leading building society house price indexes those of the Halifax and the Nationwide were pointing in different directions, one up and one down.
That signifies little, as there is always a margin of error.
A more optimistic note on house prices has been struck by big builders Wimpey.
It believes the worst is over and has launched its first ever rights issue a call for £104m.
The money will be used to top up its land bank crucial to future house building plans from 15,000 plots to 20,000.
This will enable it to be selling 9,000 homes by the mid-1990s.
Last year it only sold 5,500 houses in 12 months, but this year it has already sold 4,160 houses in the first five months.
Wimpey is raising the new money with a one-for-four issue of new shares at 148p.
The existing shares took the news well and were at 183p.
However, a rather different tale comes from timber group Meyer International.
This is one of the big three timber importers in the UK, but is best known to the public for its 191 Jewson outlets catering to the small jobbing builder.
Meyer's chairman Richard Jewson says that in the first four months of this year there is absolutely no sign of more people moving house than a year ago.
House moves fell from a peak of 2.3m in 1989 to only 1m last year, but a recovery to 1.3m has been predicted for the current year.
With four months of the year already recording no increase, there will need to be a sharp rise in the remaining months to achieve that.
Racal split pays off
THE sum of the parts is sometimes worth a good deal more than the whole.
That has proved to be the case with Racal, the company which Sir Ernest Harrison has headed for nearly 30 years.
Disappointed at the value put on his company by the stock market, which compared it with other electronics groups, he decided to spin-off Vodafone and Chubb.
Racal was then worth £1.5bn and the three companies are now worth £6bn on their own.
Investors prefer one clean business rather than a bundle.
Although Chubb Security is now valued at £900m, with the shares at 320p against the 200p at which they floated last October, it may still be undervalued to judge from the latest 64 per cent rise in profits.
The improvement comes from a restructuring programme put in place by David Peacock, who took over as chief executive 18 months ago.
This has produced savings to date of £24m of which £13m related to manpower.
Phase two will be to build on the group's strong brand names Union Locks, Lips Safes, and Pyrene fire detection all of which are well known.
Storehouse chief year with group
By Bob Newton Business Correspondent
STOREHOUSE chief executive David Dworkin was paid a huge £3.3m in his last year with the BhS and Mothercare group, according to the annual report published yesterday.
His basic pay of £575,850 up from £344,586 in the previous year was topped up with a one-off, long-term performance bonus of £2,714,624.
The bonus scheme for American Mr Dworkin, who is credited with turning round the company's fortunes, began when he was appointed chairman and chief executive of BhS in November 1989.
The payout accounted for his entire career with the group, which ended in March this year after he left to join a US stores group.
He was chief executive at Storehouse for just eight months.
Figures in the annual report show his total package of £3,290,474 for the year to the end of March, compared with £653,886 for the previous 12 months, which included relocation expenses and an annual bonus of £69,160.
The report tells shareholders: ‘When David Dworkin joined the group the profit attributable to BhS was in sharp decline.
That decline has not only been arrested but has been substantially reversed.
‘BhS profit from retail operations this year is £44.1m, an increase of over 100pc, despite the recession, from its low point in 1990–91.’
Unlike some other departing executives lately, Mr Dworkin was paid no compensation for loss of office.
However, Storehouse paid a total of £1,162,536 compensation to five former directors for loss of office last year.
Despite his sky-high pay, Mr Dworkin brought a down-to-earth style to the management of Storehouse.
He scrapped segregated dining rooms and often walked around barefoot and in casual dress, eating bananas.
BRYNCIR.
Mssrs Bob Parry and Co report an entry of 119 cattle, 76 sheep, store cattle again an extremely fast trade, cull cows also showing a very fast trade with all classes of cows in excellent demand with an overall sale average of 112.76p.
Top prices of the day as follows nurse cow or heifer with calf at heel £1,010 shown by W I and R H Hughes Lodge Trallwyn, nurse cow or heifer in calf £750 shown by G E Jones, Bro Dawel, cull cow per kilo 129.5p and cull cow overall at £841.75 both shown by O W Owen, Pen y Bont, Llangian, prime heifer by weights 146p shown by H W Roberts, Pen Cefn Mawr, single store bullock £641 shown by A Jones, Llyftyn Gwyn, single store heifers £597 shown by Mrs J Hughes, Ael y Bryn, pair of store bullocks £626 shown by Mssrs M and G Parry, Orfedd Fawr, pair of store heifers £608 shown by D W Griffiths, Plas Newydd, Llwyndyrys, bunch of four or more store cattle £588, shown by G C Roberts, Llystyn Canol, pen of six or more ewe and lamb couples £25.50 shown by T Williams, Llechwedd.
Prices: Nurse cows 21 forward, Hereford cross heifers with bull calves up to £1,010, Hereford cross heifers with heifer calves up to £920, Hereford cross cows with bull calves up to £920, Hereford cross cows with heifer calves up to £720, limousin cross heifers with heifers calves up to £750, charolais calves with bull calves up to £850, Welsh black cows and heifers calves up to £860, Welsh black heifers in calf up to £750, cull cows 17 forward, fresian cows from 107p to 116.5p, Welsh black cows 108p to 127p, Hereford cross cows 96.5p to 115p, continental cross cows 121p to 129.5p, prime heifers 9 forward from 134p to 146p (141.02p), store cattle; 72 forward charolais cross bullocks £504 to £626, charolais cross barren heifers £460 to £597, Hereford cross bullocks £478 to £500, Hereford cross barren heifers £448 to £608, Welsh black bullocks £571 to £641, limousin cross barren heifers £463 to £556.
Store sheep, 188 forward ewe and lamb couples Welsh single couples £24 to £41.50, Welsh double couples £41 to £47.50, cross bred singles up to £51, Welsh yearling couples £46 to £60, cull ewes cross bred ewes £18.50 to £29.80, Welsh ewes £12.80 to £20.50, rams from £17 to £25.50, prime stock entry of 578 lambs with additional buyer in attendance, heavier lambs showing the best trade with insufficient numbers forward to meet demand, the lighter lambs met a firm trade resulting in a sale average of 108.1p, light lambs from 103.2p to 112.8p (107.54p), standard from 104.5p to 116.3p (107.3p), medium lambs from 113.6p to 115.7p (114.1p).
RUTHIN.
Entries of 1,754 lambs, hoggets and ewes, with a steady trade in all sections.
Light lambs from 106.3p to 121.9p (average 112.6), standard lambs 103.9 to 119.4 (113.1), medium lambs from 106.2 to 115.5 (112.5), heavy lambs from 100p to 107.8 (107), overweights from average 100p, overall average lambs 112.97.
Reject lambs from £30 up to £43.80.
Hoggets: Light hoggets 69.2 to 82.3 (78.5), medium hoggets 73.3 to 83.3 (82.7), heavy hoggets average 73.9, overall hoggets of 81.59.
Reject hoggets from £16 to £36.80.
Ewes: Welsh ewes up to £23.50, cross ewes to £32.50, overall average of £20.02.
Lucky dip
WHY are banks allowed to dip into our accounts as the mood takes them?
I have been charged twice in one month for one small overdrawn amount.
It adds insult to injury that banks are also allowed to take their charges with neither our knowledge nor consent.
They truly are a law unto themselves.
No wonder pensioners do not want payment direct to bank accounts.
(Miss) Julie A Mason,
Blacon, Chester.
Cabinet warned to cut spending or face tax rises
By David Rose Daily Post Political Editor
KENNETH Clarke bluntly warned the Cabinet last night to axe public spending or face higher taxes in his Autumn Budget.
It is the first sign from the new Chancellor that he is ready to reverse the Tories' commitment to lower taxes unless the Government tackles its £50bn overdraft.
And he used the Chancellor's traditional speech to the City of London to deliver his ultimatum to the Cabinet, which takes its first look at next year's public spending tomorrow.
‘No prudent Chancellor can ever regard taxation as something which can only ever be reduced,’ he said.
‘My own instincts are tax-cutting instincts, but if we are to keep the level of taxation down, it is essential to maintain a tight rein on public spending.’
John Major promptly lined up behind the Chancellor's tough stance by approving plans to tax the 1.5m people who get invalidity benefit.
The move will mean them paying £2.80 a week (or £140 a year) in tax netting the Treasury an extra £230m a year.
The Prime Minister gave his go-ahead at a meeting with the Chancellor, Treasury Chief Secretary Michael Portillo, Social Security Secretary Peter Lilley and Employment Minister Michael Forsyth, after being told that doctors, especially in inner city areas, sign people on for the benefit because it pays more than dole money.
This, the Government says, explains why those receiving benefit has more than doubled from 700,000 over the past ten years, raising the cost to £6bn.
‘Frankly, it beggars belief that so many more people have suddenly become invalids, especially at a time when the health of the nation has improved,’ Mr Major said in the Commons.
But, while Mr Lilley's £80bn social security budget is being specially targeted by the Treasury, other ministers will have to find deep cuts in their budgets if they are to avoid higher taxes.
About £35bn of Britain's huge £50bn borrowing debt is due to the recession, and will be wiped out as the recovery continues over the next three years.
That leaves the Chancellor and the Cabinet having to find £15bn of spending cuts or higher taxes, or accepting a combination of both.
In his City of London speech traditionally delivered at the Mansion House, but staged this year in the Guildhall, because of refurbishment of the usual venue the Chancellor endorsed Norman Lamont's plans to raise £10bn over the next two years by slapping VAT on home fuel bills and raising National Insurance contributions.
Labour's Shadow Chancellor, Gordon Brown, hit back: ‘This speech could easily have been delivered by Norman Lamont.
All that Mr Clarke has confirmed is the Tory confusion over tax policy.’
A ROADSHOW to bring expert advice to the doorsteps of businesses hits the road next week.
Organised by Merseyside Training and Enterprise Council in association with the Department of Trade and Industry, the TEC Tour will spend 10 days visiting business parks and industrial estates from Southport to Speke starting next Monday.
Free business, training and enterprise advice will be available.
Linda Bloomfield, chief executive of Merseyside TEC, said: ‘Businessmen's time is in short supply so taking the show to them seemed a logical idea.’
Dates and venues: June 21: Caddick Road, Knowsley Industrial Estate; 22: Kirkby Industrial Estate; 23: Huyton Industrial Estate; 24: Speke Hall Estate; 25: Wavertree Technology Park; 28: Wavertree Technology Park; 29: Brunswick Business Park; 30: Fylde Road Industrial Estate; July 1: Stephenson Way Industrial Estate, Formby; 2: Aintree Racecourse Industrial Estate.
MERSEYSIDE solicitors Goldsmith Williams is one of the first in the country to gain BS5750 quality assurance status.
The firm, founded in 1984, has a staff of 115.
Bankers on fact finding mission
BRITISH expertise and working practices will help modernise the banking system in a former Soviet republic following a fact-finding mission to Liverpool by two Ukrainians.
Alexei Pavlov, a marketing manager with the Ukraina Bank and Slava Tkatchenko, head of international payments at Gradobank, have been spending some time at Girobank to see how UK banks operate.
The use of modern technology at the Bootle headquarters has surprised both men, whose aim is to apply what they have learned to the banking system in Ukraine.
From left are: Mr Pavlov, Noel Butler, head of International at Girobank and Mr Tkatchenko.
Manweb VAT warning as profits top £100m
By Mark Currie
ELECTRICITY supplier Manweb, which yesterday announced annual profits of more than £100m, is giving £7m back to customers in the form of a price cut.
From next month, bills for 1.3m domestic users will be reduced by 1pc and new tariffs will be introduced, including a ‘low user’ deal which has no standing charge.
Card meter customers will also be able to obtain discounts.
John Roberts, the company's chief executive, said he expected ‘tens of thousands’ of customers to benefit from the new tariff, which is aimed predominantly at low income families.
The price cut will go a little way to alleviating the burden of VAT on bills, due to be introduced next April, a move described by Manweb chairman Bryan Weston as disappointing.
The government's decision to impose VAT at 8pc in 1994 and at the standard rate of 17pc 12 months later could reverse a trend which has seen customer disconnections fall by 70 pc in the past 12 months and Manweb said only six customers were disconnected for non payment in the past six months.
In addition, complaints to electricity watchdog Offer in the first quarter of 1993 were down by 44pc compared with the same period of 1992.
Mr Roberts said the company's performance during the year was sound, particularly as it had been achieved without any significant price increases.
Pre-tax earnings, at £111.2m, were 17.4pc up on the 1992 figure of £94.7m while turnover moved ahead from £834.6m to £919.9m, an increase of 10.2pc.
Earnings per share rose to 69.3p from 58.7p.
Shareholders will receive a final dividend of 14.9p a share, making a total for the year of 21p per share, up by 15pc.
During the year Manweb spent £85.5m on improving the network, which stretches from Aberystwyth to Merseyside, and is planning similar capital expenditure in the coming 12 months.
Several new businesses began operating during the year and are already trading profitably.
These include Manweb Gas and Wind Resources, in which Manweb is a partner.
Its core distribution business saw profits push ahead by 4.6pc to £101.4m.
Appliance sales fell by 1pc but improved purchasing and cost control turned a previous £2.1m loss into a £500,000 profit.
Mr Roberts said the company was pleased with the success of its £500,000 energy-saving initiative in Holyhead which has introduced a range of subsidised energy-efficiency measures to benefit domestic, commercial and industrial customers.
In the drive for greater efficiency, Manweb is in discussion with Welsh Water about sharing depot and other facilities and has plans to develop new business initiatives, including a fee-earning energy consultancy.
John Roberts
Manweb's profit rise ‘not enough to curb the bills’
By Ian Herbert Business Editor
MANWEB last night admitted that a 17.4pc jump in profits would not be enough to cushion customers from an increase in bills when VAT is imposed on fuel.
The electricity distributor yesterday cut tariffs by 1pc for 1.3m customers as it announced pre-tax profits of £111.2m.
But the company's chief executive, John Roberts, told the Daily Post that consumers would be bear the cost of an 8pc VAT charge on electricity, to be imposed next year.
‘It would be unrealistic to say we can absorb all the cost of the VAT charge,’ he said.
‘We will do all we can to help customers as much as we can, especially those on low incomes and we want to take more time during the course of the year to evaluate the charge in detail.
‘But even for low income customers, we do have difficulties.
Our licence is clear about cost subsidies between different groups of users.’
Mr Roberts refused to speculate on how much of the VAT charge Manweb could absorb.
But Manweb warned that the imposition of VAT, at 8pc in 1994 and at the standard rate of 17.4pc 12 months later, could lead to more disconnections.
That would reverse a trend which has seen customer disconnections fall by 70pc in the last 12 months.
Only six customers had been disconnected for non-payment in the last six months.
The threat of increased bills was in part offset by the 1pc tariff reduction, from the beginning of July.
The company announced additional help for lower income consumers, including a 2pc discount for card meter holders, targeted at consumers with payment difficulties.
They are becoming more widely available in Threshers and Telegraph service stations.
For consumers who use 1,000 units or less a new tariff is introduced, with no standing charge.
It will help single people and pensioners who live alone.
Charles Myers, chairman of the electricity consumers' committee for Merseyside and North Wales, dismissed the 1pc tariff cut as insufficient to help the ordinary customer.
He said: ‘With an increase in dividend of over 15pc, some customers will not feel that the benefits of the company's improved performance are being fairly shared.’
But Mr Roberts said his company's dividend was worth £3m to shareholders in one year, while the package of tariff cuts would cost the company £7m.
Mr Roberts said Manweb would seek to keep its own costs down in preparation for VAT.
Leisure plans for Herculaneum Dock
By Ian Herbert Business Editor
DEVELOPERS will be persuaded to turn a Liverpool dock into a thriving leisure and commerce centre under a new Government funding initiative, it emerged yesterday.
Inner Cities Minister Sir George Young declared the Herculaneum Dock has been earmarked for Private Finance Initiative cash, which will speed up the hunt for a private sector developer.
The dock, near the Garden Festival site, is being marketed by the Merseyside Development Corporation as a waterfront development which could include offices, industry, a car showroom or fast food outlet.
The Government's finance initiative targets developers which have been starved of public and private sector cash during the recession.
It will allow the MDC to hand over the land at Herculaneum Dock to private companies which would finance development projects in return.
And if a developer could not immediately secure rent from premises it builds at the dock, the Private Finance Initiative would provide it in the short-term, until the property market improves.
MDC external affairs director Bob Lane last night said the Private Finance Initiative enhanced the prospects of a clutch of development plans on Merseyside.
The 15-acre Herculaneum Dock, two miles from Liverpool city centre, was filled in and reclaimed for the International Garden Festival.
An Environment Department spokesman said yesterday: ‘The former dock is a prime site and ripe for development.
It is close to other prestige schemes which should make it attractive to developers.
‘An alliance between the MDC and a private company would be an excellent example of partnership to create jobs and prosperity.
‘The Private Finance Initiative will provide a means to build even closer relationships with the private sector and keep up the momentum of regeneration.’
Freight line makes Speke its new base
By David Hope
A MAJOR freight airline is to transfer its operation to Liverpool Airport, it emerged last night.
Jane's Aviation will switch its operation from Blackpool to Speke, boosting the airport's reputation as a freight traffic centre.
The company will be the largest freight carrier to be based at the Speke airport.
It uses one of the largest fleets of HS 748 aircraft in the UK.
Its 35-strong workforce transports a range of freight around the UK.
It works for Royal Mail and some of the nation's leading freight carriers, including Lynx, TNT and Parcel Line.
Parts
Another of its larger contracts involves the movement of car parts to and from the motor industry in Coventry.
The company is already a regular operator at Liverpool Airport.
For the past nine months it has been involved in a nightly Royal Mail operation out of the airport.
Mail is currently flown between Liverpool, Leeds, Stansted and Edinburgh and other freight contracts include the movement of newspapers from Liverpool to the Isle of Man and parcels to Belfast.
Jane's is now negotiating for new hangar space to house its eight engineers, a number which is shortly expected to increase in line with the company's expansion.
It brings a fleet of seven 44-seater British Aerospace aircraft to Liverpool, each of which can carry up to six tonnes of freight.
Its craft are based around the UK, serving Edinburgh, Leeds, the Isle of Man and Belfast services to and from Liverpool.
Jane's managing director Andy Janes (crt) said last night: ‘We are delighted with Liverpool's future plans and keen to be part of them.’
The firm, originally known as Jane's 748 Ltd, was established last year.
With the help of the Greyhound Bank it acquired Dan Air assets but grew quickly as its order book grew.
Mr Janes' aviation interest stem from 1987 when he established a Blackpool-Belfast service for Lynx.
He cited Liverpool's willingness to operate a 24-hour service as a key to the decision to switch to Merseyside.
Liverpool Airport managing director Rod Hill said last night: ‘The addition of this new business reinforces the belief in future opportunities at Liverpool.
‘Freight movements have always played an important role here and our planned future growth encompasses this important sector of the airline market.
‘Operators like Jane's Aviation will have the best opportunity to develop their business by being based here.’
Liverpool's freight and mail volumes rose by 9pc last year.
Truck demand bad news for Leyland
By Mark Currie Deputy Business Editor
CHAMPAGNE corks were popping in Lancashire last week following the success of the worker-led MBO of Leyland Daf's heavy truck division which has saved 700 jobs.
But new figures next week from the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders (SMMT) are set to show that demand for commercial vehicles is still pretty flat and what signs there are of recovery are patchy at best.
A spokesman said Tuesday's quarterly forecast was likely to be revised downwards, following an upbeat assessment last February.
‘Then, total commercial vehicle production was forecast at 210,000 registrations for 1993, an increase of 4.5pc on the actual 1992 figure,’ he said.
‘But the market is 4.5pc down on the year so far and it looks as though the light end of the market might not yet have bottomed out.’
Evidence of the uneven nature of the path out of the worst recession since the Second World War came yesterday in announcements from two Leyland Daf competitors, Iveco Ford and the smaller, Cheshire-based, Foden.
Recruitment
Rod Heather, managing director of Foden, gave details of a recruitment programme to boost his workforce by 20pc to cope with growing demand for tractor units.
In all, 80 temporary staff have been added to the 480-strong workforce at Sandbach as orders for those types of vehicle are 40pc up compared to last year.
‘You have to bear in mind that we are coming off a very low base,’ said Mr Heather.
‘1991 and 1992 were disastrous for us, with business down 50pc on 1989 levels.
‘There was a massive drop in demand, but so far this year registrations are up 10pc on last year.
We have had a good couple of months and we are fairly positive about the outlook for the remainder of the year.’
His view contrasts sharply with that of Iveco Ford, which is Leyland Daf's main UK rival.
Forecasting nil growth in the market this year, the company said it expected a slight upturn in the final quarter of 1993 but its total truck sales would not exceed last year's 32,000.
Unions say Timex plant will close by Christmas
By Joe Quinn Daily Post Correspondent
THE strife-torn Timex plant in Dundee is set to close by Christmas, union officials said last night after talks with its American management.
The talks came just hours after the abrupt resignation of chairman Peter Hall, viewed by sacked workers as a hate figure throughout the five-month dispute.
His departure was initially greeted with euphoria by sacked workers who saw him as the major stumbling block to a negotiated settlement of the bitter dispute, Britain's worst industrial confrontation since the 1980s.
But union leaders emerged from talks in the city last night saying there had been no agreement on a tough back-to-work formula and closure looked likely.
William Leslie, sacked deputy convener at the Timex plant, said: ‘The company told us that even if the package they put to us was accepted, there was a 90pc likelihood of closure by Christmas.
‘The policy of the company is to seek an orderly closure.’
The talks will resume today but there seems little hope of settlement.
Management would say nothing after the talks, but John Kydd, divisional organiser of the AEEU, said the company had effectively delivered an ultimatum to the union to accept virtually the same package as was rejected by sacked workers nearly two weeks ago or the factory could close.
Mr Kydd said the two sides were ‘poles apart.’
He said: ‘We believe there is a future for Timex at Dundee with reasonable wages and conditions.
‘We are prepared to compromise, the company is not.’
The formula on offer by the company last night is said to be similar to the rejected package but with slightly better redundancy terms.
That package, rejected unanimously by the workforce last week, was claimed by workers to involve a 27pc cut in pay and benefits.
The company said it would mean a pay cut of about 10pc, as sacked workers would be rehired at an existing union-agreed ‘new worker’ rate.
Even before last night's talks began, AEEU general secretary Gavin Laird said he was ‘extremely pessimistic’ and that only a miracle could prevent the plant's closure.
Timex managers had told him of heavy losses in recent years and the possibility of more losses this year.
Mr Laird said: ‘Unless there is some event, some circumstance, some miracle that I cannot see, then I repeat there is a possibility that the plant will cease to exist.’
Earlier, Mr Kydd said Timex had warned 18 months ago, when Mr Hall was appointed, that the plant faced closure if he failed turn it round.
Mr Hall said of his resignation: ‘It was my decision.’
Speaking at his home in Godalming, Surrey, he added: ‘It has been a hard few months and I am now looking forward to a break and spending some time with my family.’
Bay area promising
By Ian Herbert
A LEADING North Sea oil company yesterday declared its licence to explore the depths of Liverpool Bay was among the most sought-after off the UK coast.
Marathon Oil UK's licence to explore waters off Point of Ayr, Clwyd, is one of its first operations outside the oil-rich Bray Field, 155 miles North East of Aberdeen.
Spokeswoman Mary Gallagher said: ‘We have got what a lot of people were after.
‘The block looks very promising, because it is near a proven oil and gas field.
‘But what looks good might not be and we can only speculate.
That is the nature of the industry.’
Marathon, which has mined the North Sea for 20 years, examined geological surveys of its Irish Sea block before applying for a licence.
It will now carry out geological and sonar tests before any exploratory drilling starts.
Platforms
Marathon had already been granted two production licenses in the western edge of Cardigan Bay and St George's Channel, West Wales.
It has two manned platforms, with 200 men on each, in the North Sea and is currently building a third.
‘Liverpool Bay is a new geographical operation for us,’ said Ms Gallagher.
‘It is also nearer the coast than our previous activities so offers different constraints of beaches, wildlife and vessel traffic.
‘But the environmental standards we impose are no less stringent anywhere else.’
Deminex UK, which has secured another Liverpool Bay licence, has been exploring fields since 1972 and operating on them since 1977.
It participates in 39 offshore blocks in the North Sea and West of the Shetlands.
HIGH SOCIETY GOES TO THE RACES: Her Majesty the Queen and Prince Philip, top, arrive by horse-drawn carriage at the Ascot racecourse where high fashion, right, makes an annual, eye-catching appearance alongside the more traditional millinery of Judith Mellor, wife of Tory MP David, above, two top-hatted gents and the not-quite-so-traditional smog mask headgear of a police officer, below right Pictures: MARTIN KEENE and ADAM BUTLER
Stunned scientists told: 40 jobs will be scrapped
AROUND 40 managerial posts are to be scrapped in a major shake-up at Unilever Research's Port Sunlight Laboratory.
Union representative Peter Garner-Gray said last night that scientists at the complex were deeply shocked by the move.
He commented: ‘In the 30 years I have been with Unilever these are the first redundancies.
They have a reputation for superb manpower planning.
‘I can't recall any major upset like this before.’
Mr Garner-Gray, a member of the branch executive of the National Unilever Management Association part of the Institute of Professionals, Managers and Scientists said staff were too shaken up and surprised to react immediately.
He said: ‘They are scientists and relatively unemotional people.
They will take 48 hours to digest the information before there is any reaction.’
The move is part of a streamlining initiative to create an exploratory division aimed at enhanced performance in future detergent, personal care and speciality chemiclas products.
Dr Alan McKinnon, the laboratory's deputy head, said last night: ‘We regret that there will be job losses and we shall be doing all we can to help those affected.
‘Wherever possible the reductions will be reached by early retirement.’
He went on: ‘This reorganisation is critical to the long-term future of the laboratory and the changes will make a significant impact on our ability to meet the challenges facing us.
‘Our aim is to improve the leadership we provide by simplifying our structure, revitalising our performance and skills and generally reducing costs, to the benefit of the laboratory as a whole.’
Dr McKinnon stressed: ‘We continue to be a major employer in Port Sunlight, with some 1,300 staff.
With investments such as the £40m on the construction of our new manufacturing technology centre, our commitment to the area remains as strong as ever.’
By Geoff Barnes Daily Post Staff
Another 50 jobs to go in slim-down at N-plant
By Emyr Williams Daily Post Staff
SLIMMING down of staff at a North Wales nuclear power station to fit in with modern technology and reduced power generation has meant 100 jobs being lost in the Trawsfynydd area over the past 12 months.
And management at the Trawsfynydd power station made it clear yesterday that they were still looking for up to 50 voluntary redundancies at the station this year.
Already, said station manager John Moares, 130 people had applied for early retirement in recent weeks a situation which he considers to be partly connected with the station's uncertain future.
With the Nuclear Installations Inspectorate (NII) yet to give the go-ahead, or otherwise, for the station to re-start generation again after being shut down since February, 1991, Mr Moares said it was not surprising that some people had put in for voluntary redundancy.
On the question of staffing, Mr Moares told yesterday's meeting of the station's Local Community Liaison Council that despite a drop of 100 in staffing levels since last year, the emphasis was still on safety.
Mr Moares said: ‘What the public must understand is the fact that Nuclear Electric has to secure the economics of operation of the plant in the changed business circumstances which include the station's reduced output capability, the new competitive trading arrangements within the industry, and the current general economic climate.
‘These measures, which include staff reductions from 580 to 480, as well as other reductions in operating costs, have been introduced following full and open consultation with members of the workforce.’
The seven-day operation of the station was already discontinued with staff working Monday to Friday.
‘What we are aiming for are manning levels to cater for the re-opening of the station.
There is scope for a further reduction of up to 50 posts during this year, bringing the staff levels down to around 430,’ said Mr Moares.
‘But on shut-down, we could manage on substantially fewer.’
The Trawsfynydd N-plant
Outlook seen as grim after Timex head quits
By Joe Quinn and Alan Jones
THE UGLY industrial dispute at Timex entered a new chapter yesterday with the abrupt departure of company president Peter Hall.
Within hours of the sudden announcement talks began in Dundee between the American owned watchmaker and local union officials.
Some of the sacked workers were delighted at news of the departure, saying it removed a major obstacle to settling the bitter five-month row.
But Gavin Laird, general secretary of the Amalgamated Engineering and Electrical Union, said only a miracle could prevent the plant's closure.
John Kydd, sacked convenor at the plant, said: ‘We have to be cautious about this news.
‘It could mean negotiations, but it could mean closure.’
The company warned 18 months ago, when Mr Hall was appointed, that the plant faced closure if he failed turn it round.
Mr Laird, speaking on BBC Radio 4's PM programme, said the antipathy between Mr Hall and shop stewards was such that any form of agreement was impossible while he remained.
But he added: ‘That said, I must say I am extremely pessimistic about the future of the plant, given all that I have been hearing these last few days.’
Timex management had told him of substantial losses in recent years and of the possibility of another massive deficit this year.
Despite management optimism, the factory had not been making the goods to meet the profits required, said Mr Laird.
‘Unless there is some event, some circumstance, some miracle that I cannot see, then I repeat there is a possibility that that plant will cease to exist.’
Last night, Mr Hall said of his resignation: ‘It was my decision.’
Speaking at his home in Godalming, Surrey, he added: ‘It has been a hard few months and I am now looking forward to a break and spending some time with my family.’
The scene outside the Dundee Timex factory yesterday morning
Firm claims widespread support for store plan
By David Greenwood Daily Post Staff
FOOD giants Sainsbury's says it is getting widespread support for its plans to build their first store in Gwynedd.
The scheme, planned for land at Parc Menai on the outskirts of Bangor will cover almost 40,000sq ft, including parking and other facilities.
Plans were lodged with Arfon Borough Council in April but the council still has to make a decision.
However, hundreds of people have already had a chance to view a model of the plan.
And the company claims that out of 210 who registered comments, 209 favoured a supermarket development on the site close to the Bangor to Caernarfon A487 road.
Sainsbury's regional director, Roger Warren Evans, said: ‘We are delighted with the tremendous support for this proposal and look forward to progressing the planning application with the local authority.’
He said that local people particularly welcomed the fact that the store would bring 200 job opportunities to the area.
Meanwhile, Arfon Council's planning section in Caernarfon confirmed it was still considering the Sainsbury's plan and the application would be judged on its merits.
Three other superstore applications are in the planning pipeline for Bangor.
One for a boatyard site overlooking Hirael Bay, and another for the St David's Hospital site at the other end of the city, are awaiting the outcome of a joint local inquiry which was held before a Welsh Office inspector towards the end of April.
Sainsbury's felt it could not justify investment at either of these locations and instead surprised everyone by buying land at Parc Menai which has already got planning consent for a hotel and conference centre.
To add to planners' problems, a scheme has also been lodged for a 65,000sq ft development on the Bangor rugby ground off Caernarfon Road.
Tourism boom forecast as £7m gamble pays off
By Emyr Williams Daily Post Correspondent
THE VISION of a local authority to spend more than £7m on a harbour re-development is already paying rich dividends, according to Wales' tourism chief, former England cricket captain Tony Lewis.
At Pwllheli yesterday, the chairman of the Wales Tourist Board said there was no doubt the town had enormous potential to increase its earnings from tourism quite significantly.
‘The Royal Yachting Association regards Pwllheli as among the best yachting venues in the UK and Dwyfor District Council's vision, to spend £7.5m on a harbour redevelopment in the town, is already bringing benefits,’ said Mr Lewis.
‘Throughout the summer, I understand, you are hosting a number of national and international sailing competitions this can only be to the good of Dwyfor and, indeed, Wales.’
Performing the official opening of the town's new £20,000 tourist-information centre, Mr Lewis said: ‘Tourism plays a major role in the local economy of Pwllheli and Llyn, and an estimated £25m to £30m is generated every year from visitor-spending in the town alone.
‘But Pwllheli has enormous potential to increase its earnings from tourism quite significantly.
‘If the Manchester bid to stage the 2000 Olympics is successful, there will be enormous benefits to Llyn as the venue for yachting events.
‘The national media attention given to Pwllheli, in the run-up to the final decision, must be worth a few million pounds in advertising terms alone.’
Since publication last year of the Pwllheli Tourism Action Plan, said Mr Lewis, there had been an increased level of activity in the implementation of the LEAD Initiative, launched by the Wales Tourist Board in 1989.
Pwllheli, he said, was one of the eight community LEAD areas, each of which has £150,000 in Section 4 funds, earmarked for tourism development.
As a result work is now in progress on a shop-front improvement project as well as on Phase One of the promenade scheme.
Describing the new tourist information centre as a positive step forward, Dwyfor's economic development officer, Henry Roberts, added: ‘At last Llyn and Eifionydd have a local TIC they deserve.’
Earlier Mr Lewis presented the board's ‘Welcome Host Customer Care Charter’ to management at the Butlin's Starcoast World near Pwllheli.
The award is in recognition of the company's in-house training programme, which is aimed at providing a warm and professional welcome to all visitors.
Praise: Tony Lewis
MP makes bid to block sale of steelworks site
By David Jones Daily Post Staff
A COMPANY which plans to buy the Brymbo steelworks site is being urged to withdraw to allow the local authorities to redevelop the land.
J Saville Gordon Machinery Ltd says a deal, subject to contract with the site's owner, United Engineering Steels, has been struck.
The machinery firm says it wants to redevelop the 400 acre site, with the co-operation of Wrexham Maelor Council, for new industry and housing.
But Wrexham MP Dr John Marek claims that the full potential of the site will be realised far more quickly if it is instead transferred into public ownership.
Dr Marek said: ‘I don't believe Saville's have any intention of developing this site unless they get millions of pounds in public monies.
‘There's a danger they'll develop it in a piecemeal fashion.
Not all the land would be developed and certain areas contaminated by toxic waste would be left untouched.’
The MP added: ‘I'm calling on Saville's to withdraw as quickly as possible from the deal and allow the local authorities to acquire the land.
‘Saville's cannot possibly do anywhere near as good a job in bringing that site back into use as the local authorities could if they acquired the site themselves.’
Dr Marek said it was also likely that Saville's would press ahead with opencast coal-mining on land near Lodge, causing further problems in a community already devastated by the loss of 1,200 steelworks jobs.
John Saville, chairman of the J Saville Gordon parent group, said there was nothing to prevent the local authorities using their compulsory purchase powers to acquire the site if they so wished.
Mr Saville also admitted it was almost certain that his group would seek grants from the Welsh Office or the Welsh Development Agency for the reclamation of the site, which is scarred by toxic waste tips.
Mr Saville added: ‘If they slap a CPO on the site, then it will be up to the councils to get on with the job of reclamation.
There's no point in us spending a horrendous amount of money on the site if we've no control over it.’
Mr Justice Connell and fellow-Jockey Club members Len Cowburn, left, and Stan Mellor at yesterday's conference
Jobs joy as firm opts for £4m double output plan
By Emyr Williams Daily Post Correspondent
A SUCCESSFUL tooling company is on the expansion trail, with hopes of 70 new jobs in North Powys over the next three years as a result of a £4m investment programme.
Grayman Tooling and Pressings, a subsidiary of Oswestry-based Saltofix, already employs 110 people at its Llanfyllin works.
Expansion plans announced over the weekend will enable the company to double its manufacturing capacity.
Planning permission is being sought for a 72,000 sq ft factory to be built by The Development Board for Rural Wales on a new six acre site in the town.
The site is being developed with support from both Powys County Council and Montgomeryshire District Council.
Negotiations are also taking place with the Development Board for financial help towards the project which will provide vital expansion space for new plant and machinery.
‘We have expanded rapidly over the past few years and have now outgrown our existing factory,’ said David Gray, chairman and managing director of the Saltofix Group.
‘Approval of these plans will enable us to retain and build on our existing workforce, which is what we want to do, otherwise we would have to find a completely new site, probably out of Wales, too far away for most of our existing employees.’
Welcoming the company's plans, DBRW chairman Glyn Davies said that for many years the Development Board had sought to help the company to re-locate and expand while staying in Llanfyllin.
‘A planning approval on this six-acre site would enable the existing 110 jobs to be safeguarded, an extra 70 jobs to be created, and would allow for further expansion in the future.’
added Mr Davies.
Powys acting chief executive, Michael Rolt, said the land had been assembled by the county council as part of a major investment by the county in the town's internal highways infrastructure.
At its Llanfyllin site, Grayman Tooling and Pressings manufactures sheet metal pressings and assemblies mainly for the automotive industry.
Miraculous recovery Serena Cockburn, 6, who was unconscious after the road accident Picture: FRANK LOUGHLIN