

Jumbo-size project
MATURE student Sunny Johansen faces an unpleasant task as she plays her part in saving the African elephant.
The Liverpool University graduate will chart the distribution of the rainforest elephant in Nigeria by counting piles of dung.
Miss Johansen is due to leave in five weeks.
She has a six-month voluntary contract with the government-backed Forest Elephant Group to work in the Omo rain forests.
‘It is a dream come true for me,’ she said.
‘I have loved elephants since I was a child and it will be fantastic to see them in their natural environment.’
Recent setbacks mean Miss Johansen, 29 from Woolton, still needs funds for a return ticket.
In return she will do research or voluntary work.
He put 3,600 miles on the ocean clock in four years
The moving tale of Bluey the long distance shark
A BLUE shark which has spent his summer holidays in the Celtic Sea has been recaptured almost four years later and 3,600 miles away.
He was only a youngster when a party of keen Warrington anglers set sail from East Ferry Quay, in Cork Harbour, with local skipper Brian Byrne aboard the 30ft Lagosta.
They were fishing off Roches Point when Dave Scott tangled with the lively middleweight shark.
Though it gave a good account of itself, Dave gently persuaded the fish close enough to be lifted aboard the boat.
Luckily for ‘Bluey,’ Brian operates the Central Fisheries Board tag and release scheme, so soon after weighing, the shark was swimming merrily away albeit it with a brightly coloured plastic tag at the back of his dorsal fin.
That was September
1989 and the shark weighed 42 lb. 1238 days later and much, much bigger taking the scales at a whopping 120 lb ‘bluey’ ran out of luck.
Nobody will ever know just how much of the oceans he had covered when he fell victim to the Spanish longliners, 3600 miles from Cork.
The commercial fishermen were in search of Blue Fin Tuna.
The shark was simply after a free meal, but as his parents would have advised him there is no such thing as a freebie.
The Irish tag was redeemed for a small reward and it was only when it arrived back in the Central Fisheries Board office, Dublin, that Sea Angling Officer, Peter Green, discovered that a new distance record had been set for their shark tag scheme.
An increasing number of British sea anglers are showing an interest in shark fishing and Ireland is certainly the place to try for them.
The likes of Brian, and his current charter boat Lagosta II (an Offshore 105), are looking forward to a new season which starts about now and improves with warming sea temperatures until early September.
The Irish record for a rod caught Blue Shark is 206 lb.