

Welfare expert to work for Legion
THE Royal British Legion has appointed a full-time county field officer to cover Clwyd, Gwynedd and Montgomeryshire.
Kevin Blanchfield was the war pensions welfare officer based at Hightown Barracks in Wrexham and has 13 years experience helping exservicemen and their dependants following discharge from the forces.
He said rehabilitation, resettlement, retraining and grant aid were all integral parts of the service offered by the Legion, often after service personnel had been injured or disabled.
‘My job as a county field officer is to help over 400 Royal British Legion caseworkers in North Wales to do their job.
I intend to ensure that they have all the information and resources they need to develop their service to the ex-service community,’ he said.
Much of the work including that carried out at the retraining facilities at Ellesemere Port is aimed at helping younger servicemen and women.
Mr Blanchfield is well-known in North Wales as vice patron of the Normandy Veterans Association in Gwynedd.
Health chiefs go public on Trust
By David Greenwood Daily Post Staff
COMMUNITY-health officials in Gwynedd will go to the public next week with their bid for NHS Trust status.
The county's community health unit, which has its headquarters at Bryn y Neuadd Hospital, Llanfairfechan, will give the people of Gwynedd a chance to air their views at a series of meetings.
If successful, the unit, which looks after all the community hospitals plus mental-health and district nursing in Gwynedd, could become a Trust by next April.
A spokesman explained the meetings in Aberconwy, Arfon/Dwyfor, Meirionnydd and Ynys Mon were part of a Welsh-Office consultation process.
The unit's general manager, John Mullen said: ‘These meetings are a key part of the process.
It will provide an opportunity for us to explain and present our plans for the development of the community health service as an NHS Trust.’
The meetings will start at Dolgellau on Monday, moving on to Llangefni on Tuesday, then Caernarfon next Wednesday and Llandudno on June 24.
9 years for rape of young sisters
A MAN who raped his two stepdaughters, making them both pregnant when they were 15, was jailed for nine years yesterday.
The 40-year-old told one of the sisters if anyone asked who the father of her baby daughter was she should lie and say it was her boyfriend, Leeds Crown Court was told.
When the older girl discovered she was pregnant, the man turned his attentions to her sister, who had a baby boy by him, said Bernard Gateshill, prosecuting.
The defendant had raped and molested both girls from the time they were 11 or 12 until they were in their late teens.
Their brother was also sexually abused from the age of eight until he was 13.
The court was told that all three were now grown up, with the girls 27 and 31, and had only just revealed their ordeal at the hands of their stepfather.
The man, who cannot be named to protect the identities of his victims, pleaded guilty to five sample counts of rape, three indecent assaults, one charge of buggery and one of gross indecency.
Motorists facing traffic hold-ups
A COUNTY'S busiest road will shortly be having work done on it and traffic holdups are likely.
Clwyd County Council says the work will mean westbound lane closures between 9.30am and 4.30pm on the A494 through Queensferry and on the A55.
Closure dates and places are: June 16, A494 Ewloe Interchange; June 17, A55 from Cheshire to A5104 Warren Bank boundary; June 18, A55 from A5104 Warren Bank to Ewloe Interchange; June 21, A55 Ewloe Interchange to Brookside; June 22, A55 Cheshire to A5104 Warren Bank boundary; June 23, A55 A5104 Warren Bank to Ewloe Interchange; June 24, A55 Ewloe Interchange to Brookside; June 25, A55 Brookside to A5119 Northop; June 28, A55 from A5119 Northop to Coed-y-Cra Bridge; June 29, A55 Coed-yCra Bridge to Casino; June 30, A55 from Casino to Brynford Hill Bridge; July 1, A55 from Brookside to A5119 Northop; July 2, A55 from A5119 Northop to Coed-y-Cra Bridge; July 5, A55, Coed-yCra Bridge to Casino; July 6, A55 Casino to Brynford Hill Bridge.
Ransom to launch raid Down Under
QUICK RANSOM could be heading to Australia for this November's Melbourne Cup following his impressive win in yesterday's Harcros Stayers Handicap at York.
But, before then, further domestic pickings lie in store for the Mark Johnston-trained five-year-old, who returned to the scene of last season's Ebor triumph to preserve his 100 per cent Knavesmire record.
‘That's three wins from three runs at York and he'll be back for the Ebor again in August,’ Johnston said.
Quick Ransom was sent on by jockey Dean McKeown some 300 yards from home and the victory earned the gelding a 3lb penalty for the Northumberland Plate in a fortnight.
‘It puts Quick Ransom on 8st 1lb and I know Dean is determined to make the weight,’ the winning trainer added.
‘The Plate has always been the midsummer target.’
Amazingly, Johnston's charge failed to make his reserve of 70,000 guineas at Doncaster Sales during the winter and, not unnaturally, his Scottish-born handler was happy to continue training him.
‘I thought the big National Hunt boys would have been banging on our door,’ he admitted.
‘We were very surprised that someone didn't snap him up to go jumping.
Perhaps if I'd entered him for the Champion Hurdle, he might have sold.
‘Since I put him in the Melbourne Cup, which is a serious entry, we've had enquiries from America, so he could yet change stables.’
Butlins to fight ruling on caravans
THE giant Rank Organisation is all set to fight a planning authority decision not to allow caravans to remain on a site forming part of the Butlin Starcoast World holiday centre near Pwllheli.
The decision of Cyngor Dosbarth Dwyfor to refuse planning permission for the retention of caravans and caravan pitches outside the permitted area at the centre will be challenged by Butlins.
A public inquiry is being held at The Village Hall, Chwilog on Tuesday, June 29.
Curates' day to remember THE Rev Alexander Christopher Buckley, assistant curate of Porthmadog, and the Rev Meurig Llwyd Williams, assistant curate of Holyhead, will be ordained into the priesthood at Bangor Cathedral on Saturday, July 3.
The Bishop of Bangor will also ordain Robert William Townsend and Eric Roberts, both of St Michael's College, Llandaff, as deacons to serve as assistant curates Mr Townsend at Dolgellau and Mr Roberts at Bangor.
Welsh scheme
A WELSH national accreditation scheme for activity holiday centres will be launched today by Wales Tourist Board chairman Tony Lewis and Sports Council for Wales chairman Ossie Wheatley at Plas Menai, the national water sports centre near Caernarfon.
Survey plan
CADW, the organisation responsible for historic monuments in Wales, is to carry out a new survey of listed buildings in Holyhead the first in 43 years.
Road show
A STUDY being undertaken by the Welsh Office, Dyfed County Council and Cyngor Dosbarth Ceredigion into trunk roads in the Aberystwyth area will be the subject of a public exhibition at Aberystwyth for three days from July 8.
Political party
MONTGOMERYSHIRE Liberal Democrats are holding their annual county fete at Leighton Community Centre on Saturday.
Two injured as lorry crashes
TWO men were injured when a lorry crashed into a field after losing control on the A494 Ruthin to Mold road near Llanferres yesterday morning.
The lorry, which was carrying tarmac, lost control on a bend, careered into a farmer's field and came to a halt near a stream which feeds into a trout lake.
Both men were either thrown clear or jumped.
A 24-year-old man was taken by one ambulance crew to Wrexham Maelor Hospital with cuts to the head, back and chest injuries, while another ambulance took a semi-conscious man from Holywell to Glan Clwyd hospital at Bodelwyddan.
Police have not released their names.
Murder trial jury sees ‘body disposal’ video
By Mervyn Tunbridge Daily Post Correspondent
A MURDER trial jury watched a policewoman being sealed inside a large green wheelie-bin yesterday.
The video demonstration at Nottingham Crown Court was screened to show how the body of Leeds prostitute Julie Dart, 18, may have been dumped.
A letter from her killer and kidnapper to West Yorkshire Police claimed that after she had been beaten unconscious, then strangled, her body had been kept in a wheelie-bin for two days before being taken to where it was later found Easton, near Grantham, Lincs in July 1991.
After his arrest, the vermilion red Metro car belonging to 51-year-old Michael Sams was used for the demonstration, which proved that the bin would fit into the back of the vehicle, still allowing the tail-gate to be shut.
Sams, of Sutton-on-Trent, Notts, denies kidnapping and murdering Julie and also two charges of demanding £140,000 with menaces from Leeds City Police.
But Sams has admitted kidnapping Birmingham estate agent Stephanie Slater, unlawfully imprisoning her in January 1992 and demanding £175,000 with menaces from her then employer.
TV sets were brought into court so that the jury of eight women and four men could watch the three minute demonstration.
WPC Wendy Tinkler climbed into the wheelie-bin, which was then sealed with tape.
Then Det Con Michael Blackwell lifted the bin and slid it into the back of the Metro, from which the rear seat had been removed.
The trial continues.
Feline sad over Arnie
OUR cat Arnie died on the spot where he did most of his living.
Named after Schwarzenegger for his terminating exploits, the big, strong tabby fell to an unseen swift car bumper blow.
We don't know exactly where but it must have been close, as he dragged himself home to his favourite spot on the lawn where his life ebbed out of him in the quiet of the night.
They say it's good for children to grow up with pets around them.
But they don't tell you how to prepare you for when they die.
And if Thomas had been any older I don't know quite how I would have explained it to him.
I suppose parents have to put on a brave face.
As it was he was still asleep upstairs and never saw his dad bury him…and I could bawl unseen to my heart's content.
Arnie was just two and had a helluva short life.
When we moved he went AWOL and had to be recaptured and forcibly repatriated.
At the new house, he lived life to the full.
We were convinced he had all his mates round during the day.
There was always lots of post-partying evidence.
Paw prints everywhere, upturned vases and dead birds the leftovers from the buffet.
He darted everywhere, never strolled.
Always scurrying and suspicious, never relaxed.
He had his favourite places and didn't care for anyone or anywhere else.
He wasn't a cuddly, picture-book puss.
If hungry he'd gnaw your ankle just to let you know to fill his bowl.
And he ate so much Tesco's must have thought we kept a stegosaurus at home.
His green eyes said it all: ‘You can look but don't touch.’
If you did venture a touch, fingers were shredded.
The last of his scratch marks have faded now but his memories never will.
RIP Arnie.
Life's mysteries
Sex bias complaints on increase
COMPLAINTS about sex discrimination in the office have soared by almost 50pc, new figures showed yesterday.
More than 13,000 inquiries were made to the Equal Opportunities Commission last year an increase of 47pc on the previous 12 months according to its annual report.
The authors claim the increase must be seen against a background of changes in the labour market, making equality of pay, opportunity and status more difficult.
Despite the economy being increasingly dependent on women, their economic contribution is not being recognised by improvements in their terms and conditions of work, the report says.
It adds that the exclusion of certain part-time workers from employment protection rights, pensions and the contributory benefits system only serves to reinforce assumptions about women's economic dependency.
Kamlesh Bahl, EOC chairperson, said: ‘Achieving a woman's economic independence is a fundamental goal in progress towards a society which understands and values equality of opportunity and accords equal status to women and men.’
Motorist's 999 fight
A MOTORIST mounted a kerb, demolished a lamp-post and garden wall, and then struggled with ambulancemen who attempted to treat him, Rhuddlan magistrates were told yesterday.
Stephen Scott, 30, of Kearsley Drive, Rhyl, was fined £80 and banned for 16 months after admitting driving with excess alcohol.
The offence was committed on May 3 in Russell Road, Rhyl.
After the defendant's Ford Fiesta crashed, Scott had to be restrained before he was taken to hospital for treatment.
Fireball horror leads to warning
A CORONER has issued a warning about the dangers of combustible clothing after the death of a woman who was turned into a human fireball in her own kitchen.
Mother-of-three Kathleen Colbert, 55, was enveloped in flames after her dressing gown caught fire.
She had been making a cup of coffee and was leaning over a lit ring on the gas cooker to put the kettle on.
Mrs Colbert, a child care officer, of Y Wern, Wrexham, died in Whiston Hospital on March 17 after suffering almost 50pc burns in the February 27 fire.
Her husband, Wrexham Maelor councillor Jim Colbert, told how he rushed downstairs after hearing his wife's screams to find her dressing gown on fire.
A report from a consultant pathologist said the cause of Mrs Colbert's death was blood poisoning due to burns.
South Clwyd Coroner John Hughes, recording a verdict of accidental death, warned about the dangers of wearing potentially combustible clothing.
MPs angry at jail terms for vigilantes
By Rowan Dore Daily Post Correspondent
MPs PROTESTED to Government law officers yesterday over jail sentences on two vigilantes who kidnapped and threatened a youth suspected of being involved in thefts.
There is outrage over the five-year terms on Duncan Bond, 35, a builder and father of three from Harleston, Norfolk, and Mark Chapman, 29, an engineer from Horham, Suffolk.
Tory MP for Suffolk Central Michael Lord has written to Attorney General Sir Nicholas Lyell asking him to review the sentences.
Another Tory MP, Henry Bellingham, Norfolk North West, has told Lord Chancellor Lord Mackay of Clashfern that he is concerned at the severity of the punishment.
Transport Secretary John MacGregor, MP for Norfolk South, has been approached by the family of Bondone of his constituents and is believed to be making his own contact with Sir Nicholas.
Mr Lord said: ‘These young men were wrong to take the law into their own hands but the five years they were given was excessive.
‘They are both well respected members of the community and I have asked the Attorney General to look at the sentences.’
Mr Bellingham said: ‘We don't want to condone anyone who breaks the law but I think the extreme sentences on these men are completely out of order.’
He added: ‘There is widespread concern throughout East Anglia about these jailings.’
Labour last night insisted courts must make clear they will not tolerate the actions of vigilantes.
Shadow home affairs minister Alun Michael said: ‘Action by vigilantes who break the law is serious and also dangerous.’
Bond and Chapman were jailed after admitting kidnapping and threatening Gavin Last, 17, who they suspected to be involved in a spate of thefts.
They bundled him into a van, tied him up and threatened to douse him in petrol and set him on fire.
The two claimed in court they only intended to scare him into giving information about their property.
John McGregor may intervene
Britain's first toll motorway
PLANS for Britain's first £300m toll motorway the Birmingham Northern Relief Road were being unveiled.
The 27-mile autoroute, intended to relieve congestion on the M6, is the first of several proposed privately owned toll roads.
Plan for £1m museum in park is crushed
AN attempt to turn a building in which rocks were once crushed into a museum and restaurant has been scrapped.
The £1m proposal for Breakwater Park, Holyhead, is considered not feasible.
Ynys Mn Borough Council's director of planning, Arthur Owen, now says the creation of an open-air museum is the best alternative to attract people to the park.
This museum will feature information boards and relics recovered from the old quarry.
Mr Owen has prepared a £100,000 plan to make the building, which dates back well into the last century, safe by partial demolition, repairs and site clearance.
Mr Owen said: ‘The chief purpose of the park is to create an attraction with economic benefits to the town of Holyhead.’
Even without the crusher building transformation, Mr Owen believes it is still possible to develop the area along more commercial lines if public money becomes available or the private sector shows any interest.
Nurses press for Allitt case review
By Amanda Brown Daily Post Correspondent
NURSES are to take legal action to press for a public inquiry into the case of Beverley Allitt who murdered four children and injured nine others.
The Royal College of Nursing is applying to the Court of Appeal for a judicial review of Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley's decision to hold a private inquiry into the case.
Ex-nurse Allitt was convicted of the crimes at Grantham and Kesteven Hospital, Lincolnshire, last month and the Health Secretary decided to set up a hearing behind closed doors, chaired by Sir Cecil Clothier.
The RCN says Mrs Bottomley failed to take sufficient notice of the wishes of nursing staff to give their evidence in public.
The parents of Allitt's victims have already failed in a court bid to force a public inquiry.
The RCN plans to submit its application for a review at the end of the week.
It is expected to be heard on July 6 when the parents' renewed application for a review is scheduled.
The College believes a public hearing is necessary to ensure the full facts surrounding the tragedy are uncovered.
Beverley Allitt
Fresh hopes for cease-fire
BOSNIA'S UN commander General Philippe Morillon hoped to nail down a cease-fire between Serb, Moslem and Croat military chiefs today.
Many truces have been violated in the 14-month war and battles raged across Bosnia today as the UN expressed particular concern about the besieged Moslem ‘safe area’ of Gorazde.
‘Royal’ arrest An Australian farmer and his wife who declared their Queensland farm an independent country, calling themselves the Duke and Duchess of Marlborough, have been arrested for defying a court order to hand over the property to receivers.
Nudes news: Women are upset by female nudity in films because it sets an impossible standard but think there should be more male nudes on screen, according to a Glamour magazine survey.
Mascot diet: Organisers of Atlanta's 1996 Olympics said their mascot a shapeless smiling blob known as Whatizit would be slimmed down and given a proper male name to broaden its appeal.
Horror attack: Three Afghan women refugees chopped off the tongue of a 10year-old girl in Pakistan who refused to tell them where her family had hidden its valuables.
Doctor jailed: A doctor blamed for a botched abortion that resulted in a baby being born with a severed arm was jailed in New York.
Action defended: The UN Security Council has defended its soldiers' actions in Somalia.
Hair ban: Kuwait is to enforce an Islamic ban on men working as hairdressers for women in beauty parlours.
WAYNE ‘WENT TO KEEP PEACE’
UN soldier ‘unlawfully killed’ in ‘Sniper's Alley’
By David Jones Daily Post Staff
A SINGLE shot from an unseen sniper killed a British soldier serving in Bosnia with the Cheshire Regiment, and UN peace-keeping forces.
The jury at the Wrexham inquest yesterday on Welch Fusilier Lance/Corporal Wayne Edwards, 26, returned a unanimous verdict that he was unlawfully killed by an unknown person in Gornji Vakuf.
His mother, Barbara Edwards, of Cae Gwilym Lane, Cefn Mawr, Wrexham, said: ‘I am very pleased with the verdict today.
I did not want a verdict that he was killed in action because he did not go out there to fight.
He went out to keep the peace.
‘Whatever I say is never going to bring him back.
But I am so proud of him.’
Earlier she had listened intently as a statement by Cheshires commanding officer Lt Col Bob Stewart read out at the hearing told how L/Cpl Edwards' killer had not been traced.
‘I will constantly keep up the pressure to identify the murderer of L/Cpl Edwards.
We must do whatever we can to bring the murderer to justice, although realistically I do not think he will ever be found,’ wrote Lt Col Stewart.
L/Cpl Edwards was driving a Warrior armoured personnel carrier, one of two British army vehicles escorting an ambulance taking casualties to Split on January 13.
Corporal Alan Furniss, commander of the Warrior, said they were driving through an area nicknamed Sniper's Alley when he received a message there was firing from a cinema ahead.
He ordered the hatches to be closed, but there was no response from L/Cpl Edwards, and the Warrior careered off the road.
Consultant pathologist Dr Roger Williams said L/Cpl Edwards would have lapsed into unconsciousness immediately and died shortly afterwards.
South Clwyd Coroner, John Hughes, said he had been impressed by the courage of the other crew members and medics who had pulled L/Cpl Edwards from the vehicle, and tried to resuscitate him.
He told Mrs Edwards her son had given his life in the service of humanity and his sacrifice had not been in vain.
Mrs Edwards went to the Cheshires' base in Germany last month to receive her son's United Nations service medal.
Wayne's tombstone
Mrs Barbara Edwards
Wayne Edwards killed by a sniper in Bosnia
Gas blast blow to banger butcher
By Barry Turnbull A GAS blast served up bangers and smash at an award-winning butcher's shop.
Callaghan's in Maghull was devastated by an explosion in the early hours of this morning.
Master butcher Howard Callaghan returned from picking up an award for a pork window display to discover the plate glass front of the shop blown away.
But the Retail Butcher of the Year promised to pick up the pieces and re-open as soon as possible.
He said today ‘It looks a complete mess at the moment.
‘The front has been blown away, a wall is keeling over and the ceiling has been badly damaged.
Promise
‘We have also had to throw away 200 lbs of meat in case it has been contaminated by glass fragments.
‘However, I can promise our customers that we will be putting everything into opening up as soon as possible.
‘I would like to have something makeshift set up by Friday but that depends on an assessment from the health and safety people.
‘I was feeling pretty pleased with myself yesterday after picking up some awards in Harrogate, including one for a window display.
Now I don't even have a window.’
Fire chiefs said the explosion, at 3.40 a.m., was caused by a gas leak from a water heater.
Blown away…butcher Howard Callaghan outside the family shop today.
Picture:
FRANK LOUGHLIN
Base at Valley be axed
By Gerald Williams Daily Post Staff
THE ANGLESEY economy would be dealt a ‘devastating blow’ if the Royal Air Force base at Valley was axed as part of defence cuts, Gwynedd councillors warned yesterday.
Now the county's economic development and planning committee is recommending that North Wales MPs be asked to lobby the Ministry of Defence.
Councillors want an assurance that RAF Valley will not be a casualty of defence review cuts.
The committee backed a motion by Holyhead councillor Alan Pritchard, recognising the station's contribution to the economy of Gwynedd over the years.
Coun Tom Wynne Roberts said 900 civilian jobs depended on RAF Valley, which brought about £3.5m yearly into the local economy.
The station, he said, had been part of the Anglesey scene for 55 years, trained fast jet pilots and provided a helicopter rescue service of great value.
Dr Eurwyn Lloyd Evans, the county's director of economic development and planning, said: ‘We are aware of the Ministry of Defence's intention to review its Air Force establishments throughout the country.
‘Our latest understanding is that the county council will be formally consulted when the situation at Valley is considered.
We expect that to happen in the autumn.’
He assured councillors that officers would keep a close eye on any move which might affect RAF Valley.
Tories own up to Nadir cash donations
By David Rose Political Editor
TORY officials finally admitted last night they had received £440,000 in donations from companies controlled by fugitive tycoon Asil Nadir.
The money came from Polly Peck and Unipac Packaging over five years and the last payment was made in March 1990.
The Conservative Party took the rare step of disclosing the amounts after Prime Minister John Major faced a demand from Labour leader John Smith to change the law, forcing political parties to make public the donations they received.
Mr Major rejected the appeal and insisted the donations from Nadir's companies had not been illegal, even though they were not made public at the time.
He told MPs that under the Companies Act the requirement to declare company donations to parties fell upon company directors.
‘The payment itself would not be unlawful, only the failure to declare it in company accounts would be.
That is a matter for the company, not the recipient.’
The row flared at Prime Minister's Question Time, with Mr Smith alleging that over £1.5m had been donated to the party by Nadir, whose counsel yesterday told Old Bailey judges he was ‘most unlikely’ to return to Britain to stand trial this September.
Mr Smith said forcing political parties to make public contributions would prevent ‘the breaches of company law which occurred in the case of Mr Nadir, whose companies apparently made seven illegal donations to the Conservatives.’
‘Home of polythene’ finds a new owner
THE SALE of a £1m office building is set to go through, bringing much-needed jobs to a Cheshire town.
ICI's Winnington Lane laboratories in Northwich, were put on the market earlier this year.
The redundant building was advertised as a potential business centre, equipped with offices and laboratory space.
Richard Smith, of Northwich commercial property consultants, Fifield Glyn, said there were several potential buyers for the building.
He could not reveal what the buyers was planning for the building, however, any investment in the site is certain to bring jobs with it.
The building is known as ‘the home of polythene’ as it is where ICI invented and developed the material.
Hit-run driver kills horse
A FORMER Mayor of Prestatyn, Mark Garfield Jones, offered a £200 reward last night after his daughter's horse had to be put down following a collision with a van which did not stop.
Nicola Jones, 15, was riding nine-year-old Ballyveamore along a country road at Bryniau, Dyserth, when she saw a blue Ford Transit approaching at high speed.
She pulled Ballyveamore over to the side of the road and stopped him.
But the van hit the horse and Nicola, of Meliden Road, Prestatyn, was thrown over a hedge.
She received only minor injuries.
Security alert as nurse knifed
A HOSPITAL is tightening its security after a nurse was knifed in a lift.
A stranger followed 26year-old Janice Butler into a lift at Aintree Hospital Trust's site in Walton, Liverpool, and asked her to push the button for his floor.
But when it stopped he lunged at her face with a jagged edged knife.
Her hands, which she threw up to protect her face took the brunt of the injury.
Her attacker then ran through the open lift door and into the corridor.
Stunned and with blood pouring from her hands Miss Butler made her way to her ward where she was due to start a night shift.
Miss Butler said: ‘He stood next to me in the lift and did not look at all shifty.
‘But when the doors opened for him to get out his arm moved towards me.
I just saw the knife heading for my face.
‘But I got my hand there in a reflex action and it took the worst of it.
‘If the man had grabbed my bag I could have understood it.
But it was as if he had done it for the thrill of it.’
A full search of the hospital and grounds failed to find the man.
And yesterday a spokesman for the Hospital Trust said its security guards were now under orders to be extra vigilant.
‘We have asked our security people to exercise even tighter vigilance following this attack,’ said the spokesman.
‘But this man attacked the nurse for no apparent reason and it is very difficult to legislate for that sort of behaviour.’
The attacker is described as white, aged 25–30 years, with brown collar length hair with blond streaks in it.
He was wearing a black, zip-up leather bomber jacket.
Anyone who saw anything suspicious is asked to contact police at Walton Lane on .
Aid plea from Samaritans
THE SAMARITANS on Merseyside are looking for help to run the service from their Clarence Street, Liverpool, base.
A new Friends of the Samaritans group is being launched tonight at the Central Hall, Renshaw Street, Liverpool, at 7.30pm.
Sliding in: A slide/talk presentation on the Los Angeles revolt by Roland Charles, director of black photographers of California and Black Gallery, Los Angeles, will be held tomorrow night at the Methodist Centre in Beaconsfield Street, Toxteth, Liverpool, at 8pm.
Safe bet: Carole Williams, a cashier in Ladbroke's betting shop in Bold Street, Liverpool, has won the firm's regional Cashier of the Month award.
She is now in the running for the overall Cashier of the Year title.
Fire horror: A woman has died from burns after apparently dousing herself with petrol and setting it alight at an address in Bell Street, Hindley, near Wigan.
Road works: Serious traffic delays are expected for four weeks while British Gas carries out excavations of the A59 at Rice Lane, near Walton Hospital, Liverpool.
Life saver: A pioneering scheme of expert coaching to reduce fatal accidents involving children is to be launched in Southport in November.
Golf haul: Thieves wheeled away a trolley and golf clubs worth £950 from outside Walton Hall Golf Club, Warrington.
Dog attack: RSPCA officer Albert Morland was savaged by a dog after calling at a home in Aigburth, Liverpool.
Towpath collapses
A 130-yard stretch of the Sankey-St Helens Canal towpath at Warrington has collapsed.
An inspection of the banks and towpath has shown another 50 yard stretch is also unstable.
Town Hall chiefs have sealed off the area, and consultants have been commissioned to submit proposals for an investigation of the towpath wall from Sankey Bridges to Fiddlers Ferry Yacht Haven.
The canal includes the Sankey Valley Park, which draws thousands of visitors and is earmarked as a major recreational attraction.
Walkers, cyclists and horse riders use the towpath of England's first man-made waterway.
The reason for the collapse is not yet clear, but unauthorised motor cycling and the increasing popularity of horse-riding are causing erosion.
Landslip hits houses
THE owners of two houses in Deganwy face a massive clean-up after hundreds of tons of mud and rock from a hillside slid into their homes during the recent downpour.
The avalanche from the hill overlooking Station Road, Deganwy, left a trail of destruction at the rear of the houses.
Both suffered damage, with parts of both properties engulfed.
In one, a kitchen extension was completely wrecked.
Yesterday, the scene at the rear of the two gardens was one of complete devastation.
An elderly couple living in one of the houses declined to comment.
The owner of the other house was unavailable.
But a witness who lives nearby said: ‘It was just incredible.’
Some of the mud and rubbish washed down on the two houses Picture: PHIL MICHEU
Tragedy widow's scare
A WOMAN who lost her husband and two small sons in a fire earlier this year has had an attempted break-in at her new home.
Dawn Wright, 23, of Hollywell, who is still struggling to come to terms with her tragedy, believes the burglars must have known who she was.
They removed electrical fuses from outside the flat in Hollywell where Mrs Davison and daughter Jody, 12 months, now live, but failed to get in.
Kenny Davison, 25, and sons Jonathan, 4, and Damien, 2, died in the fire which swept through the upper floor of their council house at Heol-y-Brenin, Hollywell.
Mrs Davison was injured when she jumped from a bedroom window and still has to use a crutch.
Carers vow to fight on after town hall protest
By Richard Williams Daily Post Staff
PROTESTERS seem set to win their battle against controversial new £25-a-week care charges.
A leading councillor said yesterday that the charge is likely to be reduced after consultation currently being carried out.
Cheshire County Council brought in the new day centre charges on April 1 to a furious reception by carers.
Campaigners point to neighbouring Clwyd's charge which is only £5-a-week and other counties who have not introduced any charges.
Yesterday, carers held a protest as the county council's social services committee held its first meeting since the election.
New chairman, Tory councillor Keith Bland admitted that the council had made mistakes.
He went outside to meet the protesters and accept a petition of 4,000 signatures.
Later, he said: ‘I don't think councillors realise the amount of charge that had been set.
‘We did not realise what it meant and the more I have listened to them it is fair comment that they are saying it is too much.
‘All groups have said we will review it in September and there is a general feeling that the charge should not have been set as high as it has been.’
He appealed for carers to help the council in their consultations.
Cheshire Carers' spokeswoman Lil Hughes said they would battle for a complete removal of the charge.
She said: ‘We did get a fair hearing from Coun Bland yesterday but we will carry on campaigning until we have won.
‘There is a lot of support for our fight because people see that the council are targeting people who can't fight back.’
The carers are now due to go to London for a meeting with North West MPs and national charities who are to give them their support.
Placard-waving demonstrators make their point Picture: CLIFF BRETT
Christmas torment of overdose dad
A MAN took an overdose because he could not face Christmas, an inquest heard yesterday.
Divorcee Alan Anderson, 53, was found by a neighbour slumped outside the open door to his flat in Park Road, Toxteth two days before Christmas.
There was a radio playing inside.
Pathologist Dr Chris Johnson told the court that the father-of-four grown-up children had at least seven pints of alcohol in his blood and had overdosed on 30 anti-depressant tablets.
The court heard that his daughter Deborah Anderson had last seen him alive when he had visited her on December 22.
Recording a verdict that he killed himself by an overdose Liverpool coroner Roy Barter said: ‘He had been complaining of anxiety and obviously felt vulnerable before Christmas.’
Salesmen warning
VICTIMS of last week's floods are being warned to be on their guard against unscrupulous doorstep salesmen, who may try to take advantage of their situations.
‘Do not deal with people who come knocking on your door asking if they can do work or sell you goods or services, unless you are sure what you are getting into,’ says a Gwynedd Trading Standards leaflet.
Legislation gives the public a seven-day ‘cooling off’ period for contracts entered into at home.
But the public should beware as these rights could be signed away, it says.
Gummer to speak on women priests
NEW Environment Minister John Gummer is expected to speak out against the ordination of women priests when he visits Cheshire this month.
Mr Gummer will be the main speaker at the Keeping Faith event at Northwich Memorial Hall on June 26.
Mr Gummer resigned from the General Synod of the Church of England last November when they sent draft legislation to introduce women priests to Parliament.
He is now a member of the Ecclesiastical Committee which decides on its next stage.
One of the event organisers said: ‘Mr Gummer is expected to make a clear distinction between women's ministry, which he fully supports, and the Apostolic male priesthood, which he seeks to preserve.
‘He will also call for nothing less than a parallel system with equal legal status under which those who cannot accept women priests will be able to continue with bishops of like mind.’
John Gummer
£1bn goes missing
A KUWAITI official questioned over the disappearance of £1 billion of public money said he could not recall where it had gone.
Newspapers reporting a briefing by parliament speaker Ahmed alSaadoum today, did not name the official involved or his function.
‘I cannot remember where the money went,’ Saadoum quoted the official as saying.
Friends' tributes flood in after shock death
By Gavin Cordon and John von Radowitz
FRIENDS and colleagues of James Hunt paid tribute to his talent and expressed shock last night as news of his death became public.
Former racing driver Stirling Moss said he was absolutely staggered, adding: ‘I saw him not too long ago and he was exceptionally fit.
‘He had given up smoking, given up drinking he was riding a bicycle and training.’
He paid tribute to Hunt's efforts as a driver and a BBC TV commentator.
‘To be world champion you can't be any slouch.
He was obviously a first-class driver his record speaks for itself.
‘He was excellent on television.
His comments were pithy, to the point and amusing.’
Former Grand Prix Formula One team chief Lord Hesketh said he was devastated by Hunt's death.
‘I would look at myself and then at him and he seemed so fit.
He was coming to stay with me for the British Grand Prix in three weeks,’ said Lord Hesketh, now Government Chief Whip in the House of Lords.
He added: ‘James was truly outstanding and he represented the archetypal British sportsman.’
He and Hunt became Britain's most famous racing partnership as the 42-year-old Peer spent a large chunk of his personal fortune setting up and maintaining the Hesketh team, whose Grand Prix cars sported a red, white and blue livery.
Recalling their early days in racing, Lord Hesketh said: ‘He was known as Hunt the Shunt and no one would hire him.
I had a machine no one wanted to drive.
‘A few months later we were in Formula Two and three months after that in Formula One.
Eighteen months later we were fourth in the World Championships.’
Nigel Mansell, the only Briton to win the world championship since Hunt's triumph, said: ‘He was a fantastic character and he will be a great loss.’
Former British formula 1 driver John Watson, now a commentator for Eurosport, said: ‘The last time I saw him was in Monte Carlo for the Monaco Grand Prix where he was staying on a boat in the harbour.
‘I can't believe what I've heard.
It makes me feel numb.
James was such an active and athletic person.’
Stirling Moss
Lord Hesketh
John Watson
Police raid found mail order parcels
POLICE who raided a house found three van loads of goods from catalogue companies, a court heard.
Cara Pickering, prosecuting, told Chester magistrates yesterday that Joseph Griffiths, of Arrowcroft Road, Guilden Sutton, had deceived mail order companies out of thousands of pounds for almost five years by ordering goods in false names.
He admitted four offences involving £2,600 of goods, with 29 taken into consideration, of deception dating from July 1988 to March 1993.
Miss Pickering said: ‘Police who executed a search warrant found a substantial amount of property mainly unopened postal goods.’
The enclosed bills with the catalogue goods were in a variety of names none of them Griffiths.
‘All the property had to be removed in three Transit sized vehicle loads,’ she said.
Griffiths admitted to police that the goods had been obtained by supplying false details to various mail order companies.
Miss Pickering told magistrates that he opened up accounts with names he plucked from the telephone directory.
Griffiths, 40, told police that he had no intention of paying for the goods which came from Littlewoods Catalogues, John Moores Catalogues, Empire Stores, Readers Digest and other companies.
Griffiths was bailed until July 24 for pre-sentence reports to be prepared.
Council targets bad tenants
A CRACKDOWN has been launched on Liverpool council tenants who refuse to cough up the rent in a bid to reduce £18.7m arrears.
Housing chiefs have adopted a get tough approach to tenants who can pay but won't.
They are targeting the 4,000 who owe more than £1,000 in rent.
The genuinely needy are being helped by the welfare rights team, which plans eight new staff.
But tenants taking advantage of the system are being given their marching orders.
The aim is to free-up housing for the needy and boost revenue from the city's 57,000 tenants.
Latest figures show rent arrears stand at £10.8m for former tenants and £7.9m for current tenants.
The 1993–94 budget provides for a £2m contribution to this bad debt provision.
Housing committee chairwoman Margaret Clarke said: ‘We are making progress on arrears, but have quite a long way to go.
‘We do evict people on a regular basis for non-payment after taking all sorts of measures to make sure they are not in need.’
Badly-hit hospital reopens
FLOOD-damaged Llandudno General Hospital reopens this morning as management continue to assess the full cost of the disaster.
Gwynedd Health Authority has also issued an assurance that the disaster will not alter its commitment to a multi-million pound investment programme.
During last Thursday evening's downpour, water surged into the ground floor and patients had to be evacuated.
The day after the flood there were estimates that the bill could run to £m.
The hospital's heating system has been extensively damaged as have the telephones, lifts and X-ray equipment.
As from 9am today all patients should attend as normal, unless they have been contacted to have their admission cancelled.
The hospital's 24-hour casualty and emergency service is also back in action as well as all out-patient clinics.
However operating theatres, the elderly day-care centre and non-emergency X-rays are still out of service.
TB scare tests show negative
CHESTER'S tuberculosis scare appears to be over as the first results of tests on 500 children were released yesterday.
So far all the patients have tested negative.
Around two thirds of the children have now received their results.
The other 152 expect theirs within the next fortnight.
The children were called in for tests after being treated by a paediatrician at the Countess of Chester Hospital who was suffering from TB.
Thirteen families still have to be contacted, but hospital officials are confident they will be able to trace them.
Dr Philip Mannion at Chester public health laboratory said he was delighted with the results so far.
‘It's all gone very well,’ he said.
‘The initial screening is nearly completed and we now only have a small number of children left to trace.
‘Most of the children came in during the first two days and our helplines were flooded with calls, but they appear to have calmed down now.’
The doctor concerned is now recovering and is expected to return to work in the near future.
He is believed to have caught the disease from a patient.
After TB was diagnosed, he stopped work immediately and hospital staff set about contacting the 500 children and 500 staff who he had been in contact with him in the weeks before he became ill.
They say the tests were a purely precautionary measure and that the chances of anyone catching TB were ‘a million to one.’
Counsellors were drafted in to provide advice and reassurance for the hundreds of worried parents who contacted the hospital.
Any parent who is worried their child may have been in contact with the doctor can still phone the hospital for advice.
Bulger parents speak out
THE PARENTS of tragic toddler James Bulger today talked about the joy of the baby they are expecting.
Denise and Ralph Bulger told the world: ‘We didn't want to share our sorrow.
But now we have good news to tell.’
Denise says poignantly: ‘I'll always keep the baby close to me.
We'll be fighting, Ralph and I, over who gets to push the pram.’
It is the first time they have spoken publicly since the death of their two-year-old son James in February this year.
They feature in a six-page spread, with photographs, in the Spanish-based publication Hello!.
They reveal that they hadn't planned another child.
‘We were shocked at first’ said Denise.
‘The pregnancy came as a real surprise.
But now we're made up.’
The couple were quick to defend their home city.
Ralph said: ‘We certainly don't hold Liverpool responsible.
It's a great place, full of warm people.’
Two 10-year-old boys have been charged with abducting and murdering James, and are due to appear at Preston Crown Court later this year.
Say Hello…and how the Echo broke the news yesterday
Iraq arms probe told of ‘conniving to defeat justice’
By Teilo Colley Daily Post Correspondent
GOVERNMENT officials appeared prepared to ‘connive’ in impeding the course of justice in a case involving the sale of British arms to Iraq via Jordan, the arms-to-Iraq inquiry heard yesterday.
The case involved a prosecution brought against a British businessman, Reginald Dunk, by the Customs after 200 sub-machine guns were seized in this country in 1983.
The guns were being shipped to Jordan, although their end-user certificates were false and they were in fact destined for Iraq.
Eventually, Dunk was found guilty and fined £20,000.
Yesterday, the inquiry heard details of letters written by Customs and Foreign Office officials in which they discussed interfering with the defence case.
Lord Justice Scott, who is heading the inquiry, described these discussions as ‘disgraceful’.
Jordanian and Iraqi embassy officials told Customs investigators that Iraq had paid for the guns as a ‘gift for Jordan’.
But despite this, a Customs official suggested to the Foreign Office that approaches be made to the two ambassadors to suggest that they should not allow the officials to appear in court to support this claim as part of the defence case.
The inquiry heard details of a memorandum written by a Foreign Office official in which he agreed that the ambassadors might be persuaded along those lines in order to avoid embarrassment to their embassies.
The official confessed a reluctance to ‘connive’ in impeding the course of justice.
The inquiry continues on Monday.
MP in battle for Army pay jobs
A LAST-ditch effort to bring 700 Army jobs to a city is to be made next week.
Chester's fight to keep Army pay office jobs, and win new work, is being taken to Westminster once more by MP Gyles Brandreth.
He has persuaded the new Armed Forces minister, Jeremy Hanley, to see a delegation next week to hear Chester's case for it to have the new centralised pay and personnel centre.
Chester had put together a deal for the centre which would have cost the Government nothing because it was tied in with private sector development.
There was great disappointment when the Government decided to choose Glasgow as the preferred option, in spite of the deal Chester had put together.
After the previous Armed Forces minister, Archie Hamilton, was replaced by Mr Hanley, Mr Brandreth asked for a meeting in the hope that a change of minister might mean a change of heart over the pay office.
Mr Brandreth met with Mr Hanley and told him in no uncertain terms that the people of Chester were far from happy with the decision to go to Glasgow.
‘I told him that the Chester option would deliver a better service for the Army and a better deal for the taxpayer.
At the end of the meeting Mr Hanley agreed to meet a Chester delegation, which will go to Westminster to see him next Wednesday.
‘I asked him to take a fresh look at the situation, because my gut feeling is that the decision that's been taken is not the right one.’
Bob Clough-Parker, spokesman for the city's Chamber of Trade, who went on both the previous lobbying missions to London, said: ‘Speaking on behalf of the private sector we are delighted to have this renewed opportunity to discuss Chester's merits as a location for the pay office with the new minister.’
Chester's Army Pay Office is based at the old Western Command headquarters in Queen's Park and 180 civilian staff are employed there.
Plea for help after mother grabs boy
By Jan Colley Daily Post Correspondent
A HIGH Court judge has asked the public to help in the search for a small boy snatched from his nursery school by his mother.
Chatchai Ivory, who is nearly four, is thought to be in the London area with his mother, 28-year-old Janya Ivory.
Mrs Ivory, who is Thai, married Chatchai's father, Michael Ivory, in 1987, and the couple spent some time in Thailand before returning to Scotland in March.
Mrs Ivory became unsettled and talked of returning home but her husband, a 39-year-old unemployed surveyor, never suspected she would take Chatchai.
On June 3, Mr Ivory went to pick Chatchai up from nursery, only to be told his wife had already collected him.
He became worried when he got home to Tarbat Crescent, Brora, Sutherland, and discovered his wife's suitcase gone and Chatchai's clothes and toys missing.
Scottish police found them in a women's refuge in Inverness but they disappeared again and may now be in London a city Mrs Ivory knows and likes.
Mr Ivory's only contact with Chatchai since then has been a phone call, in which the little boy told him: ‘We go to Bangkok and never come back.’
Deputy Judge Miss B.P.Cooper QC lifted reporting restrictions in the hope that publicity might help track down Chatchai and his mother.
Mrs Ivory is about 5ft 3ins tall and very slim with Oriental features and long black hair.
Chatchai is tall and slim for his age, with dark brown hair and eyes, and speaks broken English.
Anyone who sees them is asked to contact their nearest police station.
Chatchai Ivory and his mother, Janya
MPs race to defend National flagman
MERSEYSIDE MPs today came to the defence of Grand National flagman Kenneth Evans the man blamed for the big race fiasco.
The MPs slammed the ‘elitism’ of Jockey Club chiefs and called for a fresh investigation into the race.
They say National starter Captain Keith Brown should take some share of the blame for the abandoned race.
Eleven MPs, mostly from Merseyside, have signed a Commons motion tabled by West Derby Labour MP Bob Wareing over the National.
They call for horseracing bosses to modernise procedures at racecourses.
Ken Evans…blamed
A marriage on thin ice
POOR Isabelle Duchesnay…she is not the first woman to discover that the man she married skater Chris Dean was more in love with his work than her.
Though it's a wonder she did not spot the writing on the wall.
Chris, it seems, was so worried about his partner Jayne Torvill finding out about his relationship with Isabelle that he insisted on seeing her in secret when Jayne had gone to bed.
He refused to take her to the pub to have a drink, explaining that he did not want to hurt Jayne, who would not approve of his energy being spent on anything other than skating.
‘One of our biggest problems was that Chris was attracted to his work more than me,’ said Isabelle.
‘And his work meant Jayne.
As long as he had her, he could work and make money and perform, which is what he is all about.’
So two years after they married and as the couple face divorce, Isabelle Duchesnay is a sadder and wiser woman, aware now that she would always have come second to his work in her husband's affections and that, because of her role in Chris's life, Jayne Torvill turned into the spectre at the feast.
As far as Chris's obsession with his work is concerned, that is something many women married to successful men encounter.
Ambitious politicians with their sights set on Downing Street probably make lousy husbands but the likes of Norma Major, Rosemary Lamont somehow cope.
But, in Isabelle Duchesnay's case, it seems she did not have just Chris's skating to contend with but his partner on ice Jayne Torvill.
Jayne, it seems, never spoke to Isabelle and the only time she smiled at her was when she learnt that Chris and Isabelle were splitting up.
Chris though, according to Isabelle, insisted that Jayne had never been in love with him.
All I can say having watched Torvill and Dean's peerless and emotional performances…you could have fooled me.
No comeback
IF Baroness Thatcher is feeling just a teensy weensy bit smug at the news that the Tories are in such a mess that a high proportion of them want her back as leader, well who can blame her?
It is to be hoped though that Lady Thatcher does not listen too closely to these siren voices and think of staging a come back.
What is past is past and you cannot turn the clock back.
Since she left Downing Street, Lady T has sensibly turned her attention elsewhere and built herself a new and interesting life around the globe.
These days she is one of the few top Tories who can still command respect in this country and has tremendous status abroad.
If, when bed time comes, she falls asleep with a smile on her face, fair enough, but no dreams of a return to Downing Street please!
Victims praise ex-nanny with a heart of gold
FORMER nanny Karen Pattinson of Conwy did not hesitate when she heard of the plight of flood victims.
Mrs Pattinson, who runs a five bedroom bed and breakfast business with her husband, Ian, a plumber and heating engineer, opened her doors at Bryn Arfon, Llanrwst Road, Woodlands, Conwy, to help them.
Now she has a newly-acquired family to care for.
‘She came down to Aberconwy School where we all were and said she wanted all the mothers and babies to stay with her,’ said Tracey Parker.
Now four families, with 12 children, share the bed and breakfast premises with Mrs Pattinson and her family, which includes two children.
‘She has been absolutely wonderful and has made it like home for us.
We cannot thank her enough,’ said Mrs Parker.
Publicity-shy Mrs Pattinson, however, declined to be interviewed.
Meanwhile, a North Wales businessman has brought a smile of joy to the face of bride-to-be Joanne Smith.
Miss Smith and fiance Maurice Jones lost everything when their new home at Llandudno Junction was engulfed in sewage-ridden water.
The couple have suffered a catalogue of misfortune in recent weeks.
The Mercedes which had been promised to take them to All Saints' Church, Deganwy, for the wedding on Saturday was sold.
And their own car, which they needed to take them on honeymoon to Scotland, was ruined in the flood.
But help was at hand thanks to North Wales haulage contractor Robin Jones, who read of their plight in the Daily Post.
He has now offered them the use of his white Rolls-Royce for the wedding as well as a Renault 19 for the honeymoon.
‘People have helped me in the past so I thought I would give them a help along the way,’ he said.
The news brought tears of joy to Miss Smith.
‘It is wonderful news.
I cried with happiness on the phone when Mr Jones rang.
He has been so kind,’ she said.
Karen Pattinson
MANWEB TO CUT POWER PRICES
Electricity users set to benefit from leap in profit
ELECTRICITY giant Manweb today cut its prices.
The Chester-based group announced profits of more than £111ma 17.4% jump which sparked an immediate 1% price drop for its 1.3m customers.
During the year to March 31, Manweb was one of only two electricity distributors to show a sales growth.
The company also saw nearly a halving of complaints against it and is hoping to widen the number of people using meters.
It says this is in reply to the government's decision to impose VAT on electricity.
A new tariff for low electricity users will also be introduced which has no standing charge.
Chairman Bryan Weston said: ‘We are concerned about the impact VAT may have on customers with low incomes.
‘To help alleviate the situation, we have introduced a new tariff for low users of electricity, which has no standing charge, and have announced a discount for card meter customers.’
He said cards were now more widely available and could be bought in Threshers and Telegraph service stations.
Earnings per share climbed to 69.3p from 58.7p.
Shareholders will receive a 15% increase in their total dividend payment to 21p per share from 18.25p.
Mr Weston said the results reflected an excellent year for the company which opened new information centres in Warrington, Birkenhead and Wrexham.
He said: ‘The benefits of our achievements will be shared between our shareholders and our customers, who will have electricity prices cut from July.’
Bryan Weston
‘excellent year’
Man stole jeans
JOSEPH Boyland, 39, of Holland Road, Wallasey, was conditionally discharged for twelve months by Wirral magistrates after admitting taking jeans worth £12.99 from Primark and items worth £32.40 from Woolworth's.
Gloomy sales forecast sparks rumour
FORD DENIES PLAN TO CUT JOBS
MOTOR giant Ford has denied there are plans for more job cuts at the firm's Halewood plant despite declining car sales.
Ford has again lowered its sales expectations and reports claimed it may be forced to lay off more workers in Europe.
But a spokesman confirmed today: ‘There are definitely no plans for more redundancies.’
The gloomy sales forecast came as Wayne Booker, executive vice president of Ford's international operations, said the company now expected car and truck sales in Europe to reach only 12.5 million units for 1993.
That is down 17.5% from already depressed 1992 levels.
Mr Booker said the European economy may worsen before recovering.
‘We believe we could be in the midst of one of the worst recessions since the last world war,’ he said.
‘I'm not sure we've seen the bottom of the industry decline yet.’
A spokesman for Ford in Britain said: ‘Mr Booker was talking very generally about the European car market.
‘We have seen five consecutive months of serious decline in the European market and it has to be a matter of concern to all motor manufacturers.’
Ford and other carmakers have steadily reduced their 1993 sales targets for Europe, which were once in the 14 million to 15 million vehicle range.
Mr Booker said it would be ‘very difficult’ for Ford of Europe to break even in 1993.
Mr Booker, who spoke at Ford's advanced engineering centre in Dearborn, Michigan, said if European conditions continued to worsen, the company could be forced to shed more jobs.
Patten walks into class room size row
By David Rose Political Editor
EDUCATION Secretary John Patten stumbled into a fresh row last night over plans to teach children in smaller classrooms.
Labour leaked a letter he sent to the Welsh Secretary, revealing he intends to save money by abandoning national standards governing the size of schools and playgrounds.
School governors in future will decide how much space they can afford to set aside to teach new generations of schoolchildren.
While Mr Patten said the Government would still retain standards covering health, safety and welfare, he said the individual school ‘should be free to deploy its resources including teaching area and land as it sees fit’.
Labour immediately hit out at Mr Patten.
Shadow Education Secretary Ann Taylor said that instead of asking the Treasury for more money to restore crumbling schools, Mr Patten ‘is actually volunteering to cut standards and to cram ever larger classes into smaller rooms’.
Miss Taylor said: ‘Mr Patten wants to pile children high and teach them cheap but they are not like soap powder.’
John Patten
Manweb profit leap ‘will not curb bills’
By Ian Herbert Business Editor
MANWEB last night admitted that a 17.4pc jump in profits would not be enough to cushion customers from an increase in bills when VAT is imposed on fuel.
The electricity distributor yesterday cut tariffs by 1pc for 1.3m customers as it announced pre-tax profits of £111.2m.
But the company's chief executive, John Roberts, told the Daily Post that consumers would bear the cost of an 8pc VAT charge on electricity, to be imposed next year.
‘It would be unrealistic to say we can absorb all the cost of the VAT charge,’ he said.
‘We will do all we can to help customers as much as we can, especially those on low incomes, and we want to take more time during the course of the year to evaluate the charge in detail.
‘But even for low income customers, we do have difficulties.
Our licence is clear about cost subsidies between different groups of users.’
But Manweb warned that the imposition of VAT, at 8pc in 1994 and at the standard rate of 17.4pc 12 months later, could lead to more disconnections.
That would reverse a trend which has seen customer disconnections fall by 70pc in the last 12 months.
The threat of increased bills was in part offset by the 1pc tariff reduction, from the beginning of July.
Charles Myers, chairman of the electricity consumers' committee for Merseyside and North Wales, dismissed the 1pc tariff cut as insufficient to help the ordinary customer.
Profits soar Page 22
City concern at school expulsions
By Jules Stenson
RACIAL equality chiefs have expressed alarm at the ‘unacceptably high’ number of black pupils and children from other minority groups being banned from Liverpool schools.
Figures show that more than 12% of children permanently excluded from city schools last year were black.
The figures for black youngsters excluded indefinitely and for a fixed period were also above average.
Out of a total 1,887 pupils excluded in all three categories last year, 164 (8.6%) were black.
A report, to be discussed by the council's education race equality sub-committee next Monday, says: ‘The racial equality management team is of the opinion that the number of black children being excluded from Liverpool schools is unacceptably high.
‘This being the case it is clear that there is a need for greater intervention by members of the team before black children are excluded.
‘Some schools have taken the opportunity to involve team members in pre-exclusion meetings and in general discussions about issues of race and racism.
Nationally, 8% of black pupils are excluded from schools.
Inkatha walks out of SA talks
THE Inkatha Freedom Party and its allies walked out of South Africa's multi-party democracy talks yesterday.
They said other delegations had rejected their demand to deal with the issues of violence and the future form of the state before setting an election date.
‘We are walking out because we feel we have not been given a hearing,’ Inkatha negotiator Joe Matthews said as he left the talks.
‘We feel the issue of the form of state and violence cannot be discussed after the setting of an election date.’
Matthew was joined by other members of his delegation and the pro-apartheid Conservative Party, the nominally independent homelands of Ciskei and Bophutatswna and four other groups.
All said they were going to consult their leaders for fresh mandates on whether to continue participating in the 26-party democracy talks.
Earlier yesterday, Inkatha and the Kwazulu black homeland government submitted a memorandum saying that negotiators should debate federalism, violence and other constitutional principles before naming the day for the country's first all-race election.
The meeting adjourned to give the 10-member planning committee time to consider Inkatha's request, which was then rejected by the majority of negotiators.
The remaining 18 groups involved in the talks carried on debating an election date, pencilled in provisionally for April 27 next year.
Woman wins thanks for saving marrow op boy
By Chris Parker Daily Post Staff
A DUTCH family has sent a heartfelt message of thanks to a bone marrow donor who saved a child's life.
Karen Hurst helped a 10-year-old a cancer sufferer back to health by donating life-giving marrow last year.
Ms Hurst knows the boy who owes his life to her kindness simply by his first name, Berend, because of the rules of anonymity governing marrow donations.
After months of uncertainty about Berend's condition, Ms Hurst, 25, of Tyburn Close, Spital, Wirral, has received a note of gratitude from his parents and other members of his family.
Ms Hurst, who works at Unilever's environmental engineering department in Port Sunlight, Wirral, said: ‘The family has told me that Berend is making great strides towards a full recovery.
He is doing very well, which is excellent news for me.
‘The letter simply thanked me for what I had done and the senders signed themselves only as Berend's Family.’
Ms Hurst first registered her marrow as a teenager in 1986, following a recruitment drive for donors by the London-based Anthony Nolan Research Centre at St Catherine's Hospital, Birkenhead.
After giving a blood sample, she was told that she would have a one-in-50,000 chance of saving a life.
In May, 1992, Ms Hurst was called to London's Royal Free Hospital to donate marrow.
Surgeons used long syringes to extract marrow from her pelvic bones, while a motorcycle courier waited outside to rush the refrigerated marrow to the plane that would carry it to a Dutch hospital.
Berend returned to school just six months after the operation.
Ms Hurst said: ‘It was absolutely lovely to receive this letter.
I have been hoping to hear from Berend's family for many months.’
Ms Hurst hopes to discuss her unshakeable link with Berend face-to-face.
She added: ‘Some donors are not so keen to make contact with the people they help but I have always wanted to receive a picture of Berend and, maybe, meet him.’
Gordon Beck, spokesman for the Anthony Nolan Research Centre, said: ‘The relationship between donor and patient is confidential but after 12 months we allow correspondence and we pass on messages from both sides.
‘After a longer period, donors and patients sometimes meet and some have become great friends.’
Mr Beck added: ‘We are in need of cash which will help us to link the register to those in other parts of the world, including the United States.’
The register holds details of 225,000 potential donors in Britain, including actresses Joanna Lumley and Pauline Collins, who have campaigned for more volunteers.
lead Couple get their dream home after 42 years
By Jules Stenson local government reporter
A COUPLE were celebrating their new home today after waiting for 42 years.
Pensioners Jim and Yolanda Byrne say they were told back in 1951 that they would only have to stay in their Liverpool maisonette for six months.
They say they have been waiting to be moved from the ‘temporary accommodation’ ever since.
Yolanda, 64, said she was amazed when the city council offered them a two-bedroom house.
She said: ‘It's a miracle and definitely better late than never.’
And the grandma advised people still on the waiting list:
‘Don't give up.
You never know what might happen!’
Winston Churchill was Prime Minister and rationing was still in force when Jim and Yolanda moved into their three-bedroomed maisonette in Heydean Road with their two young children in 1951.
The couple, who have six grandchildren, expected to be rehoused by the old Liverpool Corporation within six months.
They had given up all hope of ever moving when a two-bedroom house with a garden was found for them in Forthlin Road, Allerton last week.
They plan to move in within the next few weeks.
Green-fingered Jim, who has always wanted a garden of his own, is delighted about the move.
The retired docker's health has suffered in recent years and he has trouble getting up the stairs at their maisonette.
Yolanda said: ‘We've been round to the new house and it is lovely.
We can't wait to move in.
‘We were told we would only be in this house temporarily when we moved here.
‘We filled in loads of forms and kept reminding the council but nothing happened.
I always thought I would be in a box when I finally left here.’
Delighted
The couple thanked Liberal Democrat Councillor Malcolm Bullock who took up their case.
He said: ‘I am delighted it has finally worked out for them after all these years.’
A council spokeswoman said the couple had only been on the waiting list for 11 years.
Delay
She said they were taken off waiting list after applying to take over the tenancy at Heydean Road in 1954.
She said they applied to be rehoused in 1982 and the delay was caused because they would only accept a two-bedroomed house in Allerton, a popular area with many applicants.
Turn to Page Two.
From Page One.
Victim of sniper ‘died in service of humanity’
By David Jones Daily Post Staff
A SINGLE shot from an unseen sniper killed a Royal Welch Fusilier serving in Bosnia with UN peacekeeping forces.
The jury at the Wrexham inquest yesterday on Lance Corporal Wayne Edwards, 26, returned a unanimous verdict that he was unlawfully killed in an area of Gornji Vakuf nicknamed Sniper's Alley while on attachment to the Cheshire Regiment.
His mother, Barbara Edwards, of Cae Gwilym Lane, Cefn Mawr, said: ‘I did not want a verdict that he was killed in action because he did not go out there to fight, he went out to keep the peace.’
She was told her son died in the service of humanity.
Earlier, she had listened as a statement by Cheshires' commanding officer Lt Col Bob Stewart told how the killer had not been traced.
He said there had been fighting between Croat and Muslim militiamen around the town.
He had met commanders from both sides to tell them the shooting was being treated as murder.
Both sides had expressed regret at the killing of L Cpl Edwards but neither had named the gunman.
‘We must do whatever we can to bring the murderer to justice, although realistically I do not think he will ever be found,’ concluded Lt Col Stewart's statement.
The jury was shown a 10 minute video made by the special investigation branch of the military police of the bridge in Gornji Vakuf where L/Cpl Edwards died.
He was driving a Warrior armoured personnel carrier, one of two vehicles escorting a civilian ambulance taking casualties to the coastal resort of Split on January 13.
Cpl Alan Furniss, commander of the Warrior, said they were travelling slowly through ‘Sniper's Alley’ when he received a message that there was firing from building ahead which included a cinema.
He ordered the hatches to be closed but there was no response from L Cpl Edwards and the Warrior careered off the road into railings on the bridge.
L/Cpl Edwards had been shot through the cheek and would have become unconscious immediately and died shortly afterwards, said consultant pathologist Dr Roger Williams.
South Clwyd Coroner John Hughes said he had been impressed by the courage of the other crew members of the Warrior and medics who had pulled L Cpl Edwards from the vehicle, tried to resuscitate him and taken him to hospital.
He told Mrs Edwards that her son had given his life in the service of humanity.
Flash back colleagues carry Wayne Edwards' coffin at his funeral in January.
Right, the tombstone recording his sacrifice in Bosnia
Wayne Edwards killed by a single bullet
Booby trap
COUNCIL workmen found a booby-trapped caravan yesterday on a site they were clearing after a court battle.
They discovered a car battery had been wired to several bottles of petrol.
The caravan was one of nearly 100 Maldon council in Essex are evicting from the site at Bradwell, near Chelmsford.
Crossley: Court Stevens: Denial
Hundreds bid sad farewell to victim of plane tragedy
Full military honours for hero of Gulf War
By Carmel Brown and Geoff Barnes
GULF War hero Flight Lieutenant Stephen McNally was buried with full military honours yesterday after a special Mass in his home town.
Hundreds of people packed into Our Lady and St Joseph's RC Church in Wheatland Lane, Wallasey, for the service, including almost 150 colleagues from RAF Lyneham in Wiltshire, where he was stationed.
And police were drafted in to control the traffic which was brought to a standstill by the numbers of people lining the pavement outside the Seacombe church.
They had all come to pay their last respects to the local boy, decorated for his part in the Gulf War, who lost his life on a training mission in the Scottish Highlands.
All nine members of the crew were killed when their RAF Hercules went down during a treacherous low level flying mission through the Grampians 19 days ago.
His funeral was held at Our Lady and St Josephs at his wife Kerry's request because the parish priest, Father Peter Burke, was a friend of the couple, who met on a trip to the French shrine of Lourdes where they were helping the sick.
Fellow airmen from 70 Squadron RAF provided a guard of honour for the former pupil of St Mary's College, Wallasey.
Anniversary
And fellow officers bore his Union flag-draped coffin into the church.
‘We mourn, weep and express a sense of loss for Stephen,’ said Fr Burke who said the congregation should give thanks for Ft Lt McNally's life.
And as a mark of their respect for their aviator comrade, a lone bugler played The Last Post and Reveille before an RAF Hercules flew over the graveside at Frankby Cemetery in a special salute to the man who had given the last six years of his life to his country.
Fellow officers from 70 Squadron RAF said Flight Lt McNally, 27, had been a highly-respected officer, conscientious and hardworking.
He received a medal for his service in the Gulf War and had made food drops in Somalia, Kurdistan and Yugoslavia.
He set up home with his wife Kerry at RAF Lyneham and they would have celebrated their second wedding anniversary later this month.
Flight Lt McNally was navigating the Hercules when it went down and the RAF are still conducting an inquiry into the incident which happened 10 miles north east of Blair Atholl.
Fellow officers bear the coffin into the Church past the many floral tributes for Flt Lt McNally Picture: JOHN DAVIDSON
Flt Lt McNally and his bride on their wedding day
Soldier ‘died for humanity’
A SINGLE shot from an unseen sniper killed a Royal Welch Fusilier serving in Bosnia with the UN peace-keeping force.
The jury at an inquest in Wrexham yesterday into L/Cpl Wayne Edwards' death returned a unanimous verdict that he was unlawfully killed in an area of Gornji Vakuf nicknamed Sniper's Alley while on attachment to the Cheshire Regiment.
His mother, Barbara Edwards of Cae Gwilym Lane, Cefn Mawr, said later: ‘I didn't want a verdict that he was killed in action because he didn't go out there to fight, he went out to keep the peace.’
Mrs Edwards was told her son had died in the service of humanity.
Earlier, she had listened to a statement by Lt Col Bob Stewart, the Cheshires' CO, in which he said that the sniper had not been traced.
Lt Col Stewart said there had been fighting between Croat and Muslim militiamen around the town.
He had met commanders from both sides to tell them the killing of L/ Cpl Edwards was being treated as murder.
Both sides had expressed regret but neither had named the gunman.
Lt Col Stewart's statement concluded: ‘We must do whatever we can to bring the murderer to justice, although realistically I do not think he will ever be found.’
The jury was shown a 10-minute video, made by the special investigation branch of the Military Police, of the bridge in Gornji Vakuf where L/Cpl Edwards died.
He was driving a Warrior armoured personnel carrier, one of two vehicles escorting a civilian ambulance taking casualties to the coastal resort of Split on January 13, when the sniper opened fire.
Wayne Edwards
A Hospital nurse attacked in lift
By Caroline Storah crime reporter
A NURSE was recovering today after a nightmare knife attack in a Merseyside hospital lift.
The 26-year-old woman was on her way to start work at 8.30 last night when, for no apparent reason, a man lashed at her face in the lift at Walton Hospital, Liverpool.
The woman, who lives in Childwall, dashed to her ward with blood pouring from her face.
Horrified colleagues rallied to her assistance and raised the alarm.
A full search of the hospital grounds was mounted but the man escaped.
Detective Sergeant Dave Kelly, at Walton Lane CID, said:’ She was very lucky in that she got her hands over her face in time.’
The man is described as white, aged 25–30, 5ft 8ins tall, with brown collar-length hair with blond streaks in it.
He was wearing a black zip-up leather bomber jacket.
Anyone who saw anything suspicious around the hospital at the time of the attack is asked to contact the police on .
Two deny £m drugs plot
A GANG of Merseyside men were allegedly involved in smuggling £500,000-worth of cannabis into this country, a court heard yesterday.
After two abortive attempts to bring the drugs in by lorry from Belgium, the gang made two successful runs involving transporting consignments of 99kg and 72kg.
After the first importation in September, 1991, several people were arrested, including Ronald Scott and Peter Chorley.
But, despite this, four months later Scott and Chorley were allegedly involved in a second successful smuggling operation along with another man Michael Walker.
In the dock at Liverpool Crown Court are Trevor Caddock, a 48-year-old Haulage Contractor of Station Road, Prescot; his nephew Ronald Caddock, 34, of The Bramleys Maghull and Michael Walker, 57, of Norwood Court, Greasby, Wirral.
All deny conspiring to smuggle drugs.
The jury heard that Scott, 56, of Hutchinson Walk, Everton, had already pleaded guilty and Chorley had since died.
Opening the prosecution case, John Burke QC said both Caddocks and Scott were involved in the road haulage business as had been Chorley and this provided an ideal cover for importing drugs from Belgium.
Customs officers substituted the drugs with another substance as the consignment arrived and it continued to Scott's house where he was arrested.
However, by January of last year Scott was involved in arrangements with Chorley and Walker to bring in the second load, alleged Mr Burke.
The Caddocks were not involved he added.
The consignment was brought over in the same way and after it was left in a lay-by in Lymm, Cheshire, Customs officers pounced when Scott arrived to collect it.
The case continues.
Hoko in court date
FORMER world boxing champion Paul Hodkinson appeared in court today charged with assault.
The 27-year-old from Beattock Close, Melling, is charged with assaulting Paul Richards on February 6.
South Sefton magistrates adjourned the case to June 29.
Hodkinson, who lost his WBC world featherweight title to Mexican Goyo Bargas in April, spoke only to give his address.
The assault is alleged to have occurred at the Paradox night club in Aintree.
Police talk
THE Hoylake Police and Community Forum will meet at Hilbre High School, Frankby Road, Newton, West Kirby next Tuesday.
A meeting of the Birkenhead Police and Community Forum will be held the following evening at Tranmere Methodist Church Hall, Whitfield Street, Tranmere.
DEAD WIFE'S VOW OVER RELATIONSHIP
‘She moves into our home over my dead body’
By Paul Byrne A PREGNANT woman found hanging in her garage had vowed that her husband's woman friend would move into their home: ‘Over my dead body.’
Eddie Gilfoyle is accused of murdering his wife Paula a fortnight before she was expected to give birth to their first child.
Confided
Paula Gilfoyle was found hanging from a garage beam at her Wirral home on June 4, last year.
Liverpool Crown Court heard yesterday how Gilfoyle had a relationship with a married woman, Sandra Davies.
Gilfoyle, 31, was said to have told his wife that Sandra was going to move into their Wirral home.
The court heard that Paula, 33, told him: ‘Oh no she is not.
Over my dead body.’
The jury heard how in January last year, Paula had confided in a friend about her husband's relationship.
She told Susan Coltman the friendship had started while Paula was living with her parents and Gilfoyle was staying at their new home in Grafton Drive, Upton, as it was being renovated.
Miss Coltman said Paula had shown her a letter from Mrs Davies to Gilfoyle.
Resolved
Miss Coltman said: ‘Paula started to tell me about another woman that Eddie was seeing and at one point divorce proceedings had been started.
‘The trouble with the other woman started when Paula was living with her parents.’
Miss Coltman said Paula told her Sandra was due to move in but she put her foot down.
‘Paula jumped into her car and drove to the house and moved in that day.
‘From then on, Paula said their marriage had been better and they had resolved their differences.
They had patched things up,’ said Miss Coltman.
Gilfoyle's friend, Sandra Davies, had earlier told the jury that they met in May, 1991, at the Murrayfield Hospital in Thingwall where they both worked.
She said they were in love but their relationship was not physical and Gilfoyle asked her to move into the house in October, 1991.
Phoned
Hours before she was due to move in, Gilfoyle phoned to say his wife was pregnant.
Later that day, Paula had also phoned to tell her to stay away from Gilfoyle and the relationship then ended.
Months later, Gilfoyle sent her a Valentine and birthday card, which she tore up.
(Proceeding) Sandra Davies…friend
Getaway car in crash mayhem
A TRAGEDY was narrowly averted yesterday when a car being pursued by police was in a head-on crash with a family on a day out.
The accident happened on the outskirts of Chester after a cross-county motorway chase from Warrington as police followed up a report of an attempted armed robbery.
The driver being pursued, in a Toyota MR2 GT sports car allegedly stolen in Manchester, is said to have rammed four private cars and a police car.
The crash mayhem occurred after an incident at about 11am yesterday in which a man in his 20s allegedly tried to hold up a post office in Thelwall, Warrington.
The man is said to have gone into the post office, brandishing what appeared to be a handgun, then fled empty-handed when the female assistant ran into the rear of the premises.
Police cars and the police helicopter later trailed the man's getaway car as he drove at high speed down the M6 and M56.
Police said the Toyota rammed three cars on the motorway and another on the A556, but that fortunately no one had been injured.
The man then left the motorway and headed for Chester, driving around roads in the Mollington area.
At 11.42am the Toyota was in the head-on collision with a Vauxhall Cavalier in which a family of four from West Kirby was travelling to Chester Zoo.
The crash occurred on the A540 Parkgate Road, near the Mollington Banastre Hotel.
By sheer luck, the grandmother, 57, mother, two daughters, aged three and two, and the six-month-old baby boy in the car escaped serious injury.
All were taken to the Countess of Chester Hospital, but later discharged.
The family has not been named.
The driver of the Toyota is in the same hospital.
He has a broken pelvis.
Boy, 14, accused of attempting to rape 92-year-old spinster
A BOY aged 14 has appeared before a court in Crewe on a charge of attempting to rape a 92-year-old spinster while carrying out a burglary.
The boy, who comes from the Salford area, but who cannot be named, appeared before South Cheshire magistrates yesterday.
He was remanded into the care of the local authority until tomorrow.
The boy is also accused of burglary at the woman's home in Nantwich on Monday.
Remanded on murder charge
LABOURER Michael McNeil, 48, of Glebeland Road, Culcheth, Warrington, appeared before the town's magistrates yesterday charged with murdering landscape gardener Graham Oultram, 57, and was remanded in custody until June 29 after no application for bail was made.
TV shows up child exodus shame
By Jules Stenson
COUNSELLORS are bracing themselves for a flood of inquiries when a TV drama is screened exposing a child migration scheme which shamed Britain.
The BBC is planning to show The Leaving of Liverpool within the next two months.
The mini-series portrays the real-life trauma suffered by two children shipped from Liverpool to Australia in the 1950s.
Liverpool was used as a ‘collection point’ for the controversial child migration scheme, with the majority of the ships sailing from the city's docks.
Over more than 60 years, an estimated 150,000 children including some from Merseyside were shipped from Britain to distant parts of the Empire.
The Nottingham based Child Migration Trust has helped some of these youngsters to trace their families on Merseyside.
It is feared the screening of The Leaving of Liverpool will bring back painful memories for many people involved, and social services chiefs are preparing for a stream of referrals.
A report, to be discussed by tomorrow's social services committee, says: ‘The children migration schemes has in very many cases resulted in severe emotional trauma for those who were victim of such policies.
‘Liverpool is implicated in the history of child migrants and should therefore endeavour to put pressure on the government to support the Child Migrant Trust.’
Boxer Hodkinson on assault charge
EX-CHAMP IN COURT
FORMER world boxing champion Paul Hodkinson appeared in court today charged with assault.
The 27-year-old from Beattock Close, Melling, is charged with assaulting Paul Richards on February 6.
He wore a black shirt and brown trousers during the two-minute hearing at South Sefton Magistrates' court.
After an application by his solicitor, David Watson, the case was adjourned to June 29.
Hodkinson, who lost his WBC world featherweight title to Mexican Goyo Bargas in April spoke only to give his address.
The assault is alleged to have occurred at the Paradox night club in Aintree.
Hodkinson's defeat was only his second loss in 24 contests and he has since vowed to regain his title.
He first won the crown in autumn 1991 after beating Marcos Villasana.
The following February, he won the Echo Sports Personality of the Year Award.
Court date…
Paul Hodkinson with his wife today
Fume pool pledge by leisure boss
A SWIMMING pool blunder which hospitalised 23 children should never happen again, councillors will be told tonight.
John Bell, Knowsley Council's director of leisure services, will reassure them that Kirkby Swimming Baths is safe, despite a scare on April 30.
In a report he recommends specific hazard training courses for teachers attending swimming lessons and staff at the borough's baths.
Concerned
Fifty youngsters from Kirkby CE Primary School and Simonswood Primary School were taken to Alder Hey Children's Hospital after they were overcome by strong bleach fumes used to clear a blocked drain at the pool.
Mr Bell says: ‘We are gravely concerned about the incident and have taken steps to ensure that, by additional training and regular monitoring, the safety of schoolchildren at the pools and swimmers generally will continue to be of the highest priority.’
Two held over drugs find
TWO men were being questioned late last night after the police's Number One Regional Crime Squad's drugs wing found amphetamine sulphate in a vehicle on the M62.
Police placed the value of the haul at a ‘conservative’ £500,000.
The location of the find was not disclosed early today.
SOCIETY RAID:
Hunt on for two raiders who escaped with £1,000 from Yorkshire Building Society on Allerton Road, Allerton.
Killing informer charged with perjury
A MAN who turned police informer to escape prison and named a man for the Notting Hill Carnival killing went on trial at the Old Bailey yesterday for perjury.
Kevin Sarbutts, of Elmridge, Skelmersdale, Lancashire, is accused of lying to Court of Appeal judges when he claimed he was coerced by police into giving vital evidence against a man accused of killing a stallholder in 1987.
His testimony at Aylesbury Crown Court led to Alban Turner, 26, being jailed for life for stabbing Michael Galvin to death.
Sarbutts, 26, then collected a £6,500 reward, Jeremy Roberts, QC, told the Old Bailey.
But ‘remarkably’ Sarbutts then went to the Daily Mirror newspaper and said he had lied.
He told the newspaper the only reason he gave false evidence was that police had beaten and threatened him, the prosecution said.
Quashed
Turner appealed and the Police Complaints Authority began an investigation.
Sarbutts repeated his allegations against the police at Turner's appeal hearing.
The judges decided they could not be sure which of Sarbutts' stories was true and quashed Turner's conviction, Mr Roberts said.
Sarbutts was later charged with perjury by making a false statement while a witness at the Court of Appeal.
He denies the charge.
Mr Roberts said Sarbutts had been held by police on a minor offence in October, 1988, when police were still searching for Mr Galvin's killer.
He was also wanted in connection with another matter.
‘He did not want to go to prison, so he decided to try out one of the well-known methods of avoiding prison by offering his services as a police informer,’ Mr Roberts said.
‘He said he knew who committed the Notting Hill Carnival murder.’
After Turner's conviction in December, Sarbutts collected the reward.
The trial continues.
Drinker died in fight
By Lynda Roughley Daily Post Correspondent
A YOUNG man died after being punched in the face following a row over spilled beer, a court heard yesterday.
Andrew Maltby was outside a pub with 29-year-old Michael Waterworth, to sort out their differences but minutes later he received fatal injuries.
His friend, Norman Prescott told Liverpool Crown Court that when he came out of the Horns Inn in Lowton Road, Golbourne, he later found Mr Maltby, 30, lying on the ground and helped him up.
Waterworth still wanted to fight, claimed Mr Prescott and he stood between the two men trying to get his girlfriend back into the pub.
‘Waterworth was on my left and Andrew was on my right and Waterworth was trying to carry on fighting.
‘Andrew had his defences down as Waterworth came across in front of me and hit him in the mouth and knocked his head on the floor.
There was a sickly thud,’ said Mr Prescott.
‘He lay there snoring so I thought he was messing about and told him to get up.
After a minute nothing had happened and then people came out and I shouted: ‘Get an ambulance’.’
The court heard that the victim had a fractured skull and did not regain consciousness.
Waterworth, a pallet maker of Twist Avenue, Golbourne, near Wigan, has pleaded not guilty to manslaughter.
Mr Prescott told the court that on the fateful evening Boxing Day last year he had been in the pub with Mr Maltby and another friend.
He and Mr Maltby had drunk about eight to 10 pints.
As they were walking along a narrow passageway by the bar Mr Maltby accidentally nudged Mr Waterworth a former miner, and ‘spilled twopence worth of beer.’
Waterworth's girlfriend then began ‘mithering about it’ and Mr Maltby and Waterworth went outside, he said.
Waterworth, 6ft 3ins tall, told the jury that he had not wanted to go outside to fight.
He claimed that Mr Maltby lunged at him so he punched him, knocking him to the ground.
Mr Prescott helped him up and stood between them.
‘I was hoping Norman (Mr Prescott) would take him away.
I wanted it to finish.’
He said that Mr Maltby got passed Mr Prescott.
‘I felt he was going to try and hit me again so I stuck my right hand out.
I wouldn't have done that had he not come at me again.’
The case continues
Police to rescue of tourist
By Sue Ormesher Daily Post Staff
THE boys in blue turned knights in shining armour yesterday to go to the rescue of a young German woman left stranded in a resort.
Gabrielle Fisher, 21, had been due to leave Southport yesterday at the end of an 18-day visit to England.
But thieves stole her motorcycle, which was parked outside a hotel.
Gabrielle's boyfriend had to leave her and return to Germany alone because his motorbike was too small to take a passenger, so she contacted the local police.
They invited her to the station, gave her a meal, arranged her flight home then drove her to Manchester Airport.
Det Insp Jim Fitzsimmons said: ‘We wanted to make sure Miss Fisher got home safely.
She was in a vulnerable position and we didn't want to abandon her.
‘She had travelled over with her boyfriend and didn't know the system.
We didn't want to leave her to go home alone.
‘The bike vanished on Monday evening and Miss Fisher was very worried because she had to be back at work in the Munich area at 9am on Thursday.
‘She was over here for the Isle of Man TT Races and spent some time in the Lake District.
‘We gave her a meal and rang around rail and air companies to sort out travel arrangements.
‘We also wanted to make sure someone would be collecting her in Germany.
‘She said she had had a wonderful time and liked the people of Merseyside, so I hope this unfortunate incident doesn't remain in her mind.’
Gabrielle said: ‘The police in Southport have been very friendly and helpful and I am very grateful to them.
‘I have enjoyed my holiday, apart from losing my bike.’
The bike is a Yamaha Anduro XT 600.
Gabrielle Fisher with two of the officers who helped her
Accused told workmates that Paula was leaving
WIFE CLAIMS ‘DID NOT FIT’
A MAN accused of murdering his pregnant wife told colleagues things about his marriage that ‘just didn't fit’ Liverpool Crown Court was told today.
Eddie Gilfoyle allegedly said that mum-to-be Paula was leaving him but his workmates were still able to speak to her at home and see her in the area.
Auxilliary nurse at BUPA Murrayfield Hospital Michael Douglas told the jury at Liverpool Crown Court: ‘If he was talking about his marriage he would say they were breaking up or that she was leaving him.
But then I would see her shopping in the area.
It just didn't fit in with what he was saying.’
Pauline O'Brien said: ‘He told me that his wife was leaving him and that she was having a baby that was not his.
‘He said Paula was going to her brother's in Birmingham.
‘But a few weeks later I rang Eddie's house to see if he would give me a lift to work and Paula answered the phone.’
Gilfoyle, 31, of Grafton Drive, Upton, Wirral, denies murdering Paula on June 4 last year.
She was found hanged by a rope in the garage of their home.
The prosecution allege Gilfoyle murdered her and tried to make it look like suicide.
Earlier, the court heard that Gilfoyle, himself an auxilliary nurse at Murrayfield, had told friends that he was going to be promoted and was studying to deal with suicide cases.
But Frances Edwards, senior theatre nurse at the BUPA Murrayfield Hospital told the jury: ‘There never were any courses while he was at Murrayfield.
Auxilliary nurses do not go on any courses so there were none for him to take.
‘If any courses were run they would have been for trained staff like enrolled or staff nurses.
But there were no courses specialising in suicide.
Yesterday, the court heard that Mrs Gilfoyle had told her husband that a woman friend of his would only move into their home ‘over my dead body.’
The court heard how Gilfoyle had a relationship with a married woman, Sandra Davies.
Gilfoyle was said to have told his wife that Sandra was going to move into their Wirral home.
The court heard that Paula, 33, told him: ‘Oh no she is not.
Over my dead body.’
The jury heard how in January last year, Paula had confided in a friend about her husband's relationship.
She told Susan Coltman the friendship had started while Paula was living with her parents and Gilfoyle was staying at their new home in Grafton Drive, Upton, as it was being renovated.
Miss Coltman said Paula had shown her a letter from Mrs Davies to Gilfoyle.
Miss Coltman said: ‘Paula started to tell me about another woman that Eddie was seeing and at one point divorce proceedings had been started.’
(Proceeding) Sandra Davies…friend
Drive ban father in baby twins dash
A BANNED driver took a chance and used a van to rush to hospital when he heard his wife was about to have twins.
Tony Nelson, defending, told Wirral magistrates David Roger Powney panicked when he heard she had been rushed to hospital.
He obtained the keys of a van and drove to see her and the twins were born later the same day.
Powney, 43, of Trentham Road, Wallasey, admitted driving while disqualified, not having insurance and withholding material information he was a banned driver when applying for insurance.
Mr Nelson claimed the disqualified driving was an isolated incident.
The prosecution had claimed police kept watch for Powney after receiving a report he was regularly using the van.
The magistrates imposed a new 12-month ban and Powney was fined £200 plus £25 costs.
Cheshire soldier killed by one shot
A SINGLE shot, possibly fired from a cinema, killed a British soldier serving with the UN in Bosnia, a Wrexham inquest heard today.
Lance Corporal Wayne Edwards, 26, of Cefn Mawr, Wrexham, died while serving with the Cheshire Regiment on January 13.
He was the only British fatality during the regiment's six month tour of duty which ended in the war-torn former Yugoslavia last month.
The jury's unanimous verdict was that L/Cpl Edwards was unlawfully killed by a person unknown.
Lieutenant Colonel Bob Stewart, Cheshires' Commanding Officer, said in a statement read at the inquest that he believed the fatal shot may have been fired by either a Moslem or Croat gunman acting on his own initiative.
Lt Col Stewart said: ‘Realistically I do not think he will ever be identified.’
Firing
Corporal Alan Furniss was commanding a Warrior armoured vehicle being driven by L/Cpl Edwards.
Approaching a bridge he received a message telling him there was firing ahead.
He ordered the hatches on his Warrior to be closed.
Cpl Furniss said: ‘I shouted to L/Cpl Edwards on the intercom.
There was no reply.
I realised then that he had been shot.’
The vehicle crashed into a barrier on a bridge before coming to a halt.
The inquest jury viewed a ten minute video showing the scene of the shooting.
Mrs Barbara Edwards, mother of L/Cpl Edwards, and other relatives were at today's hearing.
Cash warning: Police warned people not to keep large amounts of cash in their homes after the theft of £740 from an 84-year-old man kicked by burglars at his Bromborough Road, Bebington, home.
Health job cuts
NEARLY 90 jobs are to be axed by a healthcare trust as a result of cost cutting.
The Bristol-based Frenchay Healthcare Trust, said the 89 job losses were needed to help cut spending by £2.3m over the next year.
It said this would bring positive improvements like more keyhole surgery, reduced waiting lists, and a day surgery unit.
By Joe Sylvester in Chicago
A CHICAGO police chief has admitted he is worried about potential violence in the city when European soccer hooligans descend for next year's World Cup finals.
‘It's a scary proposition,’ said Jack Seamans, Chicago police commander for special events.
‘We are concerned and we are preparing for the worst.’
Seamans said it was very rare that violence broke out at American football, baseball or basketball games, ‘and what is the biggest concern is that it seems to be organised violence at European soccer games which is something we have never experienced,’ he added.
‘Knowing the amount of people who could come over on cheap air fares and that's another concern it could be a problem.
‘What's deeply worrying is these people's disregard for safety, their disregard for property and their complete disregard for law and order.’
The Chicago Police Department used Sunday's US Cup game between USA and Germany as a trial run for next year's games.
They reported no arrests during or after the match, attended by 53,549 spectators.
Police in Foxboro, Massachusetts made eight arrests for drunken and disorderly behaviour after last week's England-US game.
One English fan was refused entry at a border post with Canada.
Germany, the defending world champions, kick off the tournament in Chicago and will play two of their three first-round matches there.
Germans fans were involved in rioting in Gothenburg during last year's European championship finals in Sweden.
The fear of violence was heightened in American cities last week when fans of the Montreal Canadians ice hockey team rioted in their city, causing an estimated 10 million dollars worth of damage, with 115 arrests and 160 people injured after their team won the NHL title, the Stanley Cup.
World Cup organisers are reluctant to talk about security arrangements for next year, except to say they are treating the issue very seriously and seeking help and advice from foreign police forces.
Chicago police beat Al Capone now they have to beat the fans
Tourist appeals for bike return
By Jane Gallagher
STRANDED German tourist Gabrielle Fischer today appealed for thieves to return her prized £3,500 motorbike.
The 21-year-old student had been visiting Southport on her return to Munich after watching the TT races in the Isle of Man.
But she has been left stranded after thieves stole the blue Yamaha XT600 from the car park of a Southport hotel.
Inspector Jim Fitzsimmons has asked anyone with information to contact him at Southport Police Station without delay.
He said: ‘This woman was travelling with her boyfriend who has had to go on without her to return all their gear.
‘'We hope the bike will be returned.
Obviously she is very upset being left alone in a strange country and we are looking after her at the police station.
‘We hope this unfortunate episode has not blighted her view of Merseyside.’
Anyone with information about the bike registration number DAH XT16 is asked to contact DI Fitzsimmons on .
for page 5
The Queen and Prince Philip at Ascot today for page 1 Fergie's greeting…the Duchess of York visited Wirral today full story Page 5
Couple get new home…after 42 years
THE WAITING GAME IS OVER AT LAST 
By Jules Stenson
A COUPLE were celebrating their new home today after waiting for 42 years.
Pensioners Jim and Yolanda Byrne say they were told back in 1951 that they would only have to stay in their Liverpool maisonette for six months.
They say they have been waiting to be moved from the ‘temporary accommodation’ ever since.
Yolanda, 64, said she was amazed when the city council offered them a two-bedroom house.
She said: ‘It's a miracle and definitely better late than never.’
And the grandma advised people still on the waiting list: ‘Don't give up.
You never know what might happen!’
Winston Churchill was Prime Minister and rationing was still in force when Jim and Yolanda moved into their three-bedroomed maisonette in Heydean Road with their two young children in 1951.
The couple, who have six grandchildren, expected to be rehoused by the old Liverpool Corporation within six months.
They had given up all hope of ever moving when a two-bedroom house with a garden was found for them in Forthlin Road, Allerton last week.
They plan to move in the next few weeks.
Green-fingered Jim, who has always wanted a garden of his own, is delighted.
Lovely
The retired docker's health has suffered in recent years and he has trouble getting up the stairs at their maisonette.
Yolanda said: ‘We've been round to the new house and it is lovely.
We can't wait to move in.
‘We were told we would only be in this house temporarily when we moved here.
‘We filled in loads of forms and kept reminding the council but nothing happened.
I always thought I would be in a box when I finally left here.’
The couple thanked Liberal Democrat Councillor Malcolm Bullock who took up their case.
A council spokeswoman said the couple had only been on the waiting list for 11 years.
They were taken off after applying to take over the tenancy at Heydean Road in 1954.
It's ours…
Jim and Yolanda outside their new home
Surprise Wirral date for Duchess TIRED FERGIE FLIES IN FOR HOMES VISIT
By Jason Burt
THE Duchess of York paid a private flying visit to Merseyside this afternoon and declared: ‘I've had an early start and I'm feeling pretty tired.’
Fergie arrived at Manchester airport early this morning for the private visit to five MacIntyre homes in Wirral.
The Duchess looked pale and drawn although she quickly put it down to her early start.
She is patron of the MacIntyre charity dedicated to helping children and adults with mental disabilities to overcome their handicaps.
The Duchess said: ‘It's been a busy day but very worthwhile.
All the houses are lovely and in such beautiful settings.
‘It is very nice to have been allowed into people's homes and to chat with them.
Everyone has made me feel so very welcome and I'm fortunate in that.’
The Duchess met 32-year-old Debbie George who is moving into Grange Cottage in Little Storeton Lane, Bebington.
Debbie said: ‘She is a lovely lady who takes a great interest in people.
‘I have been looking forward to her visit for weeks and was very excited when I met her.
‘She asked me how I was and when I would be moving in to the cottage.’
The Duchess posed for photographs and chatted with residents before heading back to Manchester airport.
The Duchess also visited houses in Dudley Road, New Brighton, Bedford Drive, Rock Ferry, The Wiend in Birkenhead and Penkett Road, Warrington.
Informal
Most of the 22 people living in the houses have moved from Newchurch Hospital, Warrington.
Karen Rigby, regional director of MacIntyres said ‘She wanted to come and see the project in action and keep it all very informal.’
The Queen Mother pulled out of her second public engagement in two days cancelling, at the last minute, plans to attend the opening of Royal Ascot.
But Buckingham Palace was swift to play down any concerns over the health of the Queen Mother, who is 93 in August.
A spokesman said: ‘She had a very busy weekend and has decided to have an easy day today.’
The Prince of Wales was missing from Ascot, suffering from renewed back trouble, and the Princess of Wales was reported to be spending time with their sons on half-term in London.
The Duke of York is on naval duties which left the Queen, the Duke of Edinburgh and the Duchess of Kent as the only Royal Family members at Ascot.
The Princess Royal was turned away from an entrance at Royal Ascot today when the gateman failed to recognise her.
She had arrived on foot at the Sovereign's Gate accompanied only by a policeman, after leaving her car in a car park across the road.
Only when her detective leaned over and said ‘This is the Princess Royal’ did Mr Petheridge take a second look and relent.
Report by Ann Todd
THE Duchess of York paid a flying visit to Merseyside today.
She arrived at Manchester Airport this morning to make a private visit this afternoon to four MacIntyre homes in Wirral.
The Duchess is patron of the charity dedicated to helping children and adults with mental disabilities to overcome their handicaps.
Her first stop was a house in Dudley Road, New Brighton, and from there she was going to Bedford Drive, Rock Ferry, and The Wiend, Birkenhead as well as Grange Cottage, Little Storeton Lane, Birkenhead.
THE Queen Mother today pulled out of her second public engagement in two days cancelling, at the last minute, plans to attend the opening of Royal Ascot.
But Buckingham Palace was swift to play down any concerns over the health of the Queen Mother, who is 93 in August.
A spokesman said: ‘She had a very busy weekend and has decided to have an easy day today.’
The Prince of Wales was missing from Ascot, suffering from renewed back trouble, and the Princess of Wales was reported to be spending time with their sons on half-term in London.
The Duke of York is on naval duties which left the Queen, the Duke of Edinburgh and the Duchess of Kent as the only Royal Family members at Ascot.
Mourners pay final tribute to flier Stephen
By Anne Harrison MORE than 400 mourners packed a Wirral church this afternoon for the funeral of Flt Lt Stephen McNally.
He was one of the nine airmen killed when an RAF Hercules plane crashed in the Scottish highlands last month.
Among the congregation was a 140-strong group from RAF Lyneham where Stephen was based.
Parish priest Father Peter Burke, who conducted the funeral Mass at Our Lady and St John's Church, Seacombe, described the service as a thanksgiving for the life of 27year-old Stephen.
Navigating
Officers from Stephen's Wiltshire-based squadron provided a guard of honour and the bearers party carried his Union Jack draped coffin with his RAF cap resting on the top.
Stephen, whose family is from Wallasey, had been navigating the plane when it went down near Blair Athol during a training session on May 27.
He leaves a wife, Kerry, with whom he would have celebrated his second wedding anniversary this month.
The service was followed by burial at Frankby Cemetery, which included a flypast provided by the RAF.
Horror for Janice in lift
NURSE IS KNIFED AT HOSPITAL
A NURSE told today of a nightmare knife attack in a Merseyside hospital lift.
The horror unfolded when the knifeman lashed out at nurse Janice Butler's face in the lift at Walton Hospital.
Janice, 26, was on her way to start work at 8.30 last night when she was attacked for no apparent reason.
The man got into the lift with her after he had been waiting in the foyer.
He asked her to push the button for his floor.
But when it stopped he lunged at Janice's head with the jagged-edged weapon before running off.
Janice, who switched to nights this week to cover for a colleague, today told the Echo: ‘He stood next to me and did not look at all shifty.
But when the doors opened for him to get out his arm moved towards me.
‘I just saw the knife heading for my face.
‘I felt the pain as the knife touched my face.
But I got my hand there in a reflex action and it took the worst of it.
‘There was blood everywhere.
I got to the ward with blood over my hands and face.
All the ward visitors were staring at me and the other nurses looked over in disbelief.
She said: ‘If the man had grabbed my bag I could have understood it.
But it was as if he had done it for the thrill of it.’
A full search of the hospital grounds was mounted but the man had escaped.
The attacker is described as white, aged 25–30, 5ft 8ins tall, with brown collar-length hair with blond streaks in it.
He was wearing a black zip-up leather bomber jacket.
A spokesman for Walton Hospital said security would be put on full alert in the wake of the incident.
Anyone who saw anything suspicious around the hospital at the time in question should contact the police on .
Number 10 date for union men
PRIME Minister John Major has invited a group of Merseyside trade union leaders for a meeting at Downing Street.
The delegation from Liverpool were stunned when their request to meet the PM was granted.
Kevin Coyne, co-ordinator of the city's trade union and unemployed centre said today: ‘We were surprised but obviously delighted.’
It is highly unusual for the Prime Minister to agree to meet such a group at Downing Street.
Joining Mr Coyne for the meeting tomorrow will be local TUC leader Eddie Roberts, Pat Harvey, secretary of the Liverpool Trades Council, and John Byrne, an unemployed scaffolder.
The meeting has been arranged by Riverside MP Bob Parry.
Mr Coyne said: ‘We will be expressing our great concern regarding benefits and the rumoured cuts in disability benefit.
‘We will be arguing that the long-term unemployed have suffered enough.’
The Merseyside group will also be arguing the case for extra government assistance for the region.
Before arriving at Downing Street they will meet with Labour MP Bryan Gould, and shadow health secretary David Blunkett.
New leader of countryside protectors
FORMER Clwyd county councillor Barbara Roberts has been elected chairwoman of the Campaign for the Protection of Rural Wales's Flint Branch, which covers Alyn and Deeside, Delyn and Rhuddlan.
She says the branch will be getting involved in potentially controversial planning applications.
The county's new minerals plan will come under scrutiny and she wants to see more public involvement in the CPRW's work.
Campaign for learning aids THE newly formed Wrexham and District Forum is to hold two inaugural meetings at the town's library on June 24 to campaign for better local services for people with learning difficulties.
The group is also to affiliate to Mencap, Britain's largest voluntary organisation for mentally handicapped children and adults and their families.
TNT let-off CONTRACTORS who tried to demolish the former Brymbo steelworks melting shop with explosives without first obtaining the necessary council permission are not to be prosecuted.
Root causes
COUNCILLORS in Wrexham Maelor are to undertake a survey of trees in the area and draw up a firm policy on tree protection.
Cut and run
POLICE are investigating the theft of a lawnmower and two strimmers worth £700 from a shed in Park Road, Coedpoeth, Wrexham.
Parking pain
A PETITION signed by local people has been handed to Wrexham Maelor Council objecting to its policy of wheel clamping cars and protesting against an alleged lack of security in ‘pay and display’ car parks.
Fire alarm
ALYN and Deeside MP Barry Jones says he will take the fight to keep Buckley fire station to the Home Office if necessary.
Legend in action: James Hunt (inset) speeding to third in the 1976 Japanese Grand Prix and earning the points that clinched the World Championship
Let there be light, chiefs urge
A SWITCH to more floodlit matches should be made by Sealink Welsh Alliance clubs next season, according to two of the league's chief officers.
And one prominent club, Bangor City, want to go even further by staging all their home games in midweek.
The issue will come under the spotlight when the clubs assemble for the league's AGM at Cemaes Bay on Saturday.
Reflecting on the last campaign, Sealink General Secretary Ron Bridges said: ‘It was a difficult season with the weather causing many fixtures to be postponed.
‘But with the co-operation of all clubs we did complete the programme on time.
‘Next season we must consider playing fixtures in midweek under the floodlights of those clubs who have the facilities during October, November, February and March to prevent any large backlog of matches again.
‘It is unfair for some clubs to have to play three or four times a week during May to complete their lists.’
Request
Fixtures secretary Meirion Williams said: ‘All clubs should play under lights at least four times during a season.’
Bangor City have tabled a request to the annual meeting that they should be allowed to host all their league fixtures at Farrar Road under the lights in midweek.
City explained their case by reporting better crowds at evening games and the fact that they would ease the workload on club officials who would have double commitments on Saturdays.
Five newcomers have applied for promotion to the Sealink level and the two front runners are Holyhead Town and St Asaph City, the respective Gwynedd and Clwyd League champions.
The other contenders are Llanfairfechan Town and Porthmadog, third and fourth placed in Gwynedd, and Prestatyn Town, runners-up in Clwyd.
TWO new applications have been received by the B&M Roofing Anglesey League for next season and, if accepted, it could mean the island league will be expanded to two divisions.
The AGM at Llangefni on June 25 will be told Menai Bridge Town and Rhosneigr&District have submitted bids to join.
Duke offers flood chaos
THE Llandudno flood victims will get a boost today when the Duke of Edinburgh flies in to see the disaster for himself.
This morning he will visit Cardigan before flying to Llandudno during the early afternoon.
The visit is understood to be a last minute arrangement.
Early yesterday, Buckingham Palace said there were no plans for a visit.
But the Royal visit will be a major boost for the area as it will focus national attention on the plight of an estimated 3,000 people in the Aberconwy area who have been directly affected by the disaster.
Last night Mayor of Llandudno, Coun Joan Finch, welcomed the news.
‘It will be a great boost for the flood victims.
The visit is very prompt, there has been no delay.
It shows that he is a caring man.’
Floods latest Page 5
A MOTHER'S SORROW
Verdict on a hero
GRIEVING mother Barbara Edwards yesterday welcomed the inquest verdict passed on her Bosnia hero son, Lance Corporal Wayne Edwards, who was shot in Sniper's Alley while serving in the former Yugoslavia.
The jury at the Wrexham inquest returned a verdict that L/Cpl Edwards, on attachment with the Cheshires, was unlawfully killed.
Mrs Edwards, of Cefn Mawr, said: ‘I did not want a verdict he was killed in action because he did not go out to fight; he went out to keep the peace.’
Full story Page 6 
Grieving: Mrs Barbara Edwards arrives at the inquest
Clarke hints at threat of Budget tax rise
By David Rose Daily Post Political Editor
KENNETH Clarke bluntly warned the Cabinet last night to axe public spending or face higher taxes in his Autumn Budget.
It is the first sign from the new Chancellor that he is ready to reverse the Tories' commitment to lower taxes unless the Government And he used the Chancellor's traditional speech to the City of London to deliver his ultimatum to the Cabinet, which takes its first look at next year's public spending tomorrow.
‘No prudent Chancellor can ever regard taxation as something which can only ever be reduced,’ he said.
‘My own instincts are tax-cutting instincts, but if we are to keep the level of taxation down, it is essential to maintain a tight rein on public spending.’
John Major promptly lined up behind the Chancellor's tough stance by approving plans to tax the 1.5m people who get invalidity benefit.
Benefit
The move will mean them paying £2.80 a week (or £140 a year) in tax netting the Treasury an extra £230m a year.
The Prime Minister gave his go-ahead at a meeting with the Chancellor, Treasury Chief Secretary Michael Portillo, Social Security Secretary Peter Lilley and Employment Minister Michael Forsyth, after being told that doctors, especially in inner city areas, sign people on for the benefit because it pays more than dole money.
This, the Government says, explains why the number receiving benefit has more than doubled from 700,000 over the past ten years, raising the cost to £6bn.
‘Frankly, it beggars belief that so many more people have suddenly become invalids, especially at a time when the health of the nation has improved,’ Mr Major said in the Commons.
Taxing the benefit, and introducing tighter medical checks will also, says the Government, force many to find jobs or sign back on the dole.
Labour's Shadow Social Security Minister, Donald Dewar, accused Mr Major of planning ‘a Treasury raid on the long-term sick.
The Prime Minister should admit that high unemployment is the root cause of his problems.’
But, while Mr Lilley's Continued on Page 2 Continued from Page 1 £80bn social security budget is being specially targeted by the Treasury, other ministers will have to find deep cuts in their budgets if they are to avoid higher taxes.
About £35bn of Britain's huge £50bn borrowing debt is due to the recession, and will be wiped out as the recovery continues over the next three years.
That leaves the Chancellor and the Cabinet having to find £15bn of spending cuts or higher taxes, or accepting a combination of both.
But Mr Clarke told ministers: ‘I am against any question of raising taxes to compensate for proper control of public spending.
‘The deficit we face, and the borrowing requirement we have, is far too large, and it is one of the obstacles to recovery.’
In his City of London speech traditionally delivered at the Mansion House, but staged this year in the Guildhall, because of refurbishment of the usual venue the Chancellor endorsed Norman Lamont's plans to raise £10bn over the next two years by slapping VAT on home fuel bills and raising National Insurance contributions.
Labour's Shadow Chancellor, Gordon Brown, hit back: ‘This speech could easily have been delivered by Norman Lamont.
All that Mr Clarke has confirmed is the Tory confusion over tax policy, with the new Chancellor saying that no prudent Chancellor would promise taxes would never go up, and the Prime Minister who promised tax cuts year on year.’
Take axe to spending or else
NEW Chancellor Kenneth Clarke last night issued a clear warning to his Cabinet colleagues to cut back Government spending or face the consequences.
Mr Clarke, in the Chancellor's traditional speech to the City of London, said that spending would have to be cut back drastically, or else he might have to consider tax increases in his Autumn Budget.
‘No prudent Chancellor can ever regard taxation as something which can only ever be reduced,’ he said.
‘My own instincts are tax-cutting instincts, but if we are to keep the level of taxation down, it is essential to maintain a tight rein on public spending.’
It was the first sign from the new Chancellor that he was ready to reverse the Tories' commitment to lower taxes unless the Government tackles its £50bn overdraft.
But Shadow Chancellor Gordon Brown said Mr Clarke had nothing new to offer to confront the problems faced by the country.
Full story Page 2
Murder accused had ‘family problems’
By Richard Elias Daily Post Staff
JUST weeks before his pregnant wife was found hanging, a hospital technician was allowed home early from work after telling colleagues she had left him.
Eddie Gilfoyle also told workmates the baby was not his and that he had ‘family problems’.
Gilfoyle, 31, denies murdering his wife, Paula at their home in Wirral early last June.
During the fourth day of the trial at Liverpool Crown Court, the deputy matron of the hospital where Gilfoyle worked told of a meeting she had with him.
Joyce Preston, who is also theatre manager of the Murrayfield Hospital in Thingwall, Wirral, said: ‘Several weeks before Paula died I came on duty and Eddie was waiting at the theatre.
‘He looked very distressed and upset.
He was pale and shaking.
He told me that his wife had left him and she had told him that the baby she was carrying was not his.’
Mrs Preston added: ‘In my opinion he looked too upset to work in an operating theatre so I allowed him to go home on compassionate grounds.’
Eight-and-a-half-months pregnant, Paula Gilfoyle was discovered hanging from a roof beam in the garage of her home in Grafton Drive, Upton.
Her feet were resting on a step-ladder.
Later, Mrs Preston told the court how new courses, specifically for auxiliary nurses were introduced at the hospital last year.
Earlier in the trial, the prosecution alleged that Gilfoyle claimed to be on a course at work specialising in suicide and attempted suicide cases.
But another witness, Frances Edwards, the hospital's senior theatre nurse denied there were any such schemes available at the Murrayfield.
Susan Montgomery, a food service assistant at the hospital said that on the day Mrs Gilfoyle, 33, was found, Gilfoyle was unusually reticent.
She said: ‘I told him he was very quiet.
He walked past me later and I said to him, ‘Going home early’ and he said, ‘Family problems.’
‘I said, ‘We all have those’ and he said something but I am not sure what.
It sounded like, ‘Yes but not like this.’’
The trial continues.
Eddie Gilfoyle
Alert as police link killings of five men
By John von Radowitz Daily Post Correspondent
UP TO five men, including a Liverpool-born theatre director, may have been murdered by a serial killer preying on the gay community in London, police said last night.
The latest victim was last night found naked at his home in south London by his landlady.
Because of the manner of his death, police believe it may be linked with four others which were definitely the work of the same killer.
All the victims are professional men and three, possibly four, were known homosexuals.
Late last night, anxious police called a hastily arranged news conference to issue an urgent warning to the gay community.
Det Chief Supt Ken John, co-ordinating the murder inquiry, said: ‘We feel that we owe it to the gay community to go out to the community and warn individual practising homosexuals who are frequenting various pubs, restaurants and bars in London to be aware that somebody who is prepared to attack their community is about in the city.
‘We are going to need the help of the gay community in London, the help of the media and the help of the public.’
Victim one: Liverpool-born theatre director and choreographer Peter Walker, who had been working on the hit musical, City of Angels, was found strangled, his naked body trussed up on his bed at his home in Battersea, on March 8.
Following the death of former professional dancer Mr Walker, whose parents kept a general store in Seaforth, a man phoned a tabloid newspaper claiming responsibility.
He reportedly said: ‘I tied him up and killed him.
He was homosexual and into kinky sex.’
Mr Walker, formerly of Rawson Road, Seaforth, was well-known in theatrical Continued on Page 3 Continued from Page 1 circles, and had worked on such musical successes as Annie, Chess, and Annie Get Your Gun.
Victim two: Described last night only as ‘part of the series of killings.’
Christopher Dunn, 37, a librarian, was found dead at home in Willesden, N London, on May 30.
At first police treated his case as a suspicious death but not murder.
Victim three: American company director Perry Floyd Bradley, 35, was found dead in Kensington on June 4.
Police said there was no evidence that he was homosexual, but because of the way he died, he was linked with the other victims.
Victim four: Caretaker Andrew Collier, 33, was found dead in Dalston, east London, on June 9.
Police had earlier revealed that he died in similar circumstances to Mr Walker.
Mr Collier was last seen alive on June 6 returning to his flat with another man whom police are trying to trace.
Police are revealing few details about the fifth victim, who at this stage they are not linking definitely with the others.
Mr John would not name the fifth murdered man, but said that, like the others, he was a professional.
After giving details of the first four murders, Mr John said: ‘There has been a fifth development, a murder in south London, which bears features similar to the others we are investigating.’
Asked about a possible motive for the killings, Mr John said: ‘This will be speculation.
We have to have an open mind on that, whether the victims were known to the killer or whether there is a grudge.’
He refused to discuss whether police thought the killer was a homosexual.
Nor would he go into detail about the method of murder although detectives had earlier disclosed how Walker and Collier, both HIV-positive, were killed.
Family escape death in crash with getaway car
Road mayhem after robbery attempt
By David Banks Daily Post Staff
A TRAGEDY was narrowly averted yesterday when a car being pursued by police was in a head-on crash with a family on a day out.
The accident happened on the outskirts of Chester after a cross-county motorway chase from Warrington as police followed up a report of an attempted armed robbery.
The driver being pursued, driving a Toyota MR2 GT sports car allegedly stolen in Manchester, is said to have rammed four private cars and a police car.
The crash mayhem occurred following an incident at about 11am yesterday in which a man in his 20s allegedly tried to hold up a post office in Thelwall, Warrington.
The man is said to have gone into the post office, brandishing what appeared to be a handgun, then fled empty-handed when the female assistant fled into the rear of the premises.
Police cars and the police helicopter later trailed the man's getaway car as he drove at high speed down the M6 and M56.
Police said the Toyota rammed three cars on the motorway and another on the A556, but that fortunately no one had been injured.
The man then left the motorway and headed for Chester, driving around roads in the Mollington area.
At 11.42am the Toyota was in the head-on collision with a Vauxhall Cavalier in which a family of four from West Kirkby was travelling to Chester Zoo.
The crash occurred on the A540 Parkgate Road, near the Mollington Banastre Hotel.
By sheer luck, the grandmother, 57, mother, two daughters, aged three and two, and the six-month-old baby boy in the car escaped serious injury.
All were taken to the Countess of Chester Hospital but later discharged.
The family has not been named.
The driver of the Toyota was trapped by the feet in the wreckage of the car and had to be released by firemen.
He too was taken to the Countess of Chester Hospital, where he was found to have a broken pelvis.
The man is expected to be in hospital for three or four days.
When the head-on crash occurred, the nearest police car was a quarter-of-a-mile behind the stolen vehicle.
A police spokeswoman said: ‘The police helicopter enables police to monitor the movements of a stolen car without endangering police drivers.
‘The helicopter provides a running commentary to the police control room situated in Chester, so the police cars can follow at a safe distance.’
The badly-damaged Toyota is taken away on a breakdown wagon after the head-on crash Picture: CLIFF BRETT
Hero driver pulls crash victim from blazing car
Motorist's bravery praised by police
By Chris Parker Daily Post Staff
POLICE have paid tribute to the bravery of a driver who rescued a fellow motorist from the blazing wreckage of his car.
Ian Connor, 23, pulled 47-year-old David Haigh from his car after the vehicle was involved in a five car pile-up.
Mr Connor, of Tressel Drive, Sutton Manor, St Helens, suffered burns to his arms in the rescue, which took place after a crash on the A49 near Leominster, Hereford and Worcestershire, on Monday.
Mr Connor ran from his Vauxhall Cavalier to drag Mr Haigh from the flames engulfing his Peugeot 309.
Mr Haigh, of Leymoor, Huddersfield, was taken by air ambulance to Chepstow Hospital, Gwent, suffering from 70pc burns.
A spokesman for West Mercia police said: ‘Mr Haigh's car flew into the air with the impact and it burst into flames when it hit the ground.
‘Mr Haigh's car was well alight when Mr Connor pulled him from it and he was very brave to do so.’
Mr Connor was treated for burns at Hereford General Hospital and later discharged.
His car was in a line of traffic travelling towards Leominster when it was involved in a collision with Mr Haigh's car, which was in front.
The Peugeot was pushed on to the other side of the road and was in collision with a Sierra driven by Leslie Green, of Runcorn, Cheshire, who was travelling in the opposite direction.
Mr Green and his wife Dorothy suffered chest injuries and were taken to Hereford General Hospital.
Deborah Green, 28, a passenger, was taken to the hospital by air ambulance, suffering from back injuries.
A spokeswoman for Chepstow Hospital described Mr Haigh's condition as critical but stable last night.
Man jailed after rape of pregnant woman
By Lynda Roughley Daily Post Correspondent
A 25-year-old man who raped three women, one of them six months pregnant, has been jailed for 12 years.
Robert Manning was told by Liverpool Crown Court judge the offences had been aggravated by the humiliation, terror and pain of his victims.
A psychiatric report showed he was extremely dangerous, particularly to anyone with whom he formed a relationship.
Manning, unemployed, of High Street, Standish, Wigan, admitted raping three women and assaulting two of them causing actual bodily harm over a five year period.
Prosecuting counsel Guy Gozem, said Manning's two earlier victims had kept quiet about their ordeal until he struck again when they told police.
When interviewed by detectives Manning, who has no previous convictions for sexual or violent offences, confessed, and said: ‘I was told to rape them.
I heard voices.’
He raped the pregnant woman, whom he knew, at her Wigan home last autumn, after suddenly losing his temper and punching her in the face.
Armed with a knife he told her she was going to die and after ordering her to undress he sexually abused and raped her.
Mr Gozem said the next morning she escaped and told police.
A friend of hers then revealed that four years earlier Manning had twice raped her.
He kept her prisoner in her own home and threatened to electrocute her on a sunbed and burn her with an iron.
He swung her into a wall while she was holding a nine-month-old baby, bruising its head.
She later told the police about the assault but not the rape.
A month later he raped her again, said Mr Gozem.
His earliest rape, of a 19year-old girl, happened the previous year after they met via a mutual friend.
They went to the Goose Green home of a couple, with whom he had been out drinking, and after the couple went to bed Manning raped her.
Defence counsel, Andrew Nuttall, said Manning had pleaded guilty and shortly after being arrested confessed to all the offences.
He suffered with violent mood swings and hoped to receive psychiatric help while in prison.
‘He clearly has some personality disorder.’
Accused ‘wanted to bury park attack victim alive’
By Daily Post Correspondent
A MURDER trial was adjourned last night after one of the accused broke down in the witness box as she said her fellow defendant had suggested using shovels to bury a woman alive.
Earlier, Sharon Freda McLean denied killing Linda McMullen and said that it was co-defendant Lisa Burgess who started to kick and stamp on her in the Wrexham Peace Gardens.
But McLean told the jury that she had joined in and also stamped on Mrs McMullen's stomach and throat.
Both McLean and Burgess have denied that they forced soil and debris into the victim's mouth, choking her to death.
But McLean said that she had put mud on Mrs McMullen's face to try and stop the bleeding, something she had seen done in films.
On Monday, the jury at Mold Crown Court, was told by Burgess that it was McLean who was responsible for the attack, kicking and stamping on her.
Burgess said she had kicked Mrs McMullen between three and five times but no more.
But yesterday McLean said it was Burgess who had been kicking and stamping on the victim.
‘I though it must have been because they were accusing each other of sleeping with each other 's husbands,’ said McLean.
Asked by her barrister, William Waldron QC, what happened then, McLean said: ‘I just joined in.’
Mr Waldron has told the jury that McLean, who was a heavy drinker and took medication for angina, asthma and rheumatism, suffered from a mental abnormality which severely impaired her responsibility for her actions.
Burgess, 21, who lived in a caravan at Acrefair and McLean, 43, of no fixed abode, deny murdering Mrs McMullen, 30, of Derby Road, Brynteg.
The prosecution says Mrs McMullen was murdered when soil and vegetation was impacted into her mouth and she choked.
It also claims that McLean tried to strangle her.
The case continues.
Immediate action is demanded
Bosnia rebukes world at human rights talks
By Daily Post Correspondent
IN A dramatic challenge to the credibility of the human rights conference going on in Vienna, Bosnia yesterday demanded immediate action to end the slaughter in Gorazde.
Bosnian Foreign Minister Haris Silajdzic told delegates: ‘This is the test.’
He brought the proceedings to a standstill with a stinging rebuke to the nations of the world and an emotional appeal for help to stop ‘genocide’ in the besieged town.
The chamber, filled with over 160 delegations to the World Conference on Human Rights, listened in hushed silence and then rose in a standing ovation.
Islamic states interrupted the planned order of speeches and stood up one after the other to back his call for an immediate appeal to the Security Council.
Within a few minutes it was adopted unanimously.
Bosnian President Alija Izetbegovic followed his foreign minister to refuse to take part in any further big peace conferences and instead urged the international community to let Muslims defend themselves against the Serbs.
In Washington, President Clinton said that the option of lifting the UN arms embargo was still on the table even though Britain, Russia and France rejected his earlier proposal to do so.
‘I still think it may be the only way to get them to move to a real meaningful ceasefire, real meaningful peace talks,’ Clinton said.
Silajdzic told the UN human rights meeting that this was so.
‘Bosnia-Herzegovina is everything human rights is not,’ he said.
It was a ‘bloodstain’ on the conscience of the international community.
‘Let us demand on behalf of humanity, because this is a crime against humanity, to take all measures to stop the genocide in at least one town, Gorazde,’ he said.
‘This is the test.
If this is not done I don't think there will be any credibility left for any of us in the international community or in the United Nations.’
He said the UN arms embargo meant his country was fighting with its hands tied for its very survival.
‘Where are the human rights?’ he asked.
‘Where is the political will?’
Meanwhile, in Bosnia the heads of its three warring armies met face-to-face for the first time yesterday and signed a ceasefire deal for the whole republic.
It was to go into effect at noon on Friday, giving the commanders a chance to disengage their forces and the political leaders 48 hours to work on a settlement.
The document was signed at Sarajevo airport by General Ratko Mladic for the Bosnian Serb forces, General Milivoj Petkovic for the Croats and Rasim Delic, the newly-appointed commander of the Muslim-led government army.
Haris Silajdzic
President Clinton
Huge task looms in bid to tackle flood disaster
By Ian Lang Daily Post Staff
THE number of people hit by the flood disaster, dubbed the ‘storm of the century’, will exceed 3,000 it was revealed last night.
And it has become apparent that the elderly and poor will be most affected.
The scale of the disaster which has slowly emerged over the past four days has shaken those who are working to tackle the crisis.
It has also underlined the urgent need for sufficient Government funds to pay for a massive recovery programme.
So far, it has emerged that the cost of repairing damaged roads will alone hit the £1m mark.
A total of 500 council houses have been declared uninhabitable and it will cost £2m to deal with them.
Several hundred private homes were also badly hit within a five-mile radius of Llandudno where the storm struck.
A total of 1,000 people have been made homeless and, because of the seriousness of the damage to their homes, will have to stay in temporary accommodation for several months.
A further 1,500 people have been temporarily displaced.
In all, a total of 3,000 people from Llandudno, Llandudno Junction, Conwy, Deganwy and Glan Conwy, have registered with Aberconwy Borough Council as having moved from their homes due to the floods.
That figure does not include people whose homes have been damaged but who have not contacted the authority.
Many, it has emerged, will be uninsured or under-insured adding to the misery already suffered.
The chief executive of Gwynedd County Council, Huw Thomas, said that the flood had hit the elderly and poor most.
But unlike the Towyn flood, areas hit were in large pockets spread around Aberconwy.
‘We are therefore going to have a large recovery problem which is going to be an expensive business,’ Mr Thomas said.
However, authorities are anxious that the disaster should not hit the holiday industry and tourist centres are already operating as normal.
Aberconwy's chief executive, Alan Carr, said that the majority of flood-hit areas had already been ‘rough cleaned’ which involved mopping-up and removing damaged furniture.
However, staff would return to do a more thorough job.
But he repeated appeals for householders who had not contacted the council to do so.
Police are assuring the public that there is no looting problem.
They say that no flood hit homes have been broken into.
Graffiti vandal admits £28,000 subway damage
Youth left ‘tag’ in six month spree
By Daily Post Correspondent
A 17-year-old youth has admitted being the graffiti vandal who daubed his ‘tag’ Rat on buildings in Chester during a six month vandalism spree.
Chester City Council spent £28,000 trying to scrub off his tag along with others from almost every street in the city.
Anne McGrath, prosecuting at Chester Youth Court said that sometimes the graffiti re-appeared within 30 minutes of it being cleaned off.
The youth, who cannot be named for legal reasons, admitted three charges of criminal damage between November 1, 1992 and February 28 this year and asked for four similar offences to be considered.
The youth, who lives in Boughton, used spray paint and felt marker pens in three subways in Newton, City Road and Northgate Street.
Mrs McGrath said he was arrested after a local newspaper set up a hotline appealing for information.
She told the court: ‘As a result of the journalists’ campaign two names were furnished to police.
‘After a search warrant was obtained the defendant's home was searched and pens and graffiti magazines were recovered from the house.
‘It is impossible to estimate exactly how much this defendant's offences cost the city council,’ said Mrs McGrath.
‘The only figure we have been given is of £28,000 which was spent on the cleaning of the graffiti.’
She added: ‘Some of this graffiti appeared within 30 minutes after it had been cleaned.’
Jack McGarva, defending, said his client was not responsible for all the graffiti but admitted causing the damage on a large number of occasions.
The case was adjourned for pre-sentence reports.
Warne's figures 17 Test wickets at 15 runs apiece suggest there was only one winner.
Rebuilding call as clean-up continues
Victims say: ‘We won't go back to disaster-hit flats’
By Ian Lang and Emyr Williams
ANGRY residents of flood-hit flats in Conwy want the buildings demolished, claiming they are structurally unsafe.
And they have vowed to refuse to move back into the flats on Conwy Morfa until their demands are met.
Yesterday there were angry scenes when a tenants' group held a meeting with representatives of Aberconwy Borough Council who were organising a clean-up of the badly flooded area.
The authority insists that the two storey buildings are structurally sound and safe.
Yesterday, it emerged that many of the residents had lost everything as they were not insured.
Many had no time to save their possessions as the filthy, sewage contaminated water surged into their homes.
There were harrowing scenes, remiscent of the disaster at Towyn, as possessions were piled onto lawns.
But as well as despair for the future there was also anger.
Resident Alan Jones, 26, said it was vital that the residents of the 86 flats make a stand.’
‘These flats should be demolished and they should start all over again.
The footings need to be raised so they can guarantee this sort of thing never happens again,’ said the father of four.
‘The flats were flooded two and a half years ago and we were promised that it would never happen again.’
He said council officers had told them that the repair bill per flat would cost in the region of £5,000, whereas it would cost about £40,000 to build new homes.
‘It is going to cost far more than £5,000 they are playing it down,’ he said.
He said that residents of the first floor flats, which had not been flooded had been told that they would have to return as soon as possible.
‘But we have said ‘No’.
We want them levelling and we are standing firm together.
Residents of the Morfa flats are saying they do not want to live here ever again.’
Another flat resident, mother-of-two Michelle Parry, said she was not insured and had lost everything.
‘Everything has gone it's just terrible.’
She said she had liked her flat but would not want to go back there.
‘The memories are just too terrible.
The children were terrified when the flood happened and I just do not think they would want to come back.’
The chief executive of Gwynedd County Council, Huw V Thomas, who is acting as co-ordinator following the flood damage in the Aberconwy area, last night praised the 50 Army personnel for the work they put in during the day to help clear up the mess in the Morfa Conwy and Llandudno Junction areas.
‘Such is the progress made that they are now ready to move on to Llandudno to help clear up the mess in various houses there,’ said Mr Thomas.
‘I would, therefore, like to appeal to householders who have suffered damage in the Oval and Trinity Avenue areas of Llandudno to make themselves available at their homes on Tuesday morning so that the Army can gain access and proceed without delay.’
And Aberconwy mayor Eurwen Jones has praised council staff who have worked round the clock for free to tackle the emergency.
‘They have been tremendous,’ she said.
Volunteers, including soldiers from the Staffordshire Regiment, help with the flood clean-up operation
Council vows to fight town hospital closure
By Emyr Williams Daily Post Correspondent
A PLAN to close one of Machynlleth's two hospitals has so angered local people that town councillors are to fight the proposal.
Powys Health Care Trust announced two weeks ago its intention to concentrate hospital services at the Chest Hospital.
The Trust intends to spend about £175,000 amalgamating services which are at present split between the Chest Hospital and Machynlleth Corris and District Hospital.
Concentrating services at the Chest Hospital would save at least £50,000 a year.
The Trust is also keen to develop the district site across the road as both a GP centre and a nursing home.
Michael Jones, the Trust's chief executive, said: ‘Staff are gasping for a decision on this and we need to do it urgently in order to drive up the hospital's performance and get costs down.’
A working group made up of clinicians, consultants, GPs and other health professionals has looked at a number of options and has recommended that services be consolidated, and accommodation improvements made, at the Chest Hospital.
Divisional manager Graham Chadwick said that if the 14 beds in the district hospital closed, there would be a need for five additional beds and a maternity suite at the Chest Hospital to meet demand between now and the turn of the century.
But Machynlleth councillors have come out against the Trust's plans to close the district hospital and have vowed to campaign to save it.
A working party is to be formed to draw up opposition to the plan, for presentation to the Welsh Office.
The Mayor of Machynlleth, Coun Ivan Warren, said the entire community felt betrayed.
Coun Michael Williams said: ‘It's a matter of concern that the Trust hasn't seen fit even to consult local authorities on such an important issue affecting the people of Machynlleth.’
Health authority pays out £11,000 to ‘whistle-blower’
By Peter Beal Daily Post Correspondent
A HEALTH authority yesterday pulled out of its battle with a ‘whistle-blower’ nurse who conducted a public campaign about conditions on hospital geriatric wards.
Sixty-three-year-old charge nurse Graham Pink was sacked after allegedly breaching patient confidentiality during his one-man campaign about conditions at Stepping Hill Hospital in Stockport.
He took his case to an industrial tribunal which was due to resume next week.
Stockport Health Authority said yesterday it still rejected all Mr Pink's claims about conditions in the wards and was pulling out to save money.
But it accepted there were flaws in procedures in disciplinary proceedings against Mr Pink.
And it is to pay him £11,188 the maximum that could have been awarded if the tribunal, which has already sat for ten days in March, found in his favour.
Authority chairman Tony Russell said the hearing, which had already cost the authority £90,000, was only due to last ten days but now there was prospect of it continuing for up to three months.
‘It is important that we do not use one penny of money that is earmarked for patient care,’ he added.
He said: ‘One never knows what the tribunal would have done.
But winning the case was never central to us.
We needed to defend the golden rule of nursing, that of patient confidentiality.’
During his campaign Mr Pink appeared in national newspapers, on television and wrote what the tribunal heard was a ‘torrent of words,’ including letters to the Prime Minister.
He compared conditions on the wards at night to those in jail.
He was alleged to have breached confidentiality when he released details of an incident involving an elderly, dying man.
The man's family claimed he could be identified from details given by Mr Pink.
Mr Pink was not immediately available for comment but his solicitor, Robin Lewis, said: ‘This is not a settlement, it is a concession.
‘His victory represents a triumph for those whose priority is care for patients over those whose first care is for balance sheets.’
Payment charge nurse Graham Pink
FACES OF A FUNNYMAN: Les in 1967; ‘gurning’ in a 1981 panto; as Ada, in his act with Roy Barraclough; and as Nona in a 1990 production
Two charged with murders as hunt for woman continues
By Richard Elias and Andrew Forgrave
TWO men are due to appear in court this morning charged with the murder of a young business couple.
The pair are accused of killing Garry Pettitt and his girlfriend Jean Larkin.
The two men, aged 31 and 24, are expected before Liverpool City Magistrates Court this morning.
Both are from the Old Swan area of the city.
Mr Pettitt and Miss Larkin vanished from their home on south Merseyside six weeks ago.
Their disappearance sparked a huge search involving police officers from four constabularies.
A fortnight ago, human remains were found at a remote clearing near Coppull in Central Lancashire.
These were later positively identified as belonging to 25year-old Garry Pettitt.
Further extensive tests are still being carried out on other samples but so far no trace of Miss Larkin, 24, has been found.
Mr Pettitt, who ran the Calypso Blind Co in Aigburth, Liverpool, and his girlfriend were last seen together on April 26.
Police now believe the couple met their deaths the following day, when their red Vauxhall Astra van was found abandoned at Manchester Airport.
A Merseyside Police spokesman said: ‘Two males, both from the Old Swan District of Liverpool, have been charged with the murders of Garry Pettitt and Jean Larkin.’
He added the pair were charged on Saturday.
Last night, the senior detective involved in the inquiry told the Daily Post: ‘Despite these charges our inquiries are still continuing.
What we want to do now is to find Jean.
That is our priority at the moment.’
Jean Larkin and Gary Pettitt
Four yachtsmen saved in night race sea drama
By Sue Ormesher Daily Post Staff
FOUR yachtsmen competing in an annual night race cheated death yesterday after their vessel was flooded and began to sink three miles off the Isle of Man.
The men on board the Firefly, a 25ft catamaran, had set off from the island on the return leg of the race when their craft began to ship water and threatened to founder.
They radioed for help and were rescued by the Isle of Man lifeboat.
The four were then taken back to Douglas.
The Firefly, owned by Jim Connell, of Gatley Drive, Maghull, had almost sunk by the time it had been towed in and hauled onto a slipway.
The men, none of whom was injured, had been taking part in the Isle of Man Midnight Race, an annual event organised by Tranmere Sailing Club.
The drama occurred at 6.53 yesterday morning.
Only minutes before, the yacht Request, which was also taking part in the race, had got into difficulties three miles from the Isle of Man.
A spokesman for Crosby Coastguard Station said: ‘The Isle of Man lifeboat has certainly been busy this weekend.
‘The Request was on passage from Douglas to Birkenhead when she lost her rudder.
‘A crew of three, yacht owner John Graham, of Prenton, and two friends, were on board.
‘The vessel was taken back into Douglas harbour.’
No-one was injured in this second incident either.
A 40-year-old man was airlifted to hospital from an Isle of Man-bound ferry after having a heart attack.
Nick Hodgkinson, a passenger on the King Orry, collapsed at 10pm on Saturday.
The ferry was about 20 miles out of Liverpool when Mr Hodgkinson took ill.
He was taken off by a helicopter from RAF Valley, Anglesey and flown to hospital in Barrow-in-Furness.
A nine-metre motor cruiser en route from Lancaster to Holyhead got a tow from a warship yesterday after its engine failed.
The tiny vessel Miami Vice broke down five miles north of the Liverpool Bar shortly after 11am yesterday.
A passing warship, the Humber took off the four-man crew, then towed the cruiser into Liverpool for repairs.
Murder scene massage parlour is closed down
By Richard Williams Daily Post Staff
POLICE have closed down a massage parlour operating in the room where prostitute Lynne Trenholm was murdered.
Two years to the day after the brutal killing, three women were working in the former Pinky's Massage parlour.
Police shut down the new business, called Kim's, last week after a covert operation.
Last Wednesday marked the second anniversary of the 29-year-old's death.
Friends and family left flowers and wreaths on the door to the building in Boughton, Chester, which now houses a women's fashion shop on the ground floor.
Unknown to the shop's managers, the new business was being run in the upstairs room where Miss Trenholm's blood stained body was found.
She had been knifed to death.
Adverts were placed in local papers last week but not the Daily Post offering a ‘massage in pleasant surroundings.’
Callers were told to enter the building via backstairs, avoiding the downstairs shop, which had no connection with the parlour.
Following a tip-off, Chester police launched an investigation and closed the business.
No arrests have been made.
Sgt Geoff Williams, head of Chester's Special Initiative Squad, who believes the parlour was open for three days, said: ‘It is obviously a sensitive place and we acted as soon as we could to close it.
‘We have been round there in the last couple of days and they have moved on now.
There is nothing there.
‘We are constantly keeping an eye out, and are aware of the public's concern.
It is one of my squad's duties to act on that and that is what we have done here.’
The owner of the building was unaware of the nature of the new business.
Police, who are still hunting the killer, marked last week's anniversary by renewing their appeal for help from the public.
Detectives are now following up information given to them.
Lynne Trenholm EXCLUSIVE
Cabinet colleagues back PM as he hits rock bottom in polls
By Chris Moncrieff Press Association
JOHN Major's Cabinet colleagues yesterday ruled out a leadership challenge this side of the general election, as the Prime Minister's stock remains at rock bottom in new opinion polls.
They rallied behind him despite an interview at the weekend in which he suggested he had considered the possibility of a contest for the leadership after this year.
Although the polls give him the lowest performance rating of any post-war leader, Mr Major doubted there would be a challenge this year.
However, in the interview with a national newspaper, he admitted he was less certain about the period beyond that.
But Home Secretary Michael Howard described speculation about the Prime Minister's future as a ‘midsummer spasm’ and said that the question of a challenge did not arise.
And former Tory chairman Lord Parkinson said the Prime Minister and Chancellor Kenneth Clarke would ‘sink or swim together’, and talk of rivalry between them was nonsense.
The orchestration of Cabinet ministers in radio and TV interviews at the weekend seemed designed to damp down growing unrest among Conservative back-benchers about the quality of leadership.
Board of Trade President Michael Heseltine said the Prime Minister was not on probation.
He told BBC TV's On the Record programme he believed Mr Major would lead the Tories to victory at the next election.
But the strongest condemnation of the Tory rebels came from Sir Bernard Ingham, Mrs Thatcher's press secretary when she was Prime Minister.
He told the BBC Breakfast with Frost programme: ‘The Tory Party is losing its marbles.
‘They want to shut up, regroup and start backing their Government.’
Mr Major said in the newspaper interview that he had predicted his own unpopularity.
‘I said to quite a few people immediately after the General Election that within the course of the next 12 months, I would be one of the most unpopular people in this country.
‘And that was because I could see the way the economic cycle was going.’
The interview came as a Mori poll, for The Sunday Times, showed only 16pc were satisfied with his performance and 79pc dissatisfied, a new post-war low for British premiers.
Lord Parkinson
Michael Howard
Terrorist was not free to kill, says RUC chief
Police snatch double agent hunted by IRA
By Deric Henderson Daily Post Correspondent
AN IRA terrorist who claims he was involved in more than a dozen killings while acting as a police informer was arrested yesterday.
Declan Casey, 39, was seized in Strabane, Co Tyrone, just minutes after RUC Chief Constable Sir Hugh Annesley insisted he had not been free to kill while working for Special Branch.
Sir Hugh stressed his force would allow no life to be taken in order to protect its intelligence system.
Casey made his claims to a national newspaper, but Sir Hugh, while confirming Casey was once an RUC informer, refused to believe him.
Principles
He said: ‘It is the primary duty of the RUC to protect life, and the suggestion that a police force with such vast experience in informant handling would betray its principles, as inferred in the newspaper articles, has no basis in fact, and I totally reject any such suggestion.’
Casey fled Northern Ireland last September for a new life near Nottingham but returned to Strabane at the weekend, disillusioned with the isolation and anxious to see his wife Joan and four children.
He accepted that his return made him a target for the IRA.
But the RUC reached him first.
Casey was arrested at his father-in-law's home on Strabane's fiercely republican Ballycolman estate.
Last night he was being interrogated at Castlereagh, Belfast, by police including a chief superintendent heading a full-scale inquiry into the affair.
Sir Hugh and Ulster Secretary Sir Patrick Mayhew discussed the allegations at Stormont Castle yesterday.
Outraged Unionists have demanded Casey be charged.
Republicans in Strabane are bewildered by the case.
One admitted last night: ‘We don't know what to think.
Was it some sort of ruse or what?
It's all rather bizarre.’
Unionists are also taken aback but Fermanagh-South Tyrone MP Ken Maginnis said: ‘It has not been my personal experience that the RUC Special Branch gambles with the lives of potential IRA victims.
‘If that unwritten law has been broken then heads will have to roll.’
Ex-UDR soldier David Pollock, 30, shot dead in September 1990 while driving through Strabane to visit his girlfriend, was one of two victims Casey claimed he warned the RUC about in advance.
Mr Pollock's family are deeply upset by the claim, according to their minister, the Rev Trevor Gribben.
He said: ‘While recognising that the allegations are made by a self-confessed IRA terrorist, they are nonetheless of such a serious nature that they demand full investigation.’
Bomb
The widow of another exUDR man allegedly murdered with Casey's help said she did not believe the allegations.
Kathleen Finlay's husband Ronnie, from Sion Mills, near Strabane, was killed two years ago.
Loyalist terrorists were last night blamed for a parcel bomb which exploded at Post Office headquarters in Belfast.
Five similar devices were found in mail at the building's sorting office and defused by the Army.
The parcels were all addressed to Catholics, said police.
The RUC urged the public to be on the alert in case other bombs got through the sorting system.
Sir Hugh Annesley
Sir Patrick Mayhew
Ken Maginnis MP
£200 stolen from woman
Police warning as conmen get away with cash card
By Daily Post Correspondent
POLICE have warned people to be on their guard after a smooth-talking gang conned an elderly woman into giving her bank cash card away and disclosing her PIN number.
The incident happened in Wrexham and police fear that the men who withdrew £200 from the woman's account may strike again.
Detectives say that the conmen were extremely plausible and convincing.
The elderly woman, who has not been identified, initially received a telephone call from a man with a foreign accent purporting to be an official from her bank in Chester.
He was apologetic, explained that an error had been made with her account and very cleverly was able to persuade the woman to give her PIN number.
She was told that a colleague from the bank would be around later to pick up her card and he even rang back later to check if he had been.
But almost immediately the conmen took her cash card to a hole-in-the-wall machine and withdrew the money from her account.
A police spokesman said that the woman victim had all her faculties and they feared that others could be taken in by the smooth-talkers.
Officers believe that the men were probably using a mobile phone from a car parked in the area of the woman's home in Garden Village.
They have appealed to anyone who may have become suspicious about any car in the Edinburgh Road area to come forward.
The man who collected the cash-card is said to be about 30 years of age of medium build with black curly hair and clean-shaven.
A police spokesman said: ‘If these men are preying on elderly in the area then people need to be aware of their activities.
‘They should always check for identification and following the incident should not disclose anything to anyone without first checking with their bank direct.’
Cheshires' heroic Bosnia leader to attend inquest
By David Banks Daily Post Staff
BOSNIA hero Lt Col Bob Stewart will attend the inquest into the death of one of his soldiers tomorrow.
It will be Lt Col Stewart's first public appearance since it was announced that he has been awarded the Distinguished Service Order for his courage and leadership during his tour of duty in Bosnia.
The inquest hearing into the death of L/Cpl Wayne Edwards will take place in Wrexham.
Major Tony Astle, at the Cheshire Regiment's headquarters at Chester Castle, revealed that the Cheshires' charismatic commanding officer would be attending the inquest.
Major Astle said: ‘We're not sure where he is at the moment because he's on leave.
‘The one thing I do know is that he will be at the inquest into the death of L/Cpl Edwards.
I'm certain he will be there.’
The inquest will be presided over by Clwyd south coroner, John Hughes, who opened and adjourned the hearing shortly after L/Cpl Edwards' death in January this year.
L/Cpl Edwards, 26, from Cefn Mawr, Wrexham, was killed while driving a Warrior armoured personnel carrier through the streets of Gornji Vakuf.
He was part of a detachment escorting a civilian ambulance carrying wounded people.
A jury will be assembled for L/Cpl Edwards' inquest and part of the evidence will include video footage of the streets of Gornji Vakuf, where the young soldier died.
Lt Col Bob Stewart L/Cpl Wayne Edwards
L/Cpl Wayne Edwards
BRANCHING OUT: Ivan Bennett of Southport with some of his treasured trees: ‘Bonsai has become my religion we live off each other’ Picture: STEPHEN SHAKESHAFT
Top police-chief swing the axe on forces
By Grania Langdon-Down Daily Post Correspondent
THE 43 police forces in England and Wales should be cut by about a half, one of the country's most senior officers said yesterday.
Sir John Woodcock, who retires as Chief Inspector of Constabulary at the end of the month, also spoke out in support of short term contracts, a reduction in the number of ranks and changes in the pay structure.
These are among the radical reforms likely to be recommended in the Sheehy report on rank and pay due to be published within the next few weeks alongside a government White Paper proposing changes in police financing and police authorities and the Royal Commission on criminal justice.
Sir John, who presents his last annual report later this month, said: ‘The reforms are long overdue.
‘The police service is arguably more efficient now than it has ever been.
But, paradoxically, it is under more intense scrutiny and criticism than it has ever been.
‘It has better quality people, its productivity has never been so great and yet it is still somewhat traditional in format and operation.
‘It is the right moment to look critically at the structure.
I not only applaud it, I hope I have influenced it.’
One of the reform proposals is to simplify the procedures for amalgamating forces and there was wide speculation earlier this year that the Home Office was considering reducing the number to between 20 and 25.
Sir John, 61, became a Lancashire police cadet 46 years ago aged 16 when there were 127 forces.
‘I think the present 43 forces are far too many and involve too many duplications.
I would be comfortable with something like half that number,’ he added.
‘It is not that large is better and small is worse or vice versa but there could be economies of scale.
Policing needs to be locally based why do you need so many force headquarters?’
Sir John said officers should not fear change.
Fiveyear, renewable contracts for all ranks would still mean good officers being in the job for life but should also mean an end to lazy time-servers.
Health authority pays £11,000 out to ‘whistleblower’
By Peter Beal Daily Post Correspondent
A NURSE awarded £11,000 after a health authority sacked him last night repeated his ‘whistleblowing’ claims that elderly patients were being left to die alone.
Charge nurse Graham Pink's long-running battle with Stockport Health Authority over his allegations about conditions in Stepping Hill hospital ended dramatically yesterday, when the authority withdrew its defence to his claims of unfair dismissal.
An industrial tribunal hearing his case was due to resume next week.
But the authority said it was not prepared to spend £250,000 earmarked for patient care on further legal action.
It admitted errors in disciplinary procedures against Mr Pink, 63, sacked for allegedly breaching patient confidentiality during his one-man campaign over under-staffing in three geriatric wards.
The authority will pay him £11,188 the maximum the tribunal could have awarded.
Mr Pink said: ‘I have been completely and utterly vindicated.
But I have mixed emotions.
‘I am still very sad that to the best of my knowledge there are no more nurses on those wards than there were when I was dismissed.
‘This case was not about me.
It was about elderly people I just wanted to be properly cared for.
Tonight there will still be elderly people falling out of bed and dying alone because of lack of staff.’
Mr Pink said it was unlikely he would pursue his claim for reinstatement.
He was within 18 months of retirement and has since been elected to the UK Central Council for Nursing, the profession's regulatory body.
Authority chairman Tony Russell said it still rejected all Mr Pink's claims about conditions in the wards.
‘They were totally unreal,’ he said.
‘Some of the language that he used bordered on the unforgivable.
But we have always accepted that Mr Pink is a sincere person.
‘One never knows what the tribunal would have done.
But winning the case was never central to us.
We needed to defend the golden rule of nursing, that of patient confidentiality.’
Mr Russell said the hearing, which had already cost the authority £90,000.
Unknown hero praised after quicksand drama
By David Greenwood Daily Post Staff
A MYSTERY passer-by was being hailed a hero last night after rescuing three children, two of them aged two and four, and their grandmother from deep clinging mud on a North Wales beach yesterday.
The man managed to pull them free after he heard their shouts for help at Towyn in Clwyd.
The incident happened at around 1pm close to the Golden Sands Holiday Camp.
The children, including a girl aged nine, were taken by ambulance to Ysbyty Glan Clwyd.
A hospital spokeswoman said: ‘They were released after being treated and cleaned-up.
I think they have gone off to tell the rest of their family what happened.’
It is understood they are staying at another holiday camp in Towyn.
A Golden Sands representative said: ‘We were asked to call an ambulance by other holidaymakers who are staying here.
The children were covered in mud and obviously upset and frightened.
‘From what we have been told they were stuck quite deep into the mud or soft sand.’
‘We have heard they were rescued by a man but have no idea who he was.
‘They were in a state because the more they struggled the deeper they sank.’
The spokeswoman also called for the area of beach where they became stuck to be clearly signposted.
‘In parts where there is soft mud, it can be pretty dangerous and should be signposted.
People around here have taken it up with different parties but everyone seems to pass the buck.
‘I think there was a sign at one time but it was knocked down.’