

The Northern Echo
A SCIENTIST has dispelled fears that equipment to monitor air quality was being wrongly sited in Middlesbrough.
The £50,000 Chrompac Analyser, one of only two in the country, will be the ‘test bed’ for a nationwide network.
The high-tech equipment being commissioned at Longlands College will monitor a wide range of hydrocarbons, which can be a hazard to health.
Head of the Department of the Environment's science unit, Dick Derwent, who was in Teesside to see the progress, dismissed suggestions that Redcar's Technical College might have been a better site.
‘This equipment is like a lighthouse sweeping up the hydrocarbons from all around it,’ he said.
BABY Bogdan Ursu is out of hospital and living with foster parents who will nurse him back to health.
The Romanian baby was brought to this country by Cleveland-based Convoy Aid Romania and was operated on at Middlesbrough General Hospital for water on the brain.
Eight-month-old Bogdan is now in the caring hands of Malcolm and Joan Vallan, both 51, of Cooks Court, Ormesby, Middlesbrough.
Malcolm is a former ambulance driver and Joan is a nurse.
‘He's lovely,’ said Joan.
‘He's now taking notice and responding to stimulation, which he wasn't prior to the operation.’
Malcolm added: ‘They said he needs a lot of love and affection and we've got bags of that.’
AIRCRAFT technicians of the future have the chance of working on part of one of the top jet fighters of yesteryear.
Longlands College, Middlesbrough, launched a new course in aircraft engineering, but needed aircraft parts to use as practical training aids.
An appeal resulted in a number of responses and Appleyard Bodyshop, of Thornaby, donated a complete tail section of a vintage 1950s Vampire jet.
The tail section is all that remains of two Vampire aircraft owned by Colin Appleyard, managing director of Appleyards Bodyshop.
Danny Veltman, of Longlands College, said the tailpiece would be a great boost.
‘The Vampire was the second jet aircraft to go into RAF service and is recognised by its distinctive twin-boom tail section,’ he said.
MEDICAL experts are to be called in by Middlesbrough council to report on the effects of hypnotism.
A licensing sub-committee made the decision after Tory councillor Edmund Pearson voiced fears about ‘possible residual effects’ on people who have been hypnotised.
The meeting granted an occasional entertainment licence for internationally famous hypnotist Andrew Newton to appear at Middlesbrough Town Hall on March 27.
But councillors agreed to call on expert medical evidence before approving future licences.
However Andrew Newton said: ‘If they call on expert evidence, they'll call on me, because I am the expert.
I am a practising psychologist.’
—FAVOURITE toy in the entire place is a juke box style CD player.
The Starlet holds over 200 CDs which you can just punch buttons to play.
Solves storage space and fiddling on but costs £2,000.
—THE Silver Lining Pillow Company based in Middlesbrough used the show to launch a travelling version of their orthopaedic pillow.
Good for arthritis sufferers and they say it even stops snoring.
Normally £22.95 but £8 cheaper in the Ideal Home.
CRYSTAL Earth is a new flower arranging gel.
Loks like granules, but add a pint or so of water and it swells, filling up a vase with solid squishiness and looking like crystal.
You can use it for real or artificial flowers.
ASTHMA sufferers planning to sue British Steel and ICI on Teesside are taking new strength from a science report linking ill health on Tyneside with industrial pollution.
The study, conducted by Newcastle University, found visits to GPs practising near the now-closed Monkton Coking Works rose consistently on days when sulphur dioxide levels were higher than normal.
The findings of the study, establishing a link between between pollution and chest and lung problems, has given support to communities throughout the country fighting for compensation.
People in Grangetown, Middlesbrough, have been granted legal aid to take action against the area's main employers, British Steel and ICI, because of an alleged link between high levels of asthma and local pollution levels.
John Walsh, spokesman for the campaigners, said yesterday: ‘We receive 12 tons of indissoluble deposits a month over one square mile very fine ferric oxide dust.
‘When we have complained to British Steel they have said that there is no medical evidence to suggest emissions from the steel plant will damage health.
They won't be able to get away with that one now.’
ICI said yesterday: ‘We have no evidence to suggest our emissions are causing ill health in the local communities.’
A spokesman for British Steel dismissed any comparison between Monkton and British Steel's Redcar coke plant.
‘It is not comparing like with like,’ he said.
‘The Monkton coke works are a different kettle of fish.
The Redcar coke plant is modern, and make one type of coke for use in the steel industry.
I think Monkton, which was an old plant, made different types.
Ours is a modern plant.
We don't have a pollution problem.’
Ian Frank, leading light of the Lazenby action group Neon, says he wants to study the Newcastle survey, particularly as one of its authors, Dr Peter Phillimore, wrote a previous report on the Grangetown situation.
Mr Frank said: ‘Dr Phillimore told us he could no longer rule out pollution as a cause.
In the light of this report there now seems definite linkage.’
He claimed British Steel and ICI were refusing to hand over analytical information on their emissions to solicitors acting for 28 local, asthmatic families a refusal he claimed was ‘a scandal’.
The Northern Echo was told that solicitors acting for the Grangetown families were now considering an injunction to put before a judge obliging British Steel and ICI to hand over precise information on the contents of their chimney emissions.
A DEVICE that claims to enable people to make free phone calls is being marketed in the North-East.
A South Wales company claims the Creditcall Bill Buster allows 100pc free dialling to any destination in the world.
It is said to work by blocking the metering pulses that charge calls to the customer's account.
Yesterday consumer campaigner Gwen Lamb received a letter from Development Products of Newport, Gwent, inviting her to become an agent.
Written material included a claim that the company was exploiting a legal loophole that enabled the device to be sold, even though it is illegal to attach one to a telephone in the UK.
Miss Lamb, of Worsley Crescent, Marton, Middlesbrough said: ‘It seems incredible that these people are allowed to market them quite openly.
They say they have obtained my name and address from an agency: clearly they have decided to market them in the North-East in a big way.’
It costs £49.95, but an agent would only pay £30.
A BT spokesman said an independent telephone engineer had examined the device, concluding that it was unable to suppress the metering of calls.
John Davis, of Development Products, said: ‘If BT reckon it's useless, why are some people facing prosecution for using it?
‘We sell it as a novelty and make people sign a declaration saying they understand it is illegal to use it on the UK phone system.
‘People buy things for all sorts of reasons: it's nothing to do with us.
Some people pay £7m for a painting but they don't use it as such.’
Nightstick fault
I WAS very sorry to read that Mrs Drury had cause to complain about the Nightstick car alarm (Echo March 9).
This is only the second such case out of 28,000-plus units sold in this country during the past 18 weeks.
As soon as the other case was reported, production was stopped immediately, until the fault was isolated and every effort was then made to trace, recover and destroy all Nightsticks from the same batch.
The manufacturers also took the opportunity to review their quality control procedures.
Derek Irvine, 27 Copgrove Road, Leeds.
YOUNGSTERS from a Middlesbrough nursery class got the feel of country life yesterday by feeding six-week-old lambs being ‘fostered’ at the town's leisure farm in Coulby Newham.
The six lambs have to be handreared as their natural mothers have enough to cope with.
The 38 youngsters from Park End infants were on a special study.
Nature sites:
Eighteen new sites on Wearside may be included as sites of special nature conservation interest in Sunderland's draft Unitary Development Plan to be published in June or July.
Astro lamp The Astro lamp (far right) was a sign of hipness in the Sixties.
The lamp, a psychedelic icon, contained a brightly coloured waxy substance which rose and fell in strange blobs.
One of the more bizarre examples of Sixties kitsch, it also regularly featured in the classic TV series The Prisoner.
The lamp, also called the lava lamp, was launched in 1963 but as fashions changed its popularity declined.
By the mid-Seventies sales had fallen dramatically.
But its fortunes have changed now thanks to the revival in Sixties music and style.
Crestworth Trading, the company which originally made the lamp, started work on them again in 1990 and turnover has tripled in a year and a half.
A spokeswoman said: ‘Fashions changed and they went from being very trendy to being very suburban.
But this revival has seen business booming.
‘We have changed the model slightly to fit in with the look of now.
But we have kept the Sixties colour and feel while appealing to a younger market.’
Astro lamps are sold at Fenwicks, in Newcastle, Objects, in York, Camilion Cards, in Darlington, and It's Anonymous, Middlesbrough.
HABITAT
The ubiquitous Fifties Chequers design by Terence Conran, later to become famous for his Habitat shops.
This is a selection from a range of patterns in Midwinter's Modern Stylecraft tableware (left).
Homemaker design One of the most popular designs from the Fifties, items of which are probably hidden away in cupboards around the region.
The pottery was design by Enid Seeney in 1957 for Ridgway, of Stoke-on-Trent.
It was only sold in Woolworths — on the sixpenny stall!
Examples (above) are becoming increasingly collectable today, partly because the design is so representative of its age.
The slightly wiggly black lines were influenced by television interference and the furniture featured in the design has the typically spindly legs of the period.
Flight-weight furniture A novel idea from Italy in 1968, these transparent plastic ‘bubble seats’(right) came in clear white, red, orange, yellow or blue.
Light they may have been, but they were also bulky — especially when that unexpected guest arrived and you had to blow up another one!
Flight-weight maybe, but they never really took off in British homes.
The Sea Urchin chair One step up from the ever popular bean bag, the Sea Urchin (bottom right) featured in an exhibition of ‘prototype’ furniture at the Design Centre, London, in 1967, and typical of the futuristic mood of the times.
Designed by Roger Dean, of the Royal College of Art, it was made up of 12 polyurethane foam sections joined together with contact adhesive to form a high dome, 4ft in diameter.
The dome was upholstered in an orange fur fabric.
When sat in, part of the dome depressed into the seat while the remainder provided firm support for the back and legs.
THIS is the first picture of Romanian toddler Constantin who will be travelling to the North-East for a vital operation.
Two-year-old Constantin will have his cleft palate repaired and top plastic surgeon Charles Viva will then look at the boy's deformed hands and feet to see what can be done.
Yesterday Cleveland Aid Romania co-ordinator Rod Jones, who is hoping to bring Constantin to England in July, said: ‘He has got hands but he has no fingers just little balls.
‘The idea is we are going to try and do something with his hands to see if we can give him some form of grip.’
Constantin's journey to the North-East is being sponsored by bus company Cleveland Transit.
As preparations are made for Constantin's visit CAR is sending out another load of relief for the orphanages in Romania.
The team is expected to leave on Sunday.
But the team is short of a driver for one of the vans.
Rod said: ‘Anybody with a normal car licence who has driven a van before would do.
‘It's not a massive vehicle just a three ton van.’
Any would-be drivers would need a full driving licence, a full passport and three weeks to spare.
The team is taking 26,000 baby dinners to orphanages in Iasi along with part of a consignment of shoes, baby milk, medicines and a full library of medical textbooks which were donated by North Tees General Hospital.
They will also be taking out a consignment of syringes.
Anyone who can help the team should contact Rod Jones on Middlesbrough 250325.
CD-Rom technology has been made available to people in the North-East through the Panda project.
The scheme, which gives the public access to newspaper databases, has been managed by Information North, the regional development agency for library and information services in the region.
IN serves the public, academic, private and voluntary sectors and is based on the Northern  regional Library System which was established in 1928.
Members include nine county and Metropolitan district libraries, two universities and three polytechnics as well as 18 colleges of higher and further education.
Other members include industrial concerns, private companies, hospitals, learned societies and organisations in the museums, arts and media.
Panda on CD-Rom is available throughout the region including the following places: all the county libraries, Darlington library, Middlesbrough central library, Northallerton library, Gateshead library, Newcastle central library, Sunderland central library and Washington library.
It is also to be found in most of the region's universities, polytechnics and colleges and in many schools aswell as in the British Library in London.
Panda partners also have complimentary access to the current Northern Echo database to enable more up-to-date inquiries.
The Echo's CD-Rom covers most item which appear in The Northern Echo, national and international articles aswell as a comprehensive coverage of the region.
However, some minor sporting events, television schedules, crosswords and horoscopes have been omitted.
THE Northern Echo had the honour of being the first newspaper available on CD-Rom.
At a special launch reception at Newcastle Civic Centre in December 1990 the Echo unveiled its new ‘silver newspaper,’ just ahead of the Independent, the Guardian and the Times.
When the then school minister Michael Fallon launched the Panda Project (Public Access to a Newspaper Database and Archive) it marked the culmination of years of hard work and  initiative by Information North and the newspaper's library staff.
For The Northern Echo it began in the early 1960s when editor Harold Evans introduced a cuttings library which saw 200 stories a day being cut, pasted and stored under appropriate headings.
When the paper introduced direct input in 1986 it was clear that articles created electronically could be stored the same way.
One of the great advantages was that instead of journalists having to plough through yards and yards of dusty cuttings, they could simply call the information they needed to screen.
The transformation from an on-line service to disc, using BRS Software, was an easy one.
Information then became available at people's fingertips and when Mr Fallon launched the Echo on CD-Rom he said: ‘Let us be in no doubt as to the importance of this new resource for schools, business users and the community.’
He said that the National Curriculum insisted that all children study newspapers to develop a critical understanding of the media and the role it played in the community.
Two pupils from Macmillan College in Middlesbrough showed Mr Fallon how they used the CDRom to search for the latest information about the fall of the Berlin Wall, the construction of the Channel Tunnel, and pollution in Teesside for their school projects.
That first CD-Rom contained all the articles published in The Northern Echo from November 1988 to July 1990, a total of around 100,000 files.
Then last September the Echo launched the second stage of the project, an updated disc with 161,000 articles.
This time the honour fell to Hilary Armstrong, Shadow  Education spokeswoman and MP for North West Durham, who launched the project at Tyne Tees Television's studios.
She said that this pioneering reference library was good for democracy and good for citizenship.
She said that it was increasingly important that people had easy access to information.
‘This technology means that community groups and local people are able to find out much more about an issue and how it has been tackled elsewhere much more than they ever were in the past.
‘If we want a lively and thriving democracy we have to enable people to have information in a way in which they can deal with it and use it in a way which enhances their understanding of the subject.’
Miss Armstrong said that when she had visited Wolsingham Comprehensive School, one of the first users of the Echo on CD-Rom, she had been kept on her toes by the fact that the pupils were well-informed about things she had said and done.
This second disc, unlike most sequels, was bigger and better than the original.
It included graphics and the entries from the Echo's special Who's Who in the North publication.
A later edition, providing coverage from November 1988 to January 1992, some 200,000 articles, is now available and a further disc adding coverage to the end of May will be available in June.
The Northern Echo CD-Rom is already in full use throughout the region and beyond.
Through the PANDA Project most major libraries in the region now give full access to many CD-Roms, including the Echo's.
The Government has invested £1.1m to make CD-Rom technology available in schools and apart from being available in many North-East schools our CD-Rom is widely used in schools as far afield as St Albans and London.
We remain high on the Department of Education and Science's recommended list.
Brief facts
Between Lackenby and Shipton the proposed power lines would cover a distance of 90 kilometres (about 56 miles).
The project would involve the building of 270 new pylons.
Up to 81,000 tonnes of steel would be used to build the pylon towers.
The NGC says construction work on the Lackenby-Picton section would take 12 to 18 months; the Picton-Shipton section would be completed in 18 to 20 months.
Realistically, the new lines would not be in commission until the end of 1995; because of the delay caused by the public inquiry, the NGC has been granted a temporary exemption from its obligation to link the Wilton power station to the grid network.
The Country Landowners Association opposes the project, saying the NGC should examine laying lines underground or along the seabed.
The National Farmers Union opposes the scheme, but would also be unhappy about undergrounding because of the damage to crops.
Anti-pylons candidate Mike Barr won 570 votes in the Richmond constituency at the General Election.
The NGC's new standard pylon is at 46.5 metres high, slightly shorter than the old 50 metres model.
Inquiry details
The public inquiry into the National Grid Company's application to build overhead power lines between Lackenby, Picton and Shipton opens today at the Hambleton Community Centre, Bullamoor Road, Northallerton at 10am.
It is expected to last two months with a break between June 19 and July 7.
It will move to the Marton Hotel, Stokesley Road, Marton, Middlesbrough at a later date.
A decision is not expected until next year.
The inspectors are Trevor Graham and John Lindsay who will report to Michael Heseltine, the Trade and Industry Secretary.
Sittings will take place from 10am to 4.30pm Tuesdays to Thursdays, with an hour lunch break, and on Fridays from 10am to 2pm.
Life-long love of badgers culminates in nursery for the sick and orphaned A NURSERY for the injured and orphaned is still awaiting its first patient several weeks after opening which is good news, say organisers.
Mr Ken Wood, of Hilton Road, Seamer, near Stokesley, is to run the nursery, set up to reunite badgers with the wild.
Aged 52, he has been watching badgers ‘man and boy’ and has never tired of their antics, especially the young at play with fox cubs.
He has watched the same badger set for 46 years, he says, and with an average badger lifespan of under ten years, that means several generations.
Mr Wood was one of 12 children but none of his nine sisters or two brothers ever shared his interest.
Nor, he says, does any of his own four children.
He became interested as a boy of six when he discovered a set living just a few hundred yards away from the wooden bungalow in which the family then lived.
‘You could watch them from the window,’ he says.
Even now his nightly routine includes a couple of hours badger-watching.
And he says he is still learning about them almost half a century on.
The number of sets in the Seamer area has been cut to about 20, a quarter of the total that existed in his youth, says the amiable grandfather.
He became a protector of the species four years ago at a time when badger baiting had reached alarming proportions.
He joined the East and North Yorkshire Badger Protection Group, which has over 500 families in it, and has since helped to form an umbrella group for Stokesley and district, of which he is chairman.
They meet on the last Tuesday of the month at 8pm at Stokesley Sports Club.
Of his decision to join the group, he said: ‘I had seen baiters and found baiting pits nearby.
I had found the wire cages where they were trapping them coming down into a stream.
‘There were claw marks up the bank side where the badgers had been trying to get out.’
Mr Wood said he had gone to investigate after people had been seen in the area with bull terriers, the dogs most commonly used for fighting badgers.
He said baiters broke the animal's back and his jaw and would even resort to poking out his eyes if they were training a dog to fight.
Large sums of money were often involved.
‘I was horrified so I joined an organisation with a bit of clout to do something about it.
There are now quite a lot of members from the village who have joined.’
Mr Wood works for the water board but he is so concerned about the badgers that he spends all his spare time helping and watching them.
He gives talks and shows videos to various organisations and sets up stall at open days.
And he is involved through the ENYBPG in the current battle to beat the baiters with £1,000 in rewards offered by groups incensed at the cruelty.
Mr Wood has helped to nurse back to health badgers injured on the road or found orphaned but he has never come across one which has been used for baiting.
‘They don't leave the evidence around after a fight,’ he said.
He once confronted three baiters but after an ugly scene with them he advises people not to do the same.
Leave it to the police, he says.
While badgers can ‘snuzzle and take all the corn crops’ and will sometimes take the odd lamb, they are not considered a threat to farming, though it has been suggesting that they might have links with tuberculosis in milking herds.
Surveillance equipment has been put on all the sets which are known, added Mr Wood, but even protectionists are not allowed to carry out work around the equipment during the November-June closed season.
Of the nursery, the location of which is being kept secret, Mr Wood said: ‘We are geared to taking the injured and now have veterinary backing.’
Their resources are unlimited and the project is sponsored by Metfab, a Middlesbrough engineering firm from which partner Mr Jimmy Jackson, another Seamer resident, is also a badger champion.
Mr Wood has learned enough over the years about badgers to be able to get in as close as just a foot or two.
It was through him that Mr Jackson became hooked on watching the badgers in their natural habitat.
Some people go out armed for hours of waiting and watching with flasks of hot tea and coffee but, with a good pair of binoculars, badgers can be watched in comfort from the roadside.
Sometimes the amusing antics of the young at play with fox cubs are brought to an abrupt end by the mother, who won't tolerate a fox.
‘She will nip them and chase them away,’ he said.
The nursery ‘customers’ are expected to come through the RSPCA, from an area stretching from Darlington to Whitby.
Mr Wood recalled an incident last year when the Stokesley group was asked to find a site for the release of a badger which had been taken to Throckley.
It had been caught in the most unlikely of places, not a country location but on the High Row in the centre of Darlington!— Mr Ken Wood with a badger poster.
PHYSIOTHERAPY experts at Teesside Polytechnic have been busy helping pupils from a Middlesbrough school make a video about the dangers of developing brittle bones through unhealthy diets.
The video is the result of collaboration between bone specialists at South Cleveland Hospital, the Poly's health care professionals, media study students from Longlands College, Middlesbrough, and pupils from King's Manor School, Acklam.
The Kings Manor pupils were given a challenge by Middlesbrough's mayor to highlight life on the town's Easterside estate.
Pat Turner, senior lecturer in physiotherapy at the soon-to-be University of Teesside, said: ‘We are delighted to help Project Easterside.’
Undergrounding would screen people from electrical fields, NGC expert admits Undergrounding high-voltage electricity cables would screen the public from electrical fields which pylons protestors fear could pose health risks, a public inquiry heard this week.
As anti-pylons campaigners grilled the National Grid during the second week of the Northallerton hearing, an expert witness agreed that burying cables would eliminate the field.
The comment came from Dr. John Male of the National Grid Company, which wants to run a 400,000-volt overhead line from Teesside to Shipton to upgrade the existing line and link in the Enron power station being built at Wilton.
Mr Chris Clayton, an electronics and electrical engineer, spent an hour quizzing Dr. Male on Thursday, which along with yesterday (Fri) was set aside for objectors to cross examine a panel of NGC witnesses.
However, Dr. Male said people inside buildings were screened from electrical fields in the same way as undergrounding would screen them.
He also repeated the NGC's argument that scientific studies had concluded there was ‘no proven link’ between electro-magnetic fields and cancers.
However, Mr Clayton said more research was needed before the possibility of health risks could be ruled out.
‘Not proven does not mean the same as not guilty or totally exonerated,’ he said.
Mr Clayton drew the inspectors' attention to a village in Argyll, Scotland, where power lines ran along the main street.
Although the hamlet had just 38 houses, six people had died from cancer, four others suffered forms of the disease and others had motor neurone disease which attacks the central nervous system.
People were also worried that electro-magnetic fields could destroy the body's resistance to infection.
He also said people had experienced electric shocks when working on roofs directly below the cables.
The health issue was further pursued by Mr Roger Coghill, an expert on the effects of high-voltage power lines on the human body.
Mr Coghill, brought in by Mr David Bowe, Euro-MP for Cleveland and Yorkshire North, regretted that the NGC had not included a medical doctor among its witnesses.
‘Since part of this inquiry's purpose is to allay any fears the public might have on health grounds, it is inappropriate not to be able to direct my questions to medically qualified people,’ he said.
Mr Coghill, who runs his own research laboratory in Wales, said most other countries had much stricter recommended safety levels.
Britain's standard recommended by the National Radiological Protection Board were many times lower than some other European countries.
However, Dr. Male said the NCG was happy with the guidelines.
Mr Peter Markie, of Rudby parish council, said research into the health effects of EMF was in its infancy and it was too early to discount links.
People living in the village of Middleton, between Hutton Rudby and Seamer, were concerned that their homes would be only about 230 metres from the new lines.
However, Dr. Male said research showed that 200 metres away from lines the fields were extremely low.
Mr Markie also highlighted the fears of Middleton residents who already suffered noise from the existing 275,000-volt lines.
The inquiry at Hambleton Community Centre also heard from Mr Eric Eunson, an NGC policy official, that the countryside of North Yorkshire and Cleveland did not merit underground cables.
Although sections of electricity line near the Snowdonia National Park in North Wales had been undergrounded following a public outcry, there were no plans to do the same where the route skirted the North York Moors National Park.
Mr Tom Smith and Mr Peter Bedford, for the NGC, also reiterated that undergrounding cost many times more than overhead lines.
Mr Eunson said the company would probably appeal if the environment secretary ordered the undergrounding of cables.
Landowners along the proposed routes from Lackenby to Picton and Picton to Shipton were worried that a planning blight would affect a large swathe of their land until the outcome of the inquiry was known.
Mr Michael Craven, of Huby Burn, near Easingwold, said a 400-metre strip of land throughout the two counties would be ‘sterilised.’
The corridor, amounting to about 40sq. miles, was needed to enable the NGC to make adjustments 200 metres either side of the route if needed for engineering or landscape reasons.
Mr Rodney Bennington, an individual protestor, of Welbury, near Northallerton, accused the NGC of jumping the gun by signing connection agreements with Enron and then with Scottish generators before they had permission to transmit the power.
Signing the Scottish agreement five months after the Enron contract appeared to have been done ‘purely to support your evidence for the Lackenby to Shipton line,’ he said, adding the NGC had no statutory duty to connect Scottish power.
Mr Eunson said NGC dealt with interconnectors from outside England and Wales, including France and Scotland, who wanted to come into the system.
The company was bound by law to connect English and Welsh generators on to the grid system.
Earlier in the week local authorities had the chance to question NGC witnesses.
Lord David Silsoe, representing North Yorkshire and Hambleton councils, highlighted three cases in Britain where power lines operated below the recognised standards.
The NGC has maintained throughout that, although the existing line could technically cope with the Enron power, a new line was needed to ensure the system ran according to laid-down standards.
During the two-year gap between the Enron station beginning to generate power and the new line being built, the system would operate under ‘derogation’ a special dispensation to run below standard.
A tripping system would cope with problems caused by adverse weather and other ‘outages’ of power.
Mr Eunson said permanent derogations were extremely rare and could result in instability and supply problems for consumers.
‘It would lead inevitably to higher costs which would be transferred on to the customer as an increased cost of electricity,’ he said.
During his cross examination on Wednesday Lord Silsoe reminded the hearing that the inspectors were at liberty to recommend a route other than the five put forward by the NGC.
They could also consider options looked at but rejected by the NGC, including upgrading the East-West Stella Harker line across the Pennines and linking it into the North-East system.
Members of Rural England Versus Overhead Line Transmission (Revolt) were due to cross examine the NGC yesterday, followed on Tuesday by other objectors including Lady Mary Bell of East Rounton, and Mr Tom Haigh of Stokesley, who have spearheaded the anti-pylons lobby.
The inquiry, which started two weeks ago, is due to continue in Northallerton until June 19, break for more than two weeks and reconvene at Marton, Middlesbrough, on July 7.
When evidence relating to the Cleveland end of the project is complete, the hearing switches back to Northallerton for the final days.
A decision by the Environment Secretary is not expected for several months after the close of the inquiry.
— Mr Coghill finished his cross examination on Thursday night with just an hour to spare before he was due at a public meeting in Middlesbrough.
At the meeting at Teesside Polytechnic he outlined his case against the pylons on health grounds.
He claimed his research had shown links between high-voltage overhead cables and cancer clusters.
Other protestors, including the Cleveland-based Neon, also gave details of the evidence they intend to give at the inquiry.
A REVOLUTIONARY new Siberian surgery technique could help people in Teesside suffering from bone problems walk properly for the first time.
Claire Baines, 11, has spent almost her entire life with one leg in plaster because of a fracture in abnormal bone.
She is one of the few who has gained hope through the technique, known as the Ilizarov frame.
Since having the frame fitted at Middlesbrough General Hospital, Claire, of Warwick Street, Middlesbrough, can look forward to walking independently for the first time.
And a leading surgeon is hoping to build up a stock of frames to help other people with similar problems.
Claire is one of three patients so far to undergo the procedure under the supervision of consultant orthopaedic surgeon Richard Montgomery.
The Ilizarov frame can be used to correct bone deformities, regenerate bone and to lengthen limbs, and is most useful in young patients.
Last night Claire's mum, Grace, 40, said the frame had changed her daughter's.
‘She is now out of plaster for the first time in ten years and can get into a bath,’ she said.
‘She is also learning to swim at school which before was impossible.
All she could do was sit on the side of the pool with one leg in the water.’
The technique works by passing a network of taut wires, connected to the frame, through the bone itself.
The wires are then moved a fraction of a centimetre each day to encourage the bone to stretch in the desired direction.
‘The frame is rather like a giant Mecanno set which you construct as you need to,’ said Mr Montgomery.
‘The basic idea originated in Siberia in the 1950s but it is only since the Cold War ended that people in the West have realised the potential of ideas such as this.’
He said in many cases it reduced the need for conventional surgery, and it produced less scarring.
A number of frames have been funded by the NHS, at £3,000-per-patient, but Mr Montgomery believes the potential demand among children could outstrip supply.
He is seeking help in building up a stock of frames.
Any donations can be made through the Cleveland Children's Orthopaedic Fund, at the General Office, Middlesbrough General Hospital.
Pioneer frame helps disabled child to walk An 11-year-old girl from Middlesbrough has benefited from a revolutionary surgery technique, developed in Siberia, and now in use at the town's general hospital.
Claire Baines who has spent almost her entire life with one leg in plaster because of a fracture in abnormal bone is one of those who has gained new hope through the technique, known as the Ilizarov frame.
Since having the frame fitted at Middlesbrough General Hospital, she can look forward to walking independently for the first time.
She is one of three patients so far to undergo the procedure at the hospital, under the supervision of consultant orthopaedic surgeon, Mr Richard Montgomery.
The Ilizarov frame can be used to correct bone deformities, to regenerate bone, and to lengthen limbs.
It is most useful in young patients.
The technique works by passing a network of taut wires, connected to the frame, through the bone itself.
The wires are then moved a fraction of a centimetre each day to encourage the bone to stretch in the desired direction.
‘The frame is rather like a giant Meccano set which you construct as you need to,’ said Mr Montgomery.
‘The basic idea originated in Siberia in the 1950s, but it is only since the Cold War ended that people in the West have realised the potential of ideas such as this.
‘In many cases it reduces the need for conventional surgery, and produces less scarring.’
Although frames can be re-used with replacement wires, one patient may need to keep a frame for months.
A number of frames have been funded by the NHS, at £3,000 per patient, but Mr Montgomery believes the potential demand among children in the district and neighbouring areas could outstrip supply.
He is seeking help in building up a stock of the frames.
Donations can be made through the Cleveland Children's Orthopaedic Fund at Middlesbrough General Hospital.
Driver fled after causing crash
A FORESTER drove the wrong way along a dual carriageway to escape police after hitting another car, Thirsk magistrates heard yesterday.
Christopher Todd, 19, of Boltby, near Thirsk, drove his Land Rover into the path of a car on the A168 near Thirsk, injuring two people.
Then he drove off, the wrong way down the dual carriageway, said Jane Cockburn, prosecuting.
Blood tests revealed he was almost twice the legal alcohol limit.
Todd yesterday admitted driving with excess alcohol and failing to stop and report an accident.
The case was adjourned for reports Hens raid: Thieves raided a hen house in Ripon.
They made off with nine birds worth a total of £180 from a house in Studley Road.