

The Northern Echo
ONE-year-old Neil Ferdowsian and his family, who belong to the Baha'i faith, were among hundreds who joined in an inter-faith service led by Bishop of Middlesbrough Augustine Harris on Saturday.
Followers of the Buddhist, Baha'i, Christian, Sikh, Muslim, Hindu and Jewish faiths prayed for peace and conciliation in the world during the service in the Cathedral Church of St Mary, Coulby Newham, Middlesbrough.
Top guidance
TOP theologians from Durham and Newcastle universities will help 500 North sixth formers prepare for their A-level religious studies exams at the annual study day organised by the North of England Institute for Christian Education at Durham University on March 20.
HARTLEPOOL:
Conservative candidate Graham Robb says his party is right to promise the sale of Teesside Airport.
He said the airport's development would be faster in the private sector.
The three candidates will take part in a forum at 7.30pm on April 1 at St George's United Reformed Church.
REDCAR: Liberal Democrat Chris Abbott is shocked by figures which show Langbaurgh Council needs to spend £60m to bring its housing stock up to modern standards.
He said his party would tackle problems on a ‘worst first’ basis.
THE head of a religious order flew in from Rome to lay a foundation stone for a new pastoral centre in the North-East yesterday.
Brother Brian O'Donnell, prior general of the Hospitaller Order of St John of God, laid the stone at the Viewley Centre, Hemlington, Middlesbrough.
This set in motion the final phase of a project which started in 1988 when the order was invited by the Bishop of Middlesbrough, Augustine Harris to research the pastoral needs of people in the area.
Anita Foster, speaking from the St John of God Hospital at Scorton, near Richmond, North Yorkshire, said: ‘There is a great need for this centre.’
The project will cost around £700,000 and donations are invited.
A day care centre for people with learning difficulties will be a major feature of the centre, along with support and care counselling for the elderly, infirm and sick.
There will also be a place of worship and living quarters for four brothers of the order, who will administer the centre.
The pastoral centre should be open by the end of October.
A ROW over plans for a Teesside mosque is set to provide the ammunition for a fiery public meeting tonight.
Complaints about the Middlesbrough mosque and procedures for funerals held there have been dismissed as a ‘complete misunderstanding’ by Muslim community leaders.
But residents claimed they were ‘horrified’ by the plans for the building and promised to voice their fears at tonight's meeting.
People living near the mosque at the junction of Princes Road and Bow Street say they have been kept in the dark about the reasons for recent building work.
Spokeswoman Lesley Austin, who lives on Bow Street, said: ‘We know there is to be a washroom at the rear of the building.
We are worried at the emotional impact on the children if bodies are coming and going into the church to be washed.
‘We are also concerned about the possible health risks and the possible depreciation of house prices.’
Mrs Austin claimed 1,000 people had signed a petition opposing the new building work and promised a fiery meeting tonight.
But Dr Hanif Mohammed said residents had got the wrong idea.
‘We are just improving our place of worship and upgrading its facilities,’ he said.
‘When there is a funeral, the body is washed symbolically as part of the service.’
Dr Mohammed said this might happen no more than once or twice every year depending how often people died.
The mosque serves the Muslim community to the west of Linthorpe Road, Middlesbrough.
Mrs Austin accused Middlesbrough Council of behaving in an ‘underhand’ manner and said residents should have been consulted.
‘We have been down to see the plans and were told we were not consulted because we were not affected,’ she added.
‘If bodies are being unloaded outside your house, then you are affected.’
Mrs Austin said there were health worries if bodies were stored overnight but Dr Mohammed stressed that this would not happen.
‘In the Muslim faith, we bury our dead as quickly as possible,’ he said.
‘No bodies will be kept here overnight.
‘They will be prepared by the undertaker, brought to the mosque, ceremonially washed during the service and then taken away immediately afterwards.’
But Mrs Austin was unconvinced.
‘We have massive public support,’ she said.
‘People are horrified this can happen without letting anyone know.’
Middlesbrough Council spokesman Doug Allan said there was no need to consult residents over the planning applications because they involved no change of use.
Approval for the new buildings was given in July, 1990 and March last year.
Mr Allan denied the council had been obstructive and said several residents who had visited the authority had been shown the plans.
But he said elected representatives would attend the meting to explain the council's position.
The meeting starts at 7.45pm in The Neighbourhood Centre, Union Street.
PEOPLE living near a Middlesbrough mosque appear to have resolved a dispute with the local Muslim community.
Residents were worried that adaptations to the building at the corner of Bow Street and Princes Road meant it was to be used as a morgue.
They feared bodies would be shifted in and out in full view of young children and collected a 1,000-signature petition.
But, after a public meeting, the Muslim community's spokesman Dr Hanif Mohammed said: ‘The people now seem to understand the washroom we have built is just used to symbolically wash the bodies.
The bodies maybe no more than two or three per year will be brought into the mosque and removed immediately after the funeral service.’
Driver fled after causing crash
A FORESTER drove the wrong way along a dual carriageway to escape police after hitting another car, Thirsk magistrates heard yesterday.
Christopher Todd, 19, of Boltby, near Thirsk, drove his Land Rover into the path of a car on the A168 near Thirsk, injuring two people.
Then he drove off, the wrong way down the dual carriageway, said Jane Cockburn, prosecuting.
Blood tests revealed he was almost twice the legal alcohol limit.
Todd yesterday admitted driving with excess alcohol and failing to stop and report an accident.
The case was adjourned for reports Hens raid: Thieves raided a hen house in Ripon.
They made off with nine birds worth a total of £180 from a house in Studley Road.