

Darlington medical centre includes a hi-tec body scanner
A new £1.25m. medical centre in Darlington will feature a revolutionary hi-tec magnetic body scanner.
Health Images UK, an American private health corporation, expects to complete work in April.
Facilities will be available for NHS and private patients from North Yorkshire and Teesside as well as County Durham.
Apart from helping to reduce patient waiting lists it could do away with the need for exploratory operations in certain cases, particularly spinal and knee complaints.
But on Wednesday and Thursday it caused queues of its own when 100 people attended the JobCentre to be interviewed for the initial eight jobs.
A further 12 are expected to be created.
Also on Wednesday a six tonne magnet, the key to the scanner, was delivered to the Yarm Road industrial estate site.
The huge magnet strong enough to pull nails from walls, stop watches and erase credit cards is the scanner's main component.
It will allow detailed medical checks on patients without surgery or potential radiation side-effects which may stem from conventional x-rays and scans.
Among the new employees will be radiographers who will operate the enormous magnet which powers the Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scanner.
One of their tasks will be to prevent anyone entering the magnetic scanner room carrying any metal objects and to watch for objects which store electronic data.
Information kept on a credit card would be wiped clean by the massive bursts of magnetism given off by the scanner.
These bursts of magnetic energy are contained in the scanner room by a Faraday Cage, a copper box which surrounds the whole room.
When scanner testing is conducted the patient is placed inside a large magnetic field which causes the body's hydrogen atoms to rotate.
This turning movement generates a tiny radio wave which is sent back to the scanner's powerful computer.
These electrical pulses are then analysed and used to produce detailed pictures of a patient's internal organs.
BENEFITING ‘The MRI is a means of obtaining images of various parts of the whole room.
When scanner testing is conducted the patient is placed inside a large magnetic field which causes the body's hydrogen atoms to rotate.
This turning movement generates a tiny radio wave which is sent back to the scanner's powerful computer.
These electrical pulses are then analysed and used to produce detailed pictures of a patient's internal organs.
BENEFITING ‘The MRI is a means of obtaining images of various parts of thing open.
Mr Prescott said Darlington was a natural location for an MRI scanner.
IDEAL SITE
‘There are no scanners like it between Newcastle and Leeds.
From Darlington we are ideally served to help people in North Yorkshire and much of the North East.’
Mr Alan Wallis, principal economic development officer for Darlington borough council, played a large part in attracting the private centre to the town.
He said: ‘Although the project is only creating a relatively small number of jobs it is still quite a substantial financial development.
‘More importantly the Yarm Road industrial estate is beginning to snowball as a location for hi-tec businesses and facilities.’
BIOPLAN APPEAL
Just as the Yarm Road scanner magnet was being installed, the future of another sophisticated scanner planned for Darlington was being decided.
A public planning inquiry opened in the town hall to hear an appeal from Bioplan Holdings who want to build a private medical centre in the grounds of Darlington Memorial Hospital.
Last year councillors turned down the development.
If a government inspector agrees with their decision the private hospital will not be built and the CT Scanner which Bioplan promised to bring to Darlington will be lost.
But on Thursday the managing director of Health Images told the D & S Times his company would seriously consider installing a CT Scanner at their Yarm Road centre if Bioplan's development was turned down.
‘I did not know the Bioplan hospital might not be going ahead,’ said Mr Prescott, ‘If the Darlington health authority cannot get hold of a CT Scanner from Bioplan then we will seriously consider getting one.’
Work on the Yarm Road project began in October after Health Images was told there was not enough land left at the Memorial Hospital site for a private health centre.
A report appears inside of the Bioplan planning inquiry.
ONE in 12 women is affected by breast cancer each year, a report has revealed.
The Darlington Postgraduate Journal says 23–25,000 women are diagnosed with breast cancer each year and up to 15,000 can die.
The report says regular breast-screening for women over 50 helps reduce deaths by a third.
A mobile screening unit is currently in Darlington and aims to have screened all women over 50 in the area by 1993.
The report says percentages of women turning up for screening have also been encouraging.
Up to March last year 11,676 were invited for screening and 74pc turned up.
LOOPS BAD, BUT INFRA-RED GOOD
An infra-red detection system could put an end to a long wait for cyclists.
Pedal pushers in Darlington often go unnoticed by a magnetic loop system at a pedestrian crossing on Parkgate.
Instead of waiting a matter of seconds for the lights to change, the hapless riders either remain in the saddle, take a chance when they see a gap in the traffic, or get off and wait for the green man.
Mr Nick Elliot, Darlington's cycling and footpaths officer, said: ‘The problem is down to loops not working properly and modern cycles have a high alloy level which is not being detected as easily.’
The system was installed four years ago as an experiment and has been monitored ever since.
It was paid for by the county using money from the national Transport Road Research Laboratory.
Mr Geoffrey Hillcoat, of Durham county council, told members that they planned to end the unnecessary wait.
‘The Department of Transport is likely to look favourably on any site application for a replacement and we are planning to install four infra-red vehicle detectors at the crossing,’ he said.
‘We will put in a £2,000 application for the new equipment to be installed early in the new financial year.’
College library goes hi-tech
A year-long project to update the library at Darlington College of Technology should be completed in time for the new school year in September.
Mrs Helen Ashton, college librarian, said hitech work stations and computers were set to replace the ageing desks, and floppy disc programmes would be used in conjunction with many study books.
Work began on the reorganisation in August last year and electricians have begun preparing for the computer terminals.
Initially 12 computers will be installed but this will eventually be increased to 20.
‘Officially the library will be known as a resource based learning centre,’ said Mrs Ashton.
‘People seem to think we are getting rid of all the books but the only ones we have done away with are those which had been hidden away unused for many years.’
The old books were stored in a room which had been converted to an office for the new library.
Although traditional books would continue to play an invaluable part in students' learning, computer discs would back up some of the more technical course literature.
The college might also install a CD Rom system to enable information, including encyclopaedias and atlases, to be stored on a compact disc.
INFRA-RED remote control receivers are to be installed at some of Darlington's top attractions in a bid to encourage disabled users.
Council officers believe the devices will ease access worries to popular venues such as the Civic Theatre and Railway Museum.
Disabled people will be able to use a hand-held transmitter which will trigger an alarm to alert staff that there is someone outside who requires help.
Several petrol stations and a building society in the town have already installed the equipment.
In a report to today's Land and Property Sub-Committee, John Buxton, director of property services, recommends the installation of receivers at the railway museum, the Civic theatre, Tubwell Row museum and council offices in Houndgate.
He says: ‘All these premises provide access for the disabled, although in some cases the route may be tortuous.
It is considered that a service call access scheme would enable staff to become aware and provide assistance to users.’
Disabled people would have to buy a transmitter, which costs £19.95, if they wanted to benefit from the scheme.
Students pioneer phone link
Students in Darlington are set to benefit from a groundbreaking hi-tech mail link-up with France.
The experiment, which is the first of its kind in mainland Britain, will allow students to send news and letters to their French counterparts via British Telecom's high speed Information Services Digital Network (ISDN).
And before too long the students will be able to see each other using a new video-phone link.
Staff from the Lycee Romain Rolland in Amiens this week visited Darlington College of Technology to plan the experiment.
Mr Angus Byrne, information and technology co-ordinator at the college, said: ‘This link will provide vital access to Europe for our students and they will obviously benefit from it.
‘We are actively seeking to further our links abroad as Europe is such an important part of the curriculum, for 1992-style reasons.’
Mr Byrne visited Amiens, which is twinned with Darlington, a few months ago to look into the possibility of setting up a link.
M. Marc Laurent, principal of the French college, and M. Phillipe Vergote, information technology co-ordinator, made a three day visit Darlington to hold talks with Mr Peter Shuker, college principal and Mr Byrne.
A HI-TECH body scanner, believed to be the first of its kind in the North-East, scans its first patient next month.
The Magnetic Imaging Centre, Lingfield Way, Darlington, will open its doors on April 13 and organisers hope there will be a high demand for the state-of-the-art equipment.
The scanner, made out of a large magnetic tube, gives detailed medical checks without surgery or side-effects.
Internal injuries are detected through magnetic forces which are then relayed onto computer screens.
Tony Prescott, managing director with Health Images, the company behind the development, said: ‘The whole building is finished now and we take our first patient in on April 13.’
The £1.2m development will be officially opened by England cricketer Ian Botham in May.
‘He's very interested in the scanner as it helps with sports injuries,’ said Mr Prescott.
Half the patients at the centre will be private and the others will be contracted from local health authorities.
DIAGNOSTIC equipment bought with £16,000 raised in the community has been officially commissioned at Darlington Memorial Hospital.
The electric response audiometer will be used to detect hearing defects in babies and adults which would not be discovered by other techniques.
Fund raising for the state-of-the-art machine began in 1987 and senior technician Peter Barton said help had come from several organisations including the WRVS, the Guides and the League of Friends.
‘This equipment will prove very useful in testing premature babies we suspect might have hearing problems but who are not able to have the normal tests,’ he said.
‘It can also be used for adults who have tumours putting pressure on the audiological part of the brain and can indicate the presence of other illnesses such as multiple sclerosis.’
Fund raising was initiated in the audiology department in 1987 and representatives of organisations who supported the appeal were at the hospital yesterday seeing the equipment in operation.
I EXPERIENCED Lockjaw two years ago.
I was yawning and my jaw became stuck open.
I was very afraid and went to my dad who intended to ring the doctor if it did not correct itself.
After a couple of minutes I was OK.
I have had the same trouble now and again, but if I control my jaw when I yawn it does not happen so much.
However, I was told I should see the doctor because I could choke.
LOCKJAW is actually another term for the extremely serious condition of Tetanus, and so I think what you are describing is recurrent dislocation of the tempero-mandibular joints, which link the jaw to the skull.
I remember coming across the problem occasionally when I was doing a casualty job.
The jaw literally gets stuck in the wide open position.
Obviously avoiding opening the jaw too wide helps, but some people who repeatedly get the problem may need surgery on the joints.
I do not think that you would actually choke however.
Pool sampling:
A total of 37 water samples were taken from local swimming pools and jacuzzis in February and March.
A poor result was obtained from one private jacuzzi which resulted in its closure pending further investigations.
Darlington may be home to first ‘medical village’ in Britain
An American-style medical village may be built in Darlington for a foreign healthcare company.
More than 80 jobs could be created if plans for a new private hospital at Lingfield Way, on the Yarm Road industrial estate are realised.
Last month the D&S exclusively revealed the development of a £1.25m centre at the site.
Now plans have emerged for what is thought could be the first British private medical village.
It would allow patients to receive almost every type of healthcare from beauty treatment to fullscale surgery.
Details of the proposed development were revealed in a leaked letter written by Middleton St George firm, Bowhill Construction, to Mr Stephen Tapper, chief planner for Darlington borough council.
In it, Mr Rod Bowman, Bowhill's managing director, says: ‘It would seem the facility is being regarded as a model for similar facilities in other parts of the country.’
The letter says the site will feature:
A CT scanning facility to complement the magnetic scanner already there.
Full x-ray, pathology services and 35 beds.
Two operating theatres, one to full teaching standard.
Consulting suites, physiotherapy and hydrotherapy units.
An extensive health centre for GP functions.
Ophthalmic, chiropody, and oral services are also planned, as are ‘cosmetic support facilities’; beauty treatment and fitness clinics.
Mr Bowman writes in his letter: The project is estimated to create around 80 new jobs, with substantial indirect and spin-off' job creation.’
The letter does not reveal the name of the client but suggests the proposal is due to Bioplan's failure to get a green light for a private hospital in the grounds of Darlington Memorial Hospital.
Town hall planners confirmed the letter had been received.
No formal planning application had yet been made.
Health Images UK Ltd, owners of the medical centre at Yarm Road which is due to open this month, say they would welcome plans to expand the site.
‘In America and Sweden these medical villages, where all services are concentrated, are very common,’ said Mr Tony Prescott, managing director of Health Images UK.