

DARLINGTON people who don't pay the poll tax could soon face prison sentences as problems with delayed payments mount.
Richard Collin, director of central services, who organises collection of the poll tax, said jail sentences are Darlington Council's last resort but they could soon be used.
Mr Collin said the threat of prison could be the crucial reminder to make people pay.
As yet no one has been jailed by Darlington magistrates but Mr Collin said: ‘Committals will come into the arena fairly soon.’
Councillors have urged officers to increase efforts in tracking down non-payers.
Possible methods of speeding up collection include increasing the numbers of bailiffs and contacting non-payers by telephone.
This scheme has already been operating in some London boroughs but it has prompted criticism from anti-poll tax campaigners who have branded the technique as ‘harassment’.
Kevin Miles, chairman of the North-East Anti-Poll Tax Federation, said councils would be guilty of ‘frightening people in their own homes.’
A heavy backlog of cases has snarled up the court process for dealing with non-payers.
Mr Collin has been urged by councillors to write to Darlington MP Michael Fallon and make him aware of the collection problems faced by the council.
AN action plan to improve pool safety has been put forward in a report by Richmondshire district auditor.
The auditor commended the council on sports improvements but said it still needed to address key issues such as staff cover at the swimming pool.
He made ten recommendations.
One said that while the pool's new staffing levels give greater flexibility and save on overtime pay they are 25pc below the minimum safety standards.
Guidelines say that the pool should have three lifeguards on duty at all times.
The report said there was a shortfall of ‘121 employee hours a week, some 25pc, to be covered by part-time or casual staff.
‘This does not include sickness or holiday relief, additional staff at peak times, or allowing time for supervisors performing other duties.’
He recommends that the council review its staffing structure to ensure it provides adequate poolside cover.
Chief technical officer Billy Dodds said the minimum standards were adequate and cover would be increased in line with the number of bathers.
The issue is the only one of the ten points where Mr Dodds disagreed with the auditor's recommendations.
Other points recommend: pressing for joint use of sports facilities with the Ministry of Defence at Catterick Garrison and North Yorkshire County Council;, conducting a wide-ranging public survey about sport; increasing prices in line with inflation; and taking steps to save energy.
The auditor said there was too little provision for ‘dry sports,’ and the council's strategy was too broad to effectively monitor performance.
The council, whose area stretches from Darlington in the east to the Cumbria border in the west, has one swimming pool, at the old station area in Richmond, and one small sports hall, a former school gymnasium at Garden Village, Richmond.
Sports council guidelines say a population the size of Richmondshire should have two sports halls, ten squash courts and one swimming pool.
The auditor also criticised prices which he said had been too low in the past and meant a marked increase last year, which could have a bad effect on demand.
The council's recreation and amenities committee will consider his report and recommendations at its meeting tomorrow night.
Civic cost:
The mayor of Darlington is costing the town more than £1,000 a week according to recent figures.
The budget has reached £54,500 for the year with annual increases outstripping inflation.
ROBERT Hall's love affair with Rolls-Royces has come to a temporary halt.
Mr Hall hit the headlines in 1985 when he drove to work as a groundsman at Hummersknott School, Darlington, in a Silver Shadow putting the head teacher's Escort to shame.
He was in the public eye again a few months later when the Rolls struck a bull near the Spotted Dog in High Coniscliffe.
Now Mr Hall, who funds his love of luxury cars with money raised when his farming family sold 200 acres of land near Gainford, says he is too scared to drive his latest £30,000 motor.
He bought the 11-year-old Silver Spirit last January and since then has had it in and out of the garage because of problems with the steering.
Despite extensive repairs Mr Hall claims the steering problem is still present.
Now the Rolls is languishing in a garage near his home at Waters End, Gainford.
Yesterday Mr Hall said he was dissatisfied with the service he had received from Reg Vardy's at Houghton-Le-Spring who had sold him the luxury car.
Yesterday a spokesman for Reg Vardy said the firm and Rolls- Royce had carried out more than £1,000 worth of work to rectify the steering problem, including fitting two new road wheels.
Mr Hall had then driven the car and signed a form expressing his complete satisfaction with its condition, and the garage believed the problems were solved.
He added that during the repair process Mr Hall had been told he could exchange the Rolls for another vehicle but had refused.
AN MP has called for immediate action to stop finance companies using ‘blatant political scare tactics’ in a bid to drum up business.
Langbaurgh Labour MP Ashok Kumar is outraged by a circular letter sent out by Abbey Life urging people to ‘Act Now And Beat The Tax Man’.
The letter was signed by Paul Scanlon, an associate in the company's Darlington office.
It says that with a General Election looming, now is the time to take up ‘unique tax-planning opportunities’.
The letter continues: ‘It is no secret that a future Labour Government would abolish a number of the tax planning opportunities that currently exist.
‘Failure to act before April 5 may result in you missing out and paying more tax than you need to.’
Dr Kumar said: ‘This is a subtle piece of anti-Labour propaganda creating the quite unjustified worry in many people's minds that Labour plans to attack their financial security.’
An Abbey Life spokeswoman confirmed the letter was bona fide and had been sanctioned by the company's head office in Bournemouth.
‘This is not part of an anti-Labour campaign in any way,’ she stressed.
‘It is simply a year-end letter urging people to take advantage of end-of-year opportunities.’
But Dr Kumar said the codes of practice covering such letters needed to be urgently re-examined.
‘If the company had made this kind of claim in a newspaper advertisement, I'm sure they would have been in breach of the codes of conduct on financial and political advertising,’ he said.
‘Is there any legislation or codes of practice covering circular letters of this kind, which are effectively just another form of advertising?’
Dr Kumar is to contact Marjorie Mowlam, Redcar MP and Labour spokeswoman on City and corporate affairs.
‘This matter must be raised immediately with the company and regulating bodies,’ he said.
RESTAURANTS could face hefty fines unless they join a council register.
Keith Atkinson, Darlington's head of environmental health, said food outlets throughout the town had been sent letters telling them to register before April 3.
The list is part of a national registration scheme which comes into effect from today.
Firms which ignore the requests could face fines of up to £400.
In Darlington applications have been sent to scores of businesses which are subject to regular environmental health checks.
The Government hopes it will help councils enforce hygiene regulations.
TUESDAY:
Transport Secretary Malcolm Rifkind confirmed the Tees & Hartlepool Port Authority's recommendation for the sale of the port's business to Teesside Holdings.
Defeated management-employee buy-out bid leader John Hackney considered taking an appeal to the courts.
WEDNESDAY: U.S.-owned Anglo Great Lakes announced it was closing its graphite manufacturing plant at Newburn, on Tyneside, with the loss of 230 jobs.
North of England Building Society unveiled a 20pc rise in assets to £1.2bn, and plans to expand.
THURSDAY: Telecommunications watchdog Oftel said it would review BT's pricing policy, in spite of the group's fall in third-quarter profits from £787m to £759m.
Darlington conservatory maker Amdega bought a Staffordshire-based rival for an undisclosed sum.
FRIDAY: The management-employee buy-out bid at Tees & Hartlepool Port Authority was abandoned after possible plans to take legal action over the privatisation process were dropped.
The French-owned Sunderland & South Shields Water and Newcastle & Gateshead Water companies announced proposals to bring forward their merger target date by two years to this March.
WEEKEND: National Westminster Bank's chief economist David Kern forecast that interest rates would fall within two months, with further falls likely throughout the year to 9pc by the end of 1992, and 8.5pc into 1993.
‘I could not fault the way in which the port authority conducted their responsibilities.
They did so impeccably and I believe their judgement was a judgement reached in accordance with the rules laid down by Parliament’ Transport Secretary Malcolm Rifkind on the handling of the port sale to Teesside Holdings.
‘We have never said we would bid for ICI.
That was all media speculation and market rumour and we have no plans to do so now’ Lord Hanson's message to his shareholders.
RICHARD Wood became the first marketing and development officer for Durham Wildlife Trust last August.
He lives near Newcastle and previously worked for LEPRA.
He is based at the Low Barns Nature Reserve at Witton-le-Wear, near Bishop Auckland.
‘This year is the 21st anniversary of Durham Wildlife Trust and I am busy preparing for that.
‘We are trying to organise one or two extra special events to help raise the profile of the trust.
‘On June 28 we are having an open day with various activities, a lot of displays and work by the junior section — WATCH.
‘I am also organising a programme of fund-raising events including a sponsored assault course at Stainton army camp on April 12.
‘There will be a ten-mile sponsored walk in the Hamsterley area with a Winnie the Pooh theme early in June and a sponsored walk for dogs and their owners.
‘My aim is not only to raise money but also to introduce the trust to non-members.
‘A big part is giving talks to people about the work of the trust.
‘I started going out to schools in November and what's really encouraging is the amount of knowledge and enthusiasm youngsters have.
‘I am also involved in Red Alert a survey designed to show where red squirrels can be seen.
‘This is being carried out over three years to protect the less common red squirrel.
‘Three of the northern Wildlife Trusts are involved with the sponsorship of Northern Rock and so far we have had more than 1,000 responses.
‘I am also busy trying to form a wildlife group in the Darlington area for members and non-members of the trust.
‘We do have a membership scheme and I try to increase numbers from family membership through to corporate membership.
‘I contact businesses and invite them to join the trust which costs them £250.
‘In return they get free copies of all magazines, a reduction in advertising rates, a certificate — and they are able to use the fact they support the trust in any of their own publicity.
‘I am working hard to try and build on this and so far we have about 16 corporate members.
‘My salary is sponsored by British Coal which means when I am fund-raising I know none of that money will be going to pay for my work.
‘I have full responsibility for fund-raising and publicity and because I took on a new post it means I am introducing my own ideas in consultation with the directors and chairman.
‘It's great to see things evolving and coming to fruition.
‘There's no way this could be described as a nine-to-five job — there's a lot of paperwork, talks in the evening, setting up press and photo calls, meetings and weekend opening.
‘The visitors’ centre here opened about 18 months ago although the reserve has been open since 1977 and slowly we're building it up.
‘Some days I can look up from my desk and see a couple of roe deer wander across the road.
‘And I know that when the pressure is on, I can get up and take a 20-minute walk around the reserve and come back again.
‘I can't think of anywhere where I'd get better working conditions than that.’
A MAJOR business safety conference is taking place in Spennymoor next month because Darlington couldn't come up with the cash.
Cigarette manufacturer Rothmans originally planned to use Darlington's Dolphin Centre as the venue for the conference which coincides with the European Year of Safety.
But the plans came to nothing when council officers were unable to come up with the money to help host the event which runs from March 3–5.
Rothmans, which has a major manufacturing plant in Darlington, was forced to switch the venue to Spennymoor when Sedgefield District Council stepped in with an offer.
Invitations have been sent to 3,000 businesses asking them to the conference which is backed by the Health and Safety Executive and County Durham Training and Enterprise Council.
Barry Pearson, Darlington's principal environmental health officer, explained: ‘Rothmans wanted us to pay for the hire of the centre and the money wasn't immediately available.
In the time it took to negotiate the funds Rothmans came to an arrangement with Sedgefield.’
But Tory councillor Peter Jones claimed last night that funds should have been made available.
And Darlington MP Michael Fallon called it a ‘kick in the teeth for Darlington's top company.’
THE chairman of a property company at the centre of a row over new pub leases yesterday pledged to investigate the plight of Darlington landlords faced with soaring rent rises.
Grand Metropolitan chairman Bob Williams met Cath Thompson of the Travellers Rest, Cockerton, Judith Robinson of the Grey Horse and Darlington MP Michael Fallon in London.
Mr Fallon said there was a ‘frank exchange of views’ at the meeting.
‘Mr Williams agreed to get someone from Grand Met to meet all the landlords affected.
And he seemed surprised at the Darlington rents rise which is around 100 per cent in some cases.
‘He told us other rises throughout the country have averaged around 50 per cent.’
Cath Thompson said her rent would increase from £21,000 to £48,000 under the new Grand Met lease.
Another landlord Geoff Addy, from the Old Dun Cow, left yesterday after his rent increased by £19,000.
Mr Fallon said: ‘Grand Met appear to have behaved quite ruthlessly.
‘These leases are far too long and the rents too high.’
Legal eagles to the titled and the ordinary: 100 not out
A CENTURY not out.
That is the boast of a firm of Darlington solicitors which this week chalked up 100 years in business in the town.
Next Friday the firm's nine partners will mark the occasion with a special dinner at Headlam Hall, followed later in the year by a staff celebration.
Latimer Hinks was established on January 29, 1892, by Mr John Fenwick Latimer, son of a Methodist minister and a lifelong Liberal who went on to become a Darlington town councillor and alderman.
The business was set up in one upstairs room in premises on High Row and moved to Priestgate in the early 1900s where it still practises, on a much larger scale, with a staff of more than 50.
Its partners include two women whose dedication is such that Mrs Anne Elliott even worked in the morning before going into hospital in the afternoon to have her first baby.
The senior partner, Mr Alan Vickers, has been with the firm for 40 years but still cannot claim to be the longest-serving member of staff.
Conveyancing legal executive Mr Ronnie Howe can add another decade to Mr Vickers's service, and Mr Fred Burton, now in his 70s, still works there part-time.
Mr Vickers is also well known in the town as a past president of Rotary, chairman of Darlington Round Table, secretary of the Abbeyfield Society and a member of Darlington health authority.
Another partner, Mr Tim Haggie, has distinguished himself in sporting circles.
A one-time county cricketer, he still plays for Darlington with whom he has a reputation as a high scorer.
Mrs Elliott broke new ground when she became the first woman solicitor in the firm about 15 years ago.
And over the years, says Mr Vickers, women have made a vital contribution to the practice.
When John Fenwick Latimer started, he worked alone from an office above Dresser's printing and stationery shop and went on to marry a member of that family, Miss Annie Jane Dresser.
Born in Stanley, County Durham, he was also a prominent member of Greenbank Methodist Church where his friends included Sir Charles Starmer and Ald. C.H. Leach.
In 1922 Mr Charles Hinks became articled to Mr Latimer and was given a partnership on qualifying five years later at the age of 21 quite a distinction as the custom was to buy a share in a practice.
Mr Hinks became a member of the council of the Law Society, which was quite an accolade for the firm, and he is believed to be the only Darlington solicitor to be honoured in this way.
His son, Richard, is another partner.
He is the only family member of the original firm still in the business which in 1952 was amalgamated with Wilkes, Marsham and Little, of Tubwell Row, becoming Latimer Hinks Marsham and Little.
The firm reverted to Latimer Hinks last March.
Mrs Jacqui Jones, the partnership secretary, says that besides moving ahead in terms of technology, the firm also enjoys a reputation for quality of service and can draw on the wide experience of its partners who, like the firm's founder, still deal in property conveyancing, wills, probate, trusts and investment as well as commercial and litigation work and much more.
Clients include titled people and, as well as those from the North Yorkshire, Teesside and Durham area, there are folk who have stayed on their books on moving to other regions, as well as those who remain faithful while overseas.
Pioneering private home paves the way forward in care of mentally disabled
by Colin Eshelly
In church and corner shop, pub and club, residents discover a sense of belonging
A former senior NHS manager at Aycliffe Hospital is urging health planners to put more mentally disabled people into private homes.
She says the government's care in the community policy is working and people should not be concerned about the loss of beds at Aycliffe.
Last week the Northern Regional Health Authority announced that 221 mentally handicapped people would be moved out of the hospital over the next three years.
Almost 300 have already gone over the last six years.
The move is part of a national policy aimed at helping the mentally handicapped live as normal lives as possible rather than being locked away in institutions.
Critics say the policy puts mentally disabled people onto the streets and is part of the creeping privatisation of the health service.
But the manager of a £1.2m. residential home for the mentally handicapped in Darlington believes her residents are happier out of Aycliffe and in private care.
All but three of the 34 residents at the Victoria Residential Home on Barton Street have come from the collection of buildings which make up Aycliffe Hospital.
‘Aycliffe was very isolated.
Here we are 15 minutes walk from the town centre,’ says Mrs Linda Polson, a former development and community services manager at the hospital, who now runs the Victoria private home.
‘People used to put disabled people out of the way, in green fields miles away from anywhere, but now they are able to play their part in the life of a community.
‘Another difference is that we have a lot of money which can be used quickly.
So if we get an idea to do something for the residents we do not need to go through endless red tape in order to get it done.
‘Staff morale is higher than it is on the NHS.
There is more job satisfaction because we can see our work bearing results see our ideas making the lives of the residents happier.
Health managers from two other regional health authorities in the North East are currently looking at the home as a model for private homes in their area.
But although the standard of care at the home attracts praise from other regional health authorities, managers within the NRHA are still reluctant to use up all the places on offer there.
‘I think it is a shame that more people are not convinced by the results that care in the community is producing and are not prepared to move over in greater numbers,’ says Mrs Polson, who was also a sister at Aycliffe Hospital during her 10 years there.
She was lured into the private sector by the ambitious plans of her former colleague, Mr Colin Stringer, who has been dealing with mentally handicapped people for 25 years.
Mr Stringer's own five year-old daughter, Lucy, suffers from learning difficulties.
FATHER'S LOVE Lucy's disability helped convince Mr Stringer that he should strive to provide a home for the mentally handi-capped which he would be happy to see his own daughter live in.
‘We are pioneers and we have to prove to the NHS that we can do the job,’ says Middlesborough-born Mr Stringer, who now lives in Saltburn.
The NHS pays over £200 per week to keep a mentally disabled person at the Victoria Rest Home.
‘Our home is based upon the philosophy of freedom of choice for the individual.
People here are, as far as possible, put in charge of their own lives.’
Unlike Aycliffe hospital, residents are not put on to traditional ‘Nightingale’ wards.
Instead they are given single rooms which are attached to one of four self contained units Neasham, Hurworth, Croft and Dalton.
In each unit there is a kitchen where the residents are able to make their own snacks and a communal television and activity room.
The home tries to ensure residents spend around 50 per cent of their day-times doing organised recreational activities.
INFORMAL Like most of the staff at the home activity coordinator Mrs Georgie Goodall, does not wear a uniform, which adds to the relaxed and informal atmosphere.
‘Throughout the week our residents work on their indoor gardening, cooking and painting.
On Fridays the ladies have a hairdressing and make-up morning and in the evening they play bingo,’ she says.
‘We have church services on Monday afternoon and barbecues during the summer.
There is an occupational therapist who visits once a week and a physiotherapist who gives music and movement sessions.’
Mrs Polson is enthusiastic about the recreational activities provided by Mrs Goodall and her staff.
She is also happy with the response gained from the local people of Barton Street.
‘The community as a whole have been great.
The school came in and did some carol singing,’ she said.
‘We use the church at the end of the road.
The residents go to the pub, the local corner shop, the club and they go and play bingo.
We have become a part of the community which is what it's all about.
‘We really have to get at the schoolchildren so that they learn that mentally disabled people have every right to share the same community as them.
Assistant Miss Sharon Aisbitt helps residents like Joan get the most out of their recreation sessions Residents are encouraged to choose from several activities to develop a greater sense of independence.
Marjorie is among those who benefit from being able to feel part of a community in a home close to the town centre.
Happiness on Mary's face reveals more than words about contemporary care that is a million miles from formal institutions of the past.
14 per cent rise for council rents in Darlington.
Darlington council house rents will rise by £2.85 from April an average increase of 14 per cent.
The housing committee agreed the across-the-board increases on Thursday.
Coun. Bill Dixon, Labour chairman of the committee, blamed government cuts in the borough housing budget.
‘It is far more than we wanted to put the rents up, but we have no choice,’ he said.
The proposed rent rise was no bigger than those of other local district councils, he said.
Richmondshire council was raising its rents by £3 and Sedgefield borough council by £2.95.
The proposals will increase the rent for a one-bedroomed council flat from £19.31 to £22.16; a two-bedroomed bungalow from £21.53 to £24.38; a two-bedroomed house from £20.77 to £23.62; and a three-bedroomed house from £21.84 to £24.69.
Other measures include a 50p increase on garage rent to £2.50 a week, which will bring in an additional annual income of £32,500.
Coun. Mrs Heather Scott (C) said it was unfair to impose a flat rise on tenants regardless of whether their homes had been repaired.
‘I think this a retrograde step and clearly unfair on those council tenants who are not getting work carried out on their properties,’ she said.
Councillors agreed the rise and other measures to save money in the housing budget for 1992/93.
A housing budget estimate for 1992/93 would have left a £643,000 deficit without an increase in rents.
However, members have recommended taking £385,000 from other capital funds to the housing budget to cover the shortfall.
A further £25,000 will be saved by scrapping additional garden maintenance.
The service charge of 50p per week for all warden-controlled properties will remain unchanged, and the daily charge for guest room accommodation in sheltered housing will remain at £6, as introduced in April, 1988.
The decisions will be referred to Darlington policy and resources committee next Tuesday.
CUMMINS Engine, the U.S. diesel engine maker with a plant in Darlington, claims it should be returning to profit in the first quarter of this year.
And the company has unveiled a pre-tax loss of $2.3m for the last quarter of 1991, much improved on last time's $59m.
The figures reflect an improvement in operating results and improved demand for its mid range truck engines.
A cost cutting programme also contributed to the better figures at the company.
Cummins now says it expects to return to profit this year despite no foreseeable upturn in its markets.
Electrolux, the world's biggest household appliance maker, has seen its year end profits for 1991 fall, due in part to its transfer of cooker production to Spennymoor.
Pre-tax profits slipped overall by 27pc to 1.025 billion Kroner and sales also fell by 1pc.
Household appliances and industrial and outdoor products all returned lower profits.
COUNCILS have been accused of refusing to come to the rescue of hard-pressed small firms struggling to meet their Uniform Business Rate demands.
The Federation of Small Businesses is asking local authorities to use the discretion available to them to offer rates relief to businesses found to be suffering hardship.
Recent research by the federation showed that in 1990–1 only £18,000 of relief was granted, compared to a rates income of £15bn from the business community.
‘Our survey shows how little local authorities value their small business community.
With over 200 small businesses closing each day it is imperative that this little known relief is publicised and acted upon,’ said FSB policy chairman John Harris.
Business rates are an unfair tax, not related to ability to pay.
Businesses are not making much in the way of profits, yet their business rate bills continue to go up and up,’ he added.
‘When this relief was introduced we fought long and hard to get the term ‘poverty’ replaced by ‘hardship’to make it easier for small businesses to qualify.
Now we find all that was to no avail, since nine times out of ten local authorities have pushed all thought aside of giving the relief.’
It appears few small businesses may be aware of discretionary relief.
Darlington Council, for example, has not received any hardship applications from small businesses since the introduction of the UBR.
The FSB campaign is in line with reforms being demanded by the CBI.
A COMPANY behind plans to build a new village on the outskirts of Darlington is considering appealing against the rejection of its development by town planners.
Bowater Crossley Brick director Harold Usherwood criticised Darlington councillors for displaying ‘inconsistency’ in rejecting plans for 200 houses on a derelict brickworks.
He said the proposed village enjoyed the support of all the residents near the Skipbridge site, apart from one farmer, and Hurworth parish council.
Skipbridge Village was rejected by the policy resources committee because it was contrary to planning policies.
THE Darlington Building Society maintained the North-East trend among building societies yesterday when it announced a rise in profits by more than 30pc.
The rise comes against a national picture of rising repossessions, falling profits and poor asset growth at other regional building societies.
Pre-tax profits in 1991 rose by 34pc to £1.5m at the society and assets growth, a key indicator of a society's economic wellbeing advanced by 11.49pc to £225m.
Chief executive, Alan Wood, said: ‘These results show that the society have been effective in handling the problems caused by the recession and that there is a continuing role for building societies operating on the traditional well understood bases.’
Mr Wood, who retires later this year, said: ‘The society's strong financial base will ensure that we are well able to maintain our key objective of remaining an independent financial unit serving the needs of the local community we know so well.’
The Darlington's figures are the latest from a Northern building society which show that the slump in the housing market suffered in other regions has failed to have the same feared effect in the North-East.
The latest figures from Sunderland-based North of England Building Society and Newcastle Building Society both showed a better-than-average rise in assets growth of 12pc.
And figures out on Wednesday from Newcastle-based Northern Rock showed a 29pc rise in assets to £4.4bn.
This is against a national average rise of 9pc.
Mr Wood said: ‘Or experience indicates that the national feeling of doom and gloom in residential property ownership is clearly not appropriate in our region.’
He said the society's results reflect the North's ability to cope with the recession.
‘We have experienced the recession in the past and as a result are better able to cope with it.
‘People either buy a house as a home or as an investment, as was the case in the South-East.
Northerners tend to buy homes.’
As a result repossessions remained low at the society.
‘While tragic in any circumstances, property repossessions were at a very low level, representing only 0.25pc of mortgages outstanding, and the year end not one mortgage was 12 months or more in arrear,’ said Mr Wood.
Jobs boost:
Northern Environmental Consultants of Consett has increased its workforce by eight to 34 thanks to a £12,000 grant from the DTI.
The environmental management consultancy is currently carrying out a project to assess the impact of visitors on the archaeology of Hadrian's Wall.
NEC'S managing director, Dr Philip Say, said the grant will help with the company's work examining contaminated land in the North-East.
Planning course:
Middlesbrough-based Cleveland Business Development Agency will shortly be running the latest in its series of evening Business Planning courses.
Primarily aimed at start-ups the courses will also be useful to those running an existing small business and keen to develop further.
Courses will start on February 12 and run to March 11.
For further information contact Bill Enoch on .
Bunzl donation:
Bunzl, the parent company of Jarrow-based Filtrona, has agreed to donate a further £25,000 to The Newcastle Initiative's Cruddas Park project bring the company's total contribution over three years to £75,000.
TNI launched the Cruddas Park flagship two years ago.
Since then, more than 170 jobs have been created and 20,000 people have been through the Employment and Enterprise Centre.
Debt collection:
Watson Burton, the Newcastle law firm has launched a fixed-cost debt collection service.
The new service has been designed to meet increasing demand for a flexible, cost-effective means of collecting debts.
For further information contact Watson partner Leslie Gray on  3101.
EIGHT county councillors put party politics behind them on Saturday to help raise money for Darlington Day Care Centre Appeal.
The group of councillors from across the political divide were selling appeal raffle tickets in Darlington town centre to show their support for the day centre.
And thanks to their efforts a further £387 was raised for the appeal.
Organisers of the day would like to thank everyone involved, including Marks and Spencer and British Home Stores.
The appeal hopes to raise £637,000 to build the day care centre, which will act as a meeting place for all old folk, especially the lonely, frail and housebound, and provide a range of services.
So far £111,780 has been raised.
A large part of this week's donation has come from Darlington firm Farmway who have contributed office space and a year's associated costs worth a total of £5,300 to the appeal.
Extra income has also come from bank interest earned on appeal funds already deposited.
INSURANCE company Abbey Life has been ordered to withdraw a ‘political’ circular sent out from its Darlington office.
Langbaurgh MP Dr Ashok Kumar denounced the letter as ‘blatant political scare tactics’ and asked Labour colleague and Redcar MP Dr Marjorie Mowlam shadow spokeswoman on City and corporate affairs to investigate.
The letter said it was time to make tax plans and added: ‘It is no secret that a future Labour Government would abolish a number of the tax-planning opportunities that currently exist.’
Dr Mowlam wrote to the regulatory body Lautro, which has told Abbey Life to withdraw or amend the circular.
Chief enforcement officer Mike Abrahams said: ‘It was felt the letter was making claims it would be difficult to substantiate with a degree of certainty.
‘I cannot say that it was withdrawn for its political content.’
Abbey Life claimed it was not making a political statement or dealing in anti-Labour propaganda.
It said that in the run-up to an election, it would comment on planning opportunities based on pronouncements by political parties.
A NEW breed of telephone is helping create 41 new jobs at the Darlington operation of telecommunications group Hutchison.
Record profits in time of recession
Darlington Building Society has made record profits despite the severe recession in the housing market.
Managers say that prudent lending and a close knowledge of local people are the reasons for a 34 per cent leap in net profits.
The figures confirms the comments made by the society's chairman, Mr Alan Wood, to the Darlington and Stockton three weeks ago.
He said then that the housing market recession had not hit the North East and North Yorkshire with anything like the force with which it had struck the rest of the country.
He blamed politicians and some sections of the media for whipping up anxiety about mortgage repossessions and said that for his company marital breakdown rather than poverty was still the main reason for such repossessions.
Now, despite one of the most difficult trading years in memory, the society has announced record results with:— Asset growth up 11.49 per cent to £225m. — Net profit up 34 per cent at £1.5m. — Mortgage advances up 41 per cent at £38.3m. — Retail investment balances up 11 per cent.
Mr Wood said of the figures: ‘The society's strong financial base will ensure that we are well able to maintain our key objective of remaining an independent financial unit serving the needs of the local community we know so well.
‘Actual losses on mortgage during 1991 and the provision for 1992 are well below the national industry average and prove the wisdom of our policy of prudence in lending and the good sense of members of the community in the management of their financial affairs.
‘Whilst tragic in any circumstances, property repossessions were at a very low level, representing only 0.25 per cent of mortgages outstanding, and at the year end not one mortgage was 12 months or more in arrear.
‘Our experience indicates that the national feeling of doom and gloom in residential property ownership is clearly not appropriate in our region.’
Disabled hit by blanket parking ban
The disabled this week reacted angrily to a blanket ban on vehicles in part of Darlington town centre.
Labour councillors on Tuesday voted to introduce pedestrianisation in Skinnergate and High Row without any exemptions for orange badge holders.
The total ban on all vehicles including cycles will run from 10.30am to 4pm and they stressed disabled drivers who get into the area before 10.30 would be able to stay for three hours before driving out.
They also highlighted the creation of 44 car parking spaces for disabled people in Abbots Yard; these will be patrolled vigorously to ensure no abuse from the able-bodied.
Mrs Rosemary Sandford of Darlington Association on Disability said the move would disenfranchise the disabled from using the town centre.
‘We are very upset they obviously have not listened to us at all,’ she said after the policy committee meeting.
Many severely disabled, who can only walk short distances, would be hardest hit.
Ironically the offices of the Darlington Association on Disability are in the Friends' Meeting House, Skinnergate.
Many of the committee are wheelchair-bound and are anxious about how they will reach the head-quarters after the March 29 introduction.
At the policy committee Coun. Tony Richmond, Conservative group leader, accused Labour of ratting on an earlier pledge to allow the disabled access.
He unsuccessfully proposed a decision be deferred to allow further consultation with the disabled.
Coun. Peter Jones (Con) warned the scheme would be disastrous.
‘I think the handicapped have every right to go along Skinnergate and High Row,’ he said, ‘They have gone along it since the year dot.’
SOME CONTROL But Coun. Dave Lyonette (Lab) said he had counted 43 vehicles parked between Binns and the gas showrooms on High Row last Friday displaying orange badges.
Some control had to be introduced for pedestrianisation to work.
The proposals were approved by the majority Labour councillors on the committee.
Coun. John Williams, group leader, pledged the scheme would be closely monitored to see if there were any problems for the disabled.
CONSUMER spending, one of the key planks in the Government's strategy for economic recovery, remains in the doldrums, according to latest figures out yesterday.
The amount of credit outstanding in December shrunk by £196m the sharpest fall for 15 years, said the Central Statistical Office.
It underlines the commitment by consumers to pay off debts incurred during the credit binge of the late-Eighties.
Yesterday's figures show a sharp contraction in the amount of credit outstanding in 1991.
In the fourth quarter of the year, the amount shrank £236m, the biggest quarterly fall since 1975.
Over the entire year outstanding credit grew just £224m, compared with more than £4bn in 1990 and £5.7bn in 1989.
The fall in December's outstanding credit was the fifth consecutive monthly drop and easily the biggest since the figures went into the red in August.
It will raise fresh worries for the Government that the much hoped-for consumer spending upturn remains beyond the horizon.
Analysts said that as long as credit business remained negative it was unlikely consumer spending would revive significantly.
Kevin Darlington, economist with stockbrokers UBS Phillips & Drew, said spending was likely to be ‘low in the water’ because real income was remaining flat.
‘If income was rising sharply it would not matter that credit was being paid off but there is every indication that real income is flat,’ he said.
‘It presents strong evidence that the priority among consumers is paying off debt.’
JOHN Trussler, the president of the Chartered Institute of Building renewed his call to the Chancellor for a Builders' Budget while in Darlington yesterday.
Opening design and build company Prodescon's new Duke Street office he said it is essential that Mr Lamont increases public investment to allow his members to ‘build their way out of the recession.’
‘The housing market has gone into depression and dragged down the market for consumer durables too but money could be earmarked by the Chancellor to improve existing housing stock,’ he said.
‘We'd also like to see stamp duty on property up to £250,000 abolished permanently, rather than temporarily.
Capital allowances would also be helpful.’
But Mr Trussler ruled out any more building in the commercial property sector.
Prophet and loss
‘PROFITS before people’, to quote the Bishop of Durham.
The not always Rt Rev David Jenkins speaks out without giving much thought to what he says.
He blames the Government's concern with short-term profit at the expense of people's jobs.
What about the organisation he represents, the Church Commissioners who own the MetroCentre and a large chunk of Nestles, not forgetting £3,000m worth of stocks and shares.
Very enterprising indeed.
People who live in glass houses should avoid throwing stones.
Such outbursts by Dr Jenkins seems to me yet another example of preaching socialism while thriving on the rewards of the capitalist system of government.
G.W. Bainbridge, 2 Lindisfarne Close, Hartlepool.
KENNETH Clarke's decision to release £20m to allow popular schools to expand to meet demand makes sense for three reasons.
If we were to be totally cynical, we would say it lets Darlington MP Michael Fallon off a nasty hook.
The denial of funds to two Roman Catholic schools in the town had become an election issue for the town's Roman Catholic community.
The community's leaders had been quite blunt about withdrawal of support and clearly that is the sort of pressure Mr Fallon's 2,661 majority could well do without.
While we don't believe Mr Clarke is so fond of his junior minister he would be prepared to spend £20m of public money to help secure his re-election, the fact that this was an issue in other Tory marginal seats around the country no doubt influenced ministerial thought processes.
But there are two other reasons.
The first is that stopping popular schools from expanding because spaces are available at other less-popular schools nearby is a fundamental contradiction of the Government's education policy.
If a commitment to good schools and parental choice means anything it must mean encouraging good schools to get better and making it possible for parents to send their children there.
St Augustine's and St Bede's in Darlington are manifestly good schools which were at risk of becoming bad schools because of overcrowding.
The second reason is that church schools in general represent very good value for the taxpayer.
The two senior churches pour millions into the education system of this country, helping to provide a quarter of the nation's schools.
Places in those schools are by no means exclusively reserved for the offspring of the devout, but the churches might have reconsidered that policy if the Government had, in effect, continued to place a block on their expansion plans.
SOLICITORS are joining forces in a bid to improve links with their European counterparts.
Latimer Hinks, of Priestgate, Darlington, is to become a member of LawNet Europe, which is to be launched on Monday.
The aim is to provide a two-way referral service with legal firms abroad when clients need specific advice, whether they are seeking a business partner, investing capital abroad, buying property, hiring staff or are involved in a dispute.
Tim Haggie, of Latimer Hinks's commercial department, said more clients were now needing specialist advice on European matters.
Among the services offered are access to database information and details of all member firms, their work specialities and language skills.
About 2,000 lawyers throughout Europe and Scandinavia are involved in the scheme and future contacts are being planned in Spain, Portugal and Greece.
AFTER nearly ten years work a £400m Indian power station, built by NEI Power Projects of Newcastle, will be handed over to the country's power authorities tomorrow.
The Rihand project situated in the Northern Indian state of Utter Pradesh provides power to the capital Delhi and other parts of the Northern grid.
It is claimed to be one of the largest projects ever funded by the British government's aid programme.
In recognition of this Lynda Chalker, Minister of State for Overseas Development, will formally hand it over to the Indian government's Minister for Power.
The project was first brought on stream three years ago, slowly building up to its present day output of 750m generating units.
NEI co-ordinated the 38 main UK sub-contractors and 13 main Indian sub-contractors, including the shipment of more than 110,000 tonnes of equipment made in NEI's factories.
CRUNCH talks over plans for a Sainsbury supermarket in Darlington have been re-scheduled for later this month.
Councillors are desperate to attract the supermarket chain to a site in Grange Road occupied by the Caldaire bus company.
The supermarket scheme will force Caldaire to move the United bus depot to another site.
But the deal has stalled after Caldaire management claimed a Government clause would make moving a financial impossibility.
Management hoped to meet Transport minister Roger Freeman earlier this week in a bid to enlist his help in overcoming the obstacles.
But the meeting was called off at the last minute and now Caldaire hopes to hold talks on Tuesday, February 25.
Management and councillors are anxious to get things moving as soon as possible.
FOREIGN links with Darlington have been strengthened following an international luncheon.
Twenty four foreign students from the Darlington College of Technology, Queen Elizabeth Sixth Form College and Polam Hall met the Darlington Rotary Club for an International Day lunch.
Rotary committee chairman Tony Dennett said: ‘The lunch is an ideal opportunity for us to provide hospitality to these students who are a long way from home.’
ONE aspect of Mr Lamont's forthcoming Budget which will surprise no-one will be the usual increase in duty on drink and tobacco.
While he may fell constrained electorally and by the highly effective brewers' lobby to keep the increase on drink to the rate of inflation, nobody will worry too much if the duty of cigarettes is increased, as widely predicted, by double the inflation rate.
Well, not quite everybody.
There is that admittedly-dwindling sector of the population which still smokes and those who make their living from the cigarette industry.
In South West Durham, that industry is a major employer and any increase in duty and Government policy on tobacco in general is likely to be an issue locally in the following election campaign.
Which is why two of the candidates in the marginal Darlington constituency have said such strange things about cigarettes lately.
The Conservative's Michael Fallon, the Schools Minister, clearly thinks cigarette smoking is a good thing.
For what other reason does he oppose a blanket advertising ban on tobacco?
Of course, the real reason is that 900 of his constituents work at Rothmans and he fears for his majority but he can't bring himself actually to say so.
Labour's Alan Milburn is no better.
He manages to back the calls for a ban on advertising and in the same breath say this will not harm the local Rothmans factories.
The people who know about the potential effect of a blanket ban are the tobacco manufacturers and they are not so sanguine about the prospect, threatening to pull their plants out of Britain if the ban comes into force.
Clearly, a ban would affect sales, particularly among the susceptible young, and that is why it is proposed.
It has been the policy of successive Health Ministers to reduce smoking because of the benefits to the health of the population at large and reduced cost to the health service of having less smoking-related illness to deal with.
We regret the consequences to the communities of Darlington and Spennymoor of the industry's terminal decline but then we have never thought that having factories which make a product which kills people was ever anything to be proud of.
We also understand the political realities faced by election candidates seeking votes in a very tight constituency but Mr Fallon and Mr Milburn are really kidding no-one.
Selling seminars:
Richard Denny, one of the UK's foremost authorities on sales and marketing, will address a Teesside Chamber of Commerce backed double seminar on February 26 and 27 at the Blackwell Grange Hotel, Darlington.
They are entitled Sell Out Of Recession and Customer Care and promise to show how to beat the current recession.
Further information from Lynn Hanratty on .
B&B grows:
Swallowing smaller building societies helped fatten Bradford & Bingley's annual profits to a record £107.8m.
Mergers with Leamington Spa, the Hendon and the Hampshire increased B&B's assets and expanded its capital base at a time of severe slump in the housing market.
Pre-tax profits for the year to December 31 were up from £100.6m the previous year despite dramatically increased loss provisions of £47.6m, compared with £9.4m last time.
Leisure move:
Nick Irens, finance director of First Leisure, is leaving to become chief executive of a new company about to be launched, First Leisure said yesterday.
— Livestock on page 11
DARLINGTON Business Link, an initiative designed to bring local companies together, is beginning to show signs of success.
Curtis Office Supplies, based on Risdale Street, has been introduced to a local supplier of tubular steel chair frames and is now placing orders with Profix Fabrication on Neasham Road.
Before the Business Link was established last summer, by Darlington Business Venture, Curtis had previously bought all its office chairs from a company based in Lancashire.
Cutis managing director Roger Curtis said: ‘We make and provide a particular type of chair but had had difficulty finding a local supplier who could manufacturer them for us.
‘Through the Business Link we have been able to find a supplier which is literally 500 years down the road from us.’
The deal with Profix now means that Curtis can now cut delivery times and offer a just-in-time service to its customers.
Mr Curtis, who is also chairman of Darlington & District Business Club, said: ‘As far as local companies are concerned the business link is an exceptionally good idea.
When you see lorries coming into Darlington from the length and breadth of the country bringing in supplies it is encouraging that local buyers and suppliers are now getting together.’
He said: ‘Through the Business Link a third party can now bring companies together and encourage trade between them.
And that keeps money in Darlington.’
Ken Lee who looks after the Business Link service at DBV said: ‘We are very encouraged by the development of the Business Link so far.
‘We currently have a 150 strong database of local suppliers but hopefully this will grow to about 500 by the end of the year.’
Mr Lee, who is on secondment from Glaxo at Barnard Castle, said the purpose of the link was to bring together local companies which could trade together.
‘We at the Business Venture act as a go-between for supplier and buyers and help them develop trading links.
We are now keen to expand our service and would like to hear more from local companies,’ said Mr Lee.
— For further information on Darlington Business Link telephone Ken Lee on .
CONSTRUCTION kits and painting lessons are helping children at Harrowgate Hill Infants in Darlington build vital skills for the future.
The children aged four-and-a-half to seven are working with the Construction Curriculum Centre based at the town's College of Technology.
Boys and girls are apprentices to the professionals as they plan and build their own playhouse in the school grounds.
The three-year project is designed to overcome prejudice about the construction industry and give children a realistic insight into its many occupations.
But it doesn't matter if none of these children become architects, bricklayers or decorators in the future.
For the main aim of the project is to create an interesting and relevant scenario for their National Curriculum studies.
DARLINGTON design and build company Prodescon has started work on two contracts with a combined value of more than £6m.
At Haywards Heath in Sussex the company is building a £3.3m 50-bed private hospital for Independent Care, while in Bradford a £3m extension and refurbishment contract at the Yorkshire Clinic for Community Hospitals is underway.
Both projects are due for completion in early 1993.
According to Prodescon director Gordon Smith his company was chosen for both contracts because of its speciality in building hospitals and healthcare developments,.
‘We are now on our tenth such scheme in the three years since we set up the company,’ he said.
The company has a current turnover of around £10m and will be opening a new office in Duke Street, Darlington in March.
Mine change:
Andrew Golightly Ltd is applying to Durham County Council to vary planning permission for opencast mining and a drift mine at South Brandon, Brancepeth, by dropping the proposal for the drift mine and extending the time limit for restoration of the site.
Houses approved:
JLM Projects Ltd have been given permission for a plan to build four houses on the site of a former Mission Church at Moor Crescent in Ludworth.
IMF sense
A COMMON criticism levelled by Tory propagandists at the Wilson and Callaghan Labour governments was their regular borrowing from the IMF.
According to them, this was a sign of a country on the verge of bankruptcy.
This betrays a total ignorance of the purpose and role of the International Monetary Fund.
It is not a consortium of millionaires, but was set up by the leaders of the developed nations at the Bretton Woods conference in 1944.
It was intended to replace the recently abandoned Gold Standard, but gives a much greater latitude.
So when faced with pay demands in some public services Chancellor Denis Healey did not print the extra money but went strictly by the book.
He approached the IMF and got a loan.
The workers got what they wanted and these vital public services remained freely available.
J. Conlon, 39 St John's Gardens, Sunnybrow, Willington.
Survival tax
WITH the suggested tax cuts of 1p in the £1 a lot of low paid people will get no benefit.
If the personal allowances were raised, people on low incomes would benefit.
That is what these people need to survive.
N. Tate, 34 Harrowgate Village, Darlington.
ACCOUNTANTS handling the liquidation of a North-East nursing home company have been inundated with offers for the business.
Ralph Preece, administrative receiver from Touche Ross, said there had been 145 over Darlington-based Stepfind Ltd, which owns four nursing homes in the region.
Mr Preece said when Stepfind went into receivership last year Touche Ross took over its affairs.
Day to day running of the homes at Haughton Village and Church House, in Darlington, Four Seasons, in Saltburn and South Church, near Bishop Auckland has continued as normal.
Several of the care assistants working at the homes were angered because they claimed they were not told what was happening.
And their concerns rubbed off on some of the elderly residents who spent an uncertain Christmas not knowing whether they would be staying or be forced to leave.
But after an advertisement in the Financial Times asking for offers Touche Ross have been kept busy sorting the inquiries.
‘This is a much higher than average response.
It will be some time before we can finalise sales,’ said Mr Preece.
Several of the offers are for individual homes, while some companies are interested in all four.
Mr Preece said the Four Seasons, in Saltburn, was a top quality home which has boosted interest in the sale but he would not discuss how much was being offered for the different homes.
The interest in the sale comes in the wake of Durham County Council's decision to close eight of its homes.
A £48m. scheme to turn a derelict loop of the Tees into a huge water park got underway this week.
The 250-acre site next to the river near Stockton sprang to prominence in 1987 when Mrs Margaret Thatcher ‘walked into the wilderness’ in front of the nation's press photographers, and pledged that the site would be transformed.
Five years later the industrial wasteland is a thriving mini-Docklands with homes, offices, roads, Victorian-style bridges and modern services.
And this week work started on the Tees Barrage which will transform the river.
Much of the time it is an unsightly mud-channel.
It will become a freshwater river permanently at its present high-water mark.
The National Rivers Authority warned mariners on Monday that engineers and builders would be working on the river from mid-February until June 1993.
Tarmac, the company behind £11m. worth of development, says more than a million tonnes of material has been removed and 500,000 tonnes of stones brought in.
The barrage itself will be downstream from the Teesdale site at Blue House Point.
Its three piers and two buttresses will take 15,000 cubic metres of reinforced concrete.
An eight-span steel-arched road bridge is to be built over it and a channel is being dug to divert the river while the work is underway.
The channel will allow boats to move from low tide to high-level river water bypassing the barrage.
An international canoeing area with a 460-metre white-water slalom course will be on the other side of the barrage.
Last week the NRA brought together anglers, rowers, ramblers and canoeists for a meeting in Stockton to discuss the opportunities.
‘It will be just like a freshwater lake, and it could be a real honeypot for all kinds of groups,’ said NRA spokesman Mr John Ritson.
‘It's possible there could be conflicts between them so we felt it was important to have discussions now.’
Mr Ritson said the NRA, as ‘honest broker,’ hoped to have a draft plan for recreation users published by April and a final document by August.
A £3m. road bridge linking the site with Stockton town centre is to open by mid-summer.
At the same time the finishing touches will be added to a University College jointly administered by Durham University and Teesside Polytechnic.
The first 200 students are set to arrive in September.
The start of the second phase of the £1.5m.
Cleveland Alzheimer's Residential Centre was announced two weeks ago.
The centre will be the first of its type in Britain to be fully funded, owned and managed by a voluntary organisation.
The first phase, to provide 18 bedrooms, a day centre and administrative offices will be opened in April.
A further 18 rooms will be completed by July.
Work on a new headquarters for a government pollution control watchdog started last month.
The pollution inspectorate will move from offices in Darlington to a 7,500sq. ft. development to be called Merchant's Wharf.
Its offices will be among those to look over one of the site's ornamental canals presently being worked on.
Dunedin House, another prestige office development, now has four tenants.
The first, Teesside Development Corporation, has been joined by Norwich Union Insurance which will create 40 jobs, and two other companies.
The site was in the news again this week when a Cleveland county councillor dubbed one unfinished building ‘the largest climbing frame in the world.’
The blue girders of the Stargrace building went up after Environment Minister Mr Colin Moynihan launched the £6m. office complex in June, 1990.
At the time it was ‘guaranteed’ to be completed by December.
Coun. Dave Walsh said he thought it was a visible demonstration of the slump in the property market.
‘It is in a very prominent building in a prominent location.
It is important that something happens soon, otherwise it will just become the largest climbing frame in the world.
‘We could end up in the lunatic situation of the TDC having to pull it down to make way for a new development.’
The TDC said the future of the building was being discussed.
Any water sport group interested in being involved in the NRA discussions should write to the Recreation Department, NRA, Eldon House, Regents Centre, Gosforth, Newcastle, NE3 3UD.
The prophets of doom and gloom got it wrong.
Building society repossessions last year stayed at the same levels as 1990.
And with the building societies coming under pressure from both consumer groups and the Government the signs are that there will be even fewer repossessions this year.
The North, by and large, has fared better than most regions in avoiding a high rate of repossessions.
And in comparison with the South-East, the North's housing market looks positively buoyant.
Figures released by the Council of Mortgage Lenders last week show that about 80,000 homes were repossessed by lenders in 1991.
A figure much better than the 100,000-plus constantly bandied about by some financial commentators.
The best news, however, is the fall in short-term arrears.
Woolwich says six-month arrears are back to the levels of February 1988 and the Abbey National says short-term arrears have been declining since the end of last summer and repossessions are stable or falling.
The North of England Building Society's chief executive, Robert Linden, puts a different perspective on the problem.
He says: ‘While the number of homes in possession at the end of 1991 was the highest ever at 160, the previous highest figure was 116 in June 1988, when the mortgage rate of 9.75pc was the lowest for the past 13 years.
‘In fact the amount outstanding in arrears as a proportion of our total mortgages is slightly less now than in June 1988.’
What all this points to is money in people's pockets.
The recession may not yet be over but, with repossessions stable, house sales may take off again.
This is certainly true in the North-East.
A recent survey by the Newcastle-based Northern Rock Building Society shows that house prices are continuing to rise in North Yorkshire, buoyed along by continuing demand, the recent cuts in interest rates and the temporary abolition of Stamp Duty.
In County Durham the Northern Rock noted that prices in seven out of ten house type categories, from a two-bedroom flat to a brand new four bedroom detached, have gone up.
Moreover, traditionally lower-priced towns such as Newton Aycliffe and Crook are faring better than higher-priced Darlington and Durham.
Northern Rock's chief surveyor and valuer Kevin Dougherty said: ‘Looking to the future, the housing market is showing distinct signs of renewed activity.
‘The number of housing starts is up on January 1991; the ratio of average prices to average salaries is at its lowest number for years; and the economy, especially in the North-East, looks set to improve.’
Mr Dougherty, however, is hedging his bets: ‘It is likely to be some time before this is reflected in higher prices.’
Nevertheless, the good news will bring some welcome relief to those homeowners who have been waiting for the best part of 1991 to sell their home.
One spin-off of the recent misery in the housing market is a reluctance by insurers to keep paying out heavy claims to cover those unable to keep up mortgage payments.
Sun Alliance has given notice to National Home Loans that it is cancelling its payment protection scheme at the end of the month.
NHL is endeavouring to arrange alternative cover for its borrowers.
Sun Alliance said the NHL account had become unprofitable, but it was not pulling out of payments protection in general.
For those of you currently looking after an ill or disabled relative, the Benefits Agency — the DSS to you and me — has issued a new leaflet.
Caring for Someone provides a wealth of information on the range of benefits available for the person being cared for, and the carer.
The leaflet marks a major departure in this country which has long ignored the millions of carers who struggle on alone with little or no financial help.
One major problem is that many people simply do not recognise that they are carers, and do not apply for help.
The new leaflet will let you know whether or not you qualify for aid.
Copies are available from your local social security offices.
Ask for Caring for Someone, leaflet code FB31.
THERE are secrets to being a boss which are not necessarily connected to ditching your pals on the way up.
All, or at least some are presumably revealed in a slender monthly publication.
For some reason a copy has arrived here.
It could be the launching pad to the top.
A quick dip into this must make ordinary Joes feel like natural leaders.
The story about the little girl who visited a farm one day was salutary indeed.
She wanted to buy a large water melon.
The farmer said it would cost three dollars, but the girl had only thirty cents.
At this the farmer pointed to a very small water melon.
‘How about that one?’ he asked.
To which the little girl said: ‘OK I'll take it, but leave it on the vine.
I'll be back for it in a month.’
From such an attitude are fortunes made.
Bits and Pieces, as the book is called (and a subscription from this desk is already winging its way there) is full of such tales.
Why, it might contain the essence of life itself.
The uncharitable, on the other hand, might assume it to be a collection of the sort of homilies which used to appear in women's magazines.
One of the sentences in one of the little stories in the booklet (in its own words filled with useful and stimulating ideas to help executives lead and inspire their people) talks about the fine arts of management.
One of them, it contends, is the ability to communicate a sense of urgency to people who work for you without haranguing and without being unpleasant.
Now it could be contended that any manager who needed a booklet to tell him this should be on the shopfloor.
There are lots of stirring epigrammatic statements aimed at inspiring our inspirers.
‘You may be disappointed if you fail, but you are doomed if you don't try.’
Or ‘The trouble with self-made men is that they worship their creator.’
Bob Hope was telling these jokes about a century ago.
Still, it is apparently read each month by hundreds of thousands of bosses, American and British.
When it eventually reveals the secret of life itself, or something approaching it, it will be, you can rest assured, passed on to the ordinary people out there.
FRANK Gray became the third North-East managerial casualty since Christmas when he was sacked by Darlington yesterday.
Youth team coach Ray Hankin takes over as manager until the end of the season, with veteran midfield player Mick Tait acting as his right hand man.
Gray and his assistant Tony McAndrew were dismissed after an 8am board meeting yesterday.
A dramatic slide to the foot of the Third Division sealed the fate of Gray, the former Leeds United, Nottingham Forest and Sunderland defender.
Quakers' chairman Dick Corden said the 3–0 defeat at Torquay United on Saturday was the final straw.
Corden added: ‘It was a diabolical performance and we felt something had to be done.
‘We had to act because results were getting worse and worse.
Perhaps we should have done something earlier but we hoped the team would turn the corner.
‘Gray would still have been in a job if Darlington had won at Torquay.’
Gray made more than 600 Football League appearances in his playing career and shared in Darlington's double championship triumph which took them from the GM Vauxhall Conference to the Third Division in successive seasons.
The former Scottish international succeeded Brian Little when he left for Leicester City last summer.
Despite a wealth of playing experience, Gray lacked the motivation to lift a struggling side.
Darlington had only eight wins in 31 League games, with the worst defensive away record in the four divisions.
Corden added: ‘Frank is a great guy, someone who will always be welcome at the ground and at my home.
‘It was just disappointing things did not work out for him.
Perhaps he could have fantastic success at another club.
‘Luck plays a big part in a manager's fortunes.
Last season the ball hit the post and went in.
This season the ball has hit the post and stayed out.
‘McAndrew also worked hard for the club.’
Corden said that the club would settle ‘without bitterness’ the remaining two years of Gray's contract.
There was speculation last night that Hankin's former Leeds United colleague David Harvey could join him at Feethams.
Former Scottish international goalkeeper Harvey, who was also associated with Hankin at Whitby, has resigned as coach at Harrogate Town, the HFS Loans League First Division club.
Harvey's resignation came just a fortnight after assistant manager Graham Shepherd resigned.
‘David is keen to put himself in the shop window before the end of the season so he can be involved in a new club with their pre-season preparations,’ said Town's general manager Alan Smith.
TAX incentives encouraging businesses to make donations to schools have been condemned by a teachers' leader.
The incentives, promoted by Schools Minister and Darlington MP Michael Fallon, have been dismissed as ‘a carrot’ to persuade industry to subsidise state education.
They coincide with news that Gosforth First School in Newcastle has become the second school in the country to ask parents to pay £30 each to cover a £9,000 shortfall in the budget.
Terry Buckler, regional secretary of the National Union of Teachers, warned that increasing reliance on hand-outs and sponsorship would increase inequality between schools.
Some schools in affluent industrial districts could profit from the scheme while those in rural areas with few companies nearby would have little chance of extra support.
He said: ‘It is atrocious to expect businesses and parents to bail out schools.
We try to develop closer links with industry and business.
But no way would we want or expect them to fund state education.’
On Thursday Mr Fallon launched a new guide to tax relief on business gifts to schools.
He said a gift of modern and useful equipment from a computer to a minibus, sports kit to industrial machinery, was an investment for business.
MOVES to renegotiate a deal with Northumbrian Water could net Darlington council tens of thousands of pounds.
Since 1974 the borough council has collected water rates from its tenants on behalf of Northumbrian Water.
The water company gives the authority 10pc commission on the cash a deal which netted £96,500 during the present financial year.
But the current agreement runs out in 1994 and Northumbrian Water is anxious to extend the arrangement by three years.
In a bid to encourage councillors the company has offered to increase Darlington's commission to 12.5pc.
Richard Collin, the authority's director of central services, says this would boost the council's coffers by more than £20,000 every year.
He says the money will help cover the council's collection costs and losses caused by bad debtors.
If councillors allow the agreement to expire Mr Collin believes Northumbrian Water would ask the authority to install separate service pipes to all its flats which are currently served by a common supply.
This move would cost a huge a mount of money, he warns.
Mr Collins concludes: ‘From a financial point of view an extension of the agreement to March 31, 1997 provides the greater benefit.’
A HAMBLETON businessman is to set up shop outside the area after allegedly being given a rough ride by the district council.
Fred Davies has formed a company to build special buses for the disabled.
But instead of basing it in Northallerton, where he runs the Sundial Hotel and founded the now defunct York Trailers, it will be in Shildon, near Darlington.
Mr Davies has been at loggerheads with Hambleton District Council over the future use of his hotel in Darlington Road.
Last week a Department of Environment inspector heard a planning appeal seeking to change it into a nursing home.
Hambleton planners opposed the scheme because the Sundial is in the middle of the town's industrial belt and considered unsuitable.
‘I'll be damned if I'll set up in Northallerton because of the ride they have given me,’ Mr Davies said.
‘I sense almost a vendetta in this town and I'll never start another business in Northallerton under the heel of such a group.
I've had my fill of them.’
Hambleton's economic development officer Claire Binns said: ‘That is Mr Davies’ decision.
In my knowledge he has never spoken to us about this business.
That is all we would want to say about it.’
She denied there was any vendetta against Mr Davies and that the Sundial planning appeal had anything to do with personalities.
The business will employ 36 workers at first with plans to expand.
They will build special buses with a pneumatic suspension allowing them to be lowered to the ground for the easy loading of wheelchairs.
IN Milton Street there is a smart detached house worth at least £85,000.
A few doors further down the road there is a small terraced house worth around £28,000.
The valuations are those of estate agent Peter Freitag but, on this occasion, they were not based on the usual detailed investigation of the inside of the houses.
They were made from the road, without Mr Freitag even crossing the garden gate let alone probing around the bedrooms.
That may appear less than thorough yet it is on the basis of these estimates, and those of other estate agents acting in the same way, that the Tories' new Council Tax (the sequel to the Poll Tax) will be based.
If Mr Freitag's estimates were to be accepted the two near neighbours would be paying a difference of up to £250 in their tax.
It is a valuation system which, Mr Freitag believes, could bring the Government more trouble.
In Darlington's Milton Street, the chairman of the local Liberal Democrats pointed to an example of a street where the variety of houses meant valuers would be hard pressed to give accurate prices.
Mr Freitag believes Council Tax legislation has been rushed through and there will be inevitable problems.
In Darlington estate agents have been contracted by the Inland Revenue to calculate the value of every house in the town by the end of May.
In most cases this entails a house in one street being identified as a ‘beacon’ house whose value determines others in the street.
In places like Milton Street the variety of housing prohibits the use of ‘beacon’ houses.
Mr Freitag says it will take too long to give proper values and that will lead to disputes.
Early estimates for council tax bills range from a bottom level of £301 for a house worth less than £40,000 up to £903 for a house valued at more than £320,000.
In Darlington the council calculates there are approximately 18,800 houses in the bottom band while the number of houses at the peak is negligible.
A spokeswoman for the Inland Revenue said valuation inspectors are not permitted to go into people's private property.
Mr Freitag said one of the charms about many Darlington houses is the impossibility of knowing about the house from just a glance at the front.
Mr Freitag assessed the detached house in Milton Street as worth at least £85,000, which would mean it would have a council tax of £451.
If it was above £85,000 the owners would qualify for the next band and pay £551.
He discovered houses in Milton Street where seemingly plain facades hid huge gardens or impressive extensions to the rear.
The terraced house, which Mr Freitag's put in the lowest bracket with a valuation of £28,000, would have a Council Tax bill of £301.
Kay O'Neill, who lives in the street, said her house was worth much more than one may think at first glance.
It would be impossible to find out its true value from a cursory inspection, she said.
Much of the information being used to calculate Council Tax house values is based on the old rateable values some of which are based on out of date information.
Mr Freitag said: ‘Things like central heating, double glazing, a garage or an extra bedroom all change house values considerably.’
He said if a valuer were to get accurate valuations on all the properties in Milton Street it would take more than one day.
The schedule for making valuations prohibits taking that much time.
He believes local taxation should reflect a person's ability to pay.
The Liberal Democrats have proposed a local income tax system while the Labour Party want to introduce a ‘fair rates’ system.
A MASSIVE factory development and thousands of new jobs could have come to Darlington, the town's MP has claimed.
Michael Fallon believes his intervention would have been crucial in landing the £100m scheme by U.S. firm KimberlyClark.
The town lost out to Barton, South Humberside, because the firm was offered a more attractive Government aid package.
Barton is part of a regional development area and as such it can offer new companies a wide range of financial incentives.
Darlington's Labour councillors were locked in negotiations with Kimberly-Clark management months before the company finally decided on Humberside.
But Mr Fallon, who is Schools Minister, said he was not informed until it was too late.
‘A little nudge from a Government minister could have swung things in Darlington's favour,’ he said.
‘Whether the council likes it or not I am the town's MP and I am a minister.
Therefore I have a very close relationship with the Department of Trade and Industry.’
But Labour's prospective Parliamentary candidate, Alan Milburn, slammed Mr Fallon's ‘arrogance’ over the issue.
He said: ‘The reason KimberlyClark chose Humberside is because they got a higher level of grant aid.
‘Mr Fallon and his fellow ministers have let thousands of jobs go begging because they have refused to let Darlington compete on level terms.’
Quality mark:
Compressor supplier Atlas Copco's Washington branch has been awarded the quality accreditation BS5750.
The achievement has taken 17 months and covers nearly every aspect of Atlas Copco's business including installation, service schemes, training and inspection testing.
PLANS for a Sainsbury superstore in Darlington could be doomed after crunch talks with a Government minister failed to resolve serious financial problems.
Transport minister Roger Freeman failed to break the deadlock between the Caldaire bus company and developers anxious to clinch a supermarket deal.
Caldaire occupies the Grange Road site which has been earmarked.
Birmingham-based developer J J Gallagher has offered the company £2.5m for the land.
But a Government clause says Caldaire is only allowed to keep 35pc of the purchase price above £1.3m.
Bus company management claim that any offer below £3.7m makes moving impossible.
They believe a Government promise to waive the clause could be the crucial breakthrough.
A Caldaire delegation visited London earlier this week for talks with Department of Transport officials.
But hopes that Mr Freeman would break the stalemate were dashed.
The minister has agreed to consider the problem but Caldaire's managing director Mike Widmer fears the company's appeal could be thrown out.
Moves to lift the clause would set a national precedent.
And Mr Widmer explained: ‘I think the minister will recognise that fact.
The chances of him waiving the clause are looking slim.’
If the clause is not lifted the bus company says it is staying put scuppering any plans for a new Sainsburys.
Mr Widmer said the company was re-assured that it would not be forced to move.
Darlington MP Michael Fallon believed the clawback clause would be changed if it was seen as an obstacle to striking a deal.
Mr Fallon, a champion for redevelopment of the site, said: ‘I don't want to see anything which would have a detrimental effect on the bus company but the area is crying out for a new development.’
A spokeswoman for Sainsbury said: ‘We will be watching developments very carefully.’
PLANS for a Sainsbury superstore in Darlington could be dropped after talks with a Government minister failed to resolve serious financial problems.
Transport minister Roger Freeman failed to solve a dispute between the Caldaire bus company and developers anxious to arrange a supermarket deal.
Caldaire currently occupies the Grange Road site which Sainsbury wants to develop and Birmingham-based developer J J Gallagher has offered the company £2.5m for the land.
But a Government clause says Caldaire is only allowed to keep 35pc of the purchase price above £1.3m.
Bus company management claim that any offer below £3.7m makes moving a financial impossibility.
They believe a Government promise to waive the clause could solve the problem.
A Caldaire delegation visited London earlier this week for talks with Department of Transport officials but their hopes that Mr Freeman would find a solution were in vain.
The minister has agreed to consider the problem but Caldaire's managing director Mike Widmer fears the company's appeal could be thrown out.
Moves to lift the clause inserted in the company's contract to prevent asset stripping after de-regulation of the buses would set a national precedent.
And Mr Widmer explained: ‘I think the minister will recognise that fact and it will influence his view.
The chances of him waiving the clause are looking slim.’
If the clause is not lifted the bus company says it is staying put scuppering any plans for a new Sainsburys.
Mr Widmer praised the minister for his ‘sympathetic attitude’ and said the company had come away from the meeting re-assured that it would not be forced to move.
He added: ‘We have outlined the criteria which would need to be achieved before a move could be considered the rest is up to him.’
Darlington MP Michael Fallon said he believed the clawback clause would be changed if it was seen as an obstacle to a deal.
Mr Fallon, who supports redevelopment of the site, said: ‘I don't want to see anything which would have a detrimental effect on the bus company but, at the same time, the area is crying out for a new development.’
A spokeswoman for Sainsbury said: ‘We are aware of the bus company's meeting with the minister and will be watching developments very carefully.’
She declined to say if the supermarket group had looked at alternative sites in the town.
Airline merger is ditched by
BA HOPES of a merger between British Airways and Dutch national carrier KLM ended today when talks between the two airlines were terminated without agreement.
A dispute over the shareholding of a merged company which would have dominated the European aviation scene proved the main stumbling block.
Industry sources said KLM had insisted on a 40pc share, while BA wanted an 80/20 or, at the very least, a 70/30 split.
With BA unable to complete a deal on the Dutch terms the talks, which had been going on since September 1991, finally collapsed.
Courtaulds rise:
Clothes and textiles giant Courtaulds Textiles spun annual pretax profits of £42.2m last year, up from £40.3m, after weathering the worst effects of the recession.
The increase was largely due to a 47pc drop in the group's interest charge, to £6.3m from £11.8m, coupled with an increase in operating profit.
Press jobs:
Press Construction of Darlington has won a £12m contract to install new mains and services in Northumberland and Wearside for British Gas.
The company claims around 100 jobs will be created by the three-year long project.
Recruitment of the new workers is already underway.
NEP buys:
North-East office equipment company NEP has bought the fax and photocopier division of crashed business Hill International.
The deal means that 1,000 fax and 800 copier contracts for former Hill customers on Tyneside and Teesside will be transferred to the new owner.
Gateshead-based NEP, with a current turnover of £10m, clinched the deal against competition from three rival office equipment companies.
New depot:
Rushlift, the North-East's largest independent forklift truck dealer is to open a new depot at Elswick Road on the Armstrong Industrial Estate in Washington.
CONGLOMERATE Williams Holdings increased profits by £50m, but still insisted it could see ‘no evidence of significant economic improvement’.
The group, which owns Darlington conservatory maker and several other North-East interests, made £168m last year compared to £118m in 1990.
Group Finance director Tim Allen said Amdega had a hard time in 1991, along with most firms in the consumer market.
He said it remained in the black but he refused to rule out job cuts at the factory, where 40 workers lost their jobs last year.
Land cash:
The National Rivers Authority has made a £350 donation towards the project to clear and reseed Rawcliffe Meadows in York.
Work is carried out during Sunday afternoons by volunteers.
A NORTH-EAST businessman, whose money-lending company collapsed leaving a string of debts, has been ordered to quit his £800-a month home.
Former policeman Tom Finnegan was told to leave the house in Middleton St George, near Darlington in a row over unpaid rent.
A judge at Darlington County Court also ordered Finnegan to pay £2,400 in arrears after it emerged that no rent had been paid since July last year.
The civil court appearance was Finnegan's second brush was the law in ten days.
Earlier, he had been detained by fraud police from North Yorkshire investigating alleged offences under the Banking Act.
The businessman, his wife Sylvia and business partner Barry Braund, from Cleveland, were released on bail without being charged.
They were questioned at Northallerton.
Finnegan has been under investigation after detectives were called in by creditors of North of England Investments who lost money in the company which collapsed last year.
Now Finnegan, who has two teenage sons, has been told he must leave his home in Middleton St George and pay outstanding rent arrears.
No rent has been paid since July but arrears up to the end of November are already the subject of a previous court order.
Finnegan has made arrangements for his wife's income to cover those outstanding debts.
Property Management, of Darlington, claimed it had served a notice to quit on Finnegan last September.
The company wanted him and his family out by November.
But Finnegan told the court he had never seen a notice to quit — although he did not dispute the arrears.
He said the debts had built up following the collapse of his business.
Finnegan hopes to use some of his pension benefits to pay off the outstanding arrears.
A further matter concerning alleged damage to five trees and lawns at the house was adjourned.
North Yorkshire police say they are still anxious to trace anybody who invested money with Finnegan's companies.
A former Birmingham police officer, Finnegan was set to stand as Tory candidate for Stockton South at the 1983 general election but withdrew when it was disclosed he had been a National Front organiser.
He was also the man behind Darlington's Zhivago's nightclub.
His company Citymystic spent £800,000 on the popular venue before it crashed in 1989.
The Northern also revealed how North of England Investments loaned money at an annual interest rate of 660pc.
VOLUNTEERS who use their own cars to ferry people to hospital from remote parts of the North-East could face a hefty tax bill in future.
The Inland Revenue says some drivers are making a profit by shuttling patients and visitors between hospitals.
Now the Government has proposed to crack down on mileage allowances by taxing drivers who cover large distances.
The moves have been criticised by members of the national Association of Community Health Councils who say the plan could backfire.
Vice chairman Eleanor Young, who is also a Darlington councillor, fears many volunteer drivers could withdraw their cover leaving health authorities facing huge bills for taxis.
Coun Young said: ‘I think it is pretty ludicrous to suggest anyone is getting rich by taking people to hospital ‘But if people who do this sort of thing are facing the prospect of making a loss they just won't bother.
‘If that happens the health authority is going to have to foot the bill for a taxi or ambulance if it wants to get people to hospital.
In the end they are going to end up out of pocket.’
She said drivers in the Dales who ferry people to hospitals in nearby towns could be hardest hit.
The Association has already held talks with junior health minister Stephen Dorrell who said he fully appreciated the valuable service provided by volunteer drivers.
In a letter he wrote: ‘The smooth and effective running of non-urgent patient transport services would not be possible without the very considerable efforts of those volunteers.
‘We are clearly reluctant to take any step which is regarded as hostile to their interests.’
But he pointed out that drivers had always been liable to pay tax on their allowances if it exceeded the cost of running and maintaining a car.
Mr Dorrell continued:’ In the past the Inland Revenue has, I am told, felt able to accept that the allowances paid to volunteers did no more than reimburse them for their actual expenses.
‘But more recently they have become aware that some volunteers receive quite large amounts resulting in sizeable profits.’
The Government plans to phase in its tax proposals over the next few years.
Drivers will have to pay the full amount from 1996.
Mr Dorrell said he hoped a gradual tax increase would make the principle more acceptable to drivers.
NORTHERN workers are the country's top performers on Government training schemes but half face a return to the dole queue.
Latest figures show that just one in three adults finishing an ET course between February 1990 and January 1991 were in a job three months later.
In County Durham, the picture was even worse with just one in four leavers managing to find full-time employment.
Most former trainees 62pc in the county were without work within three months of their course.
A similar pattern is repeated across the region.
In Northumberland 30pc found work while, in Wearside, Tyneside and Cleveland the figure was 25pc.
But, according to Alan Milburn, Labour's prospective parliamentary candidate for Darlington, Northern ET leavers are the best with more trainees completing their courses, working for qualifications or gaining credits.
Mr Milburn said: ‘There is no lack of willingness on the part of unemployed people in the North to train hard or find jobs.
But the Government refuses to help them.
All they have to offer the jobless are dead-end training schemes and cuts in training budgets.’
Darlington's Tory MP Michael Fallon said last night: ‘Claims that we have cut training budgets are simply untrue.
Training schemes do not guarantee a job, but they do provide necessary skills.’
THE Sedgefield office of Fairclough Building has won a £900,000 contract to build student accommodation at Durham University, designed by Newcastle architect Faulknerbrowns.
According to regional marketing manager David Asquith the contract was clinched in the face of stiff competition.
It is the second major education related project won by the Sedgefield firm in three months.
Fairclough is already on site at Newcastle University's 192-room extension valued at £1.65m.
‘They are both very important jobs for us, not least because contracts are in these lean times but also because of the calibre of both the clients,’ said Mr Asquith.
Joint venture plans at QAI
A DARLINGTON company is set to form a joint venture business with a Yugoslavian counterpart.
Consultant QAI is close to signing heads of agreement with Belgrade company Qualitas.
A week long visit to the Yugoslavian quality assessors by QAI managing director Peter Ainsworth and director Alf Duffield could clinch the deal.
If the discussions are successful Mr Duffield said that the newly formed company would have a QAI employee stationed permanently in Yugoslavia.
A DARLINGTON factory which has stood empty for three years is close to being sold.
The final stages of negotiation over the sale of Cummins' 185,000 sq ft engine factory on Yarm Road are believed to be imminent.
Simon Cope of London-based commercial agent Gerald Eve, which is marketing the scheme jointly with Sanderson Townend & Gilbert, said: ‘There has been as reasonable amount of interest in the past, and marketing has occasionally been stopped while discussions have taken place, but there are serious discussions going on at the moment.’
Market reports suggest that the sale will not be to a local business.
It could also create a substantial number of jobs in the town.
Any new operation setting up in the architecturally acclaimed building would have to satisfy strict planning constraints, however.
Many property professionals believe the factory, built in 1965 by Roche & Dinkeloo, should be listed.
And Darlington Borough Council has previously said no retail development will be allowed in the Cummins property.
THE future of a yard at the heart of Darlington's conservation area is to be decided next week.
Dockbuild Limited wants to build a pub and offices in the rundown yard off Bondgate.
The applications, which are likely to be approved, involve changing the use from a restaurant to a pub, including a flat on the first floor, and changing the use of a former restaurant to offices.
Dockbuild Limited also wants to build a three storey office development on the site.
But English Heritage has called for a thorough feasibility study before the third application is determined.
In a letter to Darlington Town Hall, John Edwards, of the Conservation Group North, wrote: ‘The proposed replacement building would be far more impersonal in this location and the loss of the existing buildings would detract from the quality of Salt Yard and the conservation area as a whole.’
The plan will be discussed by Darlington councillors on Wednesday.
Takeaway shop bid seems doomed
A BID to open a takeaway in Darlington town centre looks likely to be rejected because of potential noise problems.
The applicant is seeking permission from Darlington Borough Council to change the use of a shop in Northgate to a hot food takeaway and snack bar, but council officers fear any extension to opening hours would result in early morning noise and disturbance to residents nearby.
The shop is one of several in a row in the grade two listed terrace.
There are homes on the upper floors.
The issue will be discussed by the council's planning applications sub-committee on Wednesday.
Grants approved:
An £11,200 grant for renovations to a house on Foundry Street, Shildon, has been approved by Sedgefield District Council.
A grant of £7,905 has also been approved for work to a house on East Parade, Sedgefield.
Sales drive:
Permoid of Aycliffe, Britain's largest manufacturer of famous steel beer casks has just launched a new half a million pound production line in a bid to attract sales from Germany.
Businessmen get food for thought
THE Darlington & District Business Club will hold its monthly meeting tomorrow at the Coachman Hotel, Victoria Road Darlington.
This month's guest speaker is Peter Bell, Northumbrian Chef of the Year and senior lecturer in the catering department of the Darlington College of Technology.
He will demonstrate meals in a minute for the business person and there will be a free buffet.
All members and non-members are welcome.
For further details contract Carmel Molina on .
Sacking protest:
Top management at TV group Granada face a potentially rough ride when they confront shareholders at the company's annual meeting today.
They are likely to face protests over the sacking of Granada Television chairman David Plowright who left the company on Friday.
Mr Plowright, who was responsible for programmes such as Coronation Street, Brideshead Revisited and The Jewel in the Crown, was forced out after a clash over strategy at the company.
Disco debts:
Debt-laden disco operator European Leisure is suspending dividend payments as it struggles to service bank loans in the face of heavy debts and the recession.The group is still in the black but trading in the first two months of the year has been ‘difficult and stable’.
European Leisure, which also makes amusement machines and has property interests, plans to sell off some of its businesses in the UK and Europe to meet debts.
Purchase cash:
Bowater yesterday asked its shareholders for £333.5m to help fund the purchase of two packaging firms.
DRG Packaging and Cope Allman Packaging major suppliers to the healthcare market will cost Bowater a total of £444m.
Bowater's annual results for 1991, released yesterday, showed the group holding its own in the recession.
Pretax profits dipped slightly to £112.7m from £113.1m last time.
PRESS Construction has received a boost in business as one quarter of a consortium awarded a £75m contract by BP Exploration in Scotland.
Under the title of AMEC Dalmeny, Press and three other AMEC operating companies will carry out a project to increase oil throughput in the Forties oil field.
The Darlington business will install all of the pipe terminals, totalling around 11km, in the cross country pipeline.
Other AMEC companies will provide design engineering, process construction and heavy marine engineering skills, on the scheme, a factor in clinching the BP contract according to AMEC Delmaney director Iain Mcleod.
‘This project is a good example of how AMEC can offer a total solution to clients by integrating the skills of different parts of the group and focusing them through a bespoke joint venture company,’ he said.
David Martin, Press Construction's business development manager, said the BP contract will allow normal working at Darlington to continue, even though all of the construction work will be carried out in Scotland.
TUESDAY:
It was revealed Easington Colliery miners had broken production records to help push the loss-making mine back into profit.
Wearside motor group Cowies sold a Sheffield office block for £7.5m.
WEDNESDAY:
Pre-tax profits at Britain's biggest bank Barclays fell by £230m to £533m, and the bank announced that on-going rationalisation and job losses would continue.
British Coal chief executive Neil Clarke warned that the new breed of gas-fired power stations offered a bigger threat to the industry's future than imported coal.
THURSDAY:
Chemicals group ICI announced a 10pc fall in pre-tax profits for 1991 to £843m.
Chairman Sir Denys Henderon forecast a difficult 12 months ahead.
Troubled conglomerate Scottish Heritable Trust sold its hospital bed manufacturer Hoskins for £1.3m.
FRIDAY:
Bairdwear announced the closure of its Newtown Aycliffe factory, with the loss of 95 jobs.
Negotiations were reported to be close to reaching agreement on the sale of the empty Cummins factory in Yarm Road, Darlington.
WEEKEND:
National Westminster Bank chief economist David Kern forecast any upturn in the UK economy would be led by the North.
He said the region's economy should enjoy above average growth in 1992.
‘We have no hit list of closures but it is the case that we must react to the pressure of the market’ ICI's Chris Hamspon, the director responsible for Chemical & Polymers on Teesside.
City analysts expressed worries that Cleveland-based MTM would change its full-year reporting date following a change in its accounting procedures (see page 12).
‘We must stress that, compared with coal imports, the rush to invest in new gas-fired power stations is a much more serious threat to pits and jobs’ British Coal chief executive Neil Clarke.
PARTNERSHIP is the key to success for the Rathbone Society's alliance with County Durham Training and Enterprise Council.
The society, a national charity, aims to help people with learning difficulties reach their full potential.
It is contracted by the TEC to train people with disabilities through in-house tuition and on-the-job work with local firms.
The TEC pays the society a fixed amount per trainee for each week they work, and participating employees contribute around £5 per trainee per day to the society towards administrative costs.
Each trainee is paid their usual benefit plus £10 a week.
People are given the chance to gain a vocational qualification in areas as diverse as catering, working with horses and machinery.
Around 100 trainees come to the Rathbone Society in Darlington every year and are given initial training at its base on the Lingfield industrial estate.
They are then sent on placements to local firms who are carefully screened before being chosen.
Since April, 11 trainees have found jobs through the society and 12 have attained vocational qualifications.
George Kerswell, programme manager, said all employers were fully briefed about their new trainees and had proved extremely helpful.
‘People with disabilities are seen as individuals, if one person is unhappy in the job employers don't brand everyone else the same.
‘We are always looking for more employers to become involved and anyone who wants to support our work is welcome to get in touch.’
Mr Kerswell explained firms were asked first and foremost to teach trainees a skill, not to expect them to be productive.
‘Employers gain several benefits, through training they establish good relations with an individual who is ready to be recruited at the end.
‘Also firms get a profile in the area and can say they are helping local people and the community,’ he said.
Each year the TEC spends £80,000 on training up to 500 disabled people with County Durham firms through organisations like the Rathbone Society although it is the only one dealing mainly with the disabled.
Another 50 are funded for places on specialist courses for example at universities, polytechnics and agricultural colleges.
Sue Chester, training manager and liaison officer with Durham TEC, said she was delighted with the work being done by the Rathbone Society.
She said the TEC could offer disabled trainees help with loan of equipment, or could extend the tuition period if that was felt to be useful.
Most disabled trainees come to the TEC through disabled resettlement officers at Jobcentres, who from April 1 will be known as disability employment advisors.
Jobcentre staff would be able to identify training courses which would suit the individual's needs, then contact the TEC.
ROSEMARY
Thorne, newly appointed finance director of Sainsbury's, is probably unique among her colleagues round the board table.
She actually still pushes her trolley round the aisles every week and knows about shopping from the sharp end.
This can only be good news.
If more people responsible for businesses and services actually had to them, the world would be a better place.
We would like, for instance, to see:— An architect trying to get a pram in through the tiny front porch of the modern house.
Or a bed into the smallest bedroom;— A man from British Telecom trying to use one of those stupid modern phone boxes that are just little booths exposed to the weather ideally when he's ringing up for details of something and trying to write with one hand while trying to stop the piece of paper blowing away.
If, of course, he can hear any details to write down;— A cooker designer of under 5ft 2ins trying to use an eye-level grill that's above his head.
— Education Ministers using state schools for their children Health Ministers using NHS hospitals Transport Ministers waiting for a bus Housing ministers living on problem estates Sports Ministers trying to find a tennis court.
— A man from British Rail taking a nice long train journey with a toddler and a baby.
The toddler would need to go to the loo baby would have to come too.
Where do you change baby's nappy?
When toddler and baby both need to be carried or held at all times, how do you get the luggage and buggy off the train?
Has the man from British Rail ever wondered?;— Supermarket managers taking toddlers through the check out and telling them they can't have the sweets that are especially positioned within their grasp.
— Department store bosses trying to try on clothes in their fiddly little changing rooms (you can always tell people who've been clothes shopping they're the ones with the bruised elbows);— Town planners and architects who think steps are an interesting feature trying to get up them in a wheelchair, with a pram, or just with creaky old legs;— Hospital consultants who make ten appointments for the same time waiting in out-patients, especially if it's the day when there's a dotty old lady, a whining child and an old man who coughs and spits all in the same little section;— Weird fashion experts wearing their crazier outfits in Darlington on a rainy Monday.
The list goes on.
But the really interesting bit about Rosemary Thorne's appointment is not just that it's newsworthy there's only one other woman finance director in the country's top 100 companies but what they've done about her old job.
She used to be with Grand Metropolitan and now, apparently, they've had to appoint men to fill her post.
We'll be surprised if they manage it between them…
COSTS:
I have followed the debates and other writings relating to the Wensleydale limestone transportation.
Having myself asked several haulage firms for a similar quote, the price ranged from £75 to £100 per load.
If we take the lower figure to work on, using 90 loads per day gives a cost of £6,750 per day.
Costs for a five and a half-day week are therefore £37,125 or £1,930,500 per year.
If British Rail operate on a five-day week at the same rate it would return £7,425 per trip.
After paying a driver and guard approximately £100 per day between them and 500 gallons of highly rebated gas oil (for the locomotive), surely British Rail could be much more competitive.
Or don't they want to be?
P. Dargue,.
Scaremongering ‘
THE Eve of Destruction’(Echo February 20) is, I consider, scaremongering of the highest order.
Personally I do not believe that if there is some global warning, so-called, it will endanger our planet or its inhabitants.
Talk of catastrophe is popular and a money-maker for authors and publishers.
First, what are the world's protected areas and how many square miles set against the 54,807,420 square miles of the earth's land surface?
The daffodil is marketable in the Isles of Scilly in November due to the absence of frost.
Should the flowers there be lost our hearts will still be able to dance with daffodils in Farndale.
Assuming a rise of 1ft (uniform across the oceans) it would take 24,620 cubic miles of water where from?
Presumably from the Arctic and Antarctic.
Given time we could become lake dwellers.
Edmund J.
Jones, 94, Orchard House, Brompton Northallerton.
FORSTER-Nyham, the Darlington firm of plumbing, heating and ventilation engineers has been put into receivership with the loss of 19 jobs.
The company's bankers have appointed Michael Appleby and David Wood of accountant Latham Crossley & Davis as joint administrative receivers.
It was set up in 1981 and became a limited company in 1990.
Mr Appleby said: ‘This is a long-established business with a reputation for quality workmanship which has suffered from a series of bad debts and disputed accounts.’
HOSPITAL managers have discovered the recipe for success with new diets for diabetics.
Management at Darlington's Memorial Hospital introduced new procedures a few weeks ago when no food could be found in the hospital for a diabetic patient who had just been admitted.
Diabetics have to eat regularly if their illness is to be kept under control with insulin injections.
Sufferers could require food at any time of the day.
Now a special food store has been set up following talks with members of the British Diabetic Association.
Diabetics have praised management for their quick response to the problem.
Yvonne Simpson, the BDA's honorary secretary, said: ‘We are extremely pleased to see this problem has been resolved.
New director:
Michael Taylor has been appointed to the board of Northumbrian Water as finance director.
David Cranston will relinquish the role that he has combined with that of chief executive.
Mr Taylor was formerly group finance director of chemical and timber protection group, Hickson International.
He will now become responsible for the development of financial strategy and control throughout the Northumbrian group.
Cadbury advance:
Cadbury Schweppes seems unaware of the recession and all because the public love its chocolates, sweets and soft drinks.
Loyalty to the group's famous brands helped it to boost pretax profits by 13.2pc last year to £316.4m from £279.6m in 1990, although sales grew by just 2.7pc.
Port flotation:
Details of the last privatisation before the election were unveiled with the announcement of the £30m-plus flotation of Forth Ports.
The price of shares in the company, which is the largest ports operation in Scotland, will be set on March 12.
Applications for shares must be made by March 18 and dealing will start on March 23.
Sun Life shines:
Financial services group Sun Life Corporation boosted post-tax profits by 28.3pc last year, the company reported yesterday.
It made £41.7m compared with £32.5m in 1990 and is increasing its total dividend payout to 56.4p per share from 47p.
DARLINGTON Hospice is celebrating this week in anticipation of a share of a £37.2m Government grant just announced for hospices throughout Britain.
Regional health authorities are waiting for news of their allocation and meetings are to be held between the hospice and Darlington Health Authority chiefs this week to discuss details of the services to benefit from the extra cash.
The hospice is planning a major fund-raising event for June.
Durham Constabulary will hold their annual charity pro-am golf tournament at Brancepeth Castle course on June 10 and the expected £7,000 proceeds are to go to Darlington Hospice.
Any local companies who can help with sponsorship, advertising or anticipation should telephone Superintendent Keith Tweddle on Durham  ext 2352.
Since 1987 the hospice has concentrated on supporting patients at home.
Volunteers in the sitting service have helped families lead relatively normal lives while caring for their loved one at home.
The sitters can spend time, day or night, with the patient, providing care and companionship.
But as news of this service spreads, and more referrals are received from GPs and district nurses, the hospice needs more volunteers.
They want to recruit people with a sympathetic and ‘unruffled’ nature, nursing expertise is not essential.
Anyone who would like to know more about the service should contact volunteer coordinator Dorothy Davison on .
Because the hospice is extending its service to include a day hospice costs are set to increase dramatically and the donations from groups and individuals became all the more valuable.
This week the hospice want to thank those who gave in memory of Mr Robinson, Mr Herring, Mr Gargett and Mr Nixon.
They also send thanks to Mrs Smith and her friends who raised almost £400 at a lunch and bridge party.
A NEW survey has good news for North-East beer drinkers the region's pints are the cheapest in England.
Consumer magazine Which? found pubs in the North scored top marks for value, with some bar prices almost half those charged in London.
Yorkshire came close behind the North-East for cheapness, but the lowest prices for spirits are in Scotland where measures are bigger as well.
Bitter drinkers in the NorthEast can expect to pay between 95p and £1.35 a pint while in London the price soars to as much as £1.72.
In Yorkshire the price varies between 99p and £1.60.
A pint of lager in the North will set you back between £1.14 and £1.50, in Yorkshire between £1.20 and £1.55, and in London between £1.33 and £1.82.
Spirits in the region were closer to London tariffs.
A gin and tonic could cost as much as £1.95 in the North and one penny more in the capital.
In Yorkshire the maximum price was £1.75.
And a shot of whisky would cost between 74p and £1.25 in the North, 80p to £1.20 in Yorkshire and 90p to £1.26 in London.
Non-drinkers fare badly around the country, the average price for 4fl oz of orange juice is 62p, or £3.10 a pint, double the price of an average pint of bitter.
The report also warns drinkers to expect big differences in prices between locals in the same town, with upmarket pubs in prime locations charging more than a no-frills bar on the outskirts.
This was confirmed by a survey conducted by The Northern Echo in Darlington, Durham and Northallerton.
In each place five pubs chosen at random were questioned about their bar prices.
But surprisingly prices in Northallerton were lower than for the County Durham pubs although overall Which? found Yorkshire prices higher than in the North-East.
The magazine also singled out Darlington as a place where drinkers can enjoy a wide selection of different beers, as many breweries have pubs in the town.
Which? editor Sue Leggate said the survey showed beer drinkers in particular were being hit by prices rising faster than inflation.
‘In the year to October 1991 the average price of a pint of beer went up by about 13pc, more than three times the rate of inflation.
‘We find it difficult to understand how big increases can be justified,’ she said.
Which? argues the Government should investigate the whole licensing system so key issues including opening hours, family admission and cafe-style licenses could be aired.
Civilian jobs:
Civilians could be brought in to staff the front counter at Darlington police station in order to release three officers for beat duty.
The plan should be implemented before April 1993, Supt Alan Saddler told a meeting of the town's police and community consultative group.
THE first session of Darlington's new clothing bank opened yesterday and was hailed a huge success by the organisers.
Shoppers crowded into St Mary's Hall, Stooperdale Avenue, Cockerton, to try out the innovative donate-and-buy scheme organised by Sue Sadler, Sue Finn and Carol Smith founder members of local charity Christian Personal Care (CPC).
The entrance fee to the monthly bank is two items of clean, pressed clothes in good repair.
This gives shoppers the right to purchase donated goods at very low prices.
Bargain hunter Ann Connelly of Cockerton said yesterday: ‘This is great everything is cheap, good quality and wearable.’
Sue Sadler of CPC explained that clothes for four to 16-year-olds were now needed for the bank along with good quality toys and nursery items such as stair gates, pushchairs, cots and prams etc.
The clothing bank will be held on the first Thursday of every month.
The next one will be held on April 2.
INDECISION over the future of local taxation is hampering councils from planning their long-term budgets.
Until the general election result is known no definite commitment can be made to a new form of local tax due to be introduced in 1993.
While Conservatives have proposed the Council Tax as an alternative to the poll tax, Labour want a temporary return to the rates.
And Richard Collin, director of central services for Darlington Council, said he was uncertain of the implications of a Liberal Democrat victory.
He said: ‘So far we have not committed that many resources to the Council Tax.
We have made some preparations to our administration.’
His department has also been prevented from making an early start on council tax administration because the regulations are incomplete.
The finer details of the proposals from Environment Secretary Michael Heseltine still have to be ironed out.
For example it is not known if landlords will be prevented from making unfair rent rises to cover what they claim is the cost of the Council Tax.
Mr Collin said: ‘For the most part people in Darlington will benefit.
Almost half the houses in the town will fall in the lowest value bracket so bills should go down.’
He stressed that Government estimates for the tax could well be wrong.
‘In Darlington they estimate the bill for the lowest value bracket at £301.
I think it could be more like £400 when all is said and done.’
At present houses throughout Britain are being valued so they can be placed into one of eight value brackets.
Home owners will be notified which bracket they are in on December 2.
Dissatisfied people will then be able to query or appeal against the valuation if necessary.
Labour politicians fear estate agents carrying out the valuations will push prices up to benefit themselves.
Mr Collin and the Department of Environment are both uncertain how many people will appeal or how the system will work.
‘I imagine those who appeal would carry on paying the bill until the outcome is resolved and then receive a rebate with interest if necessary,’ said Mr Collin.
If Labour win the election it wants to introduce a fair rates system with up to date, thorough property valuations linked to a tenant's ability to pay.
Because that register would take time to compile a return to the old rates system would be necessary.
Mr Collin thinks that could prove costly and time consuming.
Darlington council has a sophisticated computer system to cope with the poll tax process.
Wholesale changes will need to be made if it is to administer a new form of tax as well.
Mr Collin said: ‘The Government says the cost of administration will drop from a million to £400,000, that is one reason why their Council Tax estimates are misleading.’
But he is pleased the Tories favour a return to property based local taxation.
Darlington council will no longer have to chase individual community charge payers but it is responsible for establishing who, at each address in the town, is liable to pay the Council Tax.
DARLINGTON'S Railside Revival scheme has been hailed as a blueprint for future development programmes which will enhance the whole trackside network.
The £6m project has helped breathe new life into land which lines the town's central rail corridor.
Travellers journeying into the town no longer look out on an industrial wasteland the ramshackle legacy of Darlington's past.
All the broken down buildings have gone, existing businesses have been hidden from 125mph prying eyes and replaced with pleasant trees and shrubs.
On the first anniversary of the project's completion Ray Sunman, the council officer who acted as project co-ordinator, says the Revival scheme has sown a legacy the benefits of which will be reaped by future generations.
As part of the programme teams of workers planted more than 30,000 trees and shrubs, many of which will not reach maturity until the next century.
Mr Sunman says: ‘The true beauty of the Railside Revival won't become apparent for many years yet.
We have created a vision of a cleaner, brighter, altogether more appealing trackside which has been followed throughout the country.’
The project's success has been quite astonishing.
Work on Bank Top station has won a national award for its appearance and the whole programme has been praised by Environment Minister Tony Baldry.
Yet when the project was launched in 1985, Darlington's rail corridor was filled with derelict buildings, rubble and rubbish a view of the town enjoyed by seven million travellers every year.
TO SOME IT WAS A WASTELAND BEYOND REDEMPTION.
Councillors decided the broken down buildings, smashed fences and forgotten scrubland were giving passengers a bad impression of the town.
The borough council teamed up with Durham County Council and British Rail for a £6m facelift.
Officials at the then Manpower Services Commission pledged to provide labour through 100 community programme places.
Local businesses jumped on the bandwagon and suddenly the project was up and running.
Firms interested in cleaning up their act were offered a special deal: Railside Revival would pay half the cost of materials and community programme workers would do the work for free.
‘Businesses proved extremely keen to take part,’ adds Mr Sunman.
‘Virtually all of them jumped at the opportunity to make a meaningful contribution to the scheme.’
Now rail travellers arriving in Darlington will notice more than just a handful of changes compared to six years ago.
The old Cleveland Bridge and engineering works factory has gone, along with the Richardson's factory.
Approaching Bank Top station, past new British Rail fences, you notice brightly coloured plant boxes where the Locomotion once stood.
The old wooden parcels depot at the Parkgate exit has gone and the bridge is newly painted.
Commenting on the changes, a BR spokeswoman said: ‘Darlington was a forerunner of similar schemes throughout the country and showed what could be achieved when local authorities got together with British Rail.’
Thanks to the success of Darlington, BR is now poised to announce a much wider scheme covering much of the North-East network.
Councillors have also turned their attention to the Skerne and are busy working on a riverside revival project.
Judging by the scheme's success it looks as though Darlington's Railside Revival project could have a profound impact on the North-East as a whole well into the next century.
CIVILIANS could be brought in to staff the front counter at Darlington police station, the town's top officer has revealed.
Supt Alan Saddler told a meeting of the town's police and community consultative group that plans are under discussion to train non-officers for inquiry desk duties to release police for beat duties.
The plan, which would free three officers from front counter work, should be implemented before April 1993.
The meeting also heard the town's 131 Neighbourhood Watch groups will be circulated with information on the work of Special Constables to encourage more people to sign up.
Speeding in the town is being monitored to see if traffic slowing measures are needed.
DOUBT surrounds the future use of land from which hundreds of caravan families have been ordered to leave.
Darlington firm Keepsafe is being forced to close its 350-caravan storage pitch off Yarm Road, Stockton, after losing a three-year planning battle.
A Government planning inspector commented that site access is on to a road where motorists speed, and the reflected light from so many caravans could distract motorists using the nearby A66 flyover.
Site landlords Trafalgar House claimed ‘grandiose’ pre-conditions demanded by highway authority Cleveland County Council were blighting attempts to develop the ten-acre plot behind the Eaglescliffe public house.
It is understood that the local authority wants a bridge demolished and a roundabout built to replace it.
The bridge presently carries Yarm Road over a derelict railway line.
A spokesman for owners Trafalgar Business Parks said: ‘We are currently looking into the costs of various alternative proposals for the future of the site, but I think a lot will depend on what grants will be made available.
‘One of the problems of the site is the authorities want a very grandiose scheme with the roadworks,’ said the spokesman.
‘We are actively looking at whether a smaller-scale scheme would be viable.’
County highways chairman Dave Walsh replied: ‘What Trafalgar House might call grandiose is a scheme to improve the safety record of that area and at the same time allow the comprehensive development of the area to facilitate any industrial or retail use.’
Teesside Development Corporation, which has planning powers over the site, said it had considered doing something with the site but had been deterred from making a bid because of site access problems.
Budget insight
TWO weeks ago Peter Willey, careful tax partner with accountants Ernst & Young, astounded us with the prediction that the General Election would be held within six months.
Now he has thrown caution to the wind in his forecast of what Chancellor Lamont may tell the House of Commons this afternoon, by revealing that: ‘this Budget is likely to highlight proposals which would be implemented by the Conservatives following an Election victory.’
DARLINGTON fuel-effect fire manufacturer Kohlangaz received bad news yesterday from the figures turned in by its parent company Glynwed.
The engineering and industrial products group's pre-tax profits slumped to £25.5m in 1991 from £70.3m in the previous year.
And the three-day week started at Kohlangaz last month will remain in operation.
The parent company blames the move on a decline in its core business of new houses.
Overseas the group's Canadian division, Columbia International, was affected by the poor conditions in the construction industry; and its Italian joint venture Forti faced a declining market for thermoplastic pipe.
Glynwed also charted a decline in its steel and building products businesses.
Consumer products showed some resilience, particularly in the second half, said chairman Gareth Davies.
The board announced a final dividend of 7.5p.
DETAILS of crunch talks on a Sainsbury superstore planned for Darlington have been revealed by Transport Minister Roger Freeman.
Mr Freeman recently held discussions with management from the Caldaire bus company which occupies the Grange Road site earmarked for a possible supermarket development.
In a letter to the town's MP Michael Fallon, Mr Freeman said Caldaire would be prepared to consider a move if it was provided with:— A new site, close to the town centre, for Darlington buses.
— A maintenance depot with better buildings which are more economical to maintain.
— A deal which doesn't leave Caldaire out of pocket.
The final point could hinge on the Government being prepared to drop a financial clause, introduced in the bus privatisation programme, which limits Caldaire to 35pc of any offer above £1.3m.
Mr Freeman gave no indication when he would make a decision.
Caldaire said it would needed at least £3.7m if it was not to end up out of pocket.
To do that, a buyer would have to stump up at least £8.5m.
Mr Fallon said: ‘I welcome Caldaire's willingness to move providing the conditions are right.’
The council's deputy Labour leader Coun Bill Dixon, said the authority would work with Caldaire if the Government resolved the issue.
New homes:
Six bungalows look set to be built on land off at Dean Gardens, Shildon, after Sedgefield District Council development committee approved the planning application yesterday.
Buyers looking for suppliers
THE Darlington Business Link is a free service from Darlington Business Venture aimed at matching customers' needs with suppliers in the area.
DBL would like to hear from locally-based companies able to supply the following:
Rewinding services
Profiled metal sheets, windows and doors
Cable connectors.
Calibration and servicing of scientific instruments.
Climbing ropes.
Plastics/steel insulated panels.
Enquiries should be made to Ken Lee, at Darlington Business Ventrue, Telephone .
Dale order: Power systems manufacturer Dale Electric has won orders worth £200,000 in Nigeria.
Filey-based Dale is to supply three generating sets, worth £138,000, for the Central Bank of Nigeria.
And it is also to send out £60,000 worth of equipment to provide back-up for power supplies to textile machinery at a factory on the outskirts of the Nigerian capital Lagos.
BTR cuts: BTR, the industrial conglomerate that won a fierce takeover battle for the Hawker Siddeley engineering group, came up with pre-tax profits at the top end of City expectations yesterday.
The £917m it made in 1991 was just 3pc down on the previous year's £945m.
The figures, in what the company described as the worst economic conditions for almost half a century, enabled it to boost its dividend for shareholders.
DELIGHTED car dealers in the North-East say they are poised to accelerate out of the recession after the Chancellor sent new prices tumbling.
Scores of car buyers flocked to showrooms yesterday encouraged by a Budget package aimed at kickstarting the motor industry.
The 5pc cut in new sales tax wiped hundreds of pounds off the price of even the cheapest models.
Buyers of expensive luxury motors and sports cars may save a mint.
David Williams, a spokesman for Wearside-based Reg Vardy, said two drivers who ordered a new Ferrari Testarossa costing £125,000 from the group's head office in Stoneygate would save almost £5,000.
Ford, Britain's biggest car manufacturer, went beyond the Budget to offer further reductions on selected Fiestas and Escorts.
A Fiesta 1.1 now costs £6,230 a fall of £1,020 taking into account the Budget changes.
The special offer produced a flood of inquiries at Ford dealerships throughout the region.
Graham Dodsworth, sales controller for Skipper of Darlington, said: ‘Things should really take off at the weekend when people have a chance to look round our showrooms on their day off.’
Robert Blower, a spokesman for Sunderland-based Cowies, reported a surge of interest in new cars.
He added: ‘Staff at our Sunderland Ford franchise were frankly amazed by the response.
They had five customers within minutes of opening up yesterday morning.’
A spokesman for Benfield Motors, Tyneside's largest retailer, said: ‘The Budget has resulted in significant savings for new car buyers which should help stimulate sales.
Certainly, there has been an encouraging amount of interest at our own showrooms.’
The Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders believes the Budget changes, including planning changes to company car tax, could result in an extra 70,000 new cars being sold this year.
And the Retail Motor Industry Federation forecast an increase of 100,000 sales which would boost 1922 figures to around 1.8m.
Bigger loans
STUDENT loans are to increase by over 25pc to a maximum of £830 a year.
Maintenance grants remain frozen at a maximum of £2,845 for students in London and £2,265 for those studying elsewhere.
And the average contribution of parents continues to fall in real terms, higher education minister Alan Howarth has announced.
Euro challenge
NORTH industrialists joined Schools Minister Michael Fallon and MEP Alan Donnelly to outline the challenges of Europe to 200 sixth formers at a conference organised by the North East Centre for Education about Europe in Darlington.
NUCLEAR Electric and the Hartlepool power station management are to be congratulated on their openness in reporting in their newsletter No 123 that a back-up cooling pump had failed a routine test because a fuel inlet was found to be isolated.
No industry that I know would ever have publicly exposed such a failure and their frankness in so doing should do nothing but increase public confidence in the honesty and integrity of those concerned and also in their total commitment to the safe and efficient operation of the station.
Having said that, and writing as a pronuclear energy member of the public, I am concerned that such a thing could ever have happened.
What it seems to mean is that if this pump had been required in an emergency, it would not have been immediately available and although, after a lifetime in industry, I know that such errors and failure can and do happen, there is really no room for such occurrences in nuclear generation.
The newsletter promises a thorough inquiry which I am sure will take place.
Can we be informed as to what action will be taken to prevent a repetition?
Mr. R. H. Searle, 2, Bardney Walk, Guisborough.
Dale's poll tax up 42pc to £242
TEESDALE District Council agreed to set the poll tax at £242.23 compared to £169.66 last year a 42pc increase of £72.57.
The budget was 2pc below the authority's Government-set standard spending assessment.
Coun George Robinson claimed that if the council had received the same level of Government support grant that it had in the 1970s, the poll tax would have been about £100.
CAB cash:
Teesdale district councillor Newton Wood, who is chairman of the local Citizens' Advice Bureau management committee, has criticised fellow councillors for shaving £5,000 off £15,000 extra earmarked for the group by the finance committee.
Chaos as tax machine folds
A POLL TAX crisis rocked Gateshead Council when the machine that folds the bills broke down.
The council was faced with half a million tax demands which had to be folded by last Tuesday.
Repairs were expected to take weeks, so officers bought a new machine costing £4,000.
SENIOR consultants have challenged management to come clean over changes to health care in the NorthEast.
They have called on the Northern Regional Health Authority to issue a categorical denial that it has any plans to merge 15 health care districts into six super districts.
The move is the result of mounting concern after The Northern Echo revealed that it was feared plans to allow districts to form powerful purchasing consortiums could be the first step towards full-scale merger.
Regional health authority officers insist they have no immediate plans to look at the possibility of merging districts.
But they have stopped short of rejecting the idea altogether.
Members of the senior management within the health service have The Northern Echo that they believe the merger question will crop up once the purchasing consortiums have begun operating.
A list leaked The Northern Echo shows 11 of the northern region's 15 district managers will be moved or retired as part of a wider strategy to streamline the service.
But a regional health authority spokesman dismissed the document as pure speculation.
He said: ‘It is very early days at the moment.
We shall have to see what happens.’
He said the authority had no plans to implement a merger programme, adding: ‘The possibility hasn't even been discussed.’
As rumours of an impending shake up swept the region, Geoff Nichol, chief executive of Darlington health district, issued a statement to staff last week clarifying his position.
Mr Nichol has been seconded to the region for a special project, studying the effects of community care throughout the country.
He said: ‘That work will take about five or six weeks and, as far as I can tell, it is purely a secondment from my existing job.
During my absence my deputy will be acting for me.’
News that the region has backed plans to create purchasing consortiums has been criticized by the British Medical Association.
Darlington BMA spokesman Dr Abdul Jaleel said: ‘Large consortiums will have difficulty in assessing the local needs of hospitals and GPs.’
Dr Jaleel said he was afraid the moves could also hit services offered in different parts of the region covered by a single consortium.
He called on the authority to issue a clear statement on the matter saying: ‘As soon as that happens I would hope to speak with the RHA about these matters and the possibility of any mergers.’
Alan Milburn, Labour's Parliamentary candidate for Darlington, said he would resist the moves.
‘This could lead to our town losing control and becoming part of a much larger bureaucracy making decisions about services,’ he said.
Poll tax arrears £1.8m. higher than expected
Poll tax arrears in Darlington are likely to be £1.8m. greater than the council had allowed for, members heard.
Mr Richard Collin, director of central services, said the council had set aside £2.3m. for bad debts this year, but the actual figure was likely to be £4.1m.
‘So clearly the job is to collect the difference between those two figures, but we will not be able to do this overnight.
We are talking about three or four years.’
He said the figures for the business rate were much better as expected with a 94.1 per cent collection rate and end of year shortfall of about £850,000.
In reply to a question from Coun. Alan Robinson, Mr Collin said there had been no problems finding time for special poll tax sessions at the magistrates court.
‘Indeed the magistrates’ clerk has been particularly helpful and we have had very few hitches.’
He said there had also been no difficulties with the inadmissibility of computer evidence because the council used other sorts of documents to prove its cases.
Darlington cash reserves ‘healthy’
Darlington's reserves remain healthy, the £1.415m. to be spent in this year's budget, said the director of central services.
Mr Richard Collin was invited to comment by Coun. Mrs Jan Taylor, the chairman.
She said the spending had been criticised by some people as irresponsible.
Mr Collin said there were no national guidelines on appropriate levels of reserves, but he thought Darlington's was relatively high.
‘We will still have £3.5m. at the end of this year.
I would just say I would not like to see the reserves fall much below £1.5m.
‘The council is in a reasonably attractive position.’
He said the money being spent on repairs to the Dolphin Centre could eventually be recouped through litigation.
‘We would hope to get some of that back to replenish the reserves or spend the money on other desirable schemes.’
Coun. Ian Paterson (C) said he was worried the Dolphin Centre would eventually cost more than the £4.5m. allocated.
But Coun. Jim Skinner (L) said the entire building had been thoroughly checked by experts.
As it was only ten years old there was a limit to how much could be wrong with it.
‘Good planning helped to win the bid’
Good business planning could have helped Darlington win its bid for a body scanner, a senior hospital official said this week.
Mr Peter Stewart, unit general manager at Darlington Memorial Hospital, said health authority plans to buy a CT scanner in the next year meant a lot of financial groundwork had already been done when bids were invited.
But fund-raisers who have supported a public appeal to buy an identical scanner for the Northallerton Friarage Hospital admitted they were disappointed Northallerton health authority's bid had been turned down.
RUNNING COSTS
Mr William Waldegrave, health secretary, announced a week ago that Darlington would receive a £300,000 scanner as part of a £20m. package for hospitals throughout the country.
North Tees and South Tyneside get identical whole body scanners, which are used to diagnose a wide range of injuries and disorders including cancer.
Mr Stewart said running costs for the machine, estimated at £100,000 a year, had also been taken into account in the health authority business plan for the coming financial year.
‘Our intention was always to purchase a CT scanner in our business plan this year and we have done a great deal of work,’ he said.
‘When the Department of Health at the turn of the year invited bids for the money available nationally we could put in a very detailed bid in the tight time scale.’
TRAINING Running costs had already been identified in the business plan although funds still had to be released officially from the health authority budget.
Mr Stewart said no other hospital services would suffer as a result of cash spent on the scanner operation.
Training would mainly involve refresher courses for medical staff already conversant with this type of scanner and these would begin before the equipment was installed.
‘We don't know yet exactly when we will take delivery of the scanner but we would hope it will be some time early in the coming financial year which starts in April,’ he said.
The machine would be sited in the X-ray department.
BASIC NEED Although South Cleveland already had a scanner and North Tees and South Tyneside were promised them, Mr Stewart did not think there was too high a concentration of the machines in a small area.
‘A few years ago this sort of equipment was found only in the big teaching centres but now it is the sort of equipment that is a basic requirement of a district general hospital,’ he said.
Miss Karen Gilroy, organiser of the Northallerton CT Scanner Appeal launched in October 1990, said she was ‘disappointed’ the Friarage Hospital had not had a share of the health department package.
CONFIDENT ‘Of course I am pleased for Darlington but envious too,’ she said.
More than £820,000 has been raised in Northallerton district towards a £1.24m. target to buy and run a scanner.
‘We are sorry the bid was not successful but I am sure that, given the great community spirit here, the fund-raisers will not give up,’ said Miss Gilroy.
Mr Haydn Cook, chief executive of Northallerton health authority, was still confident the district would have its own scanner by Christmas thanks to the efforts of fund-raisers.
‘I am genuinely delighted for Darlington,’ he said.
‘However, we will be making overtures to our regional health authority to see if this really is an unmitigated no.
DELIGHTED ‘In the meantime we are saying thank goodness we showed the initiative to fund a scanner ourselves by public appeal.’
A spokeswoman for North Tees health authority, where a scanner appeal had also been launched, was delighted at the health department announcement last Friday.
However, fund-raising would continue to ensure running costs for the machine were covered.
‘We had set a target of £600,000 to cover buying the equipment and running it for the first couple of years,’ she said.
‘However, we will continue with the appeal to raise money to enable us to run the scanner.
We are still working out the detailed running costs.’
Although it was not clear when the equipment would arrive at North Tees, managers hoped it would be installed in good time for Christmas.
Falling yields:
Average property yields have fallen for the second consecutive quarter to 9.2pc, according to property agent Hillier Parker.
Industrial yields have also dropped across the country, while retail yields have been static or fallen in all regions.
Cornmill Baker:
Lyndsey Baker, 26, has joined the Cornmill shopping centre management team in Darlington.
Previously with the York-based Borodin group she will be responsible for promotions and administration, reporting to the centre manager Albie Small.
She is graduate of Newcastle University.
Lease appeal:
Brewery leases are proving extremely popular, according to agent Christie & Co It has revealed around 850 applications for new leases over the last two months and according to Paul Newman of the company's leasing division ‘unlike other business sectors there is a strong demand for them.’
The advantages of a brewery lease is the small amount of capital needed to set up.
Around £20,00 can be sufficient.
After two or three years of trading the leases then becomes assignable, often at a premium.
FORMER workers from one of Darlington's biggest factories are holding a major reunion next week.
It is 25 years since the Darlington Forge closed down but several employees have stayed in touch with each other and regularly get together to discuss old times.
Laurie Smith, who worked at the forge from 1936 until its closure, has arranged this year's reunion at The Cottage, alongside The Freemasons' Hall, in Archer Street, Darlington.
Present at the reunion, which begins at 7pm on March 24, will be Dr W Pugh, who was the first superintendent of the company when it reopened in 1936.
Organisers also hope that the oldest living former employee, Elsie Kirk, 91, will be able to meet some of her former colleagues.
Anyone requiring more information about the reunion should contact Laurie Smith on Darlington .
Budget bore
THE average Teesside businessman's concentration span when it comes to matters economic was sorely tested last week at accounts KPMG Peat Marwick's Budget seminar last week.
Hosted at Sir John Hall's luxurious abode at Wynyard Hall, all of the best that Teesside business could provide attended the meeting.
The seminar itself involved a live overhead projection of Norman Lamont's Budget speech, together with political comment from Michael Fallon, schools minister and Tory MP for Darlington and Giles Radice, Labour MP for Durham North.
It was always going to be a dull Budget, but the reaction at the seminar had to be seen to be believed.
As the last word tripped off Lamont's mouth the room half emptied as bored businessmen raced for the buffet tables and the cold Chablis.
Top MTM man
RICHARD Lines' fall from grace is almost complete.
Only one more thing remains to make it so: David Fyfe taking over Lines' former position of managing director at the troubled chemicals company MTM.
Or, slightly less galling, Fyfe's new company Hickson & Welch of Castleford taking over the company completely.
Fyfe, MTM's former managing director, has become the City's tip to take over at MTM's Hutton Rudby base.
David Fyfe was once the managing director of MTM but left after numerous disagreements with his boss Lines.
Neither man, however, is commenting on the goings on which have turned Mr Lines from being the industry's darling, he even had his 40-acre Teesport chemicals development blessed by Mrs Thatcher, into the pariah of the market.
The only certainty, however, was prophetically forecast by the 1989 book A Chemistry for Success, which charted the rise and rise of MTM.
‘It is very much a company worth watching and will continue to surprise,’ wrote author Clive Rassam.
Low profile
DOUG Blewitt must rank as a contender for the most unsung hero of North-East business.
Despite a unique record of achievement is recent years, he can never be accused of blowing his own trumpet.
His latest success winning a £1.8m contract for his DMB Contractors to re-paint and refurbish London's Tower Bridge was brought to the public's attention courtesy of the Government's Central Office of Information.
The COI also made it widely-known that the shy Blewitt had been made a Freeman of the City of London in recognition of Dunston-based DMB's skills in tackling the restoration of the city's Blackfriars Bridge.
It is somewhat refreshing to see a North-East industrialist make a success of his business in relative anonymity.
People's man
EMBATTLED British Coal chairman Neil Clarke has decided to become a man of the people.
He spent the first 12 months of his Hobart House reign in obscurity, in spite of repeated leaked reports suggesting the number of British mines was set to tumble to around a dozen.
In recent weeks, however, Clarke has gone on the public offensive to protect his industry.
Whether this is because of the impending General Election, or the impending conclusion of negotiations with electricity generators remain to be seen.
His emergence of defender of the mines will be welcomed by all in the industry.
But I am sure there will be many former BC employees at Dawdon and Murton among them who will be wondering what might have been had Clarke shown his colours sooner rather than later.
Fiscal customs
ONE Budget custom which will never fade is the habit of astute information providers with bad news on their hands to use the furore over taxes to sneak out the unpalatable truth.
The Treasury itself is not averse to such tricks.
Thus, the disclosure that the Government's attempts to broaden individual share ownership have suffered a setback came on you've guessed it March 10.
The Treasury commissioned a survey in association with ProShare, the new lobby group set up to promote wider and deeper share ownership, to judge the success of their joint urgings.
Unfortunately, it found the number of adults with shares dropped last year below 10 million from 11 million in 1990, despite the sale of the electricity generators and another huge helping of BT shares.
N-E FEARS that tumbling property rents in London could lead companies to think again about relocating from the South-East have been dismissed by property agent Grimley JR Eve.
Ian Stringer, offices partner at GJRE, said although falling rents in the capital could tempt some companies to stay, cost is not the only factor behind relocation.
Today oversupply has helped bring down London rents to bargain basement levels.
Brand new space in Docklands can be had for £10 per sq ft.
Additionally unemployment has risen, easing the labour market.
‘With these rent levels, it is not unreasonable to suggest that companies in the South-East who are considering relocation are now thinking again,’ said Mr Stringer.
‘But I don't think relocation will come to a halt.
It isn't always about cost.
Although it may hold back for reasons of cost and supply, and because the housing market is static, during this decade I believe we will see an increasing spread of relocation moves to those parts of the country which offer a better quality of life than London and the South-East.’
A better quality of business life in out-of-town business parks with rents pitched at the £12 to £18 level will also ensure a steady trickle from the capital, added Mr Stringer.
Booly shines at Spring Fair BOOLY
BOOLY, a designer jewellery company from Darlington, has launched its latest range of fashion jewellery.
The collection of earrings, brooches and necklaces have attracted widespread interest from buyers at the International Spring Fair.
The company expects to win several contracts as a result of its attending the exhibition.
AN emphasis on customer choice and portability is being offered by the North of England Building Society for a new five-year fixed rate mortgage.
Borrowers can opt for a 10.40pc (APR 12.20) rate if they take out building and contents insurance or for 10.65pc (APR 12.00) if they take out buildings insurance with the society.
They can also choose between repayment, endowment or pension plan mortgages.
The limited offer is for loans of at least £30,000 up to 90pc of the house price or valuation, whichever is lower.
The rate is fixed until April 30, 1997 and there is a £195 administration fee.
At the end of the five years the society's variable interest rate will apply.
Rock guarantee:
Northern Rock has extended the guaranteed term on its new loans discount by a further four months to August 1, 1993, the longest discount period offered by a major UK lender.
The discount of 1.7pc off the society's variable base mortgage rate (currently 10.99pc) applies to any new mortgage or remortgage where the loan is 70pc or less of the value of the property.
The present discount rate is 9.25pc (11.4 APR).
Savings bonus:
Customers of National and Provincial Building Society now receive a higher rate of interest when their savings reach £250.
N&P has introduced a new interest tier on their Instant Reserve account to benefit customers with small savings.
The new interest rate is 7.5pc gross on balances between £250 and £500.
Heath trust:
C.E. Heath has launched a new company, C.E. Heath Trustee Company, to provide independent trustee services for corporate pension schemes.
C.E. Heath Trustee Company will be able to act in conjunction with or in place of existing pension fund trustees.
It will operate independently from C.E.
Heath Employee Benefits and C.E. Heath Financial Services.
Green investment:
New this week is a light green investment from Commercial Union: the Environmental Investment Trust.
It concentrates your money on pollution monitoring and prevention.
It is not the ethical shade of green, like Merlin International, because it will not exclude stocks on those grounds.
Wherever there is muck, even if the politics behind it are too murky for committed ethical investors, CU will go.
Investment stake is £10,000.
New share shop:
Midland Stockbrokers is to open a share shop inside the Midland Bank's branch at Prospect Place, Darlington tomorrow.
This will be followed by a share opening at the bank's Redcar branch on March 12.
TYNESIDE-based Mercantile Building Society turned in a 22pc rise in after-tax profits for 1991.
Gordon Robinson, managing director of the society with headquarters in North Shields, yesterday said there were signs of a recovery in mortgage business in the North-East.
Mercantile last year returned net profits of £863,350, and saw its assets grow to £115.9m, more than double the figure five ago.
Total lending in 1991 was £16.5m.
Mr Robinson said: ‘Our greatest strength is the quality of our mortgage book.
We have been prudent and increased mortgage loss provision from £30,000 to £50,000.
‘But arrears and repossessions are not a problem for us.
This says something about the economy in this region, and the sensible way in which local people conduct their financial affairs.’
Last October, merger negotiations between the Mercantile and Darlington Building Society were called off.
Difficulties were thought to arise over reaching agreement on a headquarters for a merged society, which would have had combined assets of £350m.
Difficulties were thought to arise over reaching agreement on a headquarters for a merged society, which would have had 75,000 customers and combined assets of £350m.
EASINGTON in County Durham must rank as Labour's safest seat.
John Cummings, who stands again, had a majority of 24,639 in 1987 the party's largest in England.
Previous MPs include Ramsay McDonald, Lord Shinwell and Jack Dormand.
One of the biggest issues is likely to be the running down of the coal industry which has resulted in the recent closure of Dawdon and Murton collieries, near Seaham, with the loss of hundreds of jobs.
While the local council has had some success in attracting new industries to the urban areas of Peterlee and Seaham, many of the former mining villages have failed to cope with the loss of their pits.
HOSPICE funds have been boosted by £9,625 from the estate of Mary Siddle Leeming and other donations.
Several considerable contributions have been sent to the hospice including a donation from the North Eastern Ladies Luncheon which added £1,090 to the £500 already given.
The committee of the Celtic Plate Tournament at Blackwell Grange Golf Club raised more than £400 and donated it to the hospice in memory of their colleague Jock Taylor who died recently.
Other contributions have included £125 from Bondgate Methodist Church and donations in memory of Mr Snow, Mr Robinson, Mr Knightson, Mr Johnson and Mr Clark.
Clothes and bric-a-brac have been pouring into the hospice's charity shops in response to an appeal for more goods.
The Skinnergate shop is set to reopen next week.
Staff want to thank shopkeepers who support the hospice by keeping collection boxes on their counters.
The response of local people is vital in the fund raising effort and any shops who would be prepared to have a collection box should contact Deidre Shaw on .
Supporters have been visiting the new hospice premises at Harewood House where a very successful coffee morning was attended by over 100 people.
More than £200 was raised at the event with a cake stall, and raffle and sale of hospice merchandise.
The coffee morning is to be a regular feature and will be held at Harewood House every second Saturday in the month.
The theme for April will be Easter and all proceeds will help buy glass and chinaware.
More than 60 people responded to an invitation to a meeting at Richmond Town Hall last month to raise awareness of the work and developments of Darlington and District Hospice Movement.
Hospice organiser Mary Lovell and volunteer coordinator Dorothy Davison explained the aims and needs of the hospice and recruited more than a dozen new volunteers to be sitters and drivers in Richmond and others became Friends of the Hospice.
NHS CASH:
When Labour promise more for the NHS we should remember that more is now being spent on the NHS than ever before.
The Government is spending over half as much again more than Labour did when they were last in power.
Whatever else anyone says about the Conservatives and the NHS, that is a fact.
Faye McCabe, 39 Flora Avenue, Darlington.
Greaves investment:
One of the country's leading colour printers, D H Greaves of Scarborough, which prints The Sunday Times colour supplement plans to invest £2m in new plant at its Eastfield factory.
The company, owned by Watmoughs, says new jobs are likely to be created as a result of the investment.
Watmoughs have just secured the contract to print The Sunday Times magazine in Scarborough for a further five years.
GRE down:
Insurance giant Guardian Royal Exchange slid further into the red last year to the tune of £210m.
Some £177m of the overall losses, which compared with £157m in 1990, came from the UK where the recession hit hardest.
House and car insurance, plus insuring mortgages for lenders, were the main reasons for the losses, the company said yesterday.
Laing loss:
International building group John Laing was cheerful yesterday despite announcing a pretax loss last year of £65.3m after huge exceptional costs.
‘We have an excellent financial position with a sound balance sheet, no borrowings and net cash in hand of £23m,’ said chairman Martin Laing.
THE ups and downs of the business world take on a whole new meaning for successful selfstarter Jonny Sims.
Bouncing around on the end of an elastic rope may not be everyone's idea of fun, but for the 24-year-old from Staindrop, County Durham, it's a fascination that has turned into a living.
Last month Jonny set up his own business, Extreme Sensations, which offers people the chance to experience the thrill of bungee jumping, and yesterday he was announced as the county winner in a national competition for young entrepreneurs.
It all started when he decided there must be more to life than selling plants and motor spares, and set off to seek his fortune in Australia with £100 in his pocket.
After selling security equipment there for a while, he went to New Zealand, and there made his first bungee dive off a high bridge.
From there, he became involved with the first commercial bungee jumping company, and brought the idea back home.
At the moment he holds bungee jumping days in Manchester, Birmingham, and the Lake District, with up to 100 people a day diving headlong off a 170ft crane on the end of a 30ft elasticated rope which stretches to 150ft.
They pay around £30 for the first jump, including membership of a club, but the cost decreases as they make more and more jumps.
‘It has been called the quickest personal growth experience you can have.
You certainly appreciate life afterwards the first jump is terrifying,’ said Jonny, one of four commercial operators in the UK.
‘I would like to operate in County Durham or Newcastle if I can find a suitable site.’
Much of the work involved in setting up the business has been research into the complex safety requirements.
‘In this country the safety regulations are very stringent,’ he said.
‘Operators have been in discussion with the Health and Safety Executive for some time, and we have now come up with a code of practice accepted by the HSE and drawn up by BERSA (British Elastic Ropes Sports Association).’
Every jumper goes through rigorous checks before they take the plunge, including a weigh-in to make sure they have the correct elastic rope for their size.
Though people have been bungee jumping in Britain for 12 years, most notably from the Clifton suspension bridge in Bristol, it is only recently that commercial operators have begun to spring up.
Yesterday Jonny, who originally comes from Piercebridge near Darlington and went to school in Barnard Castle, presented his business plan to judges in the county finals of the national Livewire competition, which aims to encourage young self-employed businessmen and women.
Jonny was given first prize and a cheque for £750 for the novelty of his idea and professional presentation.
There were 75 registrations for Livewire in County Durham this year, seven of which reached yesterday's final.
Second prize went to graphic designer Beverley Dowson, 22, of Bishop Auckland.
UNEMPLOYED Derek Auld has been made redundant three times in the last three years.
Yesterday Derek met Darlington Labour candidate Alan Milburn in a well-publicised meeting to help press home Labour's attack on Conservative jobs policies.
Derek, 42, has trained and retrained but still cannot find work.
He is just one of the 5,342 jobless announced in Darlington yesterday.
He said: ‘There's no jobs in my line.
And what jobs there are are not even for Darlington there are even some advertised for Whitehaven in the job centre.
I worked it out that it was since the beginning of the recession, since 1989, that I've been redundant.’
Derek has trained and retrained to work in the construction industry, electronics, civil engineering and offshore construction but still cannot find a job.
He is currently taking night classes to become a member of the Institute of Quality Assurance.
‘I can't find anything suitable for me,’ he said.
‘There seems to be a lack of manufacturing jobs.’
Mr Milburn said: ‘If you haven't got a manufacturing base the country as a whole and the region will fail.
Darlington is fast becoming a commuter belt.
‘And these unemployment figures are another bitter blow for the town.’
Mushrooming business may help twenty more farmers diversify
John Smith's bright idea has literally mushroomed beyond all expectations.
When he invited farmers through the Darlington and Stockton Times to consider growing mushrooms as a way of diversifying he received well over 100 calls although he was only looking for ten.
But things have gone so well that by June 1993 he hopes to launch a further 20 growers.
‘If successful, this will create about 100 new part and full time employment opportunities in the region,’ said Mr Smith, managing director of Wilgro Mushrooms of Wath, near Ripon.
‘It will help improve the viability of 20 local farmers and provide a platform for even greater expansion and job creation in the years which follow.’
The market for mushrooms is reported to be approaching 190,000 tonnes, three-quarters of which are bought fresh.
IRISH WAY
Over the last 15 years the Irish, with up to 700 growers, have come to dominate the market.
Each farm is small enough to be managed by a family which means labour costs are low and great attention is paid to quality and presentation.
The output of the growers is marshalled by half a dozen highly organised and professional marketers who have taken a huge slice of the market, including the multiples.
About 12 months ago Mr Smith decided Britain should go the way of the Irish.
‘Farming in general was having a tough time, the prices of most traditional agricultural commodities were declining in real terms, farms were having to become much larger to remain economically viable and most commentators felt things were not going to get much better in the short term indeed most said they were going to get worse.’
A small advert was placed in the D and S Times and Wilgro's telephone hardly stopped ringing for two weeks.
One of those calls was from Mr Alan Singleton, who farms at Thornton Watlass.
He and his wife, Carole, had sat down with their business adviser and decided they needed to get away from traditional crops and livestock.
‘We needed to identify an enterprise which was more stable and yet would fit in with my experience as a farmer,’ said Mr Singleton.
A number of pitfalls have to be considered when looking at diversification not least lack of experience in a new venture, the capital cost and working capital requirements, the cautious attitude of banks, and the marketing side.
‘Given these cold facts I did not feel comfortable with any of the ideas we had until I read about a satellite mushroom farming venture being launched by Wilgro last spring,’ said Mr Singleton.
Several meetings were held with Mr Smith who explained how Wilgro would train him in the art of mushroom growing and then market the produce to the supermarkets where top prices are paid for the quality crops small growers can harvest.
The training is paid for through a performance related technical levy.
‘I was able to plug into a growing formula which was already successful and so avoid the ‘learning curve’ which so often represents the downfall of any new venture,’said Mr Singleton.
CHEAPER He found it cheaper than expected to get started because groundworks and services cost less than forecast.
The growing tunnels and ancillary equipment can be leased over five years.
Wilgro provides all the compost, peat and packaging deducting the cost against mushrooms subsequently produced.
Mushrooms are usually collected daily and Wilgro takes responsibility for grading and marketing.
‘We had a few minor hiccups getting the tunnels and heating equipment commissioned but we were able to fill our first shed in July.
Our first mushroom appeared in August and I ate it, it was very tasty!’
Since then performance has been much as expected.
A good three-quarters of Mr Singleton's production falls into the top two grades but he believes he can improve on that.
Financial returns are again in line with what was expected, and will possibly prove better.
Another advantage is that payment is made monthly.
Although it is still early days Mr Singleton is happy with his diversification.
‘The tunnels take up very little space and the workload integrates reasonably well with my other enterprises,’ he said, ‘And I still manage the very occasional day off for shooting!’
Apart from the expanding mushroom business Wilgro Nurseries at Thirsk will have the first half acre of a two acre glasshouse officially opened by Mr David Curry, Junior Agriculture Minister, on Friday, March 27.
The glasshouse has the very latest technology including a weather sensitive environmental computer which measures outside temperature, wind, rain, snow and humidity levels adjusting the vents, screens and heaters to give the ideal growing climate.
The chairman of Wilgro Mushrooms, Mr John C. Wilkinson (seated) with the managing director, Mr C. John Smith.
Mushroom picking at Wilgro Mushrooms at Wath, near Ripon.
People investor:
Peterlee-based TRW REPA has become the first company in County Durham to be recognised as Investors in People, a training benchmark, by the County Durham Training and Enterprise Council.
The car seat belt company was presented with its award by TEC chief executive Fred Crow yesterday.
Quality win:
Mech Tool Engineering of Darlington has achieved the quality accreditation of BS5750 for its blast and fire wall designs.
Mech Tool is currently manufacturing fire and blast walls for oil company Shell for on and off shore use.
Franchise help:
A business specialising in franchising has been established in Darlington.
Called the Franchise Company it claims to offer help and advice on all aspects of franchising to any firm looking at franchising as a means of expansion.
The service the company covers includes initial feasibility studies, development of the franchise package and recruitment of franchisees.
The Franchise Company can be contacted at 5 Woodland Terrace in Darlington.
Attwoods expands:
Waste management group Attwoods is increasing business despite less waste from the recession-stricken UK construction industry and lower demand for its quarry products, according to figures out yesterday.
The company, where Sir Denis Thatcher is deputy chairman, saw revenue climb 30pc to £168.3m from £129.3m in the six months to January 31.
ALBION Small, the recently appointed manager of Darlington's Cornmill shopping centre, has said the scheme will not harm other shops in the town.
The Burton Property Trust developed project is due to open in August and fears have been expressed that it could harm town trade if tenants with a current presence in Darlington moved in.
‘The majority of people interested in the centre so far are not from Darlington,’ he said.
Construction of the centre has now finished and the anchor tenant C&A is starting to move in.
‘Two or three other tenants are due to start fitting out shortly,’ said Mr Small.
But no new names have been signed up to take space in the 165,000 sq ft centre, despite market reports that both Etam and WH Smith were set to confirm lettings to them this week.
Other names who have looked at the centre but are still undecided about taking space in the scheme include: Holland & Barrett, Next, Phone-in, Northern Electric, Superdrug, Foster Menswear, Adams, Rage Footwear, Northern Goldsmiths and Options.
Retailers who will definitely be taking space are Dixon Sports, Strand Cards, H Samuel, C&J Clark and Dorothy Perkins.
No Miracles:
I do not wish to gloat about the sad decline this season of Darlington, but I have written several letters pointing out the probable outcome relegation.
Ray Hankin could not be expected to work miracles with the team he inherited from Frank Gray.
I think it is accepted that Gray failed to realise how poor the team was and then, to cap it all, with the worst defensive record in the League, he proceeded to spend £100,000 on rather an ordinary centre forward.
I believe generally good teams are built around a strong defence and this has been lacking all season.
How many goals have been given away with faulty back passes?
Does the manager mention this?
If he does, someone should be facing the axe at the end of this season.
See you in the Fourth Division.
BORROWING:
Economics is not Neil Kinnock's strong point as he showed in the Budget debate.
On borrowing Mr Kinnock seems not to realise that borrowing always increases during a recession.
This is because more people claim benefits and taxation yields fall.
A large borrowing requirement during a recession is perfectly natural, just like the paying back of the national debt during the mid 80s boom.
What is important is to balance the books over the financial cycle.
As for his ‘bribery’ charge, any Keynesian economist will tell you that there are two ways of stimulating demand in the economy using fiscal policy to raise Government spending or lower taxes.
To say tax cuts preclude investment is ridiculous.
As people spend more, firms produce more and hence invest more.
The only difference is that the investment is consumer-led.
Mr Kinnock will shortly be asking us to trust him with our economy.
He would be more credible if he displayed understanding of these basic issues.
Andrew Wright, chairman, Darlington Young Conservatives,.
POWER MAD:
The Tories will lose this election and they will lose it themselves without any help from the Opposition.
They will lose because they arrogantly believe power is theirs by right.
They refuse to take part in a television debate.
Instead John Major invites 200 carefully selected friends along for a cosy chat about how rosy the Tory garden is.
Not a wrong word said in anger how very twee.
Their bribes failed because they misread the British votes, thinking that we, like them, are greedy, uncaring and fickle.
The taxation argument will fail because voters know a piddly tax cut is nothing if there is no free NHS.
They can always try to buy power by bringing in all their friends in the City and big business, the Press and showbiz world but glossy ads won't work.
They can threaten too.
Business can tell us they are unable to work with Labour, the City can hijack a Labour Government by sabotaging the economy, but they'll only show themselves up for what they are a power-mad cartel with no regard for the British people.
Jeff Storey,.
ONE of Darlington's biggest engineering companies opens its doors to employees past and present on April 11.
Cummins Engines, in Yarm Road, is putting on a special display of the work done at the plant which will include demonstrations of all the vehicles fitted with Cummins Engines.
Darlington Council is providing a bus service to take visitors from the centre of Darlington to the factory site.
Money charge:
Alan Peter Elkin, 34, of Oxbridge Lane, Stockton, was committed by Darlington magistrates yesterday for crown court trial on charges of passing a counterfeit £10 note and attempting to do so on a separate occasion.
Chairman's feat
IT had been the intention to suffer in silence for the rest of the season while the mighty Quakers continued to plummet towards the familiar, comfy surroundings of Division Four.
Then the chairman resigned.
Much has been written of Dick Corden this season, most of it unkind and some of it here.
Chairmen of football clubs are only in the papers and on the radio when the team is up the creek.
He came in when the lads were at a low ebb somewhere on the ocean bed.
They became lower.
But they quickly got better.
Corden presided over Darlington FC in their most successful campaigns champions of two different divisions in successive seasons.
He did this without spending a fortune, probably because there was not a fortune to spend.
What Corden performed, albeit once, was the most difficult chairman's trick of all.
He appointed a manager, Brian Little, who knew how to make a team play.
He proved how difficult this feat is by failing to repeat it at the second time of asking.
Frank Gray flopped all too quickly when his predecessor might have succeeded in taking the same squad to safety.
Corden's third appointment has yet to be judged.
As for the former chairman himself the greatest pity of all is that he found it necessary to go without finding a successor for himself.
Darlington for the Vauxhall Conference anyone?
A TENDER of £3.7m has been accepted to carry out vital repair work at the Dolphin Centre in Darlington.
The contract has been awarded to Shepherd Construction, which is expected to start the 22-month programme of work on the ten-year-old centre on April 13.
John Buxton, director of property services for Darlington council, said savings of about £800,000 had been made on the estimate following a review by officers.
Cutbacks meant abandoning plans for extra work such as installing mortar into internal walls and changes to the machinery which supplies air to the centre.
‘They were improvements designed to make the building 100pc perfect, but which we could take out to cut the £4.5m estimate back and still maintain safety,’ said Mr Buxton.
A statement from the council described the £4.5m estimate as ‘totally unacceptable’.
But Darlington Tory councillor Peter Jones has hit out at the Labour group, which he said was alerted of problems seven years ago.
‘Had the controlling Labour group in 1985 and 1986 taken action on the reports which were provided, then the cost to the community charge payer would have been a fraction of the £3.7m,’ said Coun Jones.
‘A stitch in time saves nine.
The Labour group ignored the reports and instead the community charge payer has to foot the bill.’
A council investigation uncovered a series of defects at the Dolphin Centre including weaknesses in the internal and external walls and distortion of aluminium panels in the pitched roof.
Neither council leader John Williams nor Liberal Democrat councillor Ken Walker would comment on the issue.
STAFF at Marks and Spencer in Darlington have raised £1,750 for local charities over the last year.
The money has been matched by the shop to make a total of £3,500.
The money will help people with Alzheimer's disease and train hearing dogs for the deaf.
THE Darlington Waggon and Engineering Company was formed in 1884, in the days when the word ‘waggon’ was the proud possessor of two gees (one of the gees seems to have disappeared between 1889–1905).
DWEC was really two companies under one name the Darlington Waggon Co which from 1867–79 had been called Harker and Pickering, and Messrs Wilson Bros and Co which had been established in 1872.
Harker and Pickering was a railway foundry that specialised in wagons.
It was situated at the bottom of York Street along with Edward, Vulcan and Howard Streets, York Street ran off Cleveland Street beside the main rail line.
(In 1977 the BBC filmed a Play For Today, set in Belfast, in the largely derelict Edward Street.
The street was demolished in 1980.)
In 1888 the York Street site was able to exhibit in Glasgow a revolutionary steel underframe to replace the existing timber supports for wagons and carriages, and the world of railways was very impressed.
By 1889, DWEC boasted that more than 12,600 wagons had been made on the site, and 30 new ones were being turned out each week.
They were shipped all over the world Spain, Australia and South America being popular destinations.
Wilson's, originally a wheel and axle works, was based within a spark's jump of Darlington Waggon Co at the Alliance Works behind Nestfield Street.
When the neighbouring Skerne Ironworks closed in 1879, Wilson's decided to expand into the empty bridge girder manufacturing market.
By 1889, DWEC was able to boast that the Alliance Works had built bridges for Mexico, Egypt, France, Ireland, Spain and, of course, India.
At the same time beside the Alliance Works' numerous sidings were two-and-a-half-miles of viaduct waiting to go to Argentina.
But a decade or so later, the Darlington Wagon and Engineering Company was finding there was less and less to boast about.
A liquidator was called in on March 25 1905, and finally in the August all 600 men (at the company's height it had employed 800) were paid off and sent home.
About 300 of them found work at either Stephenson's or the North Road Works.
FROM the amount of ‘industrial archaeology’ still in daily service carrying Indians across their huge country, it seems that the Darlington Waggon and Engineering Company was one of Britain's most influential firms in the Raj in the period 1875–1905.
With agents in the four principal centres of commerce Karachi, Bombay, Madras and Calcutta the company was very well-placed to benefit from the phenomenal growth of the Indian railways under British superintendence.
By 1875, Britain's railway network was all but completed; in India there were 6,219 miles of track.
By 1900 there would be 16,416 miles in service with another 13,019 miles still in the planning stage.
Darlington Waggon and Engineering Company (DWEC) won many bridge building contracts on the Assam Bengal Railway between Chittagong, Syhlet and Dacca from 1884–92.
Numerous spans dated 1885 still serve the Bangladesh InterCity railway today.
Chittagong Railway Station and most tracks north of Bairab Bazar Junction rely heavily upon this renowned company for their structural steel, and there are 28 DWEC spans across rivers and streams in the Chittagong area.
Down at Chittagong docks, they still use DWEC rolling stock for freight and as workers' sleeping quarters the earliest plaque is 1878.
But it is Bombay where the greatest concentrations of DWEC products exist.
The route from Bombay's Victoria Terminus perhaps the most impressive station in the world, and noted for its decorative friezes which are dedicated to the railways of North-East England, including Stephenson and the embryonic Stockton and Darlington Railway crosses 100 bridge spans in the first 24 miles, of which 22 were fabricated by DWEC (1878–1905).
The company was also very active equipping railways from Lahore to Chittagong with platforms, bridges, station roof supports and rolling stock.
By far the most diverse range of wagons and small carriages (mainly fourwheelers), are to be found between Mughul Sari and Benares, on the Oudh and Rohilkund Railway, and Saidpur on the Assam Bengal Railway.
Albeit subject to much abuse and neglect since 1947 when India became independent, literally hundreds of DWEC products are regularly summoned into service throughout the whole of what is now Bangladesh.
A DARLINGTON businessman has returned from Japan full of new ideas to encourage more NorthEast children to take up music.
Terry Dorman, 42, director of Williams music shop, in Darlington, spent ten days in Tokyo as a guest of the Yamaha firm.
The object of the all-expenses paid trip was for Mr Dorman to pick up some tips from the Japanese to promote musical learning among children.
He spent much of his time touring music schools which Yamaha run for Japanese children.
Mr Dorman, who lives in Daltonon-Tees, said: ‘It was very hard work.
For the first three days we were locked in the classrooms and never saw the light of day.’
In Japan the children are encouraged to play an instrument from a very early age.
One of the music schools which Mr Dorman visited had 2,100 pupils.
In the North-East there are three music schools and although they do not boast as many pupils as their Japanese counterparts they are growing, with over 300 pupils enrolled.
Mr Dorman said: ‘The way forward is to attract the youngsters but we have to get them at an early age.’
Staff from Williams have visited local schools offering free introductory music lessons to let the children see how straightforward electric organs and pianos are.
Mr Dorman said: ‘There is a great myth that pianos and electrical organs are difficult to learn but once people try them they realise how easy they are.’
The music schools in Darlington, Thornaby and the MetroCentre put the accent on making lessons fun.
But children are not the only pupils who attend the lessons the age group of those participating ranges from four to 80.
Yamaha staff will be making a return visit to the region to discover how the Japanese style of music teaching is catching on in the North-East.
A SUPERMARKET chain says it has ‘every confidence’ of winning an appeal for a site on the outskirts of Darlington.
A spokesman for Safeway said yesterday the company was hopeful of winning approval for its Blands Corner application and was not considering alternative sites in the area.
Safeway wants to build a £15m supermarket with 700 free parking spaces, an application rejected by Darlington Borough Council last year.
The appeal is now scheduled to go ahead in May and Safeway says it has some public support.
‘We are committed to the appeal and confident we will win the appeal,’ the spokesman said.
‘We think that quadrant of Darlington and that particular site is right for a superstore.’
Sainsbury is negotiating to develop a superstore in Darlington and has indicated it would ‘reconsider the position’ if the Safeway store goes ahead.
THE leader of one of Darlington's strongest trade unions last night rejected a claim that the national minimum wage will lead to industrial disputes.
Gerry Hunter, secretary of the Amalgamated Engineering Union, said comments made by Darlington Tory candidate Michael Fallon were unfounded.
Mr Fallon yesterday said the £3.40-an-hour minimum wage proposals which are part of Labour's manifesto will anger Darlington's skilled manual workers.
He said thousands of skilled engineers will oppose any ‘erosion of pay differentials’ between themselves and non-skilled workers.
He claimed it will lead to job losses among Mr Hunter's members.
Mr Hunter said: ‘The minimum wage is designed to help people in low pay service industries.
My members are concerned about pay differentials with semi-skilled workers not hospital porters and cleaners.’
AN in-depth report on the Government's major skills training scheme that was delivered to the Department of Employment three weeks ago will remain unpublished, it was confirmed last night.
The London-based Social and Community Planning Research organisation was commissioned nine months ago to carry out a special study of Employment Training.
Present and former trainees throughout the country were asked whether they had found their courses useful, and whether they had enabled them to find jobs.
Yesterday The Northern was contacted by an ET trainee living in Darlington who has been carrying out his own survey of trainees' attitudes.
During his research, he learnt of the SCPR study.
The trainee, who wishes to remain anonymous, said: ‘I had hoped to obtain copies of the results of the survey and a sample questionnaire.
Unfortunately I have been informed that they are both confidential and are not to be published.
‘Why canvass the view of people if you are not going to reveal the outcome?’
A spokesman for the Department of Employment said: ‘This was not a one-off study, but part of a whole range of studies undertaken for the Department by the SCPR.
Other studies have looked at YT, Job Clubs, and the Job Interview Guarantee Scheme.
None of them have been published, and they have all been put up to Ministers.
They are really an attempt to assess the effectiveness of the various schemes, and to see whether any changes should be made.
Last night Darlington Labour candidate Alan Milburn said: ‘Trainees and the general public have a right to know about the success or failure of Government training schemes.
There is general concern about the impact cuts in training budgets are having on quality and the entry to employment.’
AN economic report into the effect of the recession on Darlington could scare potential investors away, it was claimed last night.
But Labour councillors rebutted the Conservative group's allegation by accusing them of not wanting to face the truth.
A document charting how the recession has hit Darlington was prepared for councillors by chief executive Clive Owen.
Conservative group leader Tony Richmond argued Darlington should be proud of its strengths, and looking at problems could drive away new investors.
‘We have had an attempt to talk down the successes purely for party political gain because of the General Election,’ he said.
Labour councillor David Lyonette said: ‘This report is the truth and is a damning indictment of how Darlington has fared under 13 years of Conservative rule.’
MONEY to improve Darlington's council housing has been concentrated on one part of the town at the expense of other areas, Liberal Democrats claimed.
John Cresswell said the Labour group had chosen to pay for repairs on homes in Cockerton when the funding should have been more widely distributed.
Conservative Heather Scott also told the full council meeting the Department of the Environment had criticised the authority for its progress on housing.
But housing committee chairman, Bill Dixon, said the criticism related to a time before Labour was in office.
When the gaffer said ‘learn economics’ there was no arguing
AN exciting career with the United Nations peacekeeping forces took Mr Tom Berrie to many Third World trouble spots.
Now retired and living in Woodside, Barnard Castle, he left Tyneside to become a UN civil servant based in Washington DC, in the USA, where he worked with the World Bank and International Monetary Fund.
His role as peacemaker came about while working as an electricity consultant and economist developing ten year energy projects to boost Third World economies and stop fighting between neighbouring countries.
India and Pakistan were hotly disputing ownership of the 1,500-mile Indus River in 1968 when he announced the UN-sponsored Indus Basin project to share water supplies for new power stations.
Potential wars were also diffused with his Mahwali Ganga River Project in Sri Lanka and La Platta River Project in South America.
‘Travelling the world, I soon realised there was no hope for mankind or peace without the United Nations.’
His blue UN passport rescued him from many frightening situations, including the occasion armed guerillas surrounded his jeep in a warring Central American country.
Mr Berrie describes more of his experiences to Darlington branch members of the United Nations Association at their annual meeting in the Arts Centre, Darlington, on Friday at 7pm.
But for an invitation from the Foreign Office to work for the World Bank in 1968, his career could have been very different.
He served as an officer in the Royal Navy during the 1939–45 War, before qualifying as an electrical engineer for the North Eastern Electricity Board in Newcastle.
After ten years, Lord Hinton of Bankside, chairman of the Central Electricity Generating Board, informed him he would be trained as an economist.
‘The gaffer said I was going to be an economist, and that was that.’
He trained at Hendon Staff College and Cambridge University, where he studied under influential economists including Mr Michael Posner, a Fellow of Pembroke College, and Mr Ralph Turvey from the London School of Economics.
He has also worked with Sir Alan Walters, the former financial adviser to Mrs Margaret Thatcher.
He was responsible for a building programme of 30 power stations across Britain in the late 1960s, including the second generation of nuclear stations and coalfired stations in the Trent Valley.
He also designed the national Super Grid.
His third book Electricity, Economics and is published this summer.
Minimum wage: benefit or disadvantage?
Darlington would be one of the towns to benefit most from Labour's minimum wage, a top union leader said this week.
Mr John Edmonds, general secretary of the GMB, was speaking at a press conference given by Mr Alan Milburn, the Labour candidate for the town.
Mr Edmonds said 8,400 people would profit from the introduction of the £3.40 per hour rate with more than 11,000 gaining in Darlington's travel-to-work area.
Later Mr Edward Leigh, Industry Minister, visiting an engineering company with the Conservative candidate Mr Michael Fallon, said the country would suffer.
Mr Edmonds quoted a study by the National Institute for Social and Economic Research which concluded that Labour's proposals were ‘surprisingly well targeted on the poorest families.’
And Tory arguments that the tax would make companies uncompetitive were not looking at the whole picture.
‘This is going to have the biggest impact on the service industry where companies will not be undercut because everyone will have to pay the same.
Some firms are acting as though this measure will only apply to their companies.’
Mr Milburn quoted a Conservative prime minister to back his party's case.
‘It was Winston Churchill who set out most clearly the case for a minimum wage.
He said that without it ‘the good employer is undercut by the bad and the bad by the worst’.
‘I want to issue a challenge to Michael Fallon: will he explain why he believes people in Darlington should earn less than £3.40 a hour when as a government minister he earned £1,000 a week.’
Mr Fallon said he thought it was fatuous to compare one income with another.
‘It's typical of Socialist envy to suggest that people ought to earn the same.
Perhaps Mr Milburn would give the people of Darlington a commitment that he would not take an MP's salary.
Otherwise his comments are sheer humbug.’
He said all the independent surveys agreed there would be some job losses it was simply a question of how many.
‘It is wrong to make businesses pay more than they can afford.
Many smaller firms in Darlington have already been in touch with me about the jobs they say are being put at risk.’
Mr Leigh, visiting Malcolm Engineering in Banks Road, said the country lived and died by the competitiveness of its industry.
And he said a Labour government would result in more intervention, more borrowing, higher taxation and higher inflation.
Mr Vernon Malcolm, managing director of the company which supplies parts for Nissan, said most of his employees were paid at least £3.40 an hour, but he needed to be able to set his own rates of pay rather than having them imposed by government.
He hoped a new contract to make the new Nissan model to replace the Micro would mean he could employee between six to ten more people by July.
Mr Fallon said 160 companies had come to Darlington or expanded in the town since 1987, creating 2,185 jobs.
‘It's absolute nonsense to suggest that Darlington has become a commuter town as Mr Milburn has said.
It's a slur on the town's industry which I am hoping he will now withdraw.’
Practical skill + academic + business = a perfect family business
The passion of two teenage sons for computer games spurred a Darlington woman on to set up her own software shop which opens today.
‘I couldn't beat them so I joined them,’ said Mrs Dorothy Spence, of Broad Meadows, who started the Game Gallery in Woodland Road with the help of Darlington Business Venture and the Enterprise Allowance Scheme.
Her eldest son, Phil, aged 18, will work full time in the shop with his brother, Edward, aged 15, helping out on Saturdays.
The family is the perfect team.
‘Phil is the practical one, Edward is the academic and I have the business head,’ said Mrs Spence.
The shop is aimed primarily at children and teenagers and includes a buy and swop scheme to help cope with youngsters' fickle fads for games.
‘These console type games costing around £36 are not cheap so I thought customers could bring back their used games within, say, a month and swop for another for a fiver,’ said Mrs Spence.
Parents who fork out one a year for expensive games would not have to see them abandoned in the cupboard and teenagers could have a dozen games a year at pocket money prices.
Other computer games stocked would be at knockdown prices because they were two or three months old rather than the ‘latest thing’ she said.
The idea of Game Gallery was born back in September when Edward, a pupil at Hummersknott School, lamented a lack of software shops in the town.
‘I was looking for a business niche and the idea really took off,’ said Mrs Spence.
‘Darlington Business Venture helped me put a package together and draw up a business plan which qualified for Enterprise Allowance.’
Edward then catalogued the stock and took charge of the paperwork while Phil touted for business, fetched and carried.
Mrs Spence is a former legal secretary who is considering an appeal against an industrial tribunal decision which went against her last week.
She had alleged she was unfairly dismissed during sick leave by Darlington solicitors Ward Hadaway; the tribunal chairman said the panel had ruled against her ‘reluctantly’ and would be giving its reasons later.
Mrs Spence and her sons, Edward (left) and Phil, ready to open their computer games business today.
Time for people in the town centre
Traffic-free shopping starts in Darlington town centre on Monday with the launch of an 18 month pedestrianisation pilot scheme.
High Row, Skinnergate, Blackwellgate, Bondgate and the eastern end of Duke Street will be closed to traffic for six days a week between 10.30am and 4pm, although buses and pedal cycles may still use Blackwellgate and Bondgate.
Entry to Abbot's Yard car park will be through the archway off Bondgate and exit via Skinnergate to Bondgate.
Disabled drivers with orange badges are to be provided with free parking spaces around the traffic-free area in Abbot's Yard car park, Horsemarket, Houndgate and Raby Terrace.
Signs detailing the changes were in place around the route this week and county and borough councillors plan a formal opening of the scheme on Monday morning when a special bollard is locked into place in Duke Street.
Footpaths have been widened in Bondgate and similar work is going on near the Northgate, Tubwell Row and Priestgate entrances to the Cornmill shopping centre.
Coun. John Williams, leader of Darlington council, said: ‘This pedestrianisation of Skinnergate and High Row is just one of a number of initiatives we are taking to improve the environment of the town centre.
‘The county and borough authorities are now looking at ways of reducing the danger and congestion caused by buses and our proposals for dealing with this problem will be published later in the year.’
Coun. Ray Flowers, chairman of the county highways sub-committee, also welcomed the pedestrianisation scheme, which is to be monitored for 18 months.
GREATER COMFORT
‘Pedestrians will be able to walk and shop in this part of the town in greater comfort and safety than for many years,’ he said.
A leaflet giving full details of the scheme has been produced by the two councils and is available in libraries, Darlington town hall and Durham County Hall.
Inquiries should be directed to the director of environment at Durham County Hall (tel.  ext. 2442) or the director of development services at Darlington town hall (tel.
Darlington  ext 382).
Private enterprise is normally a Conservative watchword, but when Labour took the initiative with ‘Vote Milburn’ posters on Darlington buses it was ‘propaganda’, according to one Tory councillor.
No sooner had the first Labour ad appeared on a Darlington Transport Company vehicle than Coun. Peter Jones, one-time chairman of the borough transport committee, warned of dire consequences.
At best, he said, it was propaganda, at worst it would drive Conservative-minded passengers on to rival services and bankrupt the DTC.
Mr Stuart Hyslop, head of DTC, was unworried if a little bemused.
‘The Conservatives wanted us to act in a commercial manner and that's what we're doing,’ he said.
‘Labour booked space on our buses before the General Election was called.
Any party which paid up could advertise, even the Raving Loonies who would probably fit in rather well in Darlington.’
Hedgerows all over the Richmond constituency seem to be sprouting a new form of vegetation even faster than in the 1989 by-election.
It's square, blue and white, generally weather resistant and belongs to the genus Hague.
Should the head be removed accidentally by a farmer's hedge cutter, or purposely by a political hooligan, the stout stalk can be recycled.
Experience in 1989 showed that it makes an excellent garden stake.
Politicians seem to work on the assumption that the early bird catches the voter.
Not content with 8am and 8.30am press conferences, Mr Peter Allen, Liberal Democrat candidate for Langbaurgh, this week announced daily press conferences at 7.30am.
However he has at least promised the bleary-eyed hacks that they can attend an informal chat over breakfast.
We seem to remember that revelations about recycling Mr Kinnock's speeches led to an American presidential candidate withdrawing in that country's last election.
But Mr Michael Fallon, the Conservative candidate for Darlington, showed no hesitation in lifting details from a talk given by Mr Norman Tebbit at Hummersknott School earlier in the week.
On proportional representation the Chingford Skinhead had quipped that they had an election in Belgium eight weeks ago and no one yet knew who had won it.
Strangely enough Mr Fallon brought up exactly the same example just 12 hours later at a debate in Polam Hall.
The Tory candidate for Skipton and Ripon, Mr David Curry, must be employing a good getaway driver to meet his punishing campaign schedule.
On Tuesday night, in the space of just 2 5 hours, he addressed four separate public meetings in the villages of Ripley, Burton Leonard, Bishop Monkton and Littlethorpe.
‘It is surprising,’ says Sedgefield's ebullient Conservative candidate, Mr Nick Jopling, ‘that I am interested in politics at all, never mind standing for election.’
The reason for this electoral angst stems from an incident in 1983 when his father was Minister for Agriculture and Nick was due to receive his degree from Newcastle University.
Explains Nick: ‘Dad said he'd be there and then got a call from Brussels to talk about herring quotas or something.
I asked the University if I could be last to get my degree, I was so sure he'd make it back in time.
‘I never believed he wouldn't make it.
I was actually second last before I realised.
I can remember having a certain amount of resentment towards politics after that.’
Nostalgia ruled at a Liberal Democrat campaign launch in Ripon on Tuesday night when the former Liberal MP for the old Ripon constituency, Mr David Austick, turned up to support candidate Coun. Richard Hall.
Mr Austick recalled that it was almost 19 years since he ‘turned the Tories out’ at a by-election and said Coun. Hall was poised to repeat that surprise victory in Skipton and Ripon on April 9.
There have been mutterings about the fact that Mr Peter Bergg, the Liberal Democrat candidate for Darlington, lives outside the constituency in Newton Aycliffe.
But according to his campaign manager Mr Brian Fisk, it's all much closer to home than it was in 1966.
In that election the candidate dropped out at the last minute and the only man who could be found to replace him was living in Zambia.
The records show that Robert Noel Waddington Oakeshott, adviser to the Zambian Government, went on to poll 3,891 votes.
The Junior Agriculture Minister, Mr David Curry, is having to break off from his campaign in the Skipton and Ripon constituency to represent Britain's farmers and fishermen at crucial talks in Brussels and Luxembourg next week.
‘No politician likes leaving an election campaign in full swing, but Britain's farmers and fishermen expect me to do the job I was appointed for and I am not prepared to take the risk of measures hostile to the UK getting through because I am not there,’ said Mr Curry, who is defending a 17,000 Conservative majority.
As he's schools minister, we've been scanning Mr Michael Fallon's press releases for spelling mistakes so far to no avail.
But in one of theirs Labour accused him off being about to ‘tow the party line’.
The party with education at the top of its agenda will have to be more on its toes than that.
ACCORDING to a recent survey only 35pc of party goers in the North find cold-sores a major turn-off while in the South only 35pc don't.
But it wasn't this fascinating piece of statistical flotsam that brought Glasgow herpes expert Dr Philip Lamey to Darlington last week.
His main concern is that although eight million people in the UK have the herpes virus, only half of them realise they are infectious.
‘People don't think twice about kissing babies, sharing towels and sharing toothbrushes,’ says the doc.
Most people become infected with the virus before they are five years old, often from an innocent kiss from a parent or relative.’
The cold-sores, a virus in the same family as chickenpox and shingles, usually appear on the lips and around the nose but they can be spread to the eyes, fingers and genitals.
Although symptoms can be treated effectively, the virus hides in the nerves of the skin in our lips.
Here it sits waiting for a dose of stress to weaken your immune system when out it pops.
The good news is that Dr Lamey says it can now be cured.
A tube of Zovirax, which you can get from your doctor or dentist stops the virus dividing and makes each attack less painful until they die out.
For more information you can ring a cold-sore helpline on Freephone .
TAX BLOW:
Liberal Democrats have proposed to put 1pc on the basic income tax rate to be used exclusively for education.
The Conservatives knee-jerk reaction to this is to condemn it as a knock-out punch for everybody.
As more than half the population do not pay income tax this is at best only a half-truth.
This 1pc increase will mean the highest earner will pay the biggest increase, for example a taxpayer earning £50,000 a year will pay an extra £500, representing just three days' pay per year for someone earning £1,000 a week.
This is surely not so much a knock-out punch, more of a gentle slap on the wrist.
A recent worldwide report on children's education has shown UK lagging far behind other countries.
Unless UK education is rapidly improved by 1993 when Europe becomes a single market enabling the better qualified to move freely in the employment market, the situation for our future citizens is grim indeed.
John D. Mortimer, 52 Woodland Road, Darlington.
TAX BONUS:
Among all the fuss about income tax, I should like to point out that one of the best things the Conservatives have done is to allow a wife's earnings to be taxed separately from her husband.
The two sets of allowances are a great benefit to many couples, particularly those on lower incomes.
Elisabeth Hutton-Squire, Holtby Hall, Leeming Bar, Northallerton.
GAS RISE:
So much for Mr John Major's boast of a classless society.
The chairman of British Gas gets a 17pc pay rise while the small gas users are being hammered for a full standing charge even if they use only one unit per quarter.
Conservative privatisation was supposed to break up the big monopolies and make them more competitive and accountable to the public empty propaganda indeed.
E. Turnbull, 38 Elsdon Road, Gosforth.
MINIMUM WAGE:
Unemployment may be too high now, but it would be much worse under a Labour government and a national minimum wage which independent surveys show would destroy jobs.
Employers would be unable to employ so many people if the Government forced them to pay an artificially high wage.
Cliff Richardson, 12 Manor Road, Darlington.
HUTCHISON Telecommunications has promised to invest £500m in the UK over the next four years, part of which will be used to increase the customer service department in Darlington.
Around 300 workers are employed at the Yarm Road site and another 40 jobs are to be created shortly on the back of a telepoint service launch by the company.
Telepoint will offer outgoing calls from a pocket handset.
They will be relayed from radio bases in public places such as railway stations and motorway service stations.
Company spokesman John Dodds said the investment would be staggered over a period of time and would not necessarily mean a glut of vacancies in Darlington.
‘We are keen to ensure that we don't promise more than we can deliver.
But we are prepared to back our business and Darlington is one of our key areas,’ he said.
The huge investment will further increase the cash spent by the Hong Kong-based group.
The UK subsidiary has been eating into the parent company's profits due to start up costs for its paging and mobile communications operations.
And last week part of this was revealed as the group turned in 1991 pre-tax profits 5pc down on 1990 to £251m.
THE talk after last year's dour Darlington derby was of amalgamation.
The talk, at least in the home camp, after Saturday's match was of how Darlington are about to embark on an exciting rebirth.
The first team will still be playing at McMullen Road next season, but they will have a high profile coach and, if all goes to plan, the following season they will enjoy some of the best facilities in the North-East.
The plans are still being kept tightly under wraps, partly through the fear that Mowden might try to scupper them.
Although there is no animosity between the players, most of whom can see the benefits of joining forces, there remains a strong rivalry between those few people in either camp who have resisted amalgamation.
Darlington hung on tenaciously after going ten points down in 20 minutes, but after Mark Butler missed two penalties they could find no way back into the game.
Mowden, with possible promotion at stake, were the more fired up.
The tireless graft of flanker John Whitehouse, the experience of lock Rob Wilson and the aggression of No 8 Colin Gibson kept them going forward.
Full back Andy Craggs scored 15 points, starting with two wellstruck penalties in the first eight minutes.
He then appeared on the left wing to take a scoring pass from Brian Cowton after good work by the pack.
It remained 10–0 until 15 minutes from time, when Gibson picked up from a scrum and launched a blind side move which put skipper Steve Towns over.
Craggs added an excellent conversion, then landed his third penalty.
Mowden finished fourth in Durham and Northumberland Division One, which will probably turn out to be one place too low for promotion.
But they will hope to put themselves more firmly on the map under their new name of Darlington Mowden Park next season a move which Darlington opposed.
The battle lines are drawn.
The fear is that if one club does manage to forge ahead, it will be at the expense of the other.
Naked error
IT was a big mistake bordering on the huge (and which movie is that from?) to suggest that there was only one North-East recipient at the annual awards of the British Association of Film and Television Arts.
Not only was there comic Vic Reeves and writer Ian La Frenais there was also producer Nicolas Kent.
He won, surprisingly but deservedly, in the factual documentary category for his eye-opening series Naked Hollywood.
This was not quite a case of the bitten getting up and rewarding the biter because Kent exposed Hollwyood, which is not quite the British movie industry.
Whatever, he did a jolly good job.
It turns out he comes from Harrogate.
MAXIMUM TAX:
I see that Durham County councillors are to impose a poll tax which is the maximum they can get away with within Government limits.
Their refusal to curtail spending plans and to increase the burden on poll tax payers is expected.
It happens every year and no department of the council will cut its costs voluntarily.
There is perhaps one area of poll tax we could make a change and that is the surcharge imposed on the people who have to pay the debts of the non-payers.
At a time of an election when MPs at least pretend to listen to voters, object strongly and question the legality of a law which can lead to people who have paid all their poll tax being taken to court for refusing to pay non-payers' debts.
Before the General Election perhaps all parties could make their views on this issue known.
Mr A. Craig,.
NOT FACIST:
I would like to respond to the somewhat muddled letter by Peter Winstanley (HAS March 20) concerning the British National Party.
He declares the BNP is the party of racial hatred and because of that, Dr Donald Clarke, the Darlington BNP candidate, is a fascist.
First of all, Dr Clarke has stated repeatedly that he does not hate anyone of other faith or race.
Dr Clarke went on to say ‘this does not, however, mean that we agree to be displaced in one city after another.
It cannot be wrong to love our country, it's way of life and our own folk.’
As for fascism, the first fascists in Italy under Mussolini were not racist.
Mussolini spoke of the national spirit as a metaphysical concept, not a racialist one.
Since then many people, ranging from Mrs Thatcher to Arthur Scargill, have been called fascist.
The term fascist is meaningless and obsolete.
Such abuse is the last resort of the political illiterate.
Kevin Scott, Election Agent for Dr Donald Clarke, PO Box 61, Darlington.
IT IS a fact that having to deal with all aspects of VAT can give rise to considerable costs for business.
This particularly applies when disputes occur with Customs and Excise.
Routine control visits by VAT inspectors frequently raise queries on businesses' VAT returns.
Often this results in the issue of a substantial VAT assessment.
These days, interest charges are automatically levied with penalties being applied to more substantial errors.
When a dispute arises Customs and Excise suggest that taxpayers should contact their local VAT office to request a review of the decision.
Indeed many VAT disputes can be settled by this method.
However, there is an increased tendency for disputes to drag on over weeks and months.
In such cases there is no automatic entitlement to costs.
Where a taxpayer appeals successfully to an independent VAT Tribunal costs are generally awarded.
There is then a strong argument for submitting a formal appeal at an early stage.
This was illustrated by a recent tribunal case (RM and DJ Jarrett).
A husband and wife partnership ran a chemist's shop.
VAT returns were submitted monthly, based on the computer records of the business.
During a control visit a VAT officer queried the VAT returns of the business.
It was suggested that too much VAT had been claimed over the previous two years.
No obvious explanation was available and Customs and Excise raised an assessment.
As a precaution, the Jarrett's accountant lodged a formal appeal.
At a subsequent meeting Customs agreed that the VAT returns were correct and the assessment was withdrawn.
This left the couple facing a bill for professional costs through no fault of their own.
Customs refused to meet the costs claimed but the chairman of the tribunal disagreed.
He ruled that the costs were justified and Customs were directed to pay in full.
This goes to demonstrate a point that I have long argued businesses should not be hit in the pocket when a dispute arises through no fault of their own.
Anyone facing a VAT assessment which they consider unreasonable should consider seeking professional advice they could see the assessment thrown out and recover the costs if the circumstances are right.
Linda Davies is a tax consultants at accountants Haines Watts, Darlington.
ENTRUST, the small firms enterprise agency, as appointed a new general manager.
He is Charles Linaker, 36, a senior manager at the Newcastle office of accountants Price Waterhouse.
He succeeds John Eversley who retires later this year after nearly ten years in the post.
Entrust was set up in 1982 with the aim of stimulating the development of the small firms sector in Tyne and Wear.
Graham Randell, 47, has been appointed deputy general managing director at Greggs of Gosforth, the Stock Exchange listed bakery company.
Building society Nationwide has appointed Barry Cummins area land and new homes manager for the North-East.
He will be responsible for setting up and running the department which will cover most of the Northern region.
George Hamlyn, 47, has been appointed general manager of Minories' Peugeot dealership at Stockton.
Minories, part of the Harrogate-based Appleyard group, has also appointed Steve Wright, 39, general manager at the company's Benton Road Peugeot dealership.
Eric Connor has been appointed to the new post of director of resources at Northern Electric's operational director's department.
Martin Jenkins has joined the company and commercial department at Newcastle law firm Dickinson Dees.
He is a specialist in pension law.
Northumbrian Water has appointed two new managers for the Teesside area.
Martin Mavin, 30, joins the company as a sewage works manager at Stressholme and Sue Mitchell, 26, has been appointed water treatment manager at Broken Scar, Darlington.
Philip Parker has been appointed general manager at Randells Hotel Conference and Leisure Centre, Skipton.
He was appointed by Touche Ross to reorganise the hotel, conference and leisure complex and implement a structured business development plan.
Duncan Young, area sales manager covering the Ponteland, Hexham and Gosforth offices of General Accident Property Services, has been put in charge of a further two more offices in Newcastle city centre.
Teesside Chamber of Commerce asked the three main political parties in the marginal seat of Darlington where they stand on the issues facing industry.
Today the three main candidates give their answers AS an international trading nation suffering from a consistently declining balance of trade, which must be paid for, exports are vital to our prosperity.
What do you see as the role of Government in promoting UK exports and how do you feel this compares with the support received by other European businesses?
THE recession has taken a heavy toll on UK investment levels, which are crucial to sustainable long-term growth.
What should Government now be doing, if anything, to stimulate investment in the UK?
Do Britain's banks do enough to fund business in the current climate?
WITH more than half our trade now being with the EC, its development and influence has never been more important.
Do you agree that the Government's priorities for the EC during its tenure in the Presidency should be the completion of the Single Market, improvements to endorsement of EC law, and reducing the burden on business?
MORE money needs to be spent on training.
Encouraging the private sector to spend more is essential.
There are a range of possible initiatives from the establishment of a levy system, to tax relief for individuals.
What can Government do to encourage the private sector to fund more training?
ECONOMIC development in the regions varies enormously, with consequent impacts on employment and prosperity.
With economic convergence a crucial factor in proceeding with European Economic and Monetary Union, how should Government address the issue of regional economic convergence and development, particularly in the peripheral regions?
ALL legislation costs money and administrative time to implement.
This is a cost borne by businesses and consumers which dampens enterprise and reduces profitability.
What more do you feel needs to be done to remove the burden of legislation on business?
CHAMBERS of Commerce, local authority economic development units, the Department of Employment and the DTI are just some of the bodies involved in local economic development.
What do you understand the specific role of chambers to be and how does it differ from other bodies involved?
RESPONSIBILITY for small firms policy currently rests with the Department of Employment.
The reorganisation of DTI away from sectors has proved to be successful.
How can further improvements be made to the range and delivery of Government services, aimed at promoting business interest, particularly small and medium-sized enterprises?
FORMER Labour and SDP MP for Thornaby and Stockton Sir Ian Wrigglesworth has been appointed chairman of the CBI's Northern Regional Council.
Mr Wrigglesworth is deputy chairman of Middlesbrough-based engineer Livingstone Group that includes Northern Machine Tools, and Darlington engineer DFN within its operations.
He will replace outgoing chairman Paul Briggs.
Sir Ian has promised that under his chairmanship the collective Northern business voice will be heard by ‘those responsible for shaping the future of the North.’
‘Over the next two years I shall be paying particular attention to the need to stress the primary importance of manufacturing industry to this region's future,’ he said.
Sir Ian also said he hopes to raise awareness of European opportunities.
‘In nine months time many of our traditional export markets become our home market.
We must continue the drive for improved competitiveness and increased productivity, otherwise we risk being left at the starting gate,’ he said.
Business club on newspapers
DARLINGTON and District Business Club will hold its April meeting tonight at the Coachman Hotel, Victoria Road, Darlington.
The meeting starts at 7.30.
The speaker for the evening is Anne Blood, managing director of North of England Newspaper, publisher of The Northern Echo.
She will be speaking on Newspapers for Today.
The evening is sponsored by The Northern Echo and a free buffer will be provided.
All members and non-members are invited to the meeting.
For further information contact club secretary, Carmel Molina-Annett on .
Raine victory:
Building group Raine Industries yesterday declared victory in its takeover bid for fellow builder Walter Lawrence.
The £28.5m offer, which was backed by the board of Walter Lawrence, closed yesterday with Derby-based Raine owning 54.4pc of its takeover target.
The successful bid makes Raine the UK's 10th biggest house builder producing about 2,000 homes a year.
ACCORDING to European Commission statutes, Britain's workforce is among the least trained in Europe.
Ignoring this, the present Government has cut back on the already poorly resourced Youth Training and Employment Training programme.
While ET is a rubbishy, cheap labour scheme, youth training for 16–18 year-olds does have a minimum number of guaranteed training weeks.
Additionally, if a young trainee achieves a vocational qualification additional funding can be received for the benefit of future trainees.
Recent reports show that funding for training within County Durham has been reduced by as much as 20pc.
There are also no guarantees that the reduced level of funds provided by Government will actually be spent on training.
It could be spent by the Training and Enterprise Councils (TECs) for the benefit of the people who run those organisations or simply end up as profit for the TECs.
Employment training in Britain is a scandal and is often run by Government-appointed has-beens from industry accountable to no-one.
Such training is massively underfunded and the limited funds that are available are quite often not used for training.
B. Gibson, Secretary, Spennymoor and Newton Aycliffe TUC, 7 Magdalene Place, Broom, Ferryhill.
A FAIR TAX:
J. Stasiak (HAS March 21) needs reminding that the community charge was introduced after a lawful groundswell of protest about the former rates system with which many Labour councils played fast and loose.
It may be that the poll tax was used as a pretext for anarchists, militants and other left-wing Labour Party fellow travellers to encourage riots and civil disorder, but many joined in for the kicks and cared little about the issue.
And they were egged on by some Labour MPs and councillors who refused to comply with the law themselves.
The fairness of the poll tax was that every adult had to contribute something to the upkeep of the neighbourhood instead of enjoying (or destroying) everything for free.
The fairest local levy is one based on income, but there's no hope for this Lib-Dem idea.
Labour have just unveiled their proposals.
No capping, but strict control of local government spending.
Whatever do they mean?
What dubious manipulation of the system would they use for their own political ends?
Unfortunately, most payers are too responsible to take to the streets.
They will meekly pay up including making up amounts the Labour fringe refuses to pay.
R. K. Bradley,.
TAKEAWAY bosses started a 295-name petition to try to block plans for a rival fast food centre in the same area, a Darlington Council planning meeting was told yesterday.
The bid to set up a Chinese takeaway on Whinfield Road was turned down because of parking problems and likely disturbance.
DARLINGTON specialist engineering group Darchem is to sell three of its non-core businesses, including car radiator maker Fin Machine of Sedgefield.
The identity of the other two businesses has not yet been revealed.
Sale terms are still being thrashed out with the buyers but heads of agreement have already been signed for all three.
The news was revealed by Darchem's parent company William Baird, which yesterday unveiled the Darlington group's financial contribution for 1991.
Operating pre-tax profits were reduced.
Down from £12.8m in 1990 to £7.9m last year, while turnover fell from £120m to £113m.
The Darlington group also suffered from an extraordinary charge associated with the imminent sales of £2.5m.
Donald Parr, chairman of William Baird, said the figures reflect the fact that Darchem is a mix of businesses performing both very well and very badly.
‘The business in Stillington has done well for instance but we need to rationalise our presence in others,’ he said.
He promised that any job losses would be kept to a minimum.
‘Encouraging developments have taken place in Europe, particularly France, and also in the Middle East and Australia.’
Darchem's reduced figures also contributed to the ending of William Baird's 11-year run of increased profits.
The dividend for the group is the same 5.35p as last year and the shares ended the day 4p down at 211p.
RAIL ISSUE:
It was good to read a feature on railways in your Election Diary (Echo March 24).
The topic is much neglected in the North's election campaign yet it is vital to our region.
The North, more than anywhere else in England, depends on railways.
Fewer people have a car and half of Britain's rail freight is unloaded here.
While British Rail sometimes deserves criticism, there is another side to this issue.
Public money poured into a road system that is forever clogged means more pollution, more injuries, more deaths.
Meanwhile, successive governments have cut BR's funds.
Your article gives the three main parties' responses.
But it seems fair to add that the Green Party pledges to allow only the most needed road schemes and switch money to public transport.
In this respect, some states in Europe lead the way.
Germany is paying for its railways, not privatising them.
In 1990 Britain's government gave just £0.5bn to railways; Germany's gave £4.5bn.
BR's passenger coaches and brake vans have almost halved since 1970.
No wonder local trains in the NorthEast are blighted.
Paul Gliddon,.
SCHOOLS CHOICE:
Both parties claim to place education at the top of their agenda.
But which party genuinely looks to the future and offers the best for our children?
On the one hand, the Conservatives offer more choice, emphasis on traditional three Rs teaching methods in primary schools and giving power to the parents.
Labour, on the other hand, wants to abolish A-levels and return schools which would prefer to govern themselves to the control of local bureaucrats.
Conservative policies are far more forward-looking and visionary.
Anthony James Davidson,.
INDUSTRY Minister Peter Lilley said yesterday he is lobbying hard to bring part of a £500m contract to Darlington.
He told workers at Cleveland Structural Engineering yesterday ‘political pressure’ was being put on the Hong Kong government.
The Yarm Road-based metal fabricator could cash in through its parent company, Trafalgar House, part of a consortium bidding for work on the £8bn new Hong Kong airport project.
CSE would build the Tsing Ma bridge in the Colony, a mile-long link between Lantau Island and the mainland.
‘I met the Hong Kong Finance Minister in February to put Cleveland's case.
I also reassured him that European Community funding arrangements are in place,’ he said.
He has also emphasised CSE's industry reputation for delivering work on time.
But the company which has built most of the world's most impressive superstructures could be in danger of losing out to Korean competition.
Hyundai has undercut Cleveland's bid by £150m.
‘Even though other bidders have reportedly put in lower bids I have pointed out to Hong Kong ministers that in the past some of those have not always been able to complete the job,’ said Mr Lilley.
He told Alf Minns, 64, a chargehand at CSE and the company's longest-serving employee with 50 years service, he was hopeful that the contract would come to Darlington.
Earlier Hartlepool Labour candidate Peter Mandelson urged Mr Lilley to admit it was his party's policies which had created mass unemployment in the town.
‘The government's high interest rate policy, strongly promoted by Mr Lilley, crippled businesses in Hartlepool and caused mortgage misery for thousands of townspeople.
But Mr Lilley dismissed Mr Mandelson's comments as he toured the head office of local house builders Yuills.
‘In this constituency unemployment is 27 per cent below what it was in 1987.
We believe we have the policies in place to ensure we maintain that progress in the future.
A BID to open a mobile snack bar in a Darlington lorry park will be considered by borough councillors on Monday.
A businessman has put forward proposals for the Chesnut Street park which is used by up to 60 lorries each week.
In 1989 councillors unsuccessfully invited tenders for a refreshment facility in an attempt to encourage more drivers to use the site.
But policy passed since states permission will not be granted to any business or organisation to sell goods or services in any of the council's car parks.
A report to members of the borough council's transport committee claims any trader selling refreshments at Chesnut Street would need to attract other clientele and extend opening hours.
Councillors are being asked to either refuse the snack bar application or agree in principle and refer the fee and conditions to the Works and Health Committee.
This is not scaremongering.
We have seen the same thing happen when the bus industry was deregulated and this is based on hard facts.’
RAIL fares would rise by 40pc and thousands of jobs would be in jeopardy under privatisation, a top union leader claimed yesterday.
Jimmy Knapp accused the Government of ‘dodging’ a crucial debate on the issue by failing to produce its proposals in a White Paper before the General Election.
Mr Knapp, general secretary of the Rail, Maritime and Transport Union, visited the marginal seat of York yesterday following an earlier visit to Darlington.
The Better Rail Campaign believes the North-East, with its historic railway constituencies, is the key in preventing the break-up of the network.
Mr Knapp warned passengers and rail workers alike their fate was in their own hands if they voted for candidates supporting privatisation.
He said the standard return fare between York and London would rise from £84 to £117.60 as private operators sought a 20pc profit on their investment.
The standard return fare between Darlington and York would rise from £18.80 to £26.32.
Jobs at BR's Eastern Region headquarters in York would be cut by more than a quarter as work was contracted out and staffing levels cut back together with train services.
He said: ‘This is not scaremongering.
We have seen the same thing happen when the bus industry was deregulated and this is based on hard facts.
‘Experience in the bus industry has shown that white collar jobs have been cut by between 25–30pc and this would be repeated under privatisation of British Rail.’
Mr Knapp said trainmakers Brel, anxiously waiting for an order for 188 new Networker trains, could not survive BR's privatisation when investment in new stock would be cut back to a minimum.
Hugh Bayley, York's Labour candidate hoping to overturn Conservative Conal Gregory's slim 147 majority, said Labour would order the trains needed by BR and invest in a punctual, clean, public service railway.
‘The idiotic thing about the delay of Brel's order is that BR is paying the same money to keep clapped out 30 year-old trains running that it would cost to lease the new rolling stock.’
But Darlington's Conservative candidate Michael Fallon said nationalisation of the industry had failed.
‘We have seen extortionate increases in fares while BR has been in the public sector,’ he said.
The Conservatives believed BR managers should work to win new passengers by cutting costs through encouraging competition.
Conal Gregory, York's Tory candidate who supports privatisation, described the claims as a ‘smokescreen.’
‘They want to cover up falling union membership and the fact that under the last Labour Government investment rose by just 13pc whereas under the Conservatives it has risen by 55pc in real terms.
‘Anyone who uses the East-Coast mainline will recognise it is the biggest investment since the steam age.’
‘DETERIORATING’ rail services may come under the scrutiny of concerned councils in the NorthEast.
Local authorities across the region are being asked if they want to be represented on a steering committee, which would also lobby for improvements.
Councils have been discussing the proposal since a meeting last year with transport undersecretary Patrick McLoughlin.
He said he would support such a committee but did not feel it was appropriate that the department was represented on it.
Darlington Borough Council's transport manager Alan Docherty said councils were generally concerned about the decline in provincial rail services, particularly the reduction in trains.
Borough councillors on the transport committee will consider the proposal on Monday but Mr Docherty said whatever their decision he expected they would take a back seat to Stockton Borough Council which coordinated last year's meetings.
In a report to the committee, development services director Stephen Tapper recommends the council join the new group.
‘Rail services in the North-East have been deteriorating for a number of years with reduced frequencies, later first trains and earlier last trains,’ he said.
‘Train services between Darlington and Hartlepool have been drastically reduced and are expected to be withdrawn completely later this year.
The steering group would also lobby for rail improvements.
Is there any good reason for the tax year starting on April 5, and sometimes confusing new provisions in the spring Budget?
Historically it could be called the Taxman's Revenge.
In 1752 England at last adopted the calendar laid down by Pope Gregory in 1582 to replace the Julian calendar which, after 16 centuries, was ten days out of true with the natural seasons.
By 1752 the difference was 11 days.
Even so, Parliament had to vote down dissent from those who disliked the Gregorian calendar's ‘Papist’ origin, or anything ‘new-fangled’.
The 11 days were dropped in September, when Wednesday the 2nd was followed by Thursday the 14th.
Inevitably the change caused widespread dismay, and there were riotous demands to ‘Give us back our 11 days’ from people who thought they were losing wages or even having their lives shortened.
Tax and bill collectors faced more practical confusion, not only with a ‘re-timed’ calendar but because it had also been decided to start the legal year on January 1 instead of March 25, which had been New Year's Day since the twelfth century.
With the dropping of 11 days, the old March 25 became April 5, and tax collectors went on working from the old day with its new date.
Many villages, too, kept festivals and holidays on what were reckoned to be their ‘proper’ days, but that habit gradually died out, only the tax year surviving from a bygone calendar.
I've followed boxing, but I never heard the term ‘double whammy’ until it cropped up on an election poster.
Does it mean a left-and-a-right?
The pair of boxing gloves supposedly illustrating a rival party's ‘double whammy,’ or twin blows, misused an Americanism.
A ‘double whammy’ does not have a boxing origin.
It comes from Al Capp's cartoon strip Li'l Abner.
One of the hillbillies, Evil-Eye Fleagle, could ‘shoot a whammy,’ put a curse or jinx on somebody, by pointing a finger with one eye open, or a ‘double whammy’with two fingers and both eyes.
In this country, the Beano adopted the term in the late 1950s for Minnie the Minx's devastating punches, which destroyed armies of boys.
Clearing the house after a relative died, I came across what purports to be a passport to Hay-on-Wye.
It seems to be quite recent.
Is this connected with some sort of local custom?
Hay, a small country town on the Welsh border, whimsically declared its independence on April 1, 1977, at the instigation of its ‘king,’ the bookseller Richard Booth, of Hay Castle, out of exasperation with government rules and regulations.
Thanks to Mr Booth, Hay is known the world over for its second-hand books.
He opened a shop there in 1961 and gradually took over other premises, including the castle, until today he has an annual turnover of more than a million second-hand books.
Believing that ‘no book is worthless, somebody in the world wants it,’ he buys them in bulk, pricing them modestly, and making Hay a mecca for both casual browsers and collectors of rarities.
Reading a pre-war book, I came across a reference to a ‘clerihew,’ which seems to be a kind of poem.
Please can you tell me anything about it?
Clerihews were invented by Edmund Clerihew Bentley (1875–1956).
They were farcically satirical potted biographies in sets of two rhyming couplets.
As his first book of clerihews explained in 1905, The Art of Biography Is different from Geography.
Geography is about maps, But Biography is about Chaps.
A couple of examples are: Sir Humphrey Davy Detested gravy.
He lived in the odium Of having discovered Sodium.
And: George the Third Ought never to have occurred.
One can only wonder At so grotesque a blunder.
I've recently moved into a village which has a rector.
For years I've been used to addressing the parson as ‘vicar’.
What exactly is the difference?
The difference, now partly traditional, goes back to the days of tithes, the payment to the Church of one-tenth of the produce of the parish.
A rector (Latin for ruler) had full possession of all parish rights and privileges including the ‘great tithes’ from major crops (lesser crops yielded the ‘small tithes’).
A vicar was guaranteed the vicarage but received only a certain portion of the ecclesiastical income.
A vicar is literally a deputy (Latin vicarious) doing the duty of a parish for another.
Do you have any queries?
Write to Burning Questions, Echoes, The Northern Echo, Priestgate, Darlington, County Durham.
DL1 1NF.
Lilley white
TRADE Minister Peter Lilley's visit to Darlington-based Cleveland Structural Engineering brought a rash of questions from the shopfloor about a possible order bonanza from Hong Kong's new airport.
He was putting political pressure on the Colony's government, said Mr Lilley, to bring part of the order to Darlington and also ‘pointing out some of the defects of the underbidder.’
And in case some of the workers did not appreciate the Minister's subtle reference to underbidder Hyundai, Michael Fallon, Conservative candidate for Darlington, explained.
‘Dodgy outfit the Koreans.
Very shoddy stuff they produce, the Koreans.
Can't be trusted,’ he said in a manner reminiscent of Dad's Army's Corporal Jones telling Captain Mainwaring ‘they don't like it up them.’
Profit to loss
BOB Young may be one of the most colourful figures in the North-East, but never one of the most popular.
That aside, I think only a few would spare sympathy for him last week.
To be blunt, he was stitched up by outsiders ousted as chairman of the company he had created from nothing into one of the region's biggest businesses.
Of course, those who squeezed him out were at pains to say Young was staying on as Young Group chief executive.
But with a telling codicil detailing in full what his compensation entitlement would be if he should happen to resign within six months.
Rubbing salt in his wounds perhaps are the amendments to the 1990 accounts.
Religiously, it had been reported the Young Group made £1.1m profit in 1990.
Suddenly, with little explanation, that had been transformed into an £89,000 loss.
Surley the changes were not designed to shift debit figures into the past in Mr Young's time as stewardship, so as to avoid burdening the new management team in the future?
In the fast lane
IT IS not only City fatcats who could be worried by the prospect of a Labour Government.
In a move reminiscent of the news that London brokers are being paid their April salaries in advance of the election, car dealer Reg Vardy has reported the sale of £1.1m of luxury cars in the North in the past month.
Seven new Jaguars, four new and used Ferraris, two Rolls Royces and two Bentleys and an Aston Martin have all left the forecourt.
Spokesman David Williams is, however, anxious to play down the Red Menace theory.
‘It's probably dependent on a whole host of things,’ he says, quite unconvincingly for a change.
CABINET minister Peter Lilley has the easiest job in the country, he was told by a wag in the audience at BBC 1's Question Time.
As Trade and Industry Secretary he had little trade and little industry to look after, continued the rebuker.
The joker exaggerated Lilley's plight, but gave an indication of a dilemma he was about to face on the hustings.
In the thick of a stubborn recession, his Government portfolio is a tricky one to carry around on the General Election campaign.
The day before his TV appearance around Peter Sissons' round table, Lilley was in the North-East for what turned out to be a dress rehearsal of his election strategy.
His speech to CBI members in the region highlighted his difficulties.
The audience was made of around 100 leading businessmen, at the sharp end of the recession.
He chose as the topic for his 30 minute address ‘The Revival of British Manufacturing Industry’.
From the title, some might have expected Lilley to give an indication of his hopes for revival in the near future.
But instead he spoke almost solely about the revival in the Eighties.
Reference to the Nineties was confined to the final paragraph of his 11-page script.
It read: ‘I am convinced that British manufacturing industry can prosper again in the Nineties and restore Britain's place among the great industrial nations of the world.’
In recession, there is little but hope for the future that a party in Government can offer industry.
Innovative policies during the campaign raise doubts over existing policies, and raise questions over why reforms weren't introduced earlier.
Like his speech to the Northern CBI last month, Lilley's election strategy is a carefully concocted mixture of glowing references to past successes, optimism for the future, and as little mention as possible of present difficulties.
It was a concoction much in evidence last week, when Mr Lilley made his only appearance in the North-East during the election campaign.
On a tour of Cleveland Structural Engineering's Darlington fabrication shed he attempted to placate the workforce, concerned about losing out on a £500m job on Hong Kong's new airport.
What, some of those in the factory asked Mr Lilley, was the government doing to make sure CSE's parent company Trafalgar House will win the contract?
Political pressure has been applied to the Colony's government, he said.
And European funding is in place.
‘And I've pointed out the inadequacies of the underbidders,’ said Mr Lilley blandly, in a reference to the Korean underbidder, Hyundai.
Even his attacks on the Labour Party did not have the ring of conviction about them.
‘Let's forget the slogans and face the facts,’ he said.
‘The NorthEast always did worse than the rest of the UK when it suffered from socialism and its legacy.
‘The North-East has done better than the rest of the UK under Conservative policies.’
He did not reiterate Mr Major's claim that Nissan came to the region because of his party's policies, but preferred to point out it would not have done if there had been a Labour Government in situ.
As to his party's plans for investment, Mr Lilley preferred to say what would not happen under Labour.
‘The North-East would suffer most from policies which would repel inward investment.
‘Yet the Labour Party has repeatedly refused to repudiate the TUC motion rejecting inward investment as alien.
‘If a Labour government were elected the tap of investment would be turned off and jobs would dry up.’
It is a theme well received by leading businessmen in the NorthEast, if an open letter from eight company heads, including Sir Tom Cowie chairman of Sunderland-based motor dealer Cowies, and Jeremy Ropner, managing director of Darlington-based mini- conglomerate Ropner, is taken as a typical viewpoint.
They referred to prophets of gloom, seemingly incapable of recognising how much the region has progressed in the last 13 years.
They strenuously advised business people and others to support the Conservative party, which since 1979 had promoted the new British spirit of enterprise and attracted £2bn worth of overseas investment to the region.
It was a message of ‘steady as you go’, Lilley was no doubt grateful to receive.
It offered a rare relief from what he has otherwise found to be an awkward campaign.
He has conducted a campaign, full knowing his Cabinet post was in jeopardy whether or not the Conservatives win on Thursday.
For as if the attacks on him from Labour and Liberal Democrats were not enough.
He has among his own ranks the formidable figure of Michael Hesletine, understood to be lobbing for the head of a super ministry of Environment and Industry, in a slimmed down Cabinet.
Perhaps the head you win, tails you lose, options facing Mr Lilley, explains to apparent lukewarm performance on the hustings.
DARLINGTON traders are divided over the effects of a week-old scheme banishing traffic from part of the town.
Some stores have reported a drop in trade since vehicles were barred from Skinnergate and High Row last Monday, councillors have been told.
But in others turnover has soared and shop managers are delighted by the new rules.
Under the long-awaited scheme no traffic can use Skinnergate and High Row between 10.30am and 4pm any day except Sundays.
Conservative Peter Jones told yesterday's meeting of the borough transport committee he had been ‘inundated’ by complaints from traders over lack of access.
‘Some of them say they have lost £1,000 in revenue since the scheme was implemented.’
Coun Jones asked how the scheme would be monitored during its 18-month pilot, and when the evaluation would start.
He also said disabled shoppers had complained to him over access problems.
Ross Chisholm, head of local planning and transport, said officers had been studying the effect of the traffic restrictions since they were introduced.
‘I wouldn't put forward any conclusions in the first week of the scheme, it has to settle down.’
He added traders would be questioned on the effects of pedestrianisation on business over coming months.
Labour committee chairman Jim Skinner said: ‘By and large pedestrianisation has been accepted as a benefit to the town and shoppers.
‘One trader has already indicated he has had an increase in takings over the last week.
‘With any new scheme there's bound to be teething problems, but if you look at any other town that has introduced this kind of thing they would not want to go back to what they had previously,’ he said.
A DARLINGTON bank manager yesterday accused the town's Labour candidate of distortion and spreading misinformation.
David France, business manager of the Darlington branch of Barclays Bank and a member of the Middleton St George Conservative Association, says in an open letter to Alan Milburn that business has prospered and jobs have been created.
Mr France describes an ‘incredible beneficial transformation’ taking place in the North-East and particularly in Darlington.
Mr Milburn last night rejected the bank manager's claims.
‘Mr France should look at the remarks made by the Barclays Bank chairman John Quinton who said even big business is getting into difficulty.’
The Labour candidate added that 300 local business have been forced to the wall since the last Conservative election victory in 1987.
Mr France, who is also chairman of the Darlington Business Venture, said Mr Milburn's suggestion that home repossessions have doubled is a distortion.
‘House repossessions are at no higher rate than they have been for many years,’ he says.
Labour supporters have pointed to Darlington council's latest economic report written by the chief executive and published on March 17.
In the report it says that home repossessions have gone up in the last 12 months.
‘At Darlington county court in 1991, 565 homes were repossessed for non-payment of mortgages,’ the report says.
The report concludes with references to increase in long term unemployment and slump in business optimism.
Mr France ends his letter by saying Mr Milburn should cut out the denigration and let the people of Darlington progress in prosperity.
Mr France joined the Conservative Association on February 19 as ‘an act of sheer desperation, because I feared the country would return to how it was in the 1970s’.
FROM tiny beginnings in Tubwell Row over 200 years ago a firm of international repute has grown.
In 1790 Quaker William Kitching opened an ironmonger's on the corner with Prebend Row.
Six years he opening a small foundry at the back.
Having established the business, William died in 1819, leaving his sons Alfred and William Junior in charge.
William became heavily involved in the new railways even subscribing £400 to the campaign for Parliamentary permission.
When the railway went ahead, the foundry flourished.
The first contract was for 15 guineas-worth of nails to fasten the iron chairs to the sleepers.
Orders then snowballed and when the world's first public railway opened in 1825, William Jnr was one of six Stockton and Darlington Railway directors taking part in the trial run from Shildon to Darlington.
By 1831 the Kitchings had outgrown Tubwell Row and moved a mile north to Hopetown.
Three years later a locomotive crashed, and they were called in to rebuild it.
They also renamed it The Enterprise, and it was the first of 27 engines built by the foundry in 25 years.
In 1841, when the Great North of England Railway opened up for coal traffic, it was a Kitching engine that pulled the first train.
The foundry's most famous loco was the Derwent of 1845, which worked on the S&DR until the 1860s and soldiered on at a colliery until 1891.
It now stands in North Road museum having last moved under its own steam in 1925.
The Derwent was probably built by Alfred alone, who bought out his brother, took over William Lister's foundry next door, and attacked the railway market.
This tactic was an error for in the 1850s the S&DR made building and repairs an in-house operation so decimating Alfred's business.
The Kitching works were sold off to the S&DR and in 1860 Alfred handed over the Lister works to his cousin, Charles Ianson.
The company took the name of the new boss, who moved it into the structural market, building bridges, stations, hotels and even piers at Redcar, Bournemouth and Plymouth.
The 1870s and 1880s were troubled times for Whessoe, as the company was now known.
A deep recession struck and death carried off Alfred Kitching, Charles Ianson and his son, James.
Whessoe celebrated its centenary under the guidance of engineer Thomas Coates, who was very keen on the gas industry.
Quickly he generated an international order book, building refineries and tanks all over the world.
As the oil and chemical industries became important to Whessoe, so the company expanded, eating up more land in the Hopetown area.
It prospered through much of this century, also entering the nuclear industry.
In more recent years, Whessoe has laid off a number of men, and moved into more specialist fields, but it is still one of only a few companies listed on the Stock Exchange to have its headquarters in the North-East.
But why Whessoe?
The name is an ancient word referring to a Saxon village that once stood to the north of Darlington between Beaumont Hill and Walworth.
Maps show that about 17 miles north of today's factory there is a Whessoe Cottage and Grange, and the remains of a manor house.
It seems likely that most of the Whessoe village cottages were where Burtree Lane meets Whessoe Road.
Apparently fields in this area still bear the scars of this settlement.
When the Kitchings moved out of Tubwell Row they bought up land on a track called Whessoe Lane, which ran from Northgate to the village farmhouse.
During the last century or so the Lane's territory has been stolen by Station Road and Hopetown Lane, although in manner of compensation it has been up-graded to a road.
In the late 1830s Lister set up his foundry about 400 yards north of the Kitchings, and his operation became known as Whessoe Foundry.
The Kitchings' workplace which is believed to have been on the grassed wasteland in front of North Road museum became known as Hopetown Foundry.
Alfred's manoeuvring of the 1860s left his company with a base known as Whessoe.
THE TUBWELL Row corner where Whessoe had its beginnings is probably where the famous Crown Inn stood.
Here King James IV slept in ‘a little wainscotted room’ in April 1617.
Next morning he popped his royal head out the window and inquired of a passing native where he was (it had been a heavy night before).
‘Darnton,’ came the reply and the king snorted back: ‘More like Darnton i’th' dirt’, before harrumphing back to bed.
In their 41 years there, the Kitchings made more impact, as for decades the buildings were known as Kitching's Corner.
For 75 years or so to 1918, saddler William Watson occupied the foundry before moving to Skinnergate.
In July 1921 builders R Blackett and Son approached the corporation for permission to demolish the buildings on the site of what was now inexplicably called Archer's Corner.
The corporation agreed, and even paid £200 so that the new shops would be set back from the previous building line.
BUILDING contractor John Scott is being sued by a plumbing firm's boss for the crash of her company.
He has made a counter claim.
Mr Scott, who runs Elegant Homes from an office in Whessoe Road, Darlington, is being sued for £68,000 by Stockton-based CPH Mechanical Services, which crashed with an estimated deficiency of £162,000.
Director Sue Humphreys said the figure was inflated because assets and debts owed to the firm had been calculated down.
A writ has been issued against Mr Scott, claiming he failed to pay £68,000 for work on a nursing home at Peterlee.
Mrs Humphreys said: ‘Had we received the £68,000 the company would still be in business.’
Mr Scott said: ‘We have put in a counter claim.
We had to get other people to finish off the work.’
Mr Scott was a director of Amalgafix Ltd, run from the same premises as Elegant Homes.
The company was wound up in the High Court in February 1989 with tax debts of £35,520.
A CB radio fan has revived her campaign to get toilet and washing facilities for lorry drivers in a Darlington car park.
Grace Carter, who spends hours each day talking to truck drivers over the airwaves, says the Chesnut Street car park should have proper facilities.
In 1989 she raised a 250-name petition to get toilets built in the car park where drivers pay £2.50 to park for the night.
Darlington Council refused to go along with the plan but Miss Carter has revived the campaign this week as a planning application emerged wanting to put a food kiosk in the car park.
‘It grieves me think that these drivers, sometimes as many as 60 a week, have to pay to spend the night in this car park but can't even go to the loo,’ she said.
‘Lets get our priorities right.
If they want to put a food kiosk in the car park there should be washing and toilet facilities too.’
THE BOSS of Britain's biggest domestic cleaning franchise business is set to quit Darlington because she says the town has become ‘a dump.’
Sue Rorstad, who built up her Poppies firm into one of the region's most successful companies, says the town has been taken over by drunks and thieves.
During the past few years she has been forced to endure:— A break-in at her home and the loss of £5,500;— A series of raids on her office which eventually prompted the company to move elsewhere in the town;— Drunks breaking into the company headquarters to sleep off their drinking binges;— Car theft and vehicle damage.
The final straw came when two prospective clients became the latest victims of crime.
A woman staying at a local hotel returned to find her room ransacked and another motorist had her car broken into.
Last night a furious Mrs Rorstad vowed to leave the town, saying: ‘I'm going to quit this place as soon as my house is sold.
We all hate living here and my staff hate working here.
‘We aren't safe in our beds, we aren't safe in our offices, our children aren't even safe walking to school.
Darlington is a complete dump.’
Mrs Rorstad said Poppies helped focus national attention on Darlington.
But she added:’ As far as I am concerned it can go to hell now.’
Clients who are interested in a Poppies franchise travel to the town for discussions and training.
Over the years several have been the victim of petty criminals.
During one incident a thief actually climbed through a window to pinch a cashbox and, another time, a drunk was found asleep in the office.
Mrs Rorstad said: ‘I live in Darlington because my business is based here.
We have been here since 1986 and during that time the town has gone completely down the pan.’
A police spokesman said: ‘We are naturally very disappointed to hear of Mrs Rorstad's problems and her complaint will be investigated.’
But the company boss said: ‘It doesn't do any good telling the police because they just can't cope any more.
I don't know why anyone would live in Darlington any more.’
Traders return afresh
New-look fish stalls open in Darlington town centre on Monday after a £12,000 improvement scheme.
Coun. Mrs Eleanor Young, chairman of the works and health committee, will declare business at the open market stalls in East Row.
Three traders Moore's, Liddle's and Pawlett's have paid for purpose-made trailer stalls and Darlington borough council provided new electricity and water supplies and drainage.
Mr John Buxton, director of property services, said improvements were needed because of new hygiene laws which said fresh fish must be stored below a certain temperature.
The new stalls would have refrigerated display cabinets.
They would continue to open on Mondays, Fridays and Saturdays but discussions about opening on another day probably Thursday had started.
Work on the site for the stalls began three weeks ago and involved installing individual water standpipes to allow each trailer to link up with a hose.