

Chilling facts about your fridge
Green activists made some chilling discoveries when they went looking for environmentally friendly fridges.
They looked at 146 refrigerators and freezers in Darlington last week to find out which ones were on a recommended list of ecologically sound iceboxes.
But the campaigners found only four fridges which were on the list of ozone-friendly household appliances.
Darlington Friends of the Earth spokesman Mr Mark Smith said: ‘The message to people here who want a fridge which doesn't harm the environment is go to Newcastle.’
Mr Smith was one of a small group of campaigners who visited electrical stores on High Row last weekend.
They were searching for ten fridges and freezers which the consumer magazine ‘Which’ says are the most energy-efficient models on the market.
Their aim is to compile information which will send a frosty message to government environmental ministers.
Friends of the Earth want legislation introduced which will make manufacturers put energy efficiency labels on their products and they are asking ministers to suggest such labels when they meet their European Community counterparts for green talks.
‘No-one questions the need for stringent safety standards for domestic appliances.
Why shouldn't there be tough energy efficiency standards to protect us and the environment from unnecessary pollution,’ said Mr Smith.
‘Generating electricity causes serious environmental damage by contributing to acid rain, to the build up of radioactive waste and to the threat of global climate change.
‘But we could easily maintain our standard of living while using less electricity.
Improving the efficiency of domestic appliances, like fridges, would be an easy but significant start.’
Mr Smith refused to disclose the names of the shops in Darlington which had failed the environmentally friendly fridge test.
He says a league table of electrical stores will be produced when all the results of the survey are collated nationally.
But he did divulge that his own household fridge is not one of those on the Which recommended list.
Having only recently regained employment he says he is still too poor to buy one.
EVENTS this week indicate an early upsurge of return spring movement to Scandinavia of winter visiting birds.
Most notable was the appearance of a flock of about 20 shore larks in clifftop fields at Gristhorpe between Cayton Bay and Filey.
As well as being the biggest flock of this species in our region for almost 20 years, it is the first report anywhere on our coast since the above-average influx last autumn.
It is possible they dropped onto the Yorkshire coast after migrating from somewhere south of Britain for no flock of this size has been seen anywhere in the country through the winter.
Significantly their arrival coincided with the first wave of summer visitors in more southerly parts of Britain, including wheatears reported as far north as Staffordshire.
Meanwhile waxwings certainly appear to be making their way back north after the big flocks recorded here in early December generally dispersed southwards.
This week up to 20 have been reported in the grounds of Darlington College of Technology, 45 in Jesmond, Newcastle, and a smaller group at East Boldon, South Tyneside, while there have also been further sightings in Washington.
We can expect an acceleration of such activity over the coming week if the weather remains mild and we are likely to start hearing of our first summer visitors also.
I would be surprised if wheatear, ring ouzel, chiff chaff and possibly Sandwich tern and sand martin are not reported somewhere in our region by next weekend.
Incidentally, the golden eagle which I mentioned last week did not reappear in Yorkshire's Nidderdale where it spent at least five days, but it was finally relocated.
Last weekend North East Birdline announced this magnificent raptor had been found further south at Barden Scale, four miles north of Bolton Abbey, near Ilkley, and it was still present on Monday.
This is another spot which seems to be enjoying a good run of birds of prey for common buzzard and hen harrier were also there and on Saturday a red kite was seen.
ABOUT three years ago you wrote about a mystery viral illness called Myalgic Encephalomyelitis.
Have there been any further developments from research into this illness and could you do an update?
The reason I am interested is that at that time I was off work for six months and I suspected I had the illness.
Just prior to this I was under a great deal of pressure to complete a computer program, and went in to work while I was suffering from the flu and not sleeping very well.
I really didn't feel capable of returning to work, but was persuaded to by one of my managers with the promise that I could take things easy.
Don't ask me how I kept going for so long, but it took a superhuman effort.
Anyway the workload gradually increased until I found I couldn't continue any longer and have been off work for the last six months.
All attempts by my own doctor and the company doctor to diagnose my illness failed.
I have had breathing problems which my doctor has said is a figment of my imagination and he has diagnosed depression.
I only realised I was still suffering from ME after my doctor referred me to a psychiatrist.
It is very hard for me to bear because my employer and even my own family think I am just being work-shy.
I had a good job as an electronics engineer and have just been given three months notice, losing all my pension rights after working 26 years for the same company.
So as you can see, this illness has ruined my life.
I AM sorry things are so bed for you.
Today, I gladly mention the illness in my main column again, but I am afraid I am not aware of any further developments from research into ME.
I presume that the best way of keeping abreast of any developments is to write to the self help group which is extremely active.