

AS a pensioner and in common with many other townsfolk, I am incensed by the decision of local government to close eight old people's homes.
We are led to believe that ‘lack of finance’ is to blame yet we are told we are all paying an extra premium on the basic community charge in order that standards may be kept up.
So what is happening to that money?
Or to look at it in another way, if all the defaulters in community charge payments were paying their due amount, perhaps these closures would not be necessary.
It makes me wonder too, if those who decided so quickly to close the homes examined the reasons why there were so many vacancies.
I know of one private home in the Darlington area where a number of elderly residents would give their eye teeth to be in one or the other of the two Darlington homes being closed.
INEQUALITY:
Nothing illustrates the blatant inequalities in society better than the fact that Durham County Council is having to close several old people's homes.
And for no better reason than this Dickensian Government will not provide the cash.
Apparently they would rather spend it on buying gold and dollars which is all that keeps them going.
Compare this with the numerous properties at the disposal of Royals, aristocrats and squirearchs.
The Queen has at least three palaces, two castles and several houses.
The Duke of Northumberland besides Alnwick Castle has an impressive property in London.
If these they can live like this, then why should these old people's homes be closed?
DISGRACE:
Reading of the treatment by Durham County Council of the old people's homes that are being closed, I say it is an absolute disgrace and this by the people who keep on about caring councils.
These poor people have done no harm to anybody and a lot of them will have fought wars for a lot of these same people who are now deciding to put them out of their homes in the twilight of their lives.
The harmless wolf whistle
REGARDING the wolf whistling debate, should I ever receive such a gesture I think I'd die of shock, But should some young, dishy male give me a whistle I would probably give a wink and a whistle back.
But then there would be those chauvinistic enough to say if my actions led on to rape than I'd ‘have asked for it.’
For many women a wolf whistle is the last thing to worry about.
It is the silent, stalking marauder in the dark or the bullying repressive wife abuser who are to be feared.
It is a pity more serious issues are not being pursued by our political representatives.
Like the reason why Sara Thornton is being further punished inside a jail today after being driven to kill her bullying husband.
It is these issues I would like to see tackled.
CONCERNED:
Many of the ex-British Rail men and women retired or otherwise in and around this area are very concerned about the privatisation of British Rail.
Can Mr Fallon MP throw any light as to whether our concessionary tickets and free passes will be honoured by the private owners or will there be a pay off to compensate any withdrawal of our passes?
A MAN behind a building firm that has taken thousands of pounds from customers for work that was never done was bouncing cheques to his suppliers last spring.
Last week The Northern Echo reported how Terry Round whose company Yorkshire Rose Interiors operates from his home in Quaker Lane, Northallerton had broken a string of promises to customers who responded to his newspaper advertisements.
Alan Dodsworth of Darlington paid over £2,000 in cash to Mr Round last October for a kitchen that was never delivered; and disabled Ferryhill resident Royston Hunter is still waiting for work to be completed at his home after giving Mr Round £4,180 in November.
Yesterday Mike O'Connor, a Stockton builder who briefly worked with Mr Round early last year, said he had ended their association after learning that his partner had been bouncing cheques to suppliers.
Mr O'Connor produced letters dated last May from the Dishonoured Cheque Register, whose client Texas Homecare had been given cheques by Mr Round for £117.46 and £81.98.
Both bounced.
He said: ‘I feel very sorry for the people who have been let down.
I have spoken to Mr Round, who claims he has already done one of the jobs.’
Mr O'Connor has recently been distributing leaflets advertising his business on Darlington's Whinfield estate.
Some people have noticed their similarity to material distributed by Mr Round.
Mr O'Connor said: ‘Mr Round appears to have based his marketing material on ideas I developed.
Obviously I'm concerned that people should be confusing us.
I have nothing to do with him, and think the way he has treated customers is appalling.’
Mr Round can only be contacted through his cohabitee and co-director Joan Harrison, who works in the handbags department of Barkers department store in Northallerton.
She would not come to the phone and failed to respond to a message.
The effect can only be bad
I REFER to the comments in A view from High Row (Echo, Jan 20) on the subject of a new cattle mart and housing development near Hurworth.
I believe that, almost without exception, all the residents of Hurworth are opposed to this vandalism of a greenfield site when other areas are available and the effect on a much admired village can only be bad.
What has become of democracy if such a plan can be bulldozed through when the people are against it?
And what can the next step be to prevent it?
D P Stuart,.
No thanks
I RECENTLY found a wallet containing credit cards which I could have used in a dishonest way.
I handed these in to the Midland Bank, Cockerton, Darlington.
I did not receive a thank you from the owner of these cards nor from the Midland Bank, yet I was told that common practice in Britain is to reward the finder.
What is the point in being honest nowadays?.
This one could cause ulcers
IT IS rare I feel strongly about anything appertaining to Darlington, otherwise I would have an ulcerated stomach.
However, the proposed cross-town route is a different matter.
I look upon it as an act of spite by Durham County Council ‘You stopped our inner ring road scheme.
Right, we'll force this one upon you.’
I lived in York for 17 years before returning home and saw the outer ring road being built there.
Unlike our southern ring road, the York road is single carriageway width and it is impossible to overtake when the road is anything less than quiet.
I suggest that the parties involved in the Darlington project visit York, in particular, a stretch of the ring road between the A19 and the A59 especially around 3–6pm.
I am sure they would see that queues of slow moving traffic soon build up and drivers take to the town to get through.
If, however, the planners do not intend having exit ways into the town, then God help the local environment and any emergency services that may be necessary..
We all need some help
IN DARLINGTON there is a move to get people thinking for themselves and acting on the idea instead of allowing others to think for them.
It is no good anyone complaining about the state of affairs in the world if they cannot get their own town into some semblance of order.
At the moment we are sick of politics with one faction at cross-purposes with another.
The Independent Association is not political, but was formed in the hope that people would pool their news, views and ideas.
No one can achieve anything without the help of others and we are not talking about militancy, more the desire to support people in their quest to put Darlington to rights.
Idea, for instance on how to tackle the problem of drugs and the homeless.
It is no good writing about these things or sweeping them under the carpet.
They do exist and have to be faced.
If all the do-gooders in the town got down to grass roots and worked towards a better future for the next generation, this town would be a better one to live in.
I am doing my best, but I wish a few more would give a few hours of their time.,.
Path fears
I WISH to make the following points about the report Fears as river path crumbles (Echo January 23).
It is impossible to imagine the footpath ‘falling into the Tees’.
Even the photograph shows that there are several hundred yards between the two.
The final paragraph should have explained that our objection to the proposal to put steps down if the path slipped due to the retaining wall collapsing was that a) steps would be dangerous for the many elderly people who used the footpath; b) it would mean the council cutting into our upper bank and undermining our house garden wall and c) the council should consider the alternative access to the path offered by our neighbour, Mr M Jones if they did not intend to preserve the present route.
The article does not reflect the spirit of our concerns ie. the path is part of the Teesdale Way which will increase the traffic, exaggerate the wear and tear and should therefore be kept in good repair.
If the council do not propose to do this work, they should seriously consider rerouting the path.
Additionally, we have fought to preserve the path despite its obvious disadvantage to us personally.
We believe all rights of way must be preserved.,.
Right move
I WAS interested to read a letter from my old headmaster, Mr D Henderson, expressing disappointment at the failure of his bid to establish a sixth form at Hummersknott School.
I left Hummersknott two years ago and am now at the Queen Elizabeth Sixth Form College.
Had the option to continue at Hummersknott been available, I would probably have done so.
I now realise this would have been a mistake.
Having younger children around quickly becomes claustrophobic for older students: with hindsight, I would have found it stifling.
The sixth form college provides an excellent atmosphere and a valuable preparation for university.
Speaking as one with experience of both Hummersknott and the sixth form, I believe the decision to reject Mr Henderson's bid was right.
Hummersknott students' further education needs are best provided for under existing arrangements.,.
No change
WITH reference to Father Cademan's remarks (Echo, January 21), I am sure that he is aware Government policy towards Catholic schools is unchanged.
Darlington is well provided with Catholic schools and as Father Cademan is a member of the Diocesan Schools Commission and was until recently a county councillor, one might ask why did recent rebuilding proceed on the basis of an under-estimation of demand?
I was of the opinion that when the plans for the new St Augustine's School were under discussion that the number of proposed school places was too low.
The cross we have to bear in Darlington is Durham County Council which due to years of Labour Party domination has become unaccountable and virtually under the control of its officers.
When Sir Keith Joseph approved the rebuilding of St Augustine's School, officers of the county council were still attempting to make out a case for the sale of the site based on their assessment of demand for places.
Advice was given by Mr Fallon on how best to proceed to cater for increased demand for places at both St Bede's and St Augustine's schools, but it was not followed presumably for political or administration reasons.
— What's your view?
If you have a view on our Public Opinion topic or on any local, regional, national or international subject write to The Editor, Hear All Sides, The Northern Echo, Darlington, Co.
Durham, DL1 1NF.
Please restrict letters to 200 words.
If there is any issue you would like us to put to the Public Opinion test please let the editor know.
A MAN behind a building firm that has taken thousands from customers for work that has remained undone was bouncing cheques to suppliers last spring.
Last week The Northern reported how Terry Round, whose company Yorkshire Rose Interiors operates from his home in Quaker Lane, Northallerton, had broken a string of promises to customers who responded to his newspaper advertisements.
A Darlington couple paid over £2,000 to Mr Round last October for a kitchen that was never delivered; Alan Dodsworth has since had to borrow from his father to get the job done by another contractor.
And disabled Ferryhill resident Royston Hunter is still waiting for work to be completed at his home after giving Mr Round £4,180 in November.
Yesterday Mike O'Connor, a Stockton builder who briefly worked with Mr Round early last year, said he had ended their association after learning that his partner had been bouncing cheques to suppliers.
Mr O'Connor produced letters dated last May from the Dishonoured Cheque Register, whose client Texas Homecare had been given cheques by Mr Round for £117.46 and £81.98.
Both bounced.
He said: ‘I feel very sorry for the people who have been let down.
I have spoken to Mr Round, who claims he has already done one of the jobs.’
Mr O'Connor has recently been distributing leaflets advertising his business on Darlington's Whinfield estate.
They are said to be similar to material distributed previously by Mr Round.
Mr O'Connor said: ‘Obviously I'm concerned that people should be confusing us.
I have nothing to do with him and think the way he has treated customers is appalling.’
Mr Round can only be contacted through his co-habitee and co-director Joan Harrison, who works in the handbags department of Barkers department store in Northallerton.
She would not come to the phone and failed to respond to a message.
PEOPLE who don't pay poll tax in Darlington could soon face prison sentences as problems with delayed payments mount.
The finance officer charged with the task of organising the collection of the poll tax said jail sentences are Darlington council's last resort but they could soon be used.
Richard Collin, director of central services, said the threat of prison could be the crucial reminder to make people pay.
As yet no one has been jailed by Darlington magistrates but Mr Collin said: ‘Committals will come into the arena fairly soon.’
Councillors have urged their officers to increase efforts in tracking down non-payers.
Possible methods of speeding up collection include increasing the numbers of bailiffs in the town and contacting non-payers by telephone.
This scheme has already been operating in some London boroughs but it has prompted criticism from anti-poll tax campaigners who have branded the technique as ‘harassment’.
The North-East anti-poll tax federation chairman, Kevin Miles, said councils would be guilty of ‘frightening people in their own homes.’
LESSONS could soon carry on all year at Darlington College of Technology in a bid to make education available to people from different walks of life.
College principal Peter Shuker wants to see classes continuing seven days a week, 52 weeks a year.
Mr Shuker wants students of all ages and backgrounds to have access to courses at times which suit them and to see a move away from the traditional September to June academic year.
A development plan also shows a growth in the college's commitment to European links.
By 1994 the principal is confident that every student on a full-time course will have the chance to visit a foreign country as part of their studies.
Much of the work to boost links overseas is being funded by a £20,000 from the European Community.
UNEMPLOYMENT among Darlington's young people is rocketing, according to figures revealed by the town's Labour prospective parliamentary candidate yesterday.
Alan Milburn, said official department of employment figures showed that over the last two years youth unemployment has increased over 40pc faster than the general rise.
Between October 1989 and October 1991, the number of people under 25 without work in Darlington shot up by nearly one third, from 995 to 1,307, he said.
Overall jobless figures increased by one fifth in the same period to 4,174.
Mr Milburn said the new statistics also revealed a disturbing trend towards long-term unemployment.
He said, nearly 40pc (518) of young people on the dole in Darlington had not had a job for over half a year and one sixth (217) had not worked for over a year.
Mr Milburn claimed: ‘Darlington's young people are paying the price for this Conservative-created recession.’
LAST week sweeping changes in the way County Durham's fire brigade will be run were formally adopted.
County councillors of all parties unanimously backed Chief Fire Officer Alf Thompson's plans which will bring eight new tenders and 14 more firefighters into the service.
When his proposals were first outlined there was considerable disquiet, mainly among Darlington politicians, but also voiced by some firemen who feared the town would be adversely affected.
One principle point of concern was the news that the county's only heavy rescue vehicle, currently stationed at Darlington, would be transferred to Bishop Auckland.
Those fears should now be forgotten.
Mr Thompson has made it clear there is no question of ‘cuts’ or ‘reductions’in services, rather he seeks to give the public the best possible fire brigade.
As he told county councillors, the service had not been comprehensively reviewed since the Seventies and the job it is required to do has altered considerably with time notably, more of the work is to do with helping at road traffic accidents.
The fact that councillors agreed with him, whatever their political colour, suggests they are still sometimes willing to let good sense take precedence over party point scoring.
But the most compelling reassurance for townspeople should come from the firefighters themselves, some of whom were uneasy when the shake-up first came to light.
According to officers stationed at Darlington, the silent majority now support Mr Thompson's plans and believe they could even speed response times to house fires in the town.
One long-serving officer argued the review would also mean more firemen on tenders and fewer officers in the station, which would make promotion harder to win but would benefit the public.
Another said the loss of one tender being moved to Bishop Auckland would be balanced by the addition of more state-of-the-art equipment coming to the town.
He said: ‘I don't think the people of Darlington should have anything to worry about.’
If that's what the lads in the station are saying it would be a foolish local politician who still tried to suggest otherwise.
DARLINGTON'S doctors this week gave the thumbs down to Conservative MP Michael Fallon.
They claim he spoke hastily on the issue of surgeries in Darlington which have control of their own budgets.
But Mr Fallon said the medical men had misjudged his remarks.
In his column in the Darlington Advertiser newspaper Mr Fallon said Whinfield and Denmark Street surgeries both offered ‘a better service’.
This was pounced on by 34 of Darlington's 44 GPs who said there was a clear implication Mr Fallon believed those fund-holding surgeries to be superior to the others.
He quickly tried to put the record straight by claiming he had simply meant they operated better than before they held their own funds.
What he did not explain was the logical conclusion that before Whinfield and Denmark Street controlled their budgets they offered a similar service to other surgeries.
The doctors' inference appears legitimate and one which should worry Mr Fallon in the delicate weeks before the election.
Doctors tend to be respectable men and women admired and trusted by the voters.
Darlington's MP would be well advised to bear that in mind before making such comments.
DARLINGTON'S Liberal councillors have their accused Labour counterparts of ‘misleading’ bowlers over plans to rebuild a pavilion destroyed by fire.
Coun John Cresswell said Liberal councillors had supported the bowlers' campaign for a brick-built replacement at North Park, Darlington, but Labour twice threw out their proposals.
He said the Labour leader Coun John Williams had claimed an unexpected windfall would allow the pavilion to be built only in wood.
Coun Cresswell said: ‘Labour are trying to appear generous by providing a wooden pavilion, whereas this is really a kick in the teeth for bowlers.’
He added: ‘Coun Williams statement shows that he is either completely ignorant on this issue or attempting to fool the bowlers.
‘There is no windfall.
The money is an insurance payout for the old pavilion.’
Coun Cresswell said building another wooden pavilion would be a ‘futile, penny-pinching exercise’, as there could be no guarantee against another arson attack.
Coun Williams replied that he had always said the money was from an insurance payout, adding: ‘It is very easy for the Liberal Democrat councillors to make such statements.
‘They do not have the responsibility of administering a cash-starved council.’
A CAMPAIGNER for disabled people's rights has reacted angrily to plans to ban disabled drivers from Darlington town centre.
Jack Burton, chairman of the Darlington branch of Arthritis Care, said yesterday the consultation process between Darlington council and disabled groups had been ‘a complete waste of time.’
Meanwhile Conservative councillors have rounded on their Labour opponents saying the latest announcements will lead to complete chaos in the town centre.
Tomorrow Darlington council's policy and resources committee will be asked to consider a plan which would mean disabled badge drivers would not be allowed in Skinnergate and High Row at peak traffic times.
The proposal dictates that only the most severely disabled drivers would be allowed to drive down Skinnergate and High Row between 10.30am and 4pm.
Coun Peter Jones (Con) said: ‘Are the Labour group trying to make disabled people undergo a medical examination before they can take their cars into the town centre?’
He said the plans for pedestrianisation had been badly thought out and should be scrapped before what he described as ‘inevitable chaos’ began.
But Labour group leader Coun John Williams said he still believed the majority of Darlington's disabled would benefit from the new arrangements.
He said there were 2,000 orange badge holders in Darlington alone and the system is abused.
He said disabled pedestrians would be far better off because of the lack of traffic while reserved spaces for disabled motorists would rise from two to 44.
But Mr Burton, who also represents Darlington Association on Disability and the Access Action Committee, said he thought it was time the political bickering over pedestrianisation was stopped.
‘We were invited to give our opinions about how the scheme should work but all our comments have been ignored,’ he said.
He asked why the council would not accept orange badge drivers having total access during the scheme's six month trial period.
‘At least that would prove what is the best way of organising the system,’ he said.
He accepts that Skinnergate should be pedestrianised to stop the traffic chaos.
However Tory group leader Coun Tony Richmond said yesterday: ‘I have said all along that Northgate would be a far more sensible place to pedestrianise.
It is adjacent to the Cornmill, convenient for loading goods and would ease the bus congestion problem in Prebend Row.’
Patricia Routledge, 50, of Milton Street, Darlington, suffers from multiple sclerosis.
She said: ‘I think Darlington council could make some extra money by wheel-clamping cars which park illegally in spaces reserved for the disabled.’
Taking over:
The new Rural Dean of the Whitby Diocese is the Rev Nicholas Jones, the Vicar of Sleights.
He takes over from Canon Edwin Newlyn, the Vicar of Goathland.
The Bishop of Whitby, the Rt Rev Gordon Bates will install Mr Jones at a special service at Sleights on February 11.
School joy:
Eastbourne School, Darlington, will take delivery of a brand new £14,000 minibus on Wednesday.
Staff and pupils raised the cashed, helped by the PTA.
HEALTH services in Darlington are £1.3m worse off than other health authorities, it was claimed yesterday.
Labour's parliamentary hopeful Alan Milburn claimed Darlington had been shortchanged by the Government due to changes in funding.
Earlier this week the Northern Regional Health Authority announced new spending allocations for the region's 15 district health authorities.
The spending increases, which come into effect in April, average 9.7 per cent in the North.
But Darlington health authority only received an extra £2.6m the joint lowest rise in the region at 6.5 per cent.
Mr Milburn slammed the rise as totally inadequate.
He said if Darlington received the regional average increase the town's health services would be £1.3m better off.
He plans to write to the NRHA to review Darlington's fundings.
PLANS to bring a Sainsbury superstore to Darlington will be discussed by members of the policy and resources committee on Tuesday.
Sainsbury hope to build a store on United Bus company land at Grange Road, but owners Caldaire say they cannot afford to sell the land because it has to give the Government a fixed percentage of the sale.
A Darlington delegation met Transport Minister Roger Freeman last month to discuss the issue.
JARGON and gobbledegook is gradually being phased out of Darlington Borough Council letters.
A report to the policy and resources committee says the council has adopted a more friendly approach in its letters.
It says councils are often criticised for the poor quality of their letters but the borough council is now encouraging staff to write in plain English.
Stan Heywood, assistant chief executive, said: ‘Good written communications are an important principle of good customer care.
‘It is important that plain English is used without jargon or local authority expressions which the public may not understand.’
North-East ladies have no hang-ups about their age.
We asked a random selection of women who were in Darlington for market day to tell us how old they were.
Instead of black eyes, we got polite compliance.
Only one lady, Anne Stephenson, tried to lie.
‘I'm 21,’ she laughed, adding quickly, ‘no, I'm 66 actually.
I think there's too much attached to age.
The only time I might lie about my age is if I met a toy boy!’
Some better-known ladies are full of support for keeping a woman's age her own, however.
‘Women have to have some secrets you know,’ said Barbara Cartland, whose date of birth has been listed in Who's Who only since her 90th birthday.
She added: ‘I think some men are pretty sensitive about their age as well.’
Mary Whitehouse, founder of the National Viewers' and Listeners' Association, admitted to being ‘81.5’.
‘I have not objection to giving my age but if this lady doesn't want to then good luck to her,’ she said.
Elizabeth Hick, 63: ‘I can never remember how old I am but I've just learnt to swim and that's made me feel younger.’
Jean Naisbitt, 55: ‘I have to think how old I am — some days I feel 90, but others 19.’
Mary Binks, 58: ‘I don't mind people asking my age.
Anything official I always tell them.’
Shirley Hayman, 31: ‘I don't mind people knowing my age.
A lot of people start boasting once they're 90.’
Shirley's mother, Enid Flannagan, 63: ‘You should always tell the truth about your age; there's nothing you can do about it, after all — you can't be any younger than you are.’
Lillian Birdsall, 67: ‘I've never minded telling anyone my age.’
June Wilson, 65 in July: ‘I don't mind telling people my age at all, but you should always have the right to refuse if you don't want to.’
yce Hughf, of Aycliffe Village, encloses this snapshot of pupils at Rushyford School taken, she believes, some time between 1927 and 1930.
‘I am on the third row, third from the right.
I was Joyce Kell then.
The headmaster was Mr Welsh and the two teachers were Mrs Ross and Miss Annie McDonald.
The school is now a bungalow.’
l Do you have any old photographs?
We pay £10 for each one used.
Send them, with as many written details as possible, to Way We Were, Echoes, The Northern Echo, Priestgate, Darlington, Co Durham.
DL1 1NF.
FROM time immemorial drinking water came from a dirty little hole in the ground.
Around the top of the wellhead trampled pigs and cattle, and the street around was probably half full of human rubbish.
Hygiene was not an over-riding consideration.
The invention of pumps to draw the water up helped a little but not a lot.
On Wednesday, April 24, 1850 the town was awash with the news that a new, cleaner brand of water was being introduced to Darlington.
Edward Pease wrote: ‘There was considerable stir in Darlington today, this being the first day water was brought into the town from the New Water Works.’
Initially the townspeople were sceptical, but once the new water had tickled their tastebuds they took to it like the proverbial duck.
The real clincher was that it made better tea and beer than the pump muck.
However, people clung to their old fashioned pumps.
In 1898 the Corporation was debating whether or not to close the Tubwell Row pump even though an analyst had condemned it as ‘absolutely unfit for drinking purposes’.
To encourage the population to drink clean water the Local Government Board decided to use fountains to advertise its existence.
Another sector of the community, the Temperance Society, saw water as a substitute to wean indulgers off alcohol so they too began building fountains.
In 1860 the Society fitted all of Darlington's fountains with drinking cups.
The first fountain came to town in 1857.
The Local Government Board had bought the waterworks three years earlier, and on August 4 1856 it commissioned town surveyor Mr G Mason to design and build the first spouter at the top of Tubwell Row.
Primarily it was designed to be an animal fountain for the herds of beasts that sauntered around on market day.
Sadly, when Mr Mason's marvellous edifice arrived in May 1857 it was discovered that the basin which had been prepared for it was far too small.
Mr Mason's fountain had to be transferred to the centre of Bondgate and replaced by the Tubwell torrentor as featured in the inaugural Fountain of the Week.
Mason's gusher was not a big hit in Bondgate either.
Like the Tubwell torrentor it had a disconcerting habit of flooding the road and turning it into a muddy cesspool.
So after less than three years it was removed to Cleveland Lodge in Great Ayton which was the home of John Pease.
Unfortunately only wildly out-of-focus pictures exist of Darlington's first fountain, so a little bit of artistic licence has had to be employed to show what it probably looked like.
COINCIDENTALLY, the Corporation meeting in 1898 which discussed closing the Tubwell Row pump, also rejected the Southend Estate Co's invitation to buy The Rookery in Grange Road.
The Corporation considered the £2,400 price was simply an attempt by the company to exhort public money.
Of course barely three years later the company rescinded and donated the land to the town.
MP Michael Fallon has been given fresh hope that County Durham police may get extra officers.
The Darlington MP has also pledged to investigate a Home Office staffing proposal that could provide another 50 policemen.
The alarm was raised when Durham did not receive any extra posts among the 800 new allocations for 1992 to 1993.
Lord Ferrers, the Home Office minister responsible for the police, has assured Darlington's Tory MP that the County Durham bid was still ‘on the table’.
Mr Fallon was told some forces in previous years have not been able to take up the extra posts, which have then been redistributed to other places.
‘I have impressed on the Home Office the importance of getting more police officers into urban areas of the county like Darlington,’ said Mr Fallon.
‘The campaign for more police for County Durham goes on.
I shall be meeting the Home Office again at the end of March.’
In turn Lord Ferrers has suggested Durham Constabulary should employ civilians to carry out administrative posts.
‘His figures show that if Durham reached the top level of civilianisation achieved by other forces, then around 50 new police officers could be made available.
I shall be pursuing this with Frank Taylor, the Chief Constable,’ said Mr Fallon.
After voting to close eight more old people's homes Durham County Council is now cutting back many home help visits to just once a fortnight.
‘It isn't unusual to vary levels of service provision as and when finances dictate,’ says a County Hall spokesman, smugly.
Before the Bishop of Durham blames the government, here are two more levels of Durham County Council service provision.
1 In the last financial year the county spent £160,000 on twinning and exchange schemes, including the usual bumper bundle of freebies for councillors.
2 In support and sponsorship of Durham County Cricket Club, which is all very well but doesn't get the groceries in, the County Council has so far spent £145,000.
Another problem of old age, of course, is that the memory starts to play tricks.
Lest the bottom-of-the-pile old folk forget, this lot are supposedly Socialists.
…and then there's the county council-run fire brigade, much in the news and about to be brought into the 1990s.
Two things about the Chief Fire Officer's review have largely escaped attention, the first that fire brigade vehicles will (happily) continue in the traditional red.
Much the same colour red, in fact, as in the county's utterly essential new flag, gloriously unveiled at a county council press conference in November.
The other thing we noted about the fire chief's report is that the brigade is to be re-named the Durham County Fire and Rescue Service, thereby emphasising its commitment to cats up trees, cows in clarts and budgerigars that have fallen off the perch.
The fire brigade was unable to estimate the expense of each call, but helpfully points out that where the cost of malicious false alarms is being claimed back in court, the normal figure is £97.50 an appliance.
Animal rescues will be much the same just for turning out and £97.50 pays for a an awful lot of home help visits.
County Durham's old folk have a possible means of ensuring greater attention from the council, however: should reincarnation occur, they can come back as a dog in a drain.
The Cats Protection League, meanwhile, has added the Woodhouse Close estate in Bishop Auckland and the entire village of Coundon to its list of areas where their moggies will no longer be given homes.
Whether this is because people absent mindedly leave them up trees we have been unable to ascertain.
Picking on Woodhouse Close is perhaps predictable (give a cat a bad name, and all that) but Coundon?
Coundon, dammit, has a Conservative Club.
Is nothing sacred any more?
Last week's column expressed concern for the whereabouts of Peter ‘Ice’
Bergg, Darlington's semi-submerged Liberal Democratic parliamentary candidate.
Just as we were about to send someone round to check his milk bottles on Monday, he walked into the office.
Coun Bergg, we are happy to report, is alive and well and keeping his head above water.
For the moment, we have called off the hounds.
David Kingston, Labour's youthful looking candidate in the Willington by election, is known to a slightly wider audience, we can reveal.
A couple of months back he appeared on a Channel Four quiz show called Fifteen to One.
‘He reached the last two but was beaten by one point thanks to strategic play by his opponent,’ says a colleague.
Odds against the same thing happening at the count on February 20?
About 15,000–1.
Speaking of elections, can anyone explain why long serving former Darlington councillor Jimmy Whelan was in the Borough Solicitor's office last Tuesday morning?
And why Jimmy looked so pleased when told that the General Election deposit was £500, and not £1,000 as he'd supposed.
Doreen Fleetham's voice was known to many thousands of people.
Her face and her nature, both of them warm and friendly, matched the voice exactly.
For 28 years Doreen, who died last week, was a switchboard operator at the Echo.
More than that she was a mother figure times were when she even sewed this helpless young journalist's shirt buttons on and a friend.
It's impossible to recall her without a smile, or a good word, or the suggestion that even the office reprobate we've had one or two was ‘canny’.
She plugged and unplugged that cross-wired old switchboard with the ease of someone switching on the radio.
Once she came second among 60 contestants in a competition to find the telephone operator with the most pleasant and efficient manner.
The winner must have been beyond price.
While we draw breath on the wolf whistling debate as heard on the BBC World Service, apparently Coun Eleanor Young tells us that the offending action isn't even mentioned in Darlington Council's proposed code of conduct for contractors.
Clause 3, sub-section 1, paragraph IV most nearly embraces the gallant debate: ‘Encouraging contractors’ employees to have proper regard for the public, and to be courteous.’
Ah, but is wolf whistling being discourteous?
Mrs Young hits a more reassuring note in discussing the public response.
‘I've been inundated with letters,’ she says, then corrects herself.
‘No I haven't.
I've had two.’
Similarly ‘inundated’ councillors, please note.
The public inquiry into Darlington Council's refusal of planning permission for a private hospital in the Memorial Hospital grounds began last week.
Among the principal reasons for refusal was that extra vehicles would ‘restrict the free flow of traffic in Hollyhurst Road.’
Subsequently the council's own officers told the inquiry that a pedestrian had been killed on Hollyhurst Road because he couldn't find a safe place to cross, that ambulances struggle to get down Hollyhurst Road in emergencies, that residents cars are blocked in their drives and that buses have to drop off in the middle of the road.
Free flow of traffic?
Who's kidding whom?
The office of Mayor in Darlington the whole shooting match, not just the place with the armchairs will cost poll tax payers an estimated £54,500 next year.
Coun Alan Robinson properly questions the figures and is equally right to stress that he means no reflection on the present, splendid incumbent or any of those before her.
On seniority, old Smiler himself could be Mayor almost any time he wanted.
Since Gadfly readers know his fondness for public transport perhaps there will be a substantial saving when it happens.
Coun Robinson could be the first civic leader in history to sack the chauffeur and arrive by No 11 bus.
SARAH Parrott has become like a sister to her young friend Philip Dawson, who suffers from cerebral palsy.
So much so that one day at Cockerton School, Darlington, Philip fell over and hurt himself and asked for his sister.
No-one knew who he meant until he mentioned Sarah's name.
Now Sarah's kindness has won her a McDonalds Child of Achievement Award.
Seven-year-old Philip's mum, Linda, nominated Sarah for the award.
‘She did a lot for Philip when he first started at Cockerton,’ she said.
‘Sarah read to him, drew for him, took him out in his buggy, even took the top off his yoghurt pots.’
The 12-year-old has now moved on to Branksome School, but still keeps in close contact with Philip, who lives next door.
‘Philip now says Sarah is his girlfriend,’ said Mrs Dawson.
‘He goes for the older woman!’
Mrs Dawson praised Sarah for the times she has popped in to see if she could help.
‘I was ill two years ago and she was always helping out and amusing Philip.
Whenever I said thank you, she told me she hadn't done anything.
‘She really is a smashing lass.’
Sarah's mum Valerie said she and husband Richard were ‘thrilled’ by the award.
PROTESTORS will today make a late appeal for a change of heart by councillors who are due to rubber-stamp their decision to close eight old people's homes in County Durham.
A full council meeting is due to go ahead with the formality of passing the decision taken in January by members of Durham County Council's social services committee.
Hundreds of protestors, including dozens of the 260 old people directly affected by the closure plan, were at County Hall when committee members voted on the issue.
And one man whose mother lives in one of the homes listed for closure said yesterday: ‘We will be making our presence felt again when the full council meets.’
Colin Liddle, of Wylam Road, Shield Row, Stanley, has contacted every county councillor urging them to reconsider the closure of Hustledown House in Stanley, home to 38 pensioners including his 81-year-old mother Florence.
Members of the ruling Labour group have blamed the Government for the circumstances which led to the closure plan.
They say the Government's willingness to over-subsidise private old people's homes has caused the 300-plus empty spaces at the county's 42 council-run homes.
Mr Liddle accepts the need for some closures, but argues that none of the council's own figures back the selection of Hustledown House.
He has already complained to the local government ombudsman and is hoping for an investigation into alleged maladministration over the closure of Hustledown.
He said: ‘I'm not prepared to accept that their decision is carved out in tablets of stone.
They cannot justify the closure of Hustledown House.
If it was a ramshackle building where no-one wanted to live, fair enough, but that is not the case.’
He said opponents hoped the council would either reverse or defer their decision to close Hustledown House.
AN unemployed father-of-four has accused Darlington council of unfairness in allocating houses.
Derek Dooley and his family are due to leave their private rented house in Louisa Street in June.
He applied to the borough council for a transfer to the Hundens Lane area and claimed the council told him it was ‘reserved’ for travelling people.
Derek, 39, said he wanted to be near his children's school.
The couple have four children aged between seven and three and Derek's wife Dawn, 26, is expecting their fifth child next month.
Derek said: ‘We don't want to wait to find somewhere when we are homeless.
I don't want to jump the queue but it should be done on a fair system.’
Pauline Mitchell, head of housing, said: ‘We do not have any areas for any particular people and we certainly do not identify travellers as a group.
We will do everything we can to allocate the Dool-eys a house where there are vacancies.’
She advised the family to contact her six weeks before they are due to leave.
A FUNDRAISING event for an orphanage in Romania takes place in Darlington next week.
Friends of Cockerton Methodist Church hope to raise money for mattresses for a 120 bed orphanage in Tiatra Neamp.
Judith Masterman, whose daughter Alison works in the orphanage, said: ‘We are not aiming to provide everyone with a mattress but whatever we can get helps.
We want to do as much as we can while we have a contact over there.’
Alison, 23, has worked in the orphanage since last July.
Her parents visited her in October and photographs and videos from their trip will be shown at the Methodist Church on February 12.
DARLINGTON MP
Michael Fallon has issued a bullish response to town doctors who accused him of making ‘fallacious and irresponsible’ comments about the NHS.
Mr Fallon angered local GPs with an article in the Darlington Advertiser newspaper which they claimed implied they ran inferior surgeries to fundholding practices who manage their own budgets.
Last week 34 of Darlington's 44 doctors signed an open letter protesting at the article, saying his claim waiting lists were down and NHS spending up were false.
Yesterday, in a letter to the GP signatories, Mr Fallon says he did not refer to fundholding practices but believes they have benefitted from controlling their budgets.
‘The NHS has had the lion's share of the very substantial increases in public spending over the last few years, and this has resulted in higher standards of care and treatment,’ he writes.
A MOBILE breast-screening unit arrived in Darlington yesterday as part of a programme to screen almost 5,000 women aged between 50 and 64.
The screening takes place in the coming few months in the next stage of a three-year programme.
By 1993 it is hoped that all women over 50 in the area will have been screened.
Sylvia Andrews, breast screening services manager, said: ‘Last year we screened 3,500 women and this time we are aiming for 4,600.
‘We have sent out appointment cards to all the women we missed last time.’
She said the take-up of breast screening was good about 77 per cent.
The unit is to return to Darlington next year for further checks and it is hoped the scheme will be extended to younger women in the future.
A MAN beat a lone woman hiker almost to death with a rock after she turned down his sexual advances, a court heard.
Josephine Chandler was found half naked and bleeding after the attack, which left her permanently brain damaged and physically disabled.
It is alleged that kitchen porter Darren Nichol savagely attacked Mrs Chandler, 47, on the banks of the River Swale at Catterick Bridge, North Yorkshire.
He denies her attempted murder.
Yesterday a Teesside Crown Court jury was told by James Spencer QC, prosecuting: ‘That lady survives today but she is permanently brain damaged and disabled and she is unable to say what happened to her on the morning on Wednesday, August 29, 1990.’
The prosecution claims Mrs Chandler was attacked by 24-year-old Nichol, formerly of Regal Drive, Darlington, who had approached her.
Mrs Chandler, a senior occupational therapist from Chepstow, had set off to do the Coast to Coast Walk from Bees Head to Robin Hood's Bay.
She had walked through Catterick Bridge and was heading towards Scorton when she was attacked.
Lorry driver Alan Brown saw a woman walking with her head bowed with a man following one pace behind.
A second lorry driver Peter Walling later saw a man naked from the waist up scramble up the river bank but disappear when he saw the lorry.
Mr Spencer said: ‘Nichol was sexually attracted to Mrs Chandler and probably tried to engage her in conversation.
Then at a remote place on the bank of the River Swale he first sexually assaulted her and when she fought back he battered her about the head with a rock or rocks from the bank until he thought she was dead.’
Mrs Chandler suffered multiple skull fractures.
Nichol had developed a relationship with a 16-year-old girl, Alana Jeannette, with whom he worked at the Little Chef at Skeeby, North Yorkshire, said Mr Spencer.
On August 28, 1990, he and Miss Jeannette had driven to a secluded spot where they had begun to make love but Nichol was unable.
After Nichol dropped Miss Jeannette home he went to Catterick Bridge, allegedly in a sexually aroused state, attacked Mrs Chandler and returned home at 6am.
Later that day Miss Jeanette noticed fresh scratches on his face.
The trial continues.
HOSPITAL nurses caring for elderly patients are fighting plans to ban uniforms on the wards.
Some of the 30 nurses working on the two long stay geriatric wards at Darlington's Greenbank Hospital are hoping to avert a management decision to make them wear their own clothes.
The nurses have to deal with patients who suffer from a range of conditions, including incontinence.
Three nursing unions are meeting management tomorrow to discuss the dilemma.
Cohse branch secretary at Greenbank Sheila Bowes said: ‘Nurses don't want this move but management have been contemplating it for some time.’
She said the three nursing unions, Cohse, Nupe and the RCN all opposed the move.
But Joan Fox, head of patient services at Greenbank Hospital said: ‘As well as trying to look after the psychological and physical care of these long stay elderly patients, we are trying to improve their environment on the wards.
‘Uniforms are one of the things that create barriers and being in mufti will help nursing staff to be identified as individuals by patients.’
Broadening, stretching, and catching up
THE Open University opens new doors for so many people Mrs Linda Plews, of Richmond, is one.
‘I am a great fan of the OU, it has broadened my horizons so much.
I have met so many interesting people and I have enjoyed foreign travel too,’ said the Richmond School art and design teacher who has now gained a BA Hons degree.
She specialised in art history and education and her studies took her to Paris and Florence.
Now she is working for an advanced diploma in educational management.
‘Although I am a teacher I enjoy learning,’ said Mrs Plews, who studied alongside her two daughters Jennifer and Hannah.
— Like Mrs Plews, Mr Jim Tomlinson, of Richmond, found the study helped him in his work as a teacher at Risedale School, Hipswell, Catterick Garrison.
He studied computing and technology to gain his BA degree and found his in-depth knowledge a boost in the classroom.
‘I wanted to teach and went to training college.
When I started work I regretted not going for a degree, but promised myself not to miss out.
The OU provided the opportunity.
‘It was hard work but very rewarding.
I enjoyed being stretched,’ said Mr Tomlinson, a father of two, who is president of Richmondshire Rugby Club and plays bass with the Richmondshire Orchestra.
— An ex-soldier believes his work with the OU helped him get his present job as a computing lecturer at Darlington College of Technology.
Mr John McIleree, who served with the Royal Signals for 20 years and now lives at Scotton, near Richmond, has been working for his technology degree since 1973 when he was still in the Army.
His study was interrupted after two years when he was posted abroad and he rejoined OU three years ago.
As well as studying electronics and computing for his degree, he worked for a diploma in industrial management.
‘It was not easy.
When I resumed my studies I found I had a lot of catching up to do.’
Now he is planning do a masters degree and may work through the OU again because of its flexibility.
Every full-time student at Darlington College of Technology will be able to travel abroad by 1994, according to a new report.
The college's development plan reveals that it hopes to give 700 pupils a year a taste of education in one of nine countries funds permitting.
In this way all 1,400 students would have the opportunity to travel once during their two-year course.
Mr Peter Shuker, the principal, said the college now had links with France, Germany, Italy, Greece, Spain, Portugal, Denmark, Czechoslovakia and Hungary.
There are plans for tie-ups with Bulgaria and Romania in the near future.
He said the college had already secured £20,000 worth of grants from European Community funds with a further £20,000 in the pipeline.
‘This is something that we hope to have expanded greatly by 1994,’ he said.
The report also reveals that new courses are planned in performing arts, engineering, leisure industry skills, media studies and beauty therapy in the next two years.
And as part of the expansion, Mr Shuker says he wants the college to be open seven days a week, 52 weeks a year, closed only for bank holidays.
He said he hoped this would allow people to pursue subjects whenever they wished, rather than being stuck in the traditional September to June timetable.
‘When we move over to this scheme it will be perfectly possible for people to pop in and do a module in June, July or August,’ he said.
In the meantime he said college bosses were waiting to hear if a parliamentary bill to give the college self-governing status would be scuppered by an early election.
‘At the moment the bill looks likely to receive the royal assent in early April, so if the election is later than that then we will be pressing on with the plans.
‘If not, the whole scheme is likely to be put on hold for quite a while.’
Ministry men rally to save town guest house
Top civil servants have pledged their support for a guest house which is facing closure.
Berncia House, in Vane Terrace, Darlington, is a regular haunt of London officials from a number of ministries who come to the town on business.
A complaint over parking space led to the discovery that no planning permission had been granted for the guest house.
When Mr Bernard Corker, who owns the business, applied for retrospective planning permission the council refused on the grounds that it was too noisy, conflicted with proposed parking standards and did not fit in with the character of the residential area.
Men from the ministries including Education and Science, Transport and the Ministry of Defence have rallied round to save their stop-over, which ranks as one of the top six in the town.
Mr Corker said: ‘Staff from the ministries cannot be called as references but we do have letters of recommendation from them and the Department of the Environment has these in our appeal.
‘It's a personal recommendation really.’
He added: ‘We have been here since 1986 but it has been used as a guest house since 1965.
‘Other residents are fine about it and I have collected a petition to support our appeal.’
He said the only other complaint was in November when he put up a sign advertising the guest house.
He took it down when asked to do so.
Ironically, the council which is now opposing the business, sings its praises in the town's new tourism booklet, Decide on Darlington.
And Mr Corker has received letters from the tourism office advising him of financial help available for expansion plans.
‘It's a little farcical,’ he said, ‘one department is asking us to expand and another is trying to close us down.’
Mr Corker's planning appeal will be dealt with in written submissions by a planning inspector appointed by the Department of the Environment.
Harewood hospice team targets summer opening
Organisers moved a step closer to opening Darlington's new hospice this week.
The team moved its office headquarters to the hospice's new base at Harewood House, on Harewood Hill.
Mrs Elaine Phillips, who helps co-ordinate the hospice's home care service, said: ‘We hope to be open by the summer but we are now working from the hospice itself.
‘The hospice now needs to be furnished, so that we can provide respite for up to 15 patients a day.
‘We are aiming to provide a wide range of facilities for them from arts and crafts to aromatherapy and massage.
Anything that will improve their quality of life.’
The team is appealing for second-hand office furniture for their HQ, but patient facilities at the hospice will be bought using money raised by well-wishers.
‘The public have been absolutely tremendous,’ Mrs Phillips said, ‘we are very grateful to everyone who has helped us.’
A furniture auction by Elm Ridge Methodist Church raised almost £3,000 for the hospice last weekend.
During the past year the Rev. Keith Garner and his parishioners have donated almost £10,000 to the appeal.
A further £1,115 was raised by clubs and churches in the area last week.
Mrs Phillips said the group was now planning to ask firms in the town to sponsor a room in the hospice.
Volunteers are still needed to help the hospice expand its current home sitter service.
Mrs Dorothy Davison will meet volunteers in Northallerton on February 13 and in Richmond on February 27.
Anyone who is interested in becoming a sitter should call the hospice on Darlington .
Office now open: the hospice team, from left, Mrs Deirdre Shaw, Mrs Dorothy Davison, Mrs Elaine Phillips, and Mrs Jean Husband.
Service cuts warning as councils tighten their purse strings
Councils around the region are set to tighten their purse strings after the Government announced spending levels for the coming year.
The figures, which were announced at the weekend, disappointed most and led to warnings of cuts in services to avoid charge capping.
Darlington borough council, Wear Valley and Sedgefield district councils said they were worst hit by the spending limits.
Coun. John Williams, leader of Darlington borough council, said their £10.324m. standard spending assessment the amount the Government says they need to provide services was not enough to give the town its planned facelift.
He said: ‘This is inadequate for Darlington's needs, in particular for environmental projects and improving the town centre.
‘Many quality initiatives and housing services will be affected.’
The council will be looking to save in the region of £700,000 to remain within the new target level.
Mr Eddie Scrivens, director of finance at Wear Valley district council, said the outlook was extremely bleak.
The council's appeal for more money to Mr Michael Portillo, local government minister, was refused.
‘We have a standard spending assessment of £6.155m. which is in no way related to our spending needs,’ he said, ‘We are looking at about a £1.4m. reduction in spending.
It's iniquitous.’
Mr Brian Allen, assistant director of finance at Sedgefield council, said: ‘The budget will be frozen this year in order to avoid being capped.
‘We will be endeavouring to get our budget within the £7.127m. limit and we are hoping that it will be achieved relatively painlessly.’
Durham county council was awarded an extra £2m. after appealing against an earlier allocation.
But Mr John Kirkby, director of finance, said the £6.902m. spending limit was fairly disappointing.
He said: ‘We are trying a bit of good house-keeping across the board.
‘About £4.2m. is to be saved from the services, trimming here and there, but hopefully we will be able to do this without significantly affecting the services we provide.’
But Teesdale district council is confident it will escape the next round of belt tightening.
Mr Bryan Atherton, director of finance at Teesdale district council, said their budget had come well within last year's allowance.
The Department of the Environment this year set spending levels for the council at £2.362m.
Mr Atherton said: ‘There will be no cuts in services that I can foresee.
‘The council has always been a very moderate spender in the past and we should be able to undertake new initiatives this year.
‘In the next few months we will see what the public think we should spend our money on, as we look at the results of a survey.’
Major changes in fire service win county vote
Sweeping changes in the way Durham county fire brigade is run were approved by county councillors on Thursday.
In the next year, old emergency tenders at eight of the nine 24-hour stations in the county will be replaced by the most advanced fire engines, costing £92,000 each.
And many specialist machines are to be replaced by new equipment making full use of the latest technology.
The changes come after an 18-month review conducted by the chief fire officer, Mr Alf Thompson, and received all-party support at a committee meeting held behind closed doors.
They included a change in name from Durham County fire brigade to Durham County fire and rescue brigade.
One of the more controversial decisions is to move the heavy rescue unit, used in major road accidents, to the Bishop Auckland station from Darlington.
The town's MP, Mr Michael Fallon, and several councillors in Darlington had said they would fight the move.
Mr Fallon had been asked for his help in December by worried Darlington firemen.
They argued that Darlington was much nearer the busiest trunk road the A1(M) as well as the main railway line and Teeside Airport.
But at a press conference after the public protection committee met, Mr Thompson said the relocation would benefit the whole county.
It would mean firemen in the north of the county would be able to use the vehicle, as well as those in Darlington and the south.
He said he had been accused of ‘asset stripping’ as a prelude to the possibility of Darlington opting out after the next election.
‘But I had no mandate to do this from the council.
This has come about for purely geographical reasons.
If Bishop Auckland was where Darlington is I would be doing exactly the same thing.’
Mr Fallon said he was disappointed to hear that the heavy rescue unit was moving and that the public had not been allowed to hear the debate.
‘It's another closed doors decision that I regret.
If our county councillors don't look after us then the future is bleak.
This heavy rescue unit is another asset lost.’
He said he would now wait to see if Darlington firemen wanted him to take the matter to the home office.
The mayor of Darlington, Coun. Mrs Rita Fishwick, said she too was disappointed.
But she said she was pleased to see Darlington was to get one of the new advanced tenders.
‘I have got to see things from a parochial view, not from the county-wide perspective.
I am sad to see anything leave Darlington.’
Mr Thompson said the new regime would mean Darlington would have one basic fire engine, one with rescue equipment and another with a turntable ladder.
It would also have one four-wheel drive vehicle and a basic fire engine in reserve.
He said the existing system was a throwback to the days when each borough ran its own affairs and added that for much of the time the heavy rescue unit could only be used if firemen were taken off other machines.
Now the unit would have its own crew 24 hours a day another factor which would mean Darlington would have a better service.
Other staff changes would mean the county would have 14 more firefighters at the expense of some middlemanagers.
Included in this figure are ten extra part-time firemen to be spread around the stations which are not open for 24 hours.
Barnard Castle, Middleton in Teesdale and Stanhope will all get one more fireman.
In the future, Mr Thompson said he looked forward to all 17 stations full and part-time having one of the new rescue engines by 1995–96.
Eight of the nine full-time stations would have them within a year, the exception being Bishop Auckland.
He said the review reflected changes in the county.
‘Durham county fire brigade needs to change to offer an effective response.
I am confident that what has been agreed will enable us to achieve that without spending any cash over and above that already in our normal annual budget over the next two years.’
After the council meeting, Coun. Tony Moore, Independent councillor for Newton Aycliffe, said he was disgusted that the public and the press had not been allowed into the meeting.
He said he would be writing to the chief executive of the county council to ask him why the decision had been taken.
Only district in the area without special nurse for diabetics
An estimated 3,000 people suffer from diabetes in the Darlington and Teesdale area but the health authority has no specialist diabetic nurse.
On Thursday Mrs Marian Flowers, CHC member and herself a diabetic, criticised the district for again omitting any such appointment from its budget for the 1992–93 financial year.
‘We have asked year after year and quite honestly we are fed up of being ignored,’ she said, claiming Darlington health authority was the only one in the area which has no such post.
Dr. Edwin Pugh, director of public health medicine, said there were 1,001 things the authority wanted to do but those in the business plan were items which were thought possible during the coming year.
Deciding the priorities was a very complicated and difficult task.
Mr Reg Watson, CHC chief officer, said answers given in previous years included the fact that in-service training was given to nurses.
However specialist nurses were provided in certain districts and there was a feeling that it was a better system.
After the meeting Mrs Flowers said a specialist nurse could liaise between hospitals, GPs and patients.
Often patients, particularly newly diagnosed people, were unsure about an aspect of their diet or treatment but did not feel they should bother their GP or hospital.
A specialist nurse would be an ideal contact.
Socialist urges rethink on police manpower
The Home Secretary is to be pressed to think again and allow County Durham Police to recruit more officers.
Mr Alan Milburn, Labour's prospective parliamentary candidate for Darlington, is writing to Mr Kenneth Baker, Home Secretary, calling on him to reconsider.
Durham Police wanted to take on 20 officers but their bid was rejected by the Home Office.
It could allow only 800 posts to be filled out of more than 1,700 applications nationwide.
Since 1979 when the Conservatives came to power Durham Constabulary has received approval for 40 extra officers, a three per cent increase.
Mr Milburn is writing to Mr Baker with figures showing that while 29,021 crimes were recorded in the county in 1978, the figure for the nine months to September 1991 was 63,418 a 118.5 per cent increase.
‘It simply is not good enough for the government to turn a blind eye; Darlington needs more police officers,’ he said.
Labour would provide more Bobbies on the beat.
Planner fears further car chaos
A chief council planner described car parking at Darlington Memorial Hospital as chaotic.
Mr Laurie Mulrine, Darlington's head of development control, said the car parking congestion around County Durham's principal hospital had made some roads a deathtrap for pedestrians.
He said that one elderly man had been killed on Hollyhurst Road because he was unable to find a safe place to cross owing of the amount of cars parked along the street.
The lack of adequate parking space within the hospital grounds was even worse, he added.
‘All marked spaces are filled and then motorists exercise their personal ingenuity.
This includes cars parked with two wheels on the roadway and two on the pavement, a disregard for double yellow lines, particularly near the main entrance.
Mr Brian Riley, the solicitor representing Bioplan Holdings in the appeal, quizzed Mr Mulrine about a report he had produced.
The report showed how:
Ambulances struggle to get through Hollyhurst Road in emergencies.
Buses have to drop off passengers in the middle of the road because cars had parked at bus stops.
Residents are blocked in their own drives by parked cars.
Cars parked on both sides of the road made it almost impossible for buses to pass each other on a popular bus route.
Mr Riley, for Bioplan, said the accident rate on Hollyhurst Road was lower than the national average.
But, said Mr Mulrine: ‘We have already had one fatality because of parked cars on Hollyhurst Road are you asking me to say that one death is acceptable?’
Mr Mulrine said more parking space could be found within the hospital grounds but it would involve ‘laying tarmac next to the cenotaph’.
He also said there were 230 patients at Aycliffe Hospital who faced an uncertain future and some of them could be moved to the Memorial hospital.
This would ‘make a chaotic situation even worse,’ he said.
‘Slower speeds, fewer accidents’ Parked cars on roads surrounding Darlington Memorial Hospital would make for fewer car accidents.
That was the claim made by the solicitor representing Bioplan Holdings at the two-day appeal held this week at Darlington Town Hall.
Mr Brian Riley, of Watson Firth solicitors, said the vehicles which line both sides of Hollyhurst Road reduced the speed at which traffic could travel.
For many years residents on Hollyhurst Road, which forms the western boundary of the Memorial Hospital, have complained that hospital workers, out-patients, and visitors park outside the homes and driveways of residents.
But Mr Riley argued that the parking on Hollyhurst Road was not a hazard to pedestrians who had to cross between parked cars instead they slowed down the speeding cars.
He also dismissed council claims that there would be an increase in the volume of traffic and noise both within the hospital grounds and along Hollyhurst Road.
Mr Riley called two witnesses; one to put the case against parking problems and the other to explain why noise pollution should not be a reason for throwing out the project.
Mrs Teresa Jane Strachan, a Newcastle town-planner, said that although the new private hospital building would take away 69 car-parking places, this loss would be more than compensated by the two new Bioplan car parks.
One car park with 30 spaces was planned to the west of the building and another with 86 spaces to the east.
Both would be used by NHS staff and patients as well as private patients and staff.
Bioplan's scheme for traffic control had been accepted by Durham county council and Darlington council officers.
She was mystified by the refusal by councillors.
But Mrs Strachan's evidence was treated with disdain by council solicitor, Mr Richard Humphreys.
‘We are appalled on this side by the behaviour of the appellant's witnesses.
They have presented us with an extraordinary melange of figures which are hugely contradictory.
‘Mrs Strachan's evidence is wholly unreliable.
She really did not seem to have done her homework.
‘It seems to me that Bioplan came here expecting an easy appeal,’ said Mr Humphreys.
His attack came after Mr Christopher Robson, another of Bioplan's witnesses contradicted much of her evidence.
Mr Humphreys said they offered different versions of the number of beds in the hospitals; the number of people working there; the volume of traffic on Hollyhurst Road; the number of parking spaces which were to be created by Bioplan and the shift patterns worked by staff at Bioplan.
Mr Robson, a transportation expert representing Bioplan, said noise levels created by traffic in the larger of the proposed hospital's two car parks, would not be higher than average levels of noise.
He said Bioplan would replace a fence with a 3m high stone wall to shield homes next to the car park from the noise created by car doors slamming and engines being started.
But Mr Humphreys said Mr Robson was ignoring those residents who were affected by the noise within the Memorial Hospital grounds.
‘You seem to be forgetting the patients in the wards,’ he said.
‘The very reason people are in those wards next to that car park is to recuperate in peaceful surroundings.
‘Is there a brand new theory which is going to be shown on Panorama tonight which says that recuperation is not good for people's health?’ he asked.
Mr Humphreys also drew attention to the installation of a new magnetic body scanner at the Yarm Road Industrial Estate in Darlington.
Bioplan had stressed that the CT scanner they were to install would dramatically improve diagnostic medicine in the town.
Mr Humphreys suggested that the new Yarm Road scanner stripped Bioplan's hospital of one of its main selling points.
Anger at plan to ban disabled from driving in town centre
Council officers in Darlington were yesterday accused of discriminating against the disabled.
Coun. Mrs Norma Town (Lab) said she could not agree with their plans to ban all traffic from High Row and Skinnergate including vehicles used by the disabled between 10.30am and 4pm.
As chairman of an access group representing the disabled in the town, she said she had written to two leading Labour councillors asking the Labour group to reject the recommendations.
She also criticised the council for not banning cyclists from the area.
She said that could lead to many serious accidents especially for blind people like herself, because cyclists could not always be heard.
The proposals, to be put before the policy and resources committee on Tuesday, give three alternatives.
One would allow the disabled to drive in the area all day; the second gives them access up until 11.30am and after 3pm, and the third would give them no special advantages at all.
Officers are recommending that councillors approve the third option.
The council leader, Coun. John Williams, said he had yet to decide what the Labour group policy would be.
‘But we want proper pedestrianisation in High Row and Skinnergate.
There are a large number of orange badge holders.
If you let huge amounts of people in then you have not got effective pedestrianisation.
So we must steer a delicate course.’
He pointed out that under the proposals an extra 42 places would be reserved for the disabled in Abbot's Yard, near High Row and Skinnergate.
However, Coun. Mrs Town said the time restrictions would seriously hamper disabled people who often had to wait for lifts into town.
‘Orange badge holders should be allowed into the pedestrian area at least in the experimental period of six months,’ she said.
‘We were told that we could not add anything to the pedestrian provision after the initial period.
Measures can be withdrawn but not added.
‘So it would seem much more sensible to allow badge holders access to start with and then withdraw it if it becomes unworkable.’
‘The recommendations say the requirements of the disabled should be monitored, but how can you monitor something that isn't happening?’
In the report Mr Stephen Tapper, director of development services, says the council has rejected the idea of setting up a special badge purely for Darlington.
He said that went against new Department of Transport guidelines.
‘Severe hardship’ permits would still be issued to a very small number of people.
Coun. Mrs Town said she did not see the difference between a severe hardship permit and a special badge, and accused the council officers of ‘just playing with words’.
She also criticised the councillors for not banning cyclists.
‘It seems particularly stupid to ban the disabled and not put any restrictions on cyclists.
‘Cyclists can be involved in some horrifying accidents, especially for those with no sight.
They could prove a terrific hazard.’
Coun. Peter Jones (C), a member of the policy and resources committee, said he would propose an amendment to make things easier for the disabled.
He accused the Labour group of going back on its promise to look after the interests of the handicapped.
He was particularly critical of the plan to set up a ‘severe hardship’ permit.
‘What on earth does that mean?
Are people going to have to take a medical before they can go down a street they have been going down all their lives?’
The policy and resource committee meets on Tuesday.
Dolphin Centre to change its appearance
The Dolphin Centre in Darlington is to be given a green roof, councillors will be told on Wednesday.
A report to the borough's planning applications sub-committee says the new-look leisure centre will also include cast-iron drainpipes and a new panel for the leaping dolphins as well as olive-green roof tiles.
Mr John Buxton, director of property services, said yesterday the new panel had been forced on them by the rarity of the brick used in the building.
The brickyard had only a few left so those around the leaping dolphins would be used as a ‘brick bank’ to make up for breakages.
They are to be replaced with a cheaper type of brick to be covered in a special layer and painted in a new light colour.
‘It will make quite a difference to the Feethams side of the building,’ said Mr Buxton.
The contract for the £4.5m. worth of repairs is due to be given out this month and be completed by the winter of 1993/4.
PRIVATE nursing home owners have come forward with a rescue plan for a doomed old people's home in a bid to save 21 pensioners from having to move.
A Darlington couple have made an anonymous offer to buy Hollyhurst, one of the eight county council-owned residential homes scheduled for closure.
The couple, who own a private old people's home elsewhere in the North-East, asked pensioners' champion Rev William Harper to help them negotiate the sale.
Mr Harper and his lay ministers in St Paul's Church Society give church services in 24 Darlington old people's homes and he has asked the Prime Minister to intervene over the closure plan.
Mr Harper, who has written to Durham County Council with the couple's bid, said: ‘I have known these people for seven years and they are superb to their residents.’
A county council spokesman said: ‘We have received Rev Harper's letter and will be replying to it in due course.’
PARISH, school and home are a three way partnership that makes learning special for children at St Augustine's RC primary in Darlington.
Pressure for places from parishioners means there is little room for other children with only 16 of the 213 pupils coming from non-Catholic homes.
They regularly lead Sunday services at the parish church and welcome the community into school to celebrate special events.
While religious education follows the Catholic faith, the rest of the school timetable is devoted to the National Curriculum with a strong emphasis on pastoral care.
MORE than 30 years of service to the Order of St John medical service will be rewarded for one of the Order's most senior doctors in County Durham.
Dr Iestyn Williams, 73, came to Darlington from Wales.
He worked in Darlington for several years in a variety of practices around the town.
He first become involved in the Order when as a junior doctor he was encouraged by the promise of a bottle of beer by a colleague.
He has gone on to be invested as a Commander.
His wife, Celia, 63, will be travelling with him to London on February 19 for the formal investiture at the Grand Priory Church, St John's Square, in Clerkenwell.
Dr Williams has been through the ranks of the order and now holds the post of County Surgeon for County Durham.
Since retiring as a GP he has continued to perform a variety of tasks for the Order.
One of the most important is his work as medical examiner for pilots flying from Teesside Airport, near his home at The Spinney, Middleton St George.
‘I am responsible for making sure all the pilots who fly from the airport are fit.
Some of them come back from all over Britain.
It's something of a social occasion,’ said Dr Williams.
He has also been able to indulge his interest in motor sport through his work for the Order.
This year will be the last time he attends the Isle of Man TT races.
‘I still enjoy going to racing at Croft circuit but I think this year's trip to the Isle of Man will be my swan song,’ he said.
Socialism's failure
YOUR generous coverage of Neil Kinnock and Co's shindig in York (Echo January 13) was remarkable not only for its front page spread of crusader Kinnock (a sad caricature of the Express's Lord Beaverbrook), its 100 column inches of fact evasion and 2,000 words of distraction from political reality.
It said nothing relevant to the well being of the country; it was blank space titivated by invective and promises of massive cash hand outs.
Not one word on where the money would come from.
They cannot tell us because they don't know and because they are campaigning for power at any cost.
Labour are spendthrifts by instinct, imposers of crippling taxes by necessity and blissfully unconcerned about causing high inflation, uncontrollable cost of living and economic chaos.
Socialism does not work.
Ask your dad or any citizen of the Soviet Republic..
INFANTS at Harrowgate Hill School in Darlington are adopting a uniform of hard hats, overalls and wellingtons and it is all because of the pantomime, Peter Pan.
The 210 children have taken up the panto's challenge and sought the advice of professional builders so they can construct Wendy's house in brick in their school yard.
As well as providing an all-weather play house, the children are building their knowledge of maths, science, technology and English.
They have visited a brick works, turned their designs into architects' drawings and are discovering the secrets of drainage and bricklaying.
A WOMAN who went to a Turkish base camp is to talk of her experiences to a Darlington audience next week.
Traveller and singer Elisabeth Parry is to speak about the Hakkari region of Turkey which was closed to foreigners for more than 40 years.
She was on an expedition where packhorses were hired to go to the camp at 10,000ft beside a mountain lake.
Ms Parry is now the Managing Director of London Opera Players and London Chamber Opera.
She has been a keen walker and rock climber for many years and has climbed in the Alps, Pyrenees and Dolomites.
The talk to Darlington Lecture Association is at Darlington College of Technology on Monday at 7.45pm.
AN INFORMATION evening into special needs teaching takes place in Darlington next week.
The College of Technology is opening its doors to people who want to take the Special Needs Teaching Certificate Course, leading to a City and Guilds.
Staff from the voluntary, health and social services sector will attend the evening on February 11 at 7pm.
All applicants must hold a recognised teaching qualification.
Further information on Darlington  or .
ONE in five poll tax payers has been summonsed to court for non-payment, a report claims today.
The independent Local Government Information Unit says councils are ‘engaged in the biggest debt collection exercise ever known.’
The unit carried out a survey of 21 authorities across the country, including some in the North-East, for its report.
It quotes Wansbeck in Northumberland, which has 47,498 people on its register, as having issued 26,549 summonses between April 1990 and last September, which resulted in 21,382 liability orders.
The survey's claim is borne out by experience elsewhere in the region.
Chester-le-Street Council spokeswoman Alison Stephens said: ‘We have issued about 9,000 summonses for the 1990/91 poll tax year, that's out of 39,800 payers.
‘That works out at about one in four and a half, which is similar to the survey figure.’
One in five payers in Darlington have been summonsed, 14,948 out of 78,300 accounts, Malcolm Watson, the borough council's head of revenue and computer systems said.
Of these 12,900 have resulted in liability orders.
‘In 1989/90, the last year of the rates, we got just over 1,800 distress warrants the equivalent of liability orders.
‘When you compare that with almost 13,000 liability orders, as you can see there is a slight difference,’ Mr Watson said.
A LUXURY country house hotel has planning approval to build an 18-hole golf course after an earlier application was turned down.
In October the owners of Redworth Hall Hotel near Darlington were refused permission for a course by the borough council.
The council backed local residents and Heighington parish council who expressed fears about increased noise and traffic the course and attached golf school would generate.
Conservation groups also objected, arguing the course would be an unnecessary intrusion into the countryside and historic Redworth Wood.
Applicants Tomorrows Leisure revised their scheme and amended the layout of the fairways to meet with the council's demands.
Yesterday's meeting of the borough planning applications sub-committee approved plans for the 48 hectare golf course subject to certain legally binding conditions.
Councillors approved the scheme after learning plans for the golf school had been dropped.
They heard fairways have been designed for beginners and medium skill players, and the public will be able to use it on a pay and play basis as well as hotel guests.
Laurie Mulrine, senior planning officer, said following redesign of the course layout the feared encroachment into Redworth Wood was now likely to be ‘negligible.’
But Trevor Swan, of Redworth Village, told the meeting he and other residents were concerned by the plans.
He said villagers already suffered noise and disruption related to the hotel, including helicopters flying in and out, and disco music blaring from parties in marquees.
‘The rural aspect of the village is being eroded by the leisure facilities of the hotel,’ he said.
Mr Swan added there was no real need for the course as a nearby one owned by Aycliffe Town Council would soon be doubled in size to 18 holes.
Council leader John Williams said he fully supported the scheme and hoped it would attract more tourists to the area.
SEVEN schemes in County Durham including the Darlington Cross Town Route are at risk because more than £4.5m of European grants could be blocked.
Coun Bob Pendlebury, deputy leader of Durham County Council, yesterday blamed a dispute between the British Government and the European Community.
Trade and industry minister Edward Leigh recently wrote to The Northern Echo firmly denying that the Government was responsible for any delay.
But European Commissioner Bruce Millan has long argued that Britain is out of step because it includes European money in its allocations to local authorities.
More than £100m of aid directed to areas hit by industrial decline has already been withheld by the EC funding under the RECHAR programme intended to help revive run-down mining areas.
Easington hoped to secure £6m under RECHAR.
Coun Pendlebury told a meeting of the full county council yesterday that seven other schemes are in jeopardy.
He named them as:
The £8m first phase of the Darlington Cross Town Route, expected to attract a European grant of £2m.;
The £6.376m A689 Newton Cap Diversion, Bishop Auckland, in line for £1.594m;
A £1.5m scheme of cash incentives to encourage business development, expected to attract £165,000 from Europe;
The £1m plan for roads and services at the Bracken Hill Business Park, Peterlee, which was hoped to attract £450,000 in European aid;
A £350,000 access road to the planned Durham County Cricket ground at Chester-le-Street, which could get £157,500;
A £350,000 scheme to open up phase three of the Seaham Grange Industrial Estate, in line for £140,000 from Europe.
A £100,980 project to train people in setting up co-operative businesses, which had been expected to secure £45,441.
Campaigners fighting to kill off the proposed Darlington Cross Town Route have welcomed the news.
Environmentalists oppose the plans because they say the road will destroy the remains of the historic Stockton Railway Line, cut the town in two and bring more heavy industrial traffic.
Late last year Treasury Minister David Mellor, while visiting Teesside International Airport, was urged by Darlington Business Venture to change the rules which blocked EC cash.
DBV members were concerned that plans for industrial units on the old Darlington Forge Site were being held up.
UNSIGHTLY billboards could soon be taken down around Darlington through new powers adopted by the borough council.
Yesterday's meeting of the planning sub-committee gave Stephen Tapper, director of development services, delegated powers to order the removal of ugly advertising displays.
Committee chairman David Lyonette said outside the meeting the authority had already successfully removed billboards around the town including Haughton Road and was looking at removing others along High Northgate.
He urged members of the public to contact the council if there were any ugly advertising boards they wanted removed.
PLANS for a car showroom and petrol station on Darlington's McMullen Road were approved by borough councillors yesterday.
Members of the planning applications sub-committee backed proposals to build a showroom, workshop, and filling station south of the proposed cross town route.
It is understood the site will be used as a Nissan dealership although the car maker's UK headquarters at Sunderland was unable to confirm this.
Labour ward councillor Frank Robson said he supported the plans but was angry work had started on the site before the scheme had been approved.
MAJOR rebuilding work on the Dolphin Centre, Darlington should begin at the end of next month.
Darlington council must decide by mid-March which of the companies bidding for the contract to repair the leisure centre will do the work.
Crumbling masonry means the Dolphin Centre needs millions spending on it to make sure it is safe.
Yesterday John Buxton, director of central services at Darlington council, denied reports that recession will significantly reduce the expected repair bill of £4.5m.
The job is being completed in two parts with the initial scaffolding already in place.
The second, and more complex, phase entails strengthening existing brickwork and roofing.
The council's finance committee heard the price agreed would be a final bill for repairs.
It was originally thought the contract could be given last year with work starting in late autumn.
But delays about the nature of the contract meant the deadline for tenders became February 24.
The financial burden of repairs has meant the council faces a year of cost cutting in other departments.
Legal action is planned against the builders Wiltshier Northern.
A PROJECT for budding photographers has been set up at a Newton Aycliffe school.
Photographer Beth Davidson, a Darlington artist, is showing pupils how to print and develop pictures as part of a major arts initiative in the county.
Seven other schools are taking part in the scheme and projects include designing and painting wall murals and environmental sculpture.
The two-month scheme has been funded by Northern Arts, Durham County Council and Wear Valley District Council.
A DIGITAL counting system to prevent overcrowding at Perry's Brasserie in Beaumont Street, Darlington has been a great success, staff said yesterday The scheme was introduced last month after environmental health inspectors made a surprise visit and found about 930 people inside the capacity is 725.
Manager Sallie Dickinson said the new system gives very exact figures.
ONE of the world's original railway landmarks may be saved from oblivion.
But the future of No. 48 Bridge Road, Stockton, built in 1825, is still not certain.
Although it is now a mouldering and dangerous ruin, it was the first-ever office for issuing freight vouchers for the Stockton and Darlington railway.
It was not, as some historians claimed, the world's first passenger railway ticket office because only coal trains rumbled down into Stockton's dockland.
Railway buffs have watched in horror over the years as the office crumbled into an eyesore.
Plans for dismantling the relic and rebuilding it as part of a railway heritage at Preston Hall museum have collapsed because the bill would be at least half a million pounds.
But councillors will be told on Monday that a compromise linked with compassion may save it.
The idea is to re-create the building as a 12-bed extension for the neighbouring and packed Stockton mission for the single homeless without losing its historical railway look.
DARLINGTON town hall is preparing to take the lead in a major project to provide child care facilities in the town.
And the move, if successful, would be part of a package used to attract new businesses to Darlington.
Darlington council has launched the project after recognising the need and demand in the community for the development of a creche to help working parents.
But because of the cash required the Town Hall wants to join forces with other major employers to set up the scheme.
‘Childcare is increasingly becoming a necessity and not the optional extra or luxury it may once have been considered,’ said Coun Frank Robson, chairman of the council's personnel sub-committee.
In a letter sent out to employers Stan Heywood, assistant chief executive, wrote: ‘As one of the biggest employers in the area, we appreciate that caring for children is an important and responsible job.
‘Children need to feel safe, require stimulation, security and fun.
They need to explore, socialise, mix with interested adult company and be looked after in a warm and friendly environment.
‘The biggest barrier to employees returning successfully to the workplace is the lack of provision of childcare facilities and arrangements.’
Mr Heywood has invited representatives from major companies to meet the council to discuss the scheme.
He hopes to set up a steering group to develop ideas.
The first meeting is to be held on February 26 at 2pm at the Town Hall.
RESIDENTS living near Darlington College of Technology have hit out at plans to use the building to its full potential.
They claim any effort to keep the college open 52 weeks a year would increase parking problems around Cleveland Avenue, Abbey Road and Milbank Road.
Principal Peter Shuker revealed last month he hoped the college would be open seven days a week on demand by 1994.
But yesterday Norman Bainbridge, of Cleveland Avenue, said students regularly ignored restrictions and parked on both sides of the roads around the college, causing havoc for motorists and blocking driveways.
‘To consider opening the college for seven days a week in this area is ridiculous,’ said Mr Bainbridge.
‘May I suggest that the college direct its attention to providing adequate parking facilities for the students already attending existing courses?’
Mr Shuker was not available yesterday for comment.
CAR thieves wrecked two fences and ripped up lawns when they sped through a quiet residential estate yesterday.
The thieves had stolen a Mitsubishi Shogun from Neasham Road, Darlington, in the early hours.
But when they spotted police along Haughton Road they sped off along Hundens Lane and raced through Brunel Way, a residential estate for pensioners.
Residents yesterday spoke of their fear as the car crashed through two fences and swerved over a lawn, smashing its indicator light.
William Huck, 66, said: ‘It was about four in the morning and I could feel the windows rattling.
I thought it was the wind.
‘I got the impression the car was being chased.
It must have been some force to knock the fences down.’
And neighbour Violet Miller said: ‘He must have been doing about 90 miles an hour.
I could feel the house shaking.’
Her mother Mary Ann Elsworth, 77, was still reeling from the shock.
‘I was in the sitting room and I could have been killed if they had come through my side,’ she said.
The car sped through the estate and left skid marks on the road and lawns.
Police said it was later found abandoned in Neasham Road.
AN ELDERLY man claimed yesterday he has to risk his life to cross a busy Darlington road because of illegally parked cars.
Yesterday police officers visited St Pauls Motors, in North Road, Darlington, to warn staff about leaving cars from the garage parked illegally on double yellow lines.
But Stephen Evans, of St Paul's Motors, said the situation was unfair as there was no need for the yellow lines to be there.
He claims they were painted when some temporary traffic lights were erected and the council never bothered to remove them when the lights were taken down.
Since then the garage has been obliged to leave some of its cars on the lines because it cannot display them any other way.
But an elderly man who lives nearby said the illegally parked cars make crossing the road extremely hazardous.
‘I have nearly been killed through having to walk on to the road to see whether it is clear,’ he said.
Yesterday a policeman warned Mr Evans that unless the cars were removed from the yellow lines St Paul's Motors would receive a series of fixed penalty fines.
POLICE have advised bicycle owners to take special precautions following a surge in thefts in the Darlington area last week.
PC Paul Robinson said 19 bicycles worth more than £3,000 had been taken, many from garages, sheds and gardens.
The thieves' favourite remains mountain bikes, with many among those taken last week.
He called on people to bring their cycles to the police station for post coding, available free of charge.
Among the cycles stolen was a blue Raleigh with green and red dots, serial number 1696257.
Meanwhile, there were 56 burglaries in the Darlington area last week, with video recorders particularly targeted.
PC Robinson advised owners to cover up the digital light of the video recorder when going out during the evening.
Among the goods removed from houses were: camcorder and video worth £100 (Primrose Street); electrical goods, jewellery and cosmetics worth £1,431 (Greenbank Road); aftershave, leather jacket, jeans and other electrical goods worth £1,370 (Grange Road) and remote control toys worth £250 (West Auckland Road).
Other goods taken were a video jewellery and binoculars (Thompson Street West); six coats and sideboard drawer (Geneva Road); electrical goods and clothing worth £2,065); cash and jewellery worth £2,100 (Neasham Road) and computer (Tyne Crescent).
Thefts from vehicles rose last week to 49, with 27 radio cassettes stolen; including a Pye radio cassette, model number CCE500 serial number 9009043504.
Other goods removed from vehicles included: torch, sunglasses and camera (Sanderson Street); two jackets (Leadenhall Street); portable generator and Hilti hammer (Westmoreland Street); pushchair, accessories and jacket (Bedford Street) and leather jacket and keys (Teesside Airport).
Vandals damaged 22 vehicles in the area.
In Whitby Way vandals unsuccessfully tried to set a car ablaze by throwing a jar containing flammable liquid and lighted rag at it.
The following items were stolen from sheds and garages last week: grinder and drill (The Headlands); pet rabbit (Harringay Cresent); lawnmower and screwdrivers (Melsonby Crescent); garden tools worth £245 (Geneva Road) and a drill (Park Crescent).
A thief snatched a handbag containing £560 from a woman as she was about to get into her car in Firthmoor Crescent, while clothing was stolen from a line in Egglestone View.
Forty six thefts of vehicles were reported last week.
Those still outstanding are: White BMW (EGR 19W); white Fiesta (UPT 100V); black XR2 (D781 GHN); blue Orion (D117 FEF); red Escort (E634 AFE); white Astra (F514 WVN); gold Fiesta (FVH 588Y); red Ford van (TVA 346W); beige Honda Moped (VLU 667X); blue Escort (B382 GGR); silver Yamaha (H468 KHN); blue Carlton (D413 YFV); black Honda (A410 EEF); red Cavalier (A664 LTM); red Sierra (A271 ACU).
POLICE investigating a complex fraud case accused a man of inventing an alter ego so he could open bank accounts in his name, a court heard.
Teesside Crown Court heard officers in the case believe Parvis Yousefi created the fictitious identity of Momen Garawand to defraud banks of thousands of pounds.
Esmund Falkes, prosecuting, said when detectives showed Yousefi stills from videos filmed inside the Royal Bank of Scotland, Darlington, he agreed it was him, but staff said they knew the man as Garawand.
It is also alleged under the name Garawand he applied for a loan of more than £40,000 to buy the house in Southfield Crescent, Stockton, where he was living.
Yousefi, 37, denies two counts of attempting to obtain by deception, four of obtaining a pecuniary advantage by deception, and five of obtaining by deception.
The trial continues.
A YOUNG mother has called on Darlington council to rid her house of damp after her son developed chest problems.
Tracy Brown, of Aldborough Walk, Darlington, said damp walls and condensation caused her one-year-old son's asthma.
Tracy, 27, said: ‘Jamie is always having colds and chest infections and has been poorly since he was born.
The wallpaper in the house is black from condensation and I am at the end of my tether.’
She said the house had been damp for a year and she had complained to the council on numerous occasions.
‘I even took them a doctor's note about Jamie's illness.
Even I find it hard to sleep in the bedrooms because of the damp.’
She said her other sons Philip, five and Liam, three, also suffered health problems.
Pauline Mitchell, Darlington council's housing director, said they had now installed a humidistat and extractor fan in the house.
‘We realise this is a long-term problem and we have tried to be helpful,’ said Mrs Mitchell.
‘It is difficult for the Browns as their house is a gable-end property which makes it difficult to heat.
But the humidistat will come on automatically to regulate the damp in the air.’
THE NUMBER of cyclists seriously injured in accidents in Darlington increased last year it has been revealed.
Statistics to be tabled at the Darlington Cycling Forum on Monday show a rise from six serious accidents in 1990 to ten last year.
There have been no fatalities during the last two years.
In County Durham as a whole serious injuries increased from 21 to 23 during the same periods.
In 1990 the six serious accidents in Darlington represented 20pc of cycling accidents, whereas in 1991 ten serious injuries accounted for 32.3pc of all the accidents.
Statistics also reflect a rise in accidents among children aged up to 16, and Darlington still has the higher share of accidents involving 17 year olds and over.
In Darlington in 1990, 19 accidents (63pc) involved over 16 year olds while in 1991 this age group was involved in 17 accidents (54pc).
The total number of accidents involving cyclists in Darlington rose by one to 31.
EXPLORER Robert Swann is helping people in the North-East turn over a new leaf and help the environment.
Mr Swann has challenged Darlington Environmental Watch (DEW) to get as many people as possible to join the ambitious worldwide Tree of Life project.
It is the brainchild of Mr Swann and Jonathon Porritt, director of Friends of the Earth.
Under the scheme anyone can send a leaf-shaped card to the June global summit, in Brazil, with their own message to world leaders about the environment.
Each leaf, with its own Pledge for the Planet will be pinned on a giant ‘tree’ which is to be put up outside the summit building in Rio de Janeiro.
Maggie Bosanquet, spokesman for DEW, said: ‘Robert Swann wants us to put Darlington and the North-East on the map in terms of this summit.
We want to send a powerful message from the region and hope to collect a mountain of leaves to send to Brazil.’
CAMPAIGNERS fighting to prevent the proposed Darlington cross town route have re-doubled their efforts to complete a dossier against the road.
The move follows news that the road could be at risk because of a wrangle over European cash grants, with the possibility of more than £4.5m to Durham County Council being blocked.
Darlington Environmental Watch spokeswoman Maggie Bosanquet said: ‘We will be urging an early meeting with Euro MP Stephen Hughes to outline our belief that this money, so desperately needed by local industry and residents, should not be squandered on an unnecessary road.’
She was speaking out after the deputy leader of Durham County Council, Bob Pendlebury, warned the dispute between the British Government and the European Community about the allocation of European grants could hit the county hard.
The cross town route one of seven schemes in the county under threat was expected to attract £2m from the EC towards the £8m needed for the first stage of the road, between McMullen Road and Darlington's southern bypass.
The road would give drivers using the A66 from Teesside a fast link with the A1(M).
But environmentalists say the road will destroy the remains of the historic Stockton Darlington Railway Line.
BUS companies have threatened a total boycott of Darlington's Skerne Park estate if speed restrictions are introduced.
Last night both United Buses and Darlington Transport Company said they had no complaint about improving safety but said the proposed speed humps are totally unsatisfactory.
They say they are willing to continue using the Skerne Park routes for a trial period while the speed humps are introduced.
If the problems they fear do arise they will stop sending buses on to the estate.
Andrew Guest, of United, said the proposals for speed restrictions would mean buses travelling over 50 speed humps on a half hour round trip.
He said the humps are far more damaging for buses than for cars.
‘Our drivers can only negotiate them at a maximum of 15mph,’ he said.
Stuart Hyslop, of DTC, said he wanted to make it very clear that neither bus company was complaining about the idea of slowing traffic down on the estate.
Mr Hyslop said: ‘There are ways and means of introducing speed controls and speed humps are not the most effective.’
He said Durham and Darlington councils had not properly consulted the bus companies about speed restrictions and had failed to consider all the alternatives.
There are final decisions still to be taken over the introduction of the speed controls but it seems likely humps would be in place by September this year.
Members of Darlington's Transport Users Consultative Committee heard from officers that speed humps are the most effective means of stopping cars racing round the estate.
All the emergency services have backed the proposal to introduce speed humps.
But Mr Hyslop and Mr Guest said already youths were treating the speed humps in Clifton Road as a race track.
They both want to see narrow bends built into straight roads as a far more effective means of slowing traffic.
Coun Hannah Straiton (Lab), who represents the Skerne Park area, said she was very surprised by the bus companies' decision.
‘I was under the impression there had been full consultation and changes had been made in the plans to suit the buses,’ she said.
YELLOW lines have become a common feature of towns and cities though they are no less intrusive than when they were first introduced.
Many narrow lanes and yards, including those in Darlington, are desecrated with yellow paint where parking would not in any case be very sensible or even desirable.
Even streets wide enough for only one vehicle still have paint on both sides of the road.
Surely a simple eye level (or car driver's level) sign would be sufficient.
There are, after all, other restrictions and dangers, such as steep hills, which do not require the whole length of a road to be daubed in paint.
Kirkbymoorside deserves sympathy for having lost its status as the only town in the country to have so far escaped the painter's handiwork.
The county council is accused of over-reaction to police complaints.
The residents and traders do not seem overly worried about indiscriminate parking they seem to regard it as an advantage which the town has over others.
But those who fear a loss of trade are also guilty of over-reaction.
Restricting car access does not necessarily lead to a loss of trade.
York, among many towns which have pedestrianised their centres, has paved many of its streets without adverse effect.
And it has also got rid of the yellow lines which once scarred them.
THERE was a problem with Albert.
He had a screw missing.
Happily the other Albert the one with two rather than four legs was in finer fettle, despite a morning spent wrestling with the complexities of a long speech.
The screw-less Albert was a make of chair, bought for the new Ronald Harwood play Reflected Glory which has its world premiere at Darlington Civic Theatre this month.
The other Albert was Albert Finney, who stars as a successful restaurateur attempting a reconciliation with his playwright brother.
He produces his lunch a chunky meat and salad sandwich from a paper bag and talks about the rehearsal process.
‘I was struggling this morning because there is a frightfully long speech it becomes a feat of memory and if memory was the only element involved in acting then Leslie Welch the memory man would have been the greatest actor in the world.
‘Sometimes you come in and feel optimistic because you have done your work the previous night and the morning's work reminds you of how little progress you have made.
You are always short of what you think you can reach.’
As an actor, Salford-born Finney is hard to pin down.
One of the breed of Northern working class actors who rose to fame in the British cinema of the early Sixties, he has moved smoothly between film (Annie, Shoot the Moon and Miller's Crossing of late), both commercial and subsidised theatre, and even television (in Kingsley Amis' The Green Man).
It is a restlessness, a refusal to longterm relationships, that has typified both his public and private life.
He readily owns up to this refusal to be tied down.
Early in his career he turned down the title role in David Lean's Lawrence of Arabia (eventually played by Peter O'Toole) after producer Sam Speigel insisted he sign a long-term picture deal.
‘I don't think it made any difference to my career or Peter's,’ says Finney.
‘I think he was better casting than I was for the part.
Much better than I could have been in the role.
‘Now it seems an odd decision because the film was such a big success, but I didn't want to be under contract to anyone for any length of time with whom I didn't feel much in common.
Sam said ‘We will change your name and send you to my tailor’.
But I didn't want a mohair suit.’
Even before Saturday Night and Sunday Morning pushed him to the front of young British actors, he'd turned down post-RADA contracts with Rank and Associated British Pictures Corporation.
Even though he had a job to go to with Birmingham Repertory Company, his agent sent him to the Rank interview for the experience.
They went as far as offering to pay him a retainer on top of his rep salary for two years.
‘I was not thinking that way.
I didn't know what I wanted to do, what direction I wanted to go in.
I needed independence and freedom to respond on the way I wanted to go,’ he says.
Efforts to turn him into the new Olivier met a similar fate.
In the late Seventies he did two spells at the Royal National Theatre, playing Hamlet and Tamburlaine the Great on the move to the South Bank.
He has ‘not been inclined’ to return to company work since: ‘The great thing here is that you can do anything film, radio, theatre, television.
We are much more mobile.
That means we don't have a permanent company in the true sense of the word.
It means actors are allowed by and large to have much more variety of work.’
Reflected Glory reunites him with writer Ronald Harwood and director Elijah Moskinsky, with whom he worked on the stage production of Another Time a few years ago.
Finney had known Harwood for a long time before finally working with him on the film of The Dresser.
Now they are neighbours, with the writer giving Finney first look at his plays.
‘Ronnie has written some wonderful characters.
That's what I like about his plays.
He writes rich and interesting characters.
So here we go again,’ says Finney.
The new play has humour, pain and anguish about the nature of brothers and family relationships ‘of people who are bound to each other but don't necessarily have a great deal in common.’
Finney doesn't have any brothers but two older sisters.
‘What can happen in one's middle-fifties one can be bugged by something they say that makes you react as if you are six.
‘I was reminded of this a year ago when I was spending some time with one of my sisters.
What she said and how she said it made me feel like a child.
It may have been totally accidental on her part.
‘That's the thing.
It's hard with family to pull the wool over their eyes emotionally because they have seen you go through all sorts of things when you are growing up.’
In the wake of his early film success, he rejected the idea of uprooting himself and moving to America as he wanted to work in theatre as well as films.
‘I have only done two films in Hollywood and part of another.
I have been on location around America rather than Hollywood.
It seemed to me that the theatre I wanted to work in from time to time was the British theatre, so I have never contemplated living in America.
‘If I was just a film actor maybe I would have done because that's where all the films get made.
To be solely a film actor over here for the last 20 years would be very hard.’
He sees little difference between acting on stage and screen: ‘It seems to be the same internal life that you try to discover in a character and the way you go about it is the same.
They just happen to be transmitted differently.’
For some years he's been lucky to be in a position of being able to pick and choose his work, while admitting ‘sometimes you have to choose from what's there and you don't always necessarily choose the best.
You can only go on what you feel.’
TOM Courtenay fidgets in the chair, runs his fingers through hair grown long for his new stage role and chooses his words carefully before answering any question.
It's not that he's unfriendly or awkward or rude, merely uncomfortable at being in the spotlight without a character to hide behind.
Interviews are a chore he has to do to sell the show.
He says he never reads the results and his parting comment is an invitation to ‘make it up’.
Courtenay is as unstarry as you can get.
One of the breed of working class Northern actors who led the British cinema revival in the early Sixties and equally, one of those who turned their backs on Hollywood for more satisfying, artistically if not financially, work in the theatre.
Yet the legacy of films like The Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner, Billy Lair and King Rat mean that any appearance by Tom Courtenay is an event.
His is the name that will sell The Miser, the Moliere comedy in which he's travelling the country.
The tour opened at Newcastle Theatre Royal last week and plays Darlington Civic Theatre from Monday.
The star a word you know Courtenay would hate being called to his face makes no bones about the fact that he wants The Miser to be successful because that will put money back into his favourite theatre, Manchester's Royal Exchange, where the production originated.
Hull-born Courtenay's refreshingly straightforward attitude has coloured his whole career.
‘I honestly can't be bothered to bullshit,’ he says.
‘That's why I don't like America because that's all they know how to do.’
He wants to talk about The Miser, so you persist with that line of questioning in the hope of drawing him on other aspects of his career.
Producer Duncan Weldon has asked him from time to time to do a tour but Courtenay has never responded until now.
‘Everything you want to do someone has just done or someone has the rights.
It's very difficult to find things,’ he explains.
Enter The Miser, Moliere's play about greed and deceit revolving around the avarice of old scoundrel Harpagon.
A wonderful part in a rarely-performed play was the appeal.
The script was handed to him by Casper Wrede, a director friend from the Royal Exchange who directed him on screen in One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich.
‘I had done Moliere's The Misanthrope with him and The Hypochondriac, which is much more difficult and not such a good play.
I really struggled with that one,’ says Courtenay.
Plans had to be put on hold when the Royal National Theatre decided to stage The Miser in London but the actor was keen enough on the project to commit himself to the project months ahead and risk turning down more lucrative work.
What annoys him is people who say Moliere is not funny: ‘I don't read reviews although I understand we have done extremely well, but a couple thought it has to be very serious.
‘It's absurd and it's profound about parents, children, human selfishness and obviously greed.
But he was a genius and it's one of his best plays and most pertinent today.
Everyone understands about money.
‘It does annoy me that the fact that we make it funny somehow demeans the play.’
His own attitude to money is simple: he has two homes (one in the Lake District) and no mortgages, so is able to plan his year around a job that doesn't pay very well.
His last foray to Hollywood was in Bill Cosby's flop Leonard Part 6.
Courtenay enjoyed making the film while admitting he needed the money to finance other things.
‘I would not mind a few more so I could do more work at the Exchange.
I would quite like to do more voice-overs in order to finance the sort of work I like doing.’
There have been long spells out of work through a mixture of choice and lack of good stuff: ‘I don't think there are that many things that one wants to do.’
His movies since the early 1970s have been few and far between.
The biggest was repeating his stage performance in The Dresser with Albert Finney in 1983.
Last year he played Derek Bentley's father in Let Him Have It.
‘I had not worked for a few months so I was ready to do something,’ is how he explains his reasons for doing it.
He shows no regret at not maintaining the movie career that started in the Sixties.
Does he miss making films?
‘I would if they were better,’ he replies.
‘I find most of them that have been very successful, I go and am very disappointed in some of the supposedly better ones out of America.
The ones I enjoy most are from the Continent.’
There is talk of a film later in the year and a couple of ‘telly notions’ are in the early stages of development.
But he displays the same choosiness in this area too: ‘I find most of the things on television are pretty repetitive.
I don't feel I miss much by not doing it.’
SCHOOLCHILDREN took part in a crime prevention exercise in Darlington yesterday.
Ten schools from the area took part in the competition which tested knowledge of crime prevention and personal safety.
There were three exercises including answering questions on crime prevention, studying a video and devising a board game to illustrate how young people can avoid getting into trouble or danger.
The winners came from High Coniscliffe Primary School.
The pupils, all aged between seven and 11 years old, scored 54.5 out of a possible 70 points.
The contest was judged by Darlington MP Michael Fallon, the Mayor Coun Rita Fishwick, Supt Alan Saddler, and John Knowles of The Northern Rock building society, which sponsored the event.
Second and third place in the competition, which will become an annual event, went to Skerne Park Junior School and Hurworth Primary respectively.
In June, Darlington police will invite 5,000 children from Darlington to take part in a week-long anti-crime project.
THIEVES have got away with a substantial amount of cash from the main branch of Lloyds Bank in Darlington.
Yesterday police revealed that there had been a break-in on Thursday night at the bank which is on the corner of Skinnergate and Coniscliffe Road.
A spokesman for Darlington police said the thieves got into the bank through the rear and then broke through to the back of the cash dispensing machines in the bank foyer.
The break-in happened between 6.30 and 10.30pm on Thursday night but so far no witnesses have come forward to give more information about the exact time of the raid.
It is believed that the thieves got away in some kind of vehicle but police investigating the crime have no information about the getaway car.
Yesterday a spokesman for the bank would only confirm that the theft had taken place.
The bank would not say how the thieves got in or how much cash has gone missing.
The spokesman said: ‘Lloyds Bank has a policy of not releasing information about thefts.
I can say that security at the Skinnergate branch is under review because of this.’
Police have appealed for anyone in the area who may have seen people acting suspiciously near the bank to contact them on Darlington .
BUS firms are being accused of discriminating against the Skerne Park estate in Darlington.
Both United and Darlington Transport Company have said the suggestions for speed restrictions on the estate could make the bus service uncomfortable and uneconomical with journey times increasing.
But Joyce Standing, a member of several community groups on the estate, said: ‘There are endless delays on North Road because of congestion but you don't hear the bus companies threatening to stop those services.’
She said neither company had bothered to attend a public meeting about the proposed speed restrictions.
‘The speed humps will be built in a special way which makes them less of an inconvenience to buses,’ said Mrs Standing.
Andrew Guest, of United Buses, said his main concern was about the discomfort facing passengers and drivers if the speed humps are built.
The companies also face the problem of schedule delays.
Darlington Transport Company has backed United's concerns.
But Mrs Standing said: ‘This is yet another example of people believing all the bad publicity about the estate.
We are being discriminated against through no fault of our own.’
A TIMESHARE company has been threatened with legal action by a couple whose dream holiday plans have been ruined by building delays.
The couple, who want to remain anonymous but live near Darlington, signed up for a unit at Sutton Hall, near Thirsk, last June.
They paid a deposit of £800, and it is costing them more than £200 a month to repay a loan on their £8,000 apartment.
But because the unit has yet to be completed, they were unable to join a timeshare exchange scheme that would have enabled them to take a family holiday in Florida at Easter.
The disappointed mother said: ‘We were assured that there would be no problem.
The whole family was looking forward to going to the United States.
‘Our solicitor has written to Sutton Hall, so far without getting a reply.
It looks as though legal action will be necessary.’
Timeshare owners at Sutton Hall are affiliated to a holiday exchange scheme called RCI, whose marketing director Colin Colins confirmed that the couple were not in a position to exchange their unit as it hadn't been built.
Sam Grant, Sutton Hall's director of marketing, said: ‘Unfortunately RCI has now discontinued its ‘two weeks for one’ exchange programme for holidays in Florida.
There have been building delays due to engineering problems, but we shall do everything we can to help these people.’
Meanwhile two people who attended a timeshare seminar at Sutton Hall last year have complained to The Northern.
David Hindmarch, of Deans Square, Topcliffe, near Thirsk was promised a prize of some kitchen units which he intended to use as part of a scheme to turn a garden shed into a workshop for his disabled wife.
Sutton Hall said he would have to pay a carriage fee of £68; his cheque was cashed last August, but he still hasn't been sent the units.
Mr Grant said the prizes had been awarded by a marketing company with which Sutton Hall was no longer associated.
After hearing of Mr Hindmarch's case he had contacted the firm, which agreed to send on the units.
Following her visit to Sutton Hall, former Darlington Mayor Heather Scott received a Golden Key card carrying £1,000-worth of free hotel accommodation.
The card was due to expire in March 1993, but she received a letter from the Golden Key company saying the card was no longer valid.
Mr Grant said Golden Key had written letters withdrawing the card because another marketing company no longer associated with Sutton Hall allegedly owed Golden Key money.
A Golden Key director had agreed to reinstate the cards' validity for Sutton Hall clients.
HOSPITAL nurses fighting plans to make them wear ordinary clothes instead of uniform are to meet to consider taking action.
Nurses from long stay elderly wards at Greenbank Hospital in Darlington are to hold a union meeting on Monday.
Cohse branch secretary Sheila Bowes said: ‘I think it's about time management started to listen to the nurses.
If they won't listen we will consider invoking the disputes procedure.’
Mrs Bowes said three unions representing more than 20 nurses at Greenbank Cohse, Nupe and the RCN were to meet with their members to discuss their next step.
‘They just want to do the job they are paid and trained to do and they want to do it in suitable clothing, ie in uniform.’
Hospital managers believe that if nurses wear casual clothes it would help break down barriers between them and patients.
A SENIOR education officer sent letters to leading county council figures before making two attempts to kill himself, it has been revealed.
Chris Horn, who lives near Darlington, wrote letters demanding the resignation of six Derbyshire County Council officers and members, accusing the authority of ‘corruption and hypocrisy’.
Mr Horn, of Hurworth Moor, resigned from his £34,000-a-year job as education officer in charge of forward planning before he was due to appear at a disciplinary hearing at the council's headquarters in Matlock last week.
The 45-year-old, who worked at Gateshead Metropolitan Borough Council from 1977 to 1985 and at Durham County Council from 1985 to 1988, sparked a nationwide search when he failed to return to his High Farm home on August 24.
It has since emerged he sent the letters from a York Post Office on that day before trying to gas himself in his car and take an overdose over the weekend.
A week later he wrote to apologise to all six, putting his behaviour down to nervous exhaustion.
The letters were sent to council leader David Bookbinder and his deputy Sean Stafford, education chairman Mark Young, education director Geoff Lennox, and two college heads Andrew Stromberg and David Bunch.
Mr Horn called for the resignation of the six men, warning he could be dead by the time they read the letters.
‘The whole place is riddled with corruption, hypocrisy and double dealing.
Don't fool yourself into believing that it is politics,’ he wrote.
In a confidential report, county personnel officer John Bonham wrote last month: ‘The contents of the letters were calculated to cause concern and distress to the individual addressees.’
In a confidential statement to the council's investigating committee Mr Horn said he had suffered stress since more than half of his duties had been transferred to another education unit in 1989.
‘The strain of living in Matlock during the week and returning home to Darlington at weekends was, in retrospect, building up almost imperceptibly,’ he wrote.
‘Medical statements confirm that I was, for me, in a uniquely depressed state of mind.’
Mr Horn was not available for comment yesterday.
ONE of the best-known licensed clubs in Darlington is to be evicted from its premises because no rent has been paid since July 1990.
Founded by former members of the DLI Regiment after the 1914–18 war, the Durlia last night appeared to have gone finally out of business.
Durham county councillors decided at a private meeting yesterday that the club building in Duke Street should be repossessed.
The Northern has obtained a confidential report written by the authority's director of estates Graham Oak.
The report outlines how last March the council agreed to sell the Duke Street premises to the club on terms to be agreed by Mr Oak.
Provisional terms were agreed, but the club failed to confirm its agreement to proceed.
Mr Oak writes: ‘I feel that members’ attention should be brought to the following: ‘The Durlia Club have not paid their rent since July 1990; they have failed to insure the building against fire, which is a serious breach of their lease; they have failed to keep the building in reasonable repair following a fire in April 1991.
‘The club were given a deadline of November 29 1991 for confirmation of the terms agreed with their agents, but the agents have recently confirmed that the club no longer wish to purchase the property.’
Mr Oak recommended that the building should be repossessed and sold on the open market: members of the land and property sub-committee voted to accept his recommendation yesterday.
The Durlia has been closed since a fire last April.
Damage estimated at costing £100,000 to repair was caused by the blaze.
The Duke Street premises were first occupied by the club in 1945.
In 1977 the Durlia moved to a lavish new building in Commercial Street, but rent and rates proved too expensive.
Five years later the 1,100-member club decided to move back to Duke Street.
None of the Durlia club officials could be contacted last night.
THE recession has caused a large rise in the number of dogs being given to kennels by owners unable to afford the animals' upkeep.
Now the South Durham and North Yorkshire branch of the RSPCA has issued an urgent appeal for help.
Paula Wilson, regional publicity officer for the RSPCA, said: ‘We've never known a time like it in years, people are ringing us every day asking to take animals off their hands, they just can't afford to keep them.’
She said that unemployment, mortgage problems and even families splitting up are the cause of an influx of more than 45 animals in the last eight weeks.
Local kennels are full to bursting point and excess animals are being temporarily housed with RSPCA officers.
Paula said: ‘We almost always manage to save animals from being put down but our resources and funds are being stretched to the limit, the situation is desperate.’
Paula needs homes now for the 30 dogs and 15 cats in care.
It costs the RSPCA £15 and £6 per week to keep dogs and cats respectively.
The charity has to rely on public generosity and numerous fundraising ventures to fund the scheme locally.
More volunteers are needed to help out.
Among puppies seeking homes are six which were given as festive presents but rescued by the RSPCA when the owners could not cope.
FURNITURE store owner David Harper has put up a £100 reward in a bid to catch the vandals who smashed his shop window.
The attack on the Harper and Harper store in Northgate, Darlington, happened exactly a week after raiders smashed their way into the store and loaded a van with three piece suites.
Last week Mr Harper's brother Paul offered a £500 reward for information leading to the conviction of the four-man gang which made off with the £3,000 haul.
David Harper discovered the latest damage on Friday when he went to open the shop.
He said: ‘It seems they tried again, but we couldn't find anything missing this time.’
A COUPLE who suffered a catalogue of tragedies are set for a second honeymoon in the Austrian mountains.
Newly-weds Martin and Andrea Stevens, who were married in November, were spending their honeymoon on day trips from their Darlington home when one outing turned into a nightmare.
Systems analyst Martin, 22, of Cumberland Street, fell from a rock at Brimham Rocks, near Pateley Bridge, on the last day of his honeymoon.
While Andrea, 21, was keeping a round-the-clock vigil at her husband's hospital bedside, burglars made off with all their wedding presents.
Among the items stolen was a locket given to Andrea by her mother Margaret who died of cancer just a fortnight before the wedding.
But now, thanks to money raised by Martin's colleagues at Magnet in Darlington and Andrea's workmates at North Tees Hospital, where she is a student nurse, the couple are preparing for their week's break.
‘I'll definitely be taking care this time,’ said Martin, who was allowed out of hospital on Christmas Eve.
‘We're not going ski-ing.
We just want to see the scenery.’
His wife added: ‘I just hope this honeymoon goes better than the last.
I'm sure it will.’
The couple wanted to thank friends and relatives for the ‘tremendous support they had given during a pretty rough time’.
THE news that 2,500 tonnes of toxic waste is to be removed from Bishop Middleham was applauded by villagers last week.
Full marks go to Durham County Council and ultimately the Department of the Environment for finally ensuring the waste will be taken and dumped elsewhere.
But the move begs the question, why did it take them so long?
The first signs of contamination were discovered just 18 months ago.
Yet the county council admits the waste could have been there for anything up to 20 years.
For two decades therefore villagers lived near cyanide- contaminated land without even knowing.
Durham County Council say they did not know the source of the waste, nor the company responsible for dumping it, and they admitted it is too late to find out.
Yet how much longer would the people of Bishop Middleham have had to live with the waste if the telltale Blue Billy had not been discovered.
The long-term side-effects of the waste are still not known quite apart from its chemical components.
Villagers could have been sitting on a chemical poison with untold consequences to health.
The county council says the waste was not a potential risk to the public.
Yet with the help of the DoE they are now prepared to pay almost £300,000 removing it.
As one villager said, perhaps the money would have been better spent ensuring it had not been dumped in the first place.
DARLINGTON'S Skerne Park estate has gained a reputation which many residents would describe as unfair as one of the less desirable parts of the town.
Certainly beyond dispute is the area's lack of community resources.
A recent report by borough councillor and community health council chairwoman Eleanor Young made the point clearly.
She wrote: ‘None of the large supermarkets are within easy walking distance of the estate.
There are no pharmacies, GP practices or dental surgeons based locally and most medical, recreational and shopping facilities are either a bus or taxi ride away.’
The same report also notes the Park East council ward, which includes part of the estate, is the most deprived in the borough a calculation which takes into account factors such as car ownership.
It should be apparent therefore that public transport is for many people on Skerne Park a lifeline link to town centre and vital facilities such as supermarkets and doctors.
But last week both United Buses and Darlington Transport Company revealed they are reviewing their routes to the estate.
The companies are concerned about planned speed restrictions on Skerne Park through ‘sleeping policeman’ type humps in the road, saying they could make journeys slower, uncomfortable and uneconomical.
And they have warned they are only prepared to leave services as they are for a trial period.
County council officials have already gone on record as saying the humps are not so severe as to pose a major problem for the buses.
The emergency services have said while the restrictions will make their response time slightly slower the humps will not stop them from carrying out their duties.
Skerne Park residents who were delighted when the traffic-slowing plans were approved are now worried by the bus companies' attitude and are accusing them of putting profit before public service.
There is clear evidence of how much people on the estate need their buses.
The transport firms should consider this issue carefully before they make any changes to schedules especially if change is for the sake of a few pounds.
IF Gadfly seeks an explanation (Echo January 29) as to why the name of Peter Bergg, our prospective candidate, and reports of the Liberal Democrats appear rarely in your paper, perhaps he should look no further than the political bias of your reporters.
No more than one in ten of the items we submit are printed and even the report of Peter's adoption did not appear until a week later and only then after complaints to the Editor.
B.K. Fiske, Darlington Liberal Democrats, 37 Cleveland Terrace, Darlington.
MORE teenagers are staying on in further education in County Durham.
Peter Shuker, principal of the Darlington College of Technology, said half of the county's over-16s stayed on in sixth forms or colleges like his.
The encouraging figures come at a time when the number of young people in the county has dropped while the older population has increased.
Mr Shuker was speaking about education in the 90s to the Darlington Soroptimists.
He said the growth of the EC and open-door policy meant students had to have greater knowledge of other languages.
‘Changes in technology are forcing rapid change,’ he said.
‘The technology which we will be using in colleges in 1999 has not even been invented yet.’
He said schools should also grasp opportunities in Eastern Europe.
A SUGGESTION that Crown Street should become Darlington's main bus pick up point has been criticised by the town's bus companies.
Both United and Darlington Transport Company say independent surveys carried out among passengers show 41pc of people to be opposed to using Crown Street as an alternative to Prebend Row.
The search to find another area of the town where buses can stop has been brought about because of mounting complaints about congestion in Prebend Row.
The situation was brought to a head last year when a woman was knocked over by a bus in Prebend Row.
Environmentalists have also criticised the dense smoke from buses which pollute the town centre.
Stuart Hyslop, of DTC, said when a survey shows more people are using public transport to get into town it would be crazy to jeopardise that.
He said the fact that more people are using buses should be a cause for celebration among green campaigners.
Andrew Guest, of United Buses, said it would be economic folly for any company to alter its business and lose a possible six per cent of its passengers and profits.
But Alan Docherty, a transport officer with Darlington Borough Council, said no final decision has yet been taken regarding a location for new bus stops.
He said there was a great deal of consultation and investigation to be undertaken and the bus managers were being premature in their reaction.
Darlington Transport Company announced last night that the concessionary fare scheme rate is to increase to 10p while the cost for a bus pass is set to increase from £15 to £17.50 later this year.
DETECTIVES are joining forces after a series of similar bank raids in the North-East.
The latest raid came on Thursday night when thieves made off with a substantial amount of money from the dispensing machine at Lloyds Bank in Skinnergate, Darlington.
Now detectives are sharing information about similar raids in Newcastle and Ponteland.
Det Sgt Hardy Jones of Darlington CID confirmed he was in contact with officers from other forces to discuss the raids.
But he said the incidents were not being linked at this stage and he could not say the same people were responsible for each theft.
MILKMEN around Darlington are planning to pick up groceries and medicine for needy people in Russia.
Durham County is twinned with the area of Kostroma in Russia where there are severe shortages of even basic medical items and food.
A county-wide appeal has been launched to help collect non-perishable foodstuffs, paracetamol, aspirin, antiseptics and vitamin tablets which will be delivered to the region in March.
Darlington people will be able to hand their goods over to their milkman on collection days until March 6.
Elizabeth Thompson, secretary of Darlington Milk Buyers Company Ltd, who supply 33 dairymen in the town, said they had been only too happy to help when approached by the borough council.
‘Elderly people and families with young children might be able to make donations this way whereas otherwise they could find it difficult.
‘We hope we get a good response, we can only try,’ she said.
DARLINGTON police have warned shopkeepers and their staff to safeguard against sneak thieves after a spate of incidents at the weekend.
On Saturday police were called to three town centre stores where someone had walked in and tried to remove property from staff rooms and employee's lockers.
Ins Terry Johnson said the type of theft had not happened in the town for some time and asked store owners and staff to be on their guard.
He said cash and personal belongings should be hidden away and staff rooms locked to maximise security.
WORK is to start next month on the first stage of a £6.5m road scheme to improve access to Teesside Airport and better links between Darlington and Cleveland.
Durham County Council has said the two-stage scheme will provide a carriageway bypassing the village of Middleton St George and include access to the airport via a new bridge over the Darlington/Saltburn railway line.
It will mean the replacement of Low Goosepool bridge which, because of its restricted headroom, meant high vehicles had to take lengthy detours.
The bridge has also been the scene of a number of serious accidents in recent years.
Its closure to through traffic is said to be an important safety feature of the scheme.
A road from the bypass to the Cleveland boundary is to be built as part of the project, providing a link to the proposed A66 junction at Long Newton proposed by the Department of Transport.
Durham County Council has announced that the first stage of the contract, valued at just under £2m, has been awarded to Sheffield firm Henry Boot, due to start work early in March.
Durham County Council says it is likely that the scheme will be completed by early 1994.
LACK of safety measures along the railway line in Darlington is an open invitation to vandals, it has been claimed.
Labour councillor Nick Thorne-Wallis believes there could be a derailment in the Darlington area if missing fencing is not replaced soon.
Now he has called on British Rail for a second time to step up safety and end the easy access to the East Coast main line.
‘I have seen young children playing games of dare on the line and nearby residents have reported similar incidents,’ he said.
‘It is an open invitation for vandals to place debris on the track which could lead to a derailment.
It is only a matter of time before a tragedy occurs.’
In November Coun Thorne-Wallis, who represents Haughton West ward, telephoned British Rail about the missing fencing below Wylam Hill near Thompson Street East but so far no action has been taken.
‘Something should have been done immediately given this is near a residential area and there are a lot of children around.
I am irritated British Rail didn't do something then,’ he added.
Yesterday a BR spokesman said he would investigate the complaint and ensure an engineer resolved the problem as soon as possible.
ANIMAL rights campaigners were on the streets of Darlington on Saturday to publicise a debate in Europe next week on cosmetic testing.
Darlington Animal Welfare Group members Angela Mazzetti and Christine Coates dressed up in giant rabbit costumes to highlight the European Parliament debate.
TRANSPORT Minister Roger Freeman is to visit Darlington this week to discuss plans for a supermarket on a site occupied by the Caldaire bus company.
Mr Freeman was invited to the town by an all-party delegation of councillors who visited him in London in December.
Councillors hope he can help to overcome obstacles holding up plans by Sainsbury's to build a supermarket on the Grange Road site.
The scheme would mean the relocation of the United Bus depot.
Caldaire claims a Government clause would make the move a financial impossibility.
Yesterday, Darlington's Labour council leader, John Williams, said Mr Freeman had agreed to meet Caldaire officials in the town on Thursday.
‘I am delighted he has agreed to the council's request and sees the need for urgency,’ he said.
Sainsbury's has said it will pull out altogether if a forthcoming appeal by Safeway for an out-of-town development at Blands' Corner is successful.
PLANS to close eight old peoples' homes in Co Durham are disgraceful, says Peter Bergg, the Liberal Democrat prospective Parliamentary candidate for Darlington.
He blames Durham County Council for the decision.
‘They cannot pass off the blame as if the order to close these homes came directly from Whitehall,’ said Mr Bergg, a member of Great Aycliffe Town Council.
‘Once again we have a Labour-run council helping to destroy our caring society and blaming others for their decisions.’
The homes due to close are:
Hustledown House in Stanley; Gainford House in Chester-le- Street; Palatine House in Durham City; Ridgeway House in Station Town, near Wingate; Dene House in Bishop Auckland; Greenfields House at Newton Aycliffe; and Hollyhurst and Baydale Lodge in Darlington.
Dysentery outbreak:
Figures show the outbreak of dysentery in the Wear Valley is on the wane with nine notifications of the disease last month.
The illness hit the region last October and 36 cases were reported in December, including 23 families.
Council officers say control measures including screening and exclusion are paying off.
Food for thought as government issues registration scheme
Up to 1,000 food traders in Darlington will have to register with the council in the next two months as part of new national legislation.
The government has already introduced tougher laws on food hygiene and now it hopes the register will help council officers enforce them.
Under the Food Safety Act 1990 every restaurant, hotel, cafe, shop, supermarket, staff canteen, warehouse, guest house, delivery vehicle and train buffet car will have to let the council know it exists.
And Mr Barry Pearson, principal environmental health officer for Darlington council, said the measure would help his department become more effective.
The department had always been able to prosecute unhygienic premises it was just a question of finding them.
‘With the old system we could only react to what members of the public told us.
Now we hope we will be able to go out and actually plan which places we are going to inspect and how often we are going to do it.
It should be a great help.’
The council sent out about 800 registration forms last Friday giving full details of who should register and who is exempt.
About 60 companies have already responded.
NO ADDRESSES Mr Pearson said he thought there were about another 200 premises for which they had no addresses.
But the government is to start a national advertising campaign in the food trade magazines this week to catch the attention of those firms.
Those which do not register by April 3 will be fined up to £400.
And new businesses must let the council know four weeks in advance that they plan to set them up.
The council cannot turn down their application and registration is free.
Village fetes, car boot sales and occasional markets are exempt because they are used for less than five days in any five consecutive weeks.
But those that happen every week will have to comply.
And charities and voluntary organisations which only store tea, coffee, sugar and biscuits in their halls are also excused.
As well as setting up the scheme, the council will be made to fill in quarterly returns so the government can monitor changes in numbers.
Mr Pearson said the complete list for Darlington will be made available to the public on May 1.
People will also be able to buy a copy of the list although a price has yet to be fixed.
As well as setting up a register the Act will eventually make it illegal for people to handle food until they have taken a basic food hygiene certificate.
STAFF TRAINING The details have yet to be revealed but Mr Pearson said the council had been encouraging firms to train their staff since 1983.
The council itself has trained over 1,200 people in special sessions in the town hall and the Dolphin Centre.
And Darlington College of Technology has been involved since September 1990.
Mr Les Baker, director of industrial liaison, said more than 500 people had successfully completed its syllabus.
The six-hour course covers food poisoning and its prevention, bacteria, personal hygiene, pest control and disinfection.
And Mr Baker said about 50 per cent of his time was spent going out to companies.
‘In the autumn we had a situation where the owner of a Wolsingham cafe wanted his staff trained.
It would have obviously been complicated to get them in to Darlington so we sent the lecturer to them.
The owner of Peggotty's Bakery and Cafe, Mr John Sowerby, arranged for other people who work with food to meet at his cafe so that to make the day cost-effective.
‘We were more than happy to help out,’ said Mr Baker.
Government or Grand Met: whose fault, asks licensee Publicans in Darlington whose livelihoods are threatened by massive rent increases have been promised a meeting with the property company owning their pubs.
Grand Metropolitan, which wants tenants to sign binding 20-year leases, agreed to send a representative from London to the town after Mr Michael Fallon, MP for Darlington, and two licensees met the company chairman.
Mrs Cath Thompson, who runs the Cockerton Travellers' Rest with her husband Geoff, and Mrs Judith Robinson, of the Grey Horse, Bank Top, met Mr Bob Williams on Tuesday.
The meeting was arranged by Mr Fallon after he met licensees in the town last month.
Tenants of 28 Grand Met pubs in Darlington and its villages have been asked to sign new 20-year leases, but few can afford to.
The leases make the publican responsible for the upkeep of the pub and, although they can be assigned to another person after two years, the original holder would be responsible for meeting payments if that person defaulted.
Rent increases of 100 per cent were common throughout the town and one landlord had already been evicted because he signed a lease but failed to meet payments on his rent which increased seven-fold.
Mrs Thompson urged tenants to think very carefully before signing the new leases.
‘In fact I would advise people not to sign,’ she said.
The Thompsons' lease expires in late June and the couple say they have no choice but to leave the pub they have run for more than 15 years.
‘We just couldn't afford the rent increase from £21,000 to £48,000 or the sort of insurance premiums we would have to pay to cover repairs and the upkeep of the pub,’ she said.
The Travellers' Rest was built in 1926, had 21 rooms and required a lot of renovation and decorating work.
However, Mrs Thompson vowed to fight on for other landlords even if time ran out for she and her husband.
‘What I really want to know is whose fault all this is,’ she said.
‘Grand Met keeps saying it is the government's fault and the government keeps blaming Grand Met.
Someone somewhere is responsible for the situation we are in.’
She hoped Mr Fallon would continue to press for action on behalf of the licensees.
Mr Fallon said Mr Williams was ‘surprised to see the strength of feeling expressed by publicans in the area.’
‘He was left in no doubt many of them would rather pack up and leave than sign these new leases and face the financial problems that appear to go with them,’ he said.
The meeting came on the same day the latest casualty of the rent increases left his pub.
Mr Geoff Addy said he could not afford the crippling rise in payments on the Old Dun Cow in Post House Wynd.
Mr Addy, aged 43, who has run the pub for eight years, said if he signed the 20-year lease his rent would increase by £19,000 to £76,000.
Bus companies take the hump over plan to halt speeders
Bus company directors say they may withdraw services from an estate if plans to introduce sleeping policemen are given the go-ahead.
Darlington borough council plans to introduce 50 humps on Skerne Park estate roads to slow down traffic.
But Darlington Transport Company and United Buses have threatened to stop their services to the estate if the scheme proves as unsatisfactory as they fear.
Mr Andrew Guest, of United Buses, said the measures were unfair to passengers and drivers who would have to endure the bumps countless times each day.
‘The mechanical condition of the bus, the passengers and the drivers will all suffer,’ he said ‘It's a shame we haven't found a suitable and sympathetic way of calming the traffic on the estate.
‘There will be 50 humps in half an hour's journey.
That is not only unbelievable, it's also incredibly uncomfortable.
‘It may damage my buses and I would have no alternative but to withdraw the service.’
Mr Stuart Hyslop, of DTC, suggested narrowing the road or putting twists in it to slow down traffic.
‘These things would inconvenience speeders as much as humps but would not mean half as much discomfort to passengers and drivers,’ he said.
The directors, who claimed they had not been consulted properly about the scheme, agreed to continue to run their buses to the estate for a trial period when the humps are introduced.
Plans still have to be approved but the measures may be in place by September.
Officers told Thursday's meeting of the transport users consultative committee the humps would prevent cars racing around the estate and the emergency services favoured them.
Residents have fought a long campaign to stop some motorists using the roads as a race track.
As a result it could become the first estate in the area to have a 20mph speed limit introduced.
Further committee reports inside.
Marjory makes her own historical mark
NO matter how she fares in her A-levels, 18-year-old Marjory Frauts will go to Oxford in the autumn.
The Polam School sixth-former has obtained a rare unconditional entry to Lady Margaret Hall to read modern history.
The only sorrow for Marjory, of Lunedale Road, Darlington, is that her grandfather is no longer here to share in the good news for it was he who introduced her to all things historical.
‘When my grandparents came on holiday with us, he was the one who took us round castles and museums and told me stories about being in the Scots Guards,’ said Marjory, who inherited most of his books when he died two years ago.
She has been an A grade student all the way through her time at the Darlington girls' school and is a stalwart of the school's debating society.
In fact, she won the history prize so many times that last term she was given it to keep, having only missed out in the second-year.
Marjory last week captained the school's senior general knowledge team which last year won the regional title but this time lost by just one question to their Ferryhill opponents.
As she prepares for her gold medal exam for speech and drama next month through the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art, she confesses she has cast aside ambitions she had as a ten- year-old to be an actress.
‘I was very happy when I learned I had got a place at Oxford and my mum still hasn't come down to earth yet.
It means I don't have to work too hard to get into university but I will try anyway for myself,’ she said.
At one point Marjory had persuaded herself she would not get into Oxford and was resigned to her second choice, Royal Holloway and Bedford, which has a big history department.
‘I couldn't believe it when the letter came,’ she said.
Marjory already has nine GCSE passes at grade A and an AO in maths.
She is taking a GCSE this year in Latin.
She is studying English, history, French and Spanish at A-level and English at S level and, as something of an all-rounder, says she enjoys sport as ‘inexpert fun.’
She also likes writing short stories and has had some published in the school magazine but ‘never dared try anything else,’ she said modestly.
Her mother, Joy, is a physiotherapist at the Memorial Hospital, father, Jim, is overseas director for Newcastle engineers NEI and she has two brothers, Christian, 15, and Simon, 11.
Marjory Frauts.
APPEAL TO SAVE NEASHAM PUMP HOUSE
Neasham residents hope to save their most prominent landmark by appealing to English Heritage.
The 170 year-old pump house, an ornate public shelter in the heart of the village, is leaking.
Repairs to the grade two listed building are expected to cost more than £1,000.
The parish council decided on Monday to ask English Heritage for help in funding the repairs.
Darlington borough council is to be approached for a donation.
Last month the parish council chairman, Coun. John Weighell, said the pump house faced dereliction if repairs could not be funded.
‘If we can't pay for it then it will just fall down,’ he said.
Parishioners hope they have solved the problem of dogs fouling their village green.
The clerk to the council, Mr Harry Whitehouse, received several letters from residents complaining about dogs fouling the green and nearby private gardens and he has been told the dog warden will be sent more regularly.
Anonymous pair offer to save home from closure
A Darlington couple have pledged to save one of the town's old peoples' homes from closure.
The couple, who run a private nursing home near Richmond, want to take over the running of Hollyhurst home in Woodland Road.
It is one of eight homes run by Durham county council which is to close in a drive to improve efficiency and economy, forcing the 21 residents to be rehoused.
The cash-strapped council this week cut home help services in the county to once a fortnight to make funds last until the new financial year in April.
But the council say they have pledged to keep the homes out of private ownership unless it is absolutely necessary.
‘There are no negotiations at the moment,’ a county spokesman said, ‘and before they are started the homes must be declared surplus to the councils’requirements.
‘We have a three year refurbishing plan for our homes and while we are undertaking that project we will need to accommodate the residents.
‘It may be that we are going to need to use some of the homes which are to close.’
The Rev. William Harper, who has championed the pensioners' cause, acted as a go-between for the couple, who do not wish to be named.
‘They are wonderful; you couldn't wish to meet people more keen than these two.
‘Old people are their life, it's not just a business venture for them, they genuinely care and they are speaking from the heart,’ he said.
He wrote to the county council recommending the couple and praising the care of residents in their privately run home.
‘It's between county hall and the couple now,’ he said.
A spokesman said the council would reply to Mr Harper's letter in due course.
Eastern Europe offers roll call for college
Rapid changes in higher education were forecast at a meeting of Darlington Soroptimists.
Mr Peter Shuker, principal of Darlington College of Technology, the guest speaker, said: ‘The technology which we will be using in colleges in 1999 has not yet been invented.’
His theme was ‘Education into the 90's’, in which he outlined national and local influences on education and the implications for future legislation which would shortly transform many areas of further and higher learning.
Concentrating on the education of those over 16, Mr Shuker said that a number of key factors had helped to shape future plans.
While the numbers of young people had dropped as the overall population grew older, in County Durham, 50% of over 16s were staying on at sixth forms or colleges such as his.
The widening of the EEC argued for greater awareness of the European market and the need for both young people and businesses to face the real demands for new skills, greater knowledge of other languages and more mobility in moving throughout other countries.
‘Changes in technology are forcing rapid change,’ he said.
Speaking of his contact with the eastern European countries since the recent political upheavals, Mr Shuker said the catchment area for students at the Darlington College now extended across Europe.
‘We must grasp the opportunities offered there.
They have a large well-educated workforce, they are 20 years behind us in technology and are choosing English as their first foreign language with German second.’
The changes in funding and management of further education colleges offered an enormous challenge, he continued.
In the future, colleges like his would have to sell courses and expertise widely, often linking on a franchise basis with higher education establishment, to supply components for degree and other higher qualifications while extending to younger students, the opportunity to gain a variety of academic and vocational ones.
He ended his talk by praising his staff for the way in which they were responding to students with special needs, particularly those with physical or sensory disabilities, who were increasingly seeking to pursue studies at the Darlington college.
Mr Shuker was thanked for his talk, supported by a video and information display, by Mrs Alma Bailey, a local primary school head teacher.
Captain's log
SPECULATION that Darlington's 83–6 rugby mauling at Blaydon two Saturdays back was the club's heaviest defeat has been ended by Ian Taylor.
He recalls a game with Durham 20 years ago when Darlington, going well at the time, were 12–0 down without touching the ball.
Several players were being watched by the County selectors; even venerable rugby correspondent John Pargeter came along to witness the improvement.
It ended 86–3.
‘The result was broadcast far and wide and never again did the mighty Pargeter grace Darlington's pitches,’ says Taylor.
‘We couldn't even use the excuse that half the team failed to turn up, though loose head prop Martin Littleton had to cry off through injury.
‘To this day he's convinced it made the difference between winning and losing.’
And why does Ian Taylor remember the debacle so well?
He was the skipper, that's why.
Kevin ‘I'm not exactly a pauper’ Keegan intends to do things in style at Newcastle United.
Instead of the usual crisps at the Press conference two days after his arrival, the media lot found themselves feasting on caviar.
BILL Harper is a man with a mission.
He is on a constant crusade to take the church to the people.
Using the bus wherever he goes, the Rev Harper travels to 24 old people's homes in Darlington as a chaplain.
He was ordained to St Paul's Mobile Church Society in 1987 and since then he has gathered a flock of more than 2,000 pensioners in the region.
Mr Harper, 63, of Ronaldshay Drive, Richmond, is a friend to the old and has become their voice.
He has spoken up for them when their homes have been threatened with closure and voiced their opinions on Radio Cleveland.
As religious advisor to the radio station he gets birthday requests played for them during Sunday morning broadcasts.
He also wrote to Prime Minister John Major protesting at the recent Durham County Council decision to close eight of its homes.
Mr Major refused to enter the row.
Mr Harper's protests were typical of his commitment.
He said: ‘We are a very active church.
People get to love you and they rely on you so when they need you, you can't turn your back on them.
That's why I stood up and shouted when the homes were to be closed.
Nobody else is speaking for them.
‘We are non-denominational so we give services for everyone, Methodists, Church of England and Catholics alike.
Like someone said, there's only one way to God,’ he said.
St Paul's Mobile Church Society also visits people in hospitals and at home.
It performs weddings and baptisms, funerals and services for people who find nothing for them in separate dominations or who can't get to church.
Mr Harper is dedicated to his work earning nothing but love and respect for it.
To support himself and his wife, Edith, he daily gets up at 2.30am to work at Richmond bakery.
He comes home at 8am to snatch an hour's snooze and then sets off on the bus for a full day's preaching to the people whose failing legs can't get them to church.
Mr Harper claims he does not find his long day tiring: ‘If it comes from the heart and it comes with divine strength it's easy.
‘It's a two-way thing.
They think I'm wonderful and I think they're wonderful.
We need each other.
You have to listen to them as well as talking.
There's a wealth of wisdom in these homes.
‘The sad thing is a lot have been people of great importance locally but they go in these homes around they're forgotten.’
Marion Pickersgill, who runs Darlington's Supreme Care Homes, including Ventress and Stanton said: ‘He is a most wonderful man and provides friendship and spiritual support to residents.’
Mr Harper is known as ‘the vicar with the music’ because he tapes the sounds of pealing bells, traditional hymns and even modern gospel sounds to recreate the church atmosphere for residents.
‘If you talk too long they switch off.
Some of them are very, very frail and they really get something out of the music,’ said Mr Harper who likes nothing better than a foot-tapping, clapping and smiling congregation.
‘They are all wonderful but it only takes someone else to sit in their chair and they're off in a mood.
But as soon as they hear The Old Rugged Cross they're fine again,’ he said.
St Paul's is a national non-denominational society with 75 ministers.
A few are ordained, but many, like Bob Jackson of Barnard Castle, are lay preachers who help out when they can.
Mr Harper also receives support from Susan Beecham and Liam Johnstone who also assist in the 50 homes they visit in Darlington, Catterick Garrison, Richmond and elsewhere.
But Mr Harper says he needs more help.
As a registered charity St Paul's can not offer wages or expenses for its volunteers but Mr Harper hopes that committed Christians will see the benefit of his work and offer their assistance too.
— Anyone who would like to help should telephone Mr Harper on .
IN a bid to get people to sign the electoral register, from today Darlington council is sending out leaflets about the electoral register and postal and proxy votes.
MALCOLM and Judy Carvell couldn't believe their eyes when they visited their old village after five years in Australia.
The couple emigrated in 1987 and are back on holiday to see friends and relatives.
They were delighted to be invited to a friend's birthday celebrations in Sadberge, near Darlington, where they used to live.
But as former Darlington and Stockton Times typesetter Malcolm and housewife Judy walked into Sadberge Village Hall on Saturday night they realised they were the guests of honour at a surprise party.
Judy said yesterday: ‘Everyone went quiet when we walked in and we wondered why then we realised.
It was a really good night.
We lived in Sadberge for seven years and it's lovely to come back.
Nothing has changed, but some of the people are a bit fatter.’
Villager Millie Scaife, who organised the celebration with three friends, said: ‘They were completely stunned.
We had a big Welcome Home banner signed by everyone.
‘About 70 people came along.
Malcolm and Judy said they didn't know they had so many friends.’
The couple now live in Townsville on Australia's eastern coast and are staying with Judy's sister, Margaret Stanbrook, in Eaglescliffe for part of their holiday.
A LAST-DITCH effort is being made to save a Bishop Auckland residential home from closure.
Wear Valley councillors have voted to urge Durham County Council to reconsider its position on Dene House one of eight local authority homes to be lost across the county.
Councillors say while it appears the situation is a fait accompli, they feel they should take every opportunity to save the home.
Coun Bill Wade, chairman of the district council's housing committee, said some elderly people had lived at Dene House for years and to move would have ‘a catastrophic effect on their lives’.
He believed Dene House was among those to close because of its potential high sale value rather than a lack of residents.
‘Dene House is purpose-built premises in a good state of repair and it's in a good location,’ he said.
‘It's likely that its closure is a fait accompli but it would be imprudent not to try all avenues in a bid to keep it open.’
Durham County Council announced the closures last month claiming there were 317 vacancies — the equivalent of eight full homes.
Homes at Stanley, Chester-le-Street, Durham, Station Town, Newton Aycliffe and Darlington are also due to be lost by the end of the year saving the council £2.5m.
A TEENAGER yesterday denied breaking a curfew order and claimed he watched Inspector Morse instead.
Joseph Betteridge, 18, of Milbank Road, Darlington, appeared before the town's magistrates charged with breaching a bail order.
Betteridge, 18, was on a curfew from 7pm to 7am and was not supposed to visit licensed premises.
A police officer told the court he was sure it was Betteridge whom he saw in Houndgate, Darlington, at 11.50pm on Saturday as he had known him since he was 15.
Nigel Jones, a civilian employee with Darlington police, said he had no doubt whatsoever Betteridge was in the Route 66 bar.
But Betteridge said he stayed in all night and watched Inspector Morse and That's Life with his girlfriend.
His mother Diane and girlfriend Donna Williams said he had been at home with them.
Paul Pacitto, defending, said either the police were mistaken or alternatively three people had perjured themselves.
‘They say every man has his double and it is conceivable they made a mistake,’ he said.
Betteridge was remanded in custody until February 17.
DARLINGTON bus companies' threat to boycott Skerne Park over proposed speed restrictions would be totally unacceptable the head of Darlington council's transport committee said yesterday.
Coun Jim Skinner (Lab) said if the companies went ahead with the boycott there would have to be changes made to the traffic slowing scheme.
United Buses and Darlington Transport Company both complained that they were not properly consulted before decisions were taken and said the proposed speed humps would make bus travel uncomfortable and could damage the vehicles.
Coun Skinner said: ‘We thought everything had been resolved but this could mean we have to discuss the speed restrictions again.’
Meanwhile people who live on the estate have continued to criticise the threatened bus boycott.
Accusations have been made that bus drivers already flout speed limits on the estate.
Bethany Megan Robinson, of Arkle Crescent, in Skerne Park, said the people on the estate need buses which drive carefully and restrictions were crucial.
She made a plea to councillors representing the area to stick by their voters and ensure buses continue to serve the estate.
County councillor Ray Flowers (Lab) said yesterday that whatever needed to be done would be done to make sure the bus service continues, but not at the expense of safety.
A DOCTOR has hit back at claims a national medical conference will be turned into a political issue.
Dr Abdul Jaleel, the BMA's representative in Darlington, was speaking out after Dr John Canning claimed the conference could make a party political issue out of health care just weeks before a General Election.
The meeting in London next month is to discuss the nation's future health care.
Dr Canning, secretary of the Cleveland local medical committee, felt it could compromise the BMA's political independence.
But Dr Jaleel, who will represent Darlington, said the decision to hold the conference was made six months ago and was not about politics.
‘This meeting is an educational and not a political exercise.
If I felt the conference was a political one I would be the first one to pull out.’
CYCLISTS look likely to fail in their bid to avoid a ban from planned pedestrian-only streets.
They say if they are barred from Skinnergate and High Row in Darlington it will force them towards the hazardous roundabouts on the inner ring road.
But Coun David Lyonette (Lab), who chaired last night's Darlington Cycling Forum meeting, said the decision had been taken because of pressure from disabled groups.
On Thursday, it is likely the council will confirm a decision to extend the town centre traffic ban to bicycles and pedal wheelchairs between 10am and 4.30pm.
He said: ‘This is a case where the arguments of one lobby group have won over another's.’
YOUR prescription for peace in Northern Ireland (Echo leading article January 20), that we work to reunite it with the South then withdraw, is ill advised.
More carnage not less would surely result if the will of the minority overrode the will of the majority.
We cannot hope that Protestant and Catholic would begin peacefully to coexist once peace-keeping British soldiers had departed.
The carnage endured in the last 20 years or so has mainly arisen not from what we from the mainland have done and/or been alleged to do, but from the conflict brought about by ineradicable sectarian fears and ambitions.
You are right about our initiatives Rees, Prior, King, Brook, they have all come to naught.
I would only add: to worse than naught, encouraging the terrorists to think that our position shifts and that their methods work.
So long as a majority of Northern Ireland voters prefer to remain with the United Kingdom, we must concentrate our energies on protection for those on whom the terrorists wage war.
And we shall do that best if we suspend the Queensberry rules, attacking to defend, putting victims and potential victims first.
Donald Clarke, Prospective Parliamentary candidate, British National Party, Coomlees Farm, Broughton in Tweeddale.
Plugged in
AT LAST we are going to get some official action about electric plugs being fitted to goods before sale.
While commendable, it does not fully address the problem which constitutes the greatest danger.
This is the practice of always supplying a 13 amp fuse with a plug.
Yet more than half of the appliances are at risk of damage even personal danger if fitted with the incorrect safety fuse.
For years now I have conducted a personal campaign, always asking if I can have, for example, a five or three amp fuse instead of the one I am given, a 13 amp.
I know the answer I will always get, but I work on the dripping water principle.
We should be able to state which fuse we require when we buy a plug in the interest of safety and economics.
Horace Wilson, 18 Ayton Drive, Darlington.
A WOMAN who suffered mysterious fits for five years before doctors identified the problem as epilepsy has started a support group to help others.
Katherine McLeod, of Hutton Avenue, Darlington, developed symptoms similar to chronic daydreaming 12 years ago.
The fits stopped her from being able to drive and made even daily chores like shopping difficult as they made her develop amnesia.
Although an initial brain scan showed nothing to suggest she might have epilepsy, she demanded further tests and was finally diagnosed as having temporary lobe epilepsy a condition which plagues many schoolchildren.
‘When you mention epilepsy people straight away think of the major fit grand-mal, they don't think of absence seizures,’ said Mrs McLeod, whose first fit happened when she had polio as a child.
She now runs the Darlington branch of the National Epilepsy Society and to help parents and teachers recognise the symptoms she had she has a number of books and videos which she is willing to lend to anyone interested.
More details are available from her on Darlington .
man has hit out at a health survey which he claims is insulting and highly personal.
In particular, Tony Bray, who is retired, has objected to a question which asks how often the respondent has taken part in physical activity long enough to get ‘sweaty’ in the past month.
But organisers of the 15-page confidential questionnaire sent out to 18,000 County Durham people over 18 say Mr Bray's complaint is their first.
The study is being carried out by the Family Health Services Authority, formerly the Family Practitioner Committee, to compile an overall picture of the county's health and health needs.
In the first section, which includes dealing with physical fitness, daily activities and quality of life, symbols such as smiling faces are used.
But Mr Bray said: ‘I really think it's silly.
Some of the questions are just stupid and I think the symbols are insulting.
‘I showed it to some of my friends and they have had a good laugh about it.
This question about how often you exercise and get sweaty is ridiculous.
It's a total waste of money.’
But survey coordinator Hilary Snowdon said test questionnaires were sent out first to gauge any objections.
After a few minor changes, the final documents were officially sent out.
‘The pictures are standard practice in a few health surveys,’ said Miss Snowdon.
‘The idea is to make it easier and try to get a good picture of how they feel about their own health.
‘We had to be specific about the exercise question because people have different ideas about what exercise is.
‘Quite a few people have telephoned us to say they think the survey is a good idea.’
ALAN Watkins in The Observer is the most readable, and perhaps the best informed, of all the political commentators.
If Labour loses the general election, he wrote on Sunday, Neil Kinnock has already indicated that he'll retire to the leek trenches of Islwyn.
But what if he does?
Who's to replace him?
Roy Hattersley, of course, will remain the Nearly Man.
John Smith, once everyone's favourite, looks like assuming the same well worn cloak.
Among younger MPs Gordon Brown remains possible but, says Watkins, the smart money is on Tony Blair.
Those who've noticed the number of times the Sedgefield MP's cherubic opinions have been aired on television recently will little doubt it.
The next leader of the Labour Party, perhaps the next Prime Minister, could be the lad from Fairfield Terrace, Trimdon.
Are they ready for this in Trimdon Colliery and Deaf Hill Workmen's Club?
Lest those in the queue might have read the back copies of Homes and Gardens three or four times before, there is now a little light reading on out-patients' appointment cards at Darlington Memorial Hospital.
As well as the chatty bit about not forgetting the urine sample, both sides carry advertising.
One of the four ads is for insurance, another for Sherwood's and the other two draw the attention of anxious patients to a particular service offered by local solicitors.
Particular service?
Compensation, actually.
Someone in Newton Aycliffe very nearly had need of a solicitor the other day, we're informed.
A cheque for £99,999,999 spewed out by Great Aycliffe Town Council's computer had already been signed once when it was spotted by council leader Arun Chandran.
Coun Chandran stopped payment: spoilsport.
Monday's paper reported the resignation of Mrs Julie Peeke, chairman of the Redhall Community Association in Darlington, in a row over the abolition of postal voting onto the committee.
It is not the only contentious matter to have been exercising the lady's mind.
Here is an extract from the minutes of January 10: ‘J Peeke brought to the attention of the committee that she only had one set of keys, not two like stated at the Christmas Party when a councillor asked where the Space Invaders keys were so they could have a few free games.’
A councillor wanting free goes on the Space Invaders machine?
Another resignation matter, surely?
Could it also be that Darlington's fun and games loving Labour councillors have finally had a change of heart over conferences?
The other day pleasant sounding trips to Birmingham and Swansea were both declined.
Or could it be that one was from March 24–26 and the other from April 6–9 when politicians of all parties confidently expect to have other things on their minds?
The new Factory Shop Guide to Northern England is out.
Not just because of the Durham Clothing Company's premises on the dulcetly named Dabble Duck Industrial estate ‘first quality goods at factory sunny Shildon features prominently.
‘If there is a single example of British signposting devised to confuse,’ it says, ‘the prize must go to Shildon.
‘At the roundabout at the Southern end of the town there are three roads with the same road number.
‘To reach Shildon from West Auckland the road has two different numbers, depending on from which direction you approach.
‘And finally, if you rely on the impressive road signs listing the many industrial estates at the South end of town, you will find it very easy to go round in a circle.’
We tried to work all this out during a visit on Saturday, but contrived only to become lost.
And Gadfly spent his first 25 years in Shildon.
Long gained local knowledge does, however, suggest where lie the boundaries between the near-inextricable communities of Eldon Lane, Bridge Place, Coronation, Coundon Grange, Close House, Gurney Valley and Auckland Park.
Since most of our reporters have been around not nearly so long, last week's story that mistakenly located the Cumberland Arms in Coronation was understandable.
Locals know it's closest to Coundon Grange, or what remains of it.
But so far no one has provided a satisfactory answer to why, for generations, the Cumberland has inevitably been known as the Blood Kit.
Any offers?
The Darlington Budgerigar Society was last week granted £100 by the council; so were the Ambassadors Old Boys, whoever they are.
The Spraire Lads football team, good lads too, got £300 but the Darlington and District Council didn't get to much as a packet of bird seed, on the grounds that they had enough already.
What sort of incentive to prudence, or to initiative, is that?
Last week's note on the animal antics that Durham County Fire Brigade gets up to rang a bell with reader H Featherstone from Bishop Auckland.
His cat was chased by a dog, he says, before finding refuge at the top of a concrete lamp post.
The fire brigade declined to shed light on the matter, however, claiming that moggies always came down of their own accord.
‘In fact it did find its own way down,’ concedes Mr Featherstone, ‘though how, I can but wonder.’
Well, quite.
But what intrigues us even more is how the hell it got up there in the first place.
Sedgefield District Council recreation officer Phil Ball, one of the council's successes, was last week regaling a committee on the benefits of exercise.
‘I presume,’ chirped up a voice from the back Coun Eric White, actually ‘that you're telling us all this from memory.’
Just two months after Gadfly highlighted the absurdity, and the danger, of letting cyclists into a pedestrianised Skinnergate, Darlington council has quietly dropped the exemption.
It's good to see that they're among our readers.
Unfortunately the exemption for disabled drivers has been withdrawn, too, which may cause particular problems for the wheelchair bound with business at the Darlington Association on Disability.
Its offices are in Skinnergate.
We cannot mooch off without recording the 1991 Co Durham crime figures.
In Darlington, where the Neighbourhood Watch scheme is supposed to be the biggest catch all since the trawl net was invented and where you can get into terrible trouble for suggesting there might be holes in the net the number of burglaries from houses has increased by 25pc in a year.
Just think what might have happened, of course, if all those folk weren't being forever vigilant.
A NEW wildlife group is to be launched tomorrow.
Darlington Wildlife Group will form part of the Durham Wildlife Trust network and is open to anyone of any age.
Organisers hope to hold meetings and outings throughout the year.
The Durham Wildlife Trust takes action to protect the wildlife of County Durham, including the boroughs of Gateshead, Sunderland and South Tyneside.
The group celebrates its 21st birthday this year and aims to hold events and open days at the nature reserves.
The inaugural meeting of the Darlington group is at 8pm at 10 Pentland Grove, Darlington.
Further details can be obtained by telephoning Darlington .
AN eight-year-old North-East schoolgirl has been named as runner-up in a national nature competition.
Tanith Blackman, of Ingleton, near Darlington, is a pupil at The Assumption School, Richmond, and the competition, organised by the Young People's Trust for the Environment, is an award scheme for business and industry involving children of company employees.
Tanith's whose father Chris works for ICI on Teesside investigated the way nature has provided effective camouflage and mimicry for certain species, including insects, reptiles, birds, fish and mammals, for her project.
She received her prizes, as runner-up in the junior young environmentalist of the year competition, from Jim Carrick, ICI Wilton's site operations manager, at Wilton Castle.
They included a trophy, a book on mammals and complimentary tickets to the Washington Wildlife Trust.
Dad Chris, environmental projects manager at Wilton, said: ‘I am delighted at Tanith's success.’
THE owner of an ailing hotel battled it out with planners yesterday at a public inquiry.
Fred Davies, who owns the Sundial in Darlington Road, Northallerton, wants to convert the hotel into a nursing home.
With an room occupancy rate of just 26.5pc, Mr Davies claims the hotel, opened just two-and-a-half years ago, is not profitable and he needs to find another use.
But Hambleton District Council opposes the move as the property lies in the heart of the town's industrial estate.
Hambleton's development control officer Maurice Cann told the inquiry that the area was unsuitable for the elderly because it was industrial and noisy.
Having a residential development there would also stifle future industrial and commercial use, he claimed.
Economic development officer Claire Binns said that the loss of the hotel would seriously hit the town's tourism industry.
She said Northallerton already had the lowest level of accommodation in Hambleton.
If the Sundial went it would drop by another 52pc.
But town planner James Asquith, for the Sundial, said the hotel had been affected by the recession.
‘This represents a constant haemorrhage of money from the business which can only be sustained for so long,’ he said.
There was no reason to think the hotel industry would pick up and this was reflected by the fact that so many local hotels were up for sale.
He claimed the alternative, if the appeal failed, was to close the Sundial down completely with the loss of 20 jobs.
A noise specialist told the inquiry that levels at the Sundial were not high, it had double glazing and an air conditioning system so there was no need to open the windows.
Mr Davies said the hotel would make an ideal nursing home with little need for alterations.
It is already residential and only the degree of care would change.
When the 28-bedroom Sundial opened it was the first new hotel in the town for 240 years.
It marked the end of an 18 month planning battle with Hambleton District Council as Mr Davies wanted to build on land the other side of the town.
A final decision will be made by a Department of Environment inspector.
A DARLINGTON man who carried out conservation work has been highly commended in prestigious awards.
James Briggs, of Stone House, Coniscliffe Road, Darlington, has been recognised in the 1991/1992 Shooting Times Conservation Awards.
His project, which stretched over 25 years, involved clearing 450 acres of bracken and regenerating heather at a family estate at Ramsgill, Nidderdale, North Yorkshire.
The awards scheme, launched last year, aims to demonstrate how game shooting and conservation work for a better countryside.
The final results will be announced at a special lunch in London, on March 23.
A SHORTFALL of millions of pounds needed to fund the teachers' pay rise is threatening education standards, angry North councils are warning the Government.
Up to 100 teachers could lose their jobs in Newcastle while County Durham's education budget will be slashed by almost £3m if the Government refuses to give more help, councillors said yesterday.
Both the county and the city councils are to ask the Government to either meet the full costs of the 7.5pc rise or lift the authorities' charge-capping limits.
They budgeted for a pay award in line with inflation and while welcoming the ‘well deserved’ rise in teachers' salaries say they cannot fund it without cutting school budgets.
But Schools Minister and Darlington MP Michael Fallon said the Government has already allowed local authorities an extra £60m towards the cost of the teachers pay rise announced on Monday.
‘That should be enough,’ he said.
Newcastle Tory councillors are backing an all party call for more cash after hearing the Government's extra grant of £309,000 still leaves a £1m shortfall.
Coun Mark Corner, the city's education chairman, said he was ‘shocked at the Government's cynicism’.
A BUS manager who was forced to give up a rural route said yesterday she was fed up with the whole business.
Newtown Coaches, from Reeth Place, Newton Aycliffe, was told by Durham County Council it must give up running the route from Darlington to Bishopton after complaints about the service.
Villagers in Bishopton and the surrounding area started to complain because they were annoyed by the irregularity of the service.
But last night Pauline Dale, of Newtown Coaches, said she was fed up with passengers continually ‘sticking the knife in’.
‘I always tried very hard to provide a good service and I used to go out and speak to the passengers to make sure they were satisfied,’ she said.
TOP motorcycle ace Andy McGladdery faced a second operation because red-faced doctors didn't have the right tools to remove screws pinning his leg.
The former British champion, who lives at Middleton St George, near Darlington, had his femur pinned together after a nasty smash at Cadwell Park last year.
Doctors at Darlington's Memorial Hospital believed the operation to remove the screws would be a fairly straightforward affair.
But surgeons were forced to call it a day because they couldn't find the right tools for the job.
‘Apparently none of their allen keys would fit the screws,’ explained Andy, who has ridden at all the world's top circuits during his 16 year career.
‘When I came round after the operation I asked the doctors if they would let me have the screws.
They stared at the floor for a few seconds then said ‘You'll have to come back because we didn't have the right tools.’’
Andy was re-admitted to hospital a couple of weeks later for the second operation.
He has kept the screws as a souvenir of a racing career which included five broken collarbones, two broken ribs, fractured legs and knees.
At the height of his fame Andy was one of Britain's brightest prospects.
But a series of unlucky breakdowns and a dire shortage of sponsorship curtailed his career.
He signed off after a fighting display at the famous Daytona racetrack in America two years ago.
It was when he was persuaded out of retirement to try classic bike racing last season that the accident happened.
But despite the set-back, Andy says: ‘I have absolutely no regrets.
It would be nice to have another go racing is in my blood.’
RAMBLERS have renewed calls for an independent inquiry into the army's need for training land.
The Ramblers Association hit out yesterday over extensions of military training areas in some of Britain's finest countryside, despite plans to cut Army numbers.
Large tracts of the North-East and North Yorkshire are used by the Army for training.
Darlington Ramblers Association spokesman Alan Hutchinson, supporting the inquiry call, said: ‘The land the Army uses is nearly always lovely open moorland.
‘With Catterick Garrison in North Yorkshire being such an important base it's hardly surprising they want so much land, but I really wonder at times whether they need so much?’
Ramblers have long argued that the army's needs should be subjected to independent scrutiny, adding the independent National Parks Review panel had agree with the group.
The MoD said it would comment when it had been able to study the report in full.
A GOVERNMENT U-turn that could ease overcrowding in Darlington's Roman Catholic schools was last night condemned as a ‘vote-catching con’ to save the seat of the town's MP.
Education Secretary Kenneth Clarke yesterday announced he is easing the ‘rules’ so that overcrowded and popular schools can expand even when there are spare places in neighbouring schools.
He said the move increased parental choice and responded to complaints that the Government was discriminating against church schools.
Many of those complaints came from priests and parents in the marginal constituency of Darlington where Mr Fallon Mr Clarke's junior minister has a 2,661 majority.
Last night Labour's education spokeswoman, Hilary Armstrong, accused Mr Clarke of trying to bail Mr Fallon out of a constituency crisis.
For the change of heart came only hours after Mr Fallon met priests in Darlington and discussed the future of church schools with a national delegation of bishops.
Roman Catholic voters have warned they will not vote Tory in the General Election unless more places are provided at St Augustine's and St Bede's primary schools in Darlington and St Joseph's in Birmingham.
Yesterday's decision gives those schools the scent of Government cash for building work next year, but Ms Armstrong, MP for North West Durham, accused Mr Fallon of using ministerial office for party political advantage.
‘They have been scared into a vote-catching con,’ she said.
‘He is not changing the rules.
All he is doing is restating the policy that was established in 1944 and that this Government has deviated from this year.’
Denying vote-catching, Mr Fallon said the rule change was good news for Darlington.
‘The whole point of being a Minister is you can get things done in Whitehall.
I am delighted to be able to help my constituency.
‘Both schools are regularly oversubscribed and popular with parents.
I am working with them on what can be done to help them as soon as possible.’
Plans clampdown call by councillor
A COUNCILLOR has called for stricter planning controls to be imposed on house builders.
Coun Graham Morris, who represents Murton on Easington District Council, claims too many companies change their original schemes once they have got planning permission and is pressing for the matter to be brought to the attention of the Department of the Environment.
He spoke out as the development services committee was asked by Leech Homes to agree to changes in the types of houses to be built on land in Bankhead Street, Seaham.
‘I think we should point that we are not happy with developers doing this time after time,’ he said.
He feared the move was often an attempt to cram more houses onto a site.
A DARLINGTON man who worked in the same menswear shop all his adult life has died at the age of 73.
Jack Robinson took a job with Starling and Allen when he was 16 years old.
He worked in the Post House Wynd store, now Starling and Godfrey, ever since and was manager for many years.
He died last Thursday.
The only break in his time at the store, also known as the Man's Shop, came during the Second World War when he joined the RAF and served in the Middle East.
A bachelor, Darlington-born Jack had many friends and store owner Philip Tarry said his charm and courtesy were well-known.
‘He was one of the old breed, always quietly spoken and very polite to people.
‘He could show these young whippersnappers how to run a shop, he bought everything and would hardly let met set foot in it,’ said Mr Tarry.
‘He wouldn't leave and I didn't want him to.
For years I was trying to get him to go part time but he always put it off.
‘He thought the world of the shop, I couldn't have told him to retire because it meant everything to him.
The staff were very fond of him, they thought he was marvellous.’
His funeral takes place at Darlington crematorium today.
A DRUNKEN mother was found slumped on a bench in a busy town centre street with her four-year-old daughter, Darlington magistrates were told yesterday.
Ann Marie Stephenson, 39, in Northgate, Darlington, said she was so drunk she was unable to give coherent answers to questions, the court heard.
Geoffrey Cardwell, defending, said Stephenson had gone to town to buy presents and had bought a bottle of vodka.
Stephenson, of Harrowgate Village, Darlington, admitted being drunk in charge of a child.
The case was adjourned to March 3.
More funding for new homes
FUNDING for 2,000 new homes across the North-East will be announced next week.
The Government-funded Housing Corporation will reveal how much it is giving about 70 housing associations in the region.
It is expected that their development plans for the new financial year will put a roof over the heads of about 7,000 people.
The funding will be announced in Newcastle next Wednesday.
A FILLING station and car showroom group, with sites in Darlington and on Wearside, has been put on sale.
The Yeoman Group has been placed in administration after suffering cash flow problems as a result of the recession and the downturn in the car sales market.
The company, which employs 12 people, will continue to trade as normal as administrator Jeff Cawson, from accountants BDO Binder Hamlyn, in Newcastle, attempts to find a buyer for the business.
Yeoman has a car showroom, offices, forecourt and storage accommodation in Darlington.
PAT Thoirs has always been a woman of letters writing, selling or delivering them.
From her newspaper stand on High Row, Darlington, Pat reckons she has gained a wealth of experience about human life.
And she has been so taken by her findings she has put them all down on paper.
Pat, 53, is now writing her third book, High Wynd Fling, the last part in a trilogy of Darlington anecdotes and reminiscences.
It's an affectionate look at the daily life and characters in the town centre and follows on from her first two books, On The Corner and Heart of the Town.
She said: ‘One day I was standing here doing nothing in particular and I thought I could write a book about all that happens.
My first book was an experiment to see if I could write and it has just gone on from there.’
Pat, who left school at 15, is not a trained writer and the only print she had dealt with before was the newspaper ink on her fingers.
She said: ‘I suppose selling newspapers gave me the smell for print.
But now my ambition is to be a full-time writer.’
High Wynd Fling the fling is jargon for newspapers includes stories on the Cornmill Centre and the Quakers.
Pat is a keen football fan.
As well as writing letters Pat, who lives in Cockerton, also delivered them.
For nine years she was a postwoman in Berkshire and used to cycle 18 miles a day.
She said: ‘I always do jobs where I can be independent.
I don't like working under anybody.
It's only a small job here but I feel I am doing a service to the public.’
Sometimes she feels like an agony aunt as many of her regular customers tell her their troubles.
Pat has dealt with everything from cancer to bereavement.
She said: ‘I have a good listening ear which a writer needs.’
She took the newspaper-selling job three years ago to supplement her husband James's income.
But since he was made redundant Pat is the breadwinner for James and their two children, Scott, 17, and Fiona, 15.
She feels things have changed in the town centre over the years.
‘You don't get characters like there used to be.’
She said she had a few hair-raising experiences, mainly from people who have had too much to drink.
But the interesting people she meets more than makes up for the bad ones.
She said: ‘I'll always find loads of material on High Row.’
STAFF at Darlington Hospice are delighted with the response to their appeal for voluntary receptionists, but would still welcome anyone else who can offer a little of their time.
The hospice staff have now completed their first full week in their new home at Harewood House and received more donations of furniture and equipment, including a fridge from Mr and Mrs Haynes who have already donated a freezer.
Mr and Mrs Brown, of Barton, gave a desk and an anonymous friend drove it to the hospice.
The hospice received a very generous donation of £750 from Mr and Mrs Ramsdale in memory of their aunt Miss Anne Farndale who died in November.
The Hospice sitting service helped Miss Farndale's family during her illness; offering support to look after her in her own home until he died.
Mr and Mrs Ramsdale have now requested that their gift be used to buy equipment which will help other families support their own relatives at home, rather than have them admitted to hospital for their last days and weeks.
There have also been generous donations from North Road Primary School, where the children raised £148, and from Route ‘66, in King Street, where the patrons collected £150 to add to funds raised by Richard and Kate Harker through a sponsored drive in their E-type Jaguar.
Forthcoming events include the very successful annual sequence dance at the Dolphin Centre on Friday, March 6 and Hospice Flag Day in Darlington on Saturday, May 16, and in Barnard Castle on Wednesday, June 17.
The hospice is seeking more collectors than usual to give an hour or two of their time on those days to help raise a record amount.
For more information or advice call ; or drop in at Harewood House, Harewood Hill, off Grange Road.
Aldbrough St John Pavilion raided:
Thieves have once more broken into the cricket pavilion in the village.
It is the third such raid in the space of 12 months.
On each occasion the items stolen have been of little value, but the thefts are a continual thorn in the side of the cricket club committee.
This time the most valuable item stolen was a Calor gas heater.
Thefts warning: Thieves have also been at work in outhouses and cars around the village.
Parish council chairman Jack Holywell said it seems that the thieves are looking for the easy targets which they know will be left unguarded at night.
He stressed the importance of local people taking care of their belongings.
Dinner guest: Tuesday night saw the annual dinner of the area British Legion Club with members meeting for a meal at the Stanwick Arms.
Guest of honour was Brigadier Garton who came up for the evening from his base at Catterick Garrison.
The dinner was a pleasant opportunity for members to catch up with each other 's news.
Teaching report:
The parents of former Heighington Primary School teacher Catherine Lee visited the village last week to tell villagers how she was getting on in her third year teaching in East Africa.
Miss Lee is at Nwanza, in Tanzania, with the Church Mission Society and will come home for a holiday in Britain next year.
A PIZZA restaurant-owner has claimed he lost business after police impounded his car.
Thomas Davidson was stopped by police last week when delivering pizzas and asked if his car engine could be inspected.
Mr Davidson, who runs a pizza takeaway on High Northgate, Darlington, said: ‘They stopped me because they thought the engine numbers were filed away and the car was stolen.
They took the keys and the car and left me stranded.’
He was without a car for two days and claimed it had cost him at least £300 in business.
‘We lost a lot of custom that night, especially as we have built up quite a good reputation.’
When the police returned the car they told him there was nothing wrong with it and the engine was legitimate.
Darlington police have since apologised for the mix-up.
But Mr Davidson felt they had not been unfair in their treatment of him.
‘They gave me no specific reason why they stopped me and I am just worried they could stop any innocent people,’ he said.
He now plans to write to the Durham Chief Constable about the matter.
Supt Alan Saddler, of Darlington police, said if Mr Davidson was still not happy with the situation he was welcome visit him to talk the matter over.
He said police had powers to remove cars if they felt there was something wrong with the vehicle.
‘If we thought the engine numbers had been filed down, we would be suspicious,’ he said.
ANIMAL lover Ray Mackinlay is looking for the owner of a lovable blind dog found wandering the streets of Darlington.
The cuddly mongrel was discovered in the town's Geneva Road area by a resident who passed the dog on to Ray while its owner was traced.
Ray thinks the stray is about ten years old and could be a collie cross.
He has been looking after it since Tuesday morning.
‘He is so affectionate but he can't see anything.
I took him out for a walk and he went straight into a lamp post,’ said Ray, of Clarence Chare, Newton Aycliffe.
‘He is getting on a bit, he is going grey round the whiskers and has a milky white coat.
‘I would desperately like to get him back to his owner, they must be feeling terrible.’
Ray, who helps Aycliffe police rehouse stray and abandoned animals, urged owners to make sure their pets had collars and identification tags on them.
He has made over 5,000 tags for local people.
He can be contacted on .
A LANCASHIRE man has crossed the Pennines to take the helm at Richmondshire District Council.
Harry Tabiner will take over as chief executive on April 1, succeeding Malcolm Tooze who retires early on March 31.
The two are now working side by side as Mr Tabiner gets to know the area and its people.
Mr Tabiner, originally from Blackburn, was deputy director of legal and administrative services at Sefton metropolitan borough council in Merseyside a unitary authority with a population of 300,000 and whose responsibilities included education and social services.
Richmondshire has a population of about 55,000 scattered around 510 sq miles from the Darlington to Cumbria borders.
Such responsibilities as education and social services are carried out by North Yorkshire County Council but could become those of Richmondshire if it wins unitary status under any local government changes.
Mr Tabiner, 40, sees the unitary issue as one of the major issues for the council over the next few years.
Another will be whether the council's diminishing housing stock should be transferred to a housing association.
Mr Tabiner gained a law degree at Warwick University, an MSc in industrial relations at the London School of Economics and studied at the law college, Chester.
He began his local government career with Cheshire County Council as an articled clerk, qualified as a solicitor, and joined Solihull council in the West Midlands as principal solicitor before moving to Sefton.
His successor at Sefton is Mark Lewis, assistant county secretary at North Yorkshire County Council.
He and his wife, Susan, have three children Helen, nine, Louise, seven, and Robert, three.
His interests include outdoor activities of fishing, climbing and walking which first introduced him to the area and DIY and cookery.
SHOPPERS in Darlington are being asked to spare some love on Valentine's Day for hungry Russian children.
The town is taking part in an appeal to collect food supplies and basic medication for people living in the Russian city of Kostroma, twinned with County Durham.
Volunteers will be at Morrison's supermarket in North Road today and tomorrow.
Darlington appeal co-ordinator Michelle Le-Neveu said donations did not have to cost a lot but should be high in nutrition like tinned fish or meat.
A CONTROVERSIAL accommodation brochure which has attracted criticism from Darlington MP Michael Fallon has been published.
‘Decide on Darlington’ is a new guide for tourists coming to the town and offers advice on a range of places to stay.
The free booklet, published by the borough council, features details of more than 70 hotels, guest houses and self-catering centres in and around Darlington.
But a number are outside the borough boundaries and some are as far afield as Northallerton, Thirsk and Wolsingham 26 miles away from Darlington town centre.
The booklet was criticised during its draft stages for including details of accommodation such a long distance away.
Darlington MP Michael Fallon said it was crazy for the brochure to encourage people to stay so far from the town.
And two Darlington guest house owners called on the council to narrow the boundaries for inclusion to eight miles instead of 20.
Council leader John Williams argued the town benefits from people who choose to stay in more rural locations and travel in during the day.
A total of 15,000 copies of the free booklet have been printed on recycled paper and will be sent to libraries and tourist information centres nationwide as well as distributed locally.
A visitors survey card has also been included to gather information.
AN accommodation brochure which attracted criticism from Darlington MP Michael Fallon has been published.
Decide on Darlington is a new guide for tourists coming to the town and offers advice on a range of places to stay.
The free booklet, published by Darlington Borough Council, features details of more than 70 hotels, guest houses and self- catering centres in and around the town.
But a number are outside the borough boundaries and some are as far afield as Northallerton, Thirsk and Wolsingham 26 miles away from Darlington town centre.
The booklet was criticised during its draft stages for including details of accommodation such a long distance away.
Mr Fallon said it was ‘crazy’ for the brochure to encourage people to stay so far from the town.
And two Darlington guest house owners called on the council to narrow the boundaries for inclusion to eight miles instead of 20.
The council leader, Coun John Williams, argued that the town benefits from people who choose to stay in more rural locations and travel in during the day.
A total of 15,000 copies of the free booklet have been printed on recycled paper and will be sent to libraries and tourist information centres nationwide as well as distributed locally.
A visitors survey card has also been included to gather information about what tourists do when they visit Darlington.
All entries will be included in a draw to win a luxury hamper.
DEVELOPERS have drawn up a hit list of high street names in a bid to fill Darlington's new £45m Cornmill shopping complex.
Burton Property Trust is planning to blitz hundreds of businesses when marketing of the town's new Cornmill centre gets under way in the next few weeks.
The ambitious plans were revealed when the company threw open the doors of its showpiece development for the first time yesterday.
BPT marketing director Sue Rutherford said: ‘We plan to assemble a variety of familiar high street retailers to form the bedrock of our plans for the Cornmill.’
By attracting famous names BPT hopes to create a snowball effect, boosting confidence and encouraging smaller retailers to take up space.
Several big names have already signed up for the massive complex which will house 68 shops when it opens in August.
They include C&A, which will open a two-tier 27,000sq ft anchor store, H Samuel, Dorothy Perkins, and C&J Clark shoes.
According to letting agents Sanderson, Townend and Gilbert, retailers are queuing up to take space in the centre, which will create 300 new jobs.
Although the marketing operation has not started in earnest yet, the company says it is close to clinching a deal on 24 shop units.
And another 22 different retailers have expressed interest in joining the Cornmill.
Details of companies which have looked at the centre are still a closely guarded secret, but BPT believes many of the centre's shops will be let, if not trading, by the time the centre opens.
A small army of workers will be moving into C&A to start shop fitting in a few weeks' time.
The operation is expected to take several months.
Tim Catterall, a director of Sanderson, Townend and Gilbert, said: ‘We have found the response to Cornmill extremely encouraging and are working hard to put together a good mix of tenants who can thrive alongside each other.
‘It is vitally important to make sure we choose our tenants carefully.
Some retailers require a degree of exclusivity if they are to take space in a development like the Cornmill.’
Visitors to the centre will be faced with a two tier shopping mall.
The upper atrium will be reached by stairs, escalators or a glass lift.
Designers have been at pains to ensure the Cornmill is not just a covered shopping mall.
The complex features glass domes which will let in natural sunlight on the two main shopping areas.
TWO WILD birds died yesterday after hours of struggling to get free from anti-pigeon netting on the roof of a town centre shop.
The starlings are believed to have died of exhaustion, despite the efforts of an office worker nearby.
Alison Hutchinson spotted the two starlings flailing about in the netting on the roof of Darlington's Singer Sewing Centre in Bondgate.
She called the RSPCA and fire brigade but the birds were found dead.
Miss Hutchinson said: ‘They shouldn't use that netting if birds are going to get caught like this.
It was horrible.
I couldn't just sit and watch them dying.’
The shop was closed yesterday afternoon but neighbouring estate agents Sanderson, Townend and Gilbert also have the netting on their roof.
Senior partner Roderick Burtt said: ‘The idea is to prevent pigeons roosting on the roof.
‘It's meant to be humane.
Ours is specially designed anti-pigeon netting but we would certainly take action if birds were getting caught in it.
‘It's a considerable problem because the pigeons produce enormous amounts of guano which blocks up the gutters.’
A WOMAN is appealing for the return of medical records and drugs she believes were stolen on shopping trip in Darlington.
Dorothy King was carrying a plastic bag containing sleeping pills and anti-depressants, a doctor's letter and a medical report on her hyperactive son.
‘I went to a few shops, including Iceland, and to the George pub on Bondgate.
When I went to the bus I realised I only had one bag instead of two so I rushed back but no-one had seen the bag in the pub or the shops.
‘I think someone must have taken it and I can only ask them to bring it back to me,’ said Mrs King, of Egglestone Way.
‘I'm worried that the pills might get into the hands of children.’
Darlington police said anyone finding the bag should hand it in at the police station on St Cuthbert's Way.
THE Government has pledged to keep tabs on radar detectors after The Northern Echo revealed how unscrupulous motorists used them to dodge speed traps.
Home Office ministers have asked the Association of Chief Police Officers to monitor the spread of scanners which can detect a radar trap up to three miles away.
But they have ruled out immediate legislation to ban the gadgets, which have flooded the market from the Far East and America.
MPs of all parties have condemned the current laws which makes it legal to own and sell detection equipment but illegal to use such a device on the road.
They have urged the Government to tighten up the apparent loophole which allows motorists to speed.
In a letter to Darlington MP Michael fallon, Home Office minister Lord Ferrers said he was concerned over the issue.
He added: ‘Although use of such devices is not at present a real problem in terms of its effect on law enforcement and road safety, the Government is aware that it might become so in the future.’
He has asked the Association of Chief police Officers to keep tabs on the proliferation of the devices.
Mr Fallon said he was pleased to see the matter would be kept under review but added: ‘I still think it is a nonsense to sell something which is illegal to use.’
THOUSANDS of homes have been relying on stored water supplies following a discharge of diesel oil into the River Tees.
Water inlets at the Broken Scar Treatment Works, near Darlington, were closed as a precautionary measure on Tuesday and its emergency supplies brought into use after a pollution alert further upstream at Barnard Castle.
The works supplies about half of the water demands of the Teesdale, Teesside and Darlington areas the rest comes from the Lartington Treatment Works, west of Barnard Castle.
National Rivers Authority officials placed booms across the river at Barnard Castle and at a tributary further upstream, after being alerted.
An NRA spokesman said the spillage had been traced back to the Lartington Treatment Works, where there had been no threat to drinking water.
He said the oil would either be absorbed by the booms or would stack up behind them, stopping it from getting downstream.
There had been no reports of wildlife or fish being affected, said the spokesman.
Further water samples will be tested today when supplies are expected to be back to normal.
CHAIRMAN Dick Corden last night refused to give Darlington manager Frank Gray a vote of confidence but insisted: ‘He's the man for the job.’
Gray's problems mounted after Tuesday night's 4–0 beating by fellow strugglers Fulham at Craven Cottage.
The defeat has deepened the Quakers' relegation worries and the visit of promotion hopefuls Huddersfield on Saturday when Darlington will be trying to avoid a third successive reversal promises to provide a searching test.
Corden, however, stressed: ‘Frank's under no pressure.
‘As far as I'm concerned he's the man for the job.
I'm sure he'll get us out of trouble.’
But Corden, mindful that in football a firm show of boardroom backing so often heralds managerial upheaval, said: ‘I'm not going to give him a vote of confidence!’
Corden added: ‘Tuesday's result was very disappointing but we have been carrying a few injuries.
‘People say luck levels out over a season, so hopefully our luck will change.
‘We will sit down tomorrow and see how we're going to handle things.
‘There is no more money to spend but Frank could bring somebody in on loan if he wanted.
‘I've been busy trying to give Frank the backing he deserves, but we, the board, can't go into the dressing room and pick the side.
It's up to him and Tony McAndrew.’
Gray, who was understood to be watching Newcastle United Reserves home game against Sheffield United last night, was unavailable for comment earlier yesterday.
The form Darlington displayed in winning 2–0 at Shrewsbury almost two weeks ago has completely deserted them and there was muted dissent among the Feethams faithful during last Saturday's 1–0 home defeat at the hands of Hull City.
The stark fact is that the Quakers have failed to achieve back-to-back victories since an encouraging start to the season when they won their first two games.
Clearly results must improve quickly if Darlington are to preserve the status they attained with such distinction under the leadership of former manager Brian Little.
PARENTS and governors will be initiated into the mysteries of mathematics as New College Durham mounts a series of courses on the National Curriculum.
Starting after Easter, the ten-week course at the Nevilles Cross Centre and Darlington Teachers' Centre gives adults a chance to try out new ways of learning maths.
Course details from Michael May on 091–384 7325, ext 298.
RETIRED Gordon Turner has launched a search for the best pal he hasn't seen in 40 years.
Mr Turner, 61, and Raymond Hubbard, who lived in Darlington, joined the Navy together in 1952.
Mr Turner, a retired electronics computer engineer, and Mr Hubbard were among 85 training on HMS Defiant at Devonport but finished training a few months apart and lost touch in 1953.
‘I would love to hear from Ray.
We were such good friends,’ said Mr Turner, of 39 Earlsgate, Winterton, South Humberside, DN15 9SS.
‘There must be some relatives still in Darlington even if Ray isn't there.’
Anyone with information should contact Mr Turner at his address or on .
STUDENTS at Darlington College of Technology have raised £105 for Cot Death Research.
Pupils on the BTEC Diploma in Caring Course raised the money by washing cars.
Lesley Lister, course lecturer, said: ‘These are group community assignments and an interesting and essential part of course work.
It raises student awareness of community needs and local charities benefit.’
SOCIAL service chiefs were yesterday urged to speak to the operators of a gipsy site before going ahead with redevelopment plans.
The scheme has been proposed to improve facilities at the Honeypot Lane site in Darlington.
It was opened in 1976 on land owned by Darlington Borough Council but has been privately managed since 1978.
It provides 45 pitches which can accommodate 90 caravans.
But members of Durham County Council's social services committee were told the site built without Department of Environment grant aid was extremely basic and fell short of the type of accommodation provided on county council-owned sites.
Social services director Peter Kemp said talks with the DoE had revealed that a 100pc grant might be available to improve the site.
At the same time it would be possible to re-locate within the boundaries of the land owned by the Borough Council to improve drainage and avoid the part which would be affected by the proposed cross-town route.
He said before agreeing funding the DoE would however require assurances on future management of the site.
Members agreed to approve spending £2,500 on design work.
But Coun Derek Mason said the site was probably one of the best run in the country because it was led by genuine Romany people, and was an excellent advert for the social services department.
‘I hope these people are consulted fully.
To disturb them after all the work that has been done would be a disaster.’
A WARNING has been issued after the theft of a leather jacket from a men's changing room.
The £80 brown jacket, containing £30 cash, was taken from changing rooms at the Dolphin Centre in Darlington on Wednesday afternoon.
Det Chief Insp Harvey Harris has warned people to beware of thieves in changing rooms.
‘This type of crime is again on the increase.
People should always place articles of clothing and all their personal possessions in a locker,’ he said.
THE Yorkshire Dales National Park committee has joined the growing protest about the Wensleydale rail line.
The committee yesterday agreed to urge Transport Secretary Malcolm Rifkind to intervene in the controversy, sparked by British Steel's decision to switch transport of Redmire Quarry limestone from rail to road.
The quarry and the anticipated road route from Redmire Quarry to the tank roads, through Catterick Garrison and on to the A1, Darlington bypass and on to Teesside is outside the national park boundary.
But park officers and members feel that the issue could have effects on the park.
The national park has been concerned for some time about the volume of heavy lorries using roads through the park.
There are fears that British Steel's decision could set a precedent and discourage other quarries in the Dales from transferring stone from road to rail.
It is also a serious setback for hopes of reinstating passenger trains on the line to go beyond Redmire to Hawes and link up with the Settle-Carlisle line.
Coun Nigel Watson said British Steel should be encouraged to apply for grants given in special circumstances that would keep the quarry traffic on the railway.
He said: ‘This seems to be the only faint glimmer of light at the end of the railway tunnel.
It's the only avenue we have left.
‘Pressure should be put on the Secretary of State for Transport to do something about this.’
He said there was no mechanism in local government to consider the environmental effects of an extra 120 HGV movements a day to and from the quarry following British Steel's commercial decision.
‘British Steel won't have to pay for the wear and tear of the roads caused by the extra traffic,’ he said.
The committee agreed to write to Mr Rifkind, environment minister David Trippier, Richmond MP William Hague and former Richmond MP Sir Leon Brittan, now a European Commissioner who still has a home in Wensleydale.
A STOLEN caravan was stripped of over £2,000 worth of property when it was stored at an East Durham farm, a court heard yesterday.
The caravan was stolen from a service station at Barton, near Darlington before being moved to the farm at Hetton-le-Hole.
When police approached Robert Francis, who was in possession of the caravan, he claimed he had bought it for £2,000 from a colleague.
At Teesside Crown Court yesterday, Francis, 36, admitted handling stolen goods.
Robin Denny, prosecuting, said Francis asked a farmer if he could store it on his land and removed property from it.
Judge William Hannah sentenced Francis, of Caroline Street, Hetton-le-Hole, to four months imprisonment suspended for two years and ordered him to pay £500 compensation.
John Wilkinson, defending, said Francis accepted that the court would treat the offence with ‘a suitable degree of gravity and seriousness.’
THE councillor who attacked a controversial version of Swan Lake is now considering seeing the performance.
Tory Darlington councillor Peter Jones hit out at the show after hearing it contained erotic love scenes, a roller skating comic, and a simulated sex act.
He started to reconsider after receiving an invitation to see the Tchaikovsky ballet.
‘I was brought up with Tchaikovsky music and the records we had were sacred to me,’ said Coun Jones.
‘When I heard rumours that this version of Swan Lake was pornographic I just wondered why they couldn't pick on some other composer.
‘Now I want to keep an open mind.
I haven't made my mind up yet as to whether I shall see it.’
A theatre-goer has congratulated Darlington Civic Theatre director Brian Goddard for his ‘stand against the narrow-minded provincialism of Coun Jones’.
The woman, from Great Smeaton, near Darlington, wrote: ‘I am convinced of the artistic integrity of Christopher Gable and his company.
With my family I feel privileged to be able to see this new production.’
PLANS to reopen the sixth form of a Darlington school have been shelved.
Disappointed governors at Hummersknott School have been told they have no right of appeal against Durham County Council's rejection of plans for a 150-place sixth form at the school.
They had hoped to appeal to Education Secretary Kenneth Clarke to overturn the decision.
Governors said reopening the sixth form would increase parental choice and win back pupils from independent schools.
But county councillors claimed it would reduce parental choice by restricting the number of 11-year-old pupils the popular school can recruit.
Peter Carberry, chairman of Hummersknott's governors, said: ‘I am very annoyed but it is just one of those things.’
He is hoping it may be possible to revive the idea after the general election.
A NEW reward of £5,000 has been offered in a bid to track down the killer of sunbather Ann Heron.
The case is one of the first serious unsolved crimes throughout the country to attract the rewards which are being put up by the Community Action Trust, the organisation behind the Crimestoppers scheme.
The cash ten times the amount offered by the dead woman's husband Peter after the murder is being put up for information leading to the detection of the killer.
Mr Heron found his wife's bloodsoaked body at the couple's isolated home Aeolian House at Morton Palms, Middleton St George, on the outskirts of Darlington.
The mother-of-three had been sunbathing on the hottest day of 1990.
Det Supt Keith Readman, in charge of the inquiry, said: ‘I hope this increased reward will trigger that vital piece of information.
‘As time goes on it does not get any easier for the relatives.’
Last night Mr Heron, who works at G E Stiller Transport in Middleton St George, said: ‘I shall repeat what I said 18 months ago.
This man has got to be caught and I am grateful for anything which helps.’
CAMPAIGNERS look likely to win their fight for more nursery places in an area of Darlington which they claim has been deprived for years.
More than 50 places are expected to be made available at Springfield Primary School, Darlington, to cater for youngsters in the Haughton area of town.
The campaign was launched after parents in the east end complained they had to travel miles to take their children to nurseries.
A petition signed by 2,500 people calling for better nursery provision was presented to County Hall in Durham.
The provision of 26 places in the morning and another 26 in the afternoon is to be discussed by Durham County Council's schools sub-committee on Wednesday.
Keith Mitchell, director of education, has recommended consideration be given to the new nursery units at the meeting.
Five other locations throughout County Durham are also to be considered for extra nursery places.
County councillor Charlie French, who organised the campaign, said yesterday: ‘It's wonderful news.
It has made everything worthwhile.’
Another campaigner, Alan Milburn, Labour's prospective parliamentary candidate for Darlington, said: ‘Labour's campaign has paid off.
I am delighted that in a rapidly expanding area like Haughton young families will now have easy access to a nursery for their children.
‘It's wrong that families from that area are having to travel miles to the nearest nursery at the moment.
This is a small step towards Labour's pledge to provide a nursery place for every three and four-year-old whose parents wish it.’
But Tory county councillor Peter Jones said the west end of Darlington was a very needy case for extra nursery places.
RIVER watchdog officials yesterday continued the clean-up of the River Tees following a spillage of diesel oil earlier this week.
And Northumbrian Water reported it was extracting water from the river once again after inlets at Broken Scar Treatment Works, near Darlington, were closed as a precautionary measure on Tuesday night, and emergency supplies brought into use.
Thousands of homes in the North-East had to rely on stored water for 40 hours after the pollution alert at Barnard Castle the discharge was traced to the vicinity of the Lartington Treatment Works, but its precise source has not been named.
A National Rivers Authority spokesman said oil booms across the River Tees at Barnard Castle and at tributary further upstream would probably be removed today.
NRA officials were making every effort to clean up any oil slicks left trapped in pools, he added.
The NRA spokesman said prosecution was being considered.
Meanwhile, a Northumbrian Water spokesman said the company was investigating the Lartington works.
SOCIAL services chiefs were yesterday urged to speak to the operators of a gipsy site before going ahead with plans to redevelop it.
The scheme has been proposed to improve facilities at the Honeypot Lane site in Darlington.
Members of Durham County Council's social services committee were told the site was extremely basic.
But Coun Derek Mason said the site was probably one of the best run in the country because it was run by genuine Romany people.
‘I hope these people are consulted fully when this application goes through,’ he said.
‘To disturb them after all the work that has been done over many years would be a disaster.’
A new system has been established to record the number of addresses in Darlington which are being used as houses in multiple occupation.
From the beginning of this month all HMOs will be registered with Darlington Council which should be able to use the information to judge whether more houses should be used.
A dangerous junction in Darlington could soon be closed to motorists after a series of accidents.
Councillors heard last night that the junction of Orchard Road and Hollyhurst Road, near Darlington Memorial Hospital, could soon be closed to cars.
People holding loud parties or operating noisy machinery will be closely scrutinised by the council's environmental health officers.
The department will spend £1,000 on buying new noise monitoring equipment.
Darlington does not have a significant air pollution problem, according to the World Health Organisation's air quality guidelines for Europe.
Monitoring work has been carried out and levels of pollution were found to be well below the danger level.
Following an incident where two youths threatened a lavatory attendant with a toy gun, Darlington Council will be consulted before charges are dropped against suspects.
There was anger when the youths received only a caution.
AN agreement has been struck between Darlington council, Quakers and a housing association which will enable elderly people to move back to the centre of town.
Labour councillors have secured a deal with the Society of Friends and the Two Castles Housing Association for the Court Arcade shops to be turned into sheltered accommodation.
But Conservatives question bringing the elderly into a noisy area.
MORE parts of Darlington could soon benefit from pedestrian-only schemes, it was hinted last night.
Labour council leader John Williams said the pedestrianisation of Skinnergate and High Row was long overdue and just the first step in a town improvement strategy.
Coun Williams said his group is determined to improve the Market Square and tackle bus congestion.
Outer areas could also get more pedestrian schemes.
He made his comments after Tory councillors attempted to delay closing Skinnergate and High Row to traffic by asking to reopen the consultations.
The Tory suggestion was voted down after Coun Jim Skinner (Lab) said all the pedestrianisation schemes were experimental and will be reviewed.
He reacted angrily to Tory leader Coun Tony Richmond's suggestion Labour had ‘ratted on promises to the disabled and to shopkeepers’.
Coun Richmond asked councillors to vote for more talks with the disabled who he felt had been let down by late changes to the scheme.
With the candles and red roses of Valentines's Day cleared away, couples are again facing up to the grim realities of living together.
Many will be asking themselves, ‘Is there sex after marriage?’
Larry and Tina have been living together for a year.
Although they appear happy and contented their sex life has evaporated.
It was fine while they had their own flats but when she moved in with Larry their sex life seemed to fade.
Allan and Francine both enjoyed sex until the birth of their first child.
Now Francine complains that they don't make love often enough.
Allan says it's the pressure of his work but the truth is he doesn't find her appealing any more.
Ginny and Peter married three years ago, since when their sexual interest in each other has gradually dwindled.
They are still happy living together but without passion they describe themselves as being like brother and sister.
These couples suffer from what sex therapists say is the number one problem in relationships the loss of sexual appetite.
One recent survey revealed that 13pc of couples only make love once a week though the researchers believe the number who don't have sex at all may be even greater.
It's generally assumed that those who forego the pleasures of the flesh are elderly, but a report in the American Journal of Psychiatry reveals that 75pc are under the age of 38.
The problem's been around for a long time, but what's new is that in an age when women are releasing themselves from stereotypical roles of submission, it's the men still locked into emotionally repressive macho fantasies who are having all the problems.
Darlington sex therapist Julia Loudon reports that majority of her patients are men who cannot get an erection.
Boredom is often used as an excuse but according to sex specialist Dr Otto Kernberg it's just a cover up for more complex reasons.
He says: ‘There is boredom when one is trying to avoid awareness that one is very angry or disappointed with the other person.
Boredom is a coverup for feelings that are not recognised or expressed openly.’
Sex therapist Carol Botwin, author of Is There Sex After Marriage?
(Bantam, £3.99) agrees, but narrows down the problem to unstated, unacknowledged and unexpressed anger and a fear of intimacy.
She believes good communication is without doubt the number one way to maintain a healthy sex life.
Sometimes even minute breakthroughs on the talking front can transform a flagging sex life.
Teesside counsellor Cricket Kemp tells of a couple who suffered from just a simple misunderstanding.
‘They would be sitting together on the sofa feeling romantic and giving each other cuddles.
But just as they were becoming sexy, she would leave the room and go to bed, while he would stretch out on the sofa and watch TV.
‘It was only when they came to see me and talked about it that he found out that when she went to bed it was to get ready for sex, while he stayed downstairs because he thought she wasn't interested.’
Sometimes boredom can set in when couples enter into the ‘perfect couple’ conspiracy.
Convinced that they are the ideal match, these lovers who are often the offspring of divorced parents not wanting to repeat their mistakes conspire not to let anything spoil the relationship.
So little irritations get filed away instead of being openly expressed and before long a boiling cauldron of repressed anger has extinguished their sexual fire.
For others the anger stems from frustrated hopes.
He's not become rich and successful and, tied to the drudgery of housework, she's no longer the beauty he married.
While all sex therapists insist on the need for emotional involvement to sustain good sex, there are some couples whose sex life takes a hike because they have become too close.
A fear of intimacy tends to affect men more than women.
Jason was typical crazy about Helen, he wanted sex every day.
But once they were engaged, there was nothing she could do to turn him on.
Still deeply in love with her, he was paralysed by his fear of intimacy.
Another man enjoyed sex with his wife while they were reasonably distant but after the tragedy of their daughter's death brought them closer together he went right off it.
Ms Botwin has found that a good clue to spotting a fear of intimacy is when someone can only have sex with people they don't care about, but can confide and be intimate with people of the opposite sex who are seen as just good friends.
A fear of intimacy can also develop from a fear of dependency.
Many British men brought up with the notion that independence is strength fear dependency as a threat to their manhood.
So to protect their autonomy they create a distance between themselves and their partners.
To establish genuine intimacy, it is crucial that a couple learn to communicate with each other not just gossiping about friends, talking about the children or discussing world events but expressing their feelings, their fears, hopes, secrets, dreams, vulnerabilities, reactions, joys, irritations and depressions.
Many people think a successful marriage is one in which they don't have problems.
Ms Botwin disagrees: ‘Problems are inevitable because you're trying to bring two very different individuals, and sometimes many more, into some kind of intimacy, which means differing values and all kinds of compromises.
The test of success is not being without problems but rather how well you can solve the problems and reconcile the difference.’
MOTORISTS in the North-East are snapping up a new device in the battle to beat car crime.
Darlington entrepreneur Brian Tudor is selling an American innovation called the Nightstick which, he claims, makes it virtually impossible to steal a car.
The device incorporates a high tensile steel tube which clamps to the steering wheel and an integral alarm.
Although it works off a car's own battery, all Nightsticks also incorporate an internal power supply to foil thieves who go for the wiring first.
Mr Tudor said: ‘I decided to start selling the Nightstick when a friend of mine had his car broken into.
He was looking for something which immobilised the car and gave an audible warning if it was broken into.’
Since he started selling the devices Mr Tudor says he has been inundated with orders.
He said: ‘Once they see what it can do, people have no hesitation in buying one.’
SCHOOLBOY William Byrne, 11, of Clare Avenue, Darlington, had a role to play at a North quarry yesterday.
He pushed the vital button which blasted twelve and a half tons of rock at the ARC Quarry near Colwell, Northumberland.
His mother, Jean, had paid £30 at a charity auction to enable her son to visit the quarry.
William is seen surveying the scene with dad Harry, and quarry manager John Austin.
A SCHEME costing £1m to tackle Darlington's acute homelessness problem was unveiled yesterday.
The YMCA announced it will start work early next year on a purpose-built home for 30 youngsters who are homeless in Darlington.
Michael King, regional secretary of the YMCA, said the home, comprising 30 selfcontained units, will be built in Melland Street, Darlington, near the Civic Theatre.
The announcement was made yesterday with members of Darlington council's housing committee who are determined to tackle the worsening problem of youth homelessness in the town.
Coun Bill Dixon (Lab), chairman of the committee, said he was delighted to be involved in a scheme which will go some way to easing the town's critical housing shortage.
Money to back the development will come from the Government's Housing Corporation.
The nearest YMCA centre is in Ripon and Mr King said it was an article in The Northern Echo which first made him consider establishing a YMCA home in Darlington.
‘I approached the council's housing department who were very positive about the our idea,’ said Mr King.
‘This will not be a hostel.
This will be a home for 30 people between the ages of 17 and 25 who need a start,’ said Mr King.
Coun Dixon said: ‘The council finds many young people who move into council houses cannot cope living by themselves.
They need a place to bridge the gap between home and standing on their own two feet.’
The council accepts there are far more than 30 youngsters needing a proper base in Darlington.
The housing department and the YMCA say the Melland Street development is a crucial start.
Young people given accommodation will pay rent and look after themselves.
There will be a full time care worker at the building.
It is hoped the home will be open early in 1994 but a management committee is already being set up.
The Rev Tom Barnfather, of St Herbert's Church in Yarm Road, said the management committee will include representatives from the Citizen's Advice Bureau, the probation service and the council.
ONE of County Durham's most gruesome unsolved murders happened 40 years ago tonight.
The corpse of May Thompson, an 18year-old factory worker was found with 37 stab wounds at her home in William Street, Low Spennymoor on the night of Friday February 15, 1952.
A friend of the dead woman found her lying in a pool of blood on the kitchen floor.
Her killer has never been found.
The shocking discovery prompted a massive police operation clearly remembered by a retired policeman who was a young constable on duty in Spennymoor on the night of the slaying.
Arthur Stephenson was 22-years-old and the sight of the tragic woman's corpse has haunted him.
Last night Mr Stephenson, of Limbrick Avenue, Fairfield, Stockton, said he had seen many dead bodies since, but the memory of May's brutal murder has never left him.
Today the case remains open.
Mr Stephenson still believes the murderer was a local man who may still be alive.
‘In 1952 murder was a capital offence.
There is no doubt if he had ever been caught he would have hanged,’ said Mr Stephenson, who left the police as an inspector in 1977.
He remembers clearly the sight which greeted him when he went into the end terrace house where the body lay.
‘I wasn't part of the investigation but because I was on duty I had to go to the scene of the crime.
‘I've seen hundreds of corpses since then but that sight has always stuck in my mind.’
he said.
Newspaper reporters gathered at Low Spennymoor eager for any information about May, who worked as a wire cutter at a nearby factory.
The Northern Echo published details of how she spent the last hours of her life on a shopping trip with her friend, Veronica Alderson, from Kirk Merrington.
Before they parted May told her friend she was going to the cinema but she never left her house again.
It was also reported that May had spoken to neighbours about her fear of being attacked.
Ellen Kipling, her neighbour, said May had a premonition ‘that something dreadful would happen to her’.
She said the woman, who lived alone with her father, often feared ‘someone was going to pounce on her’.
Last night Mr Stephenson said many of his police colleagues had strong theories about who was responsible for May's killing.
‘It wasn't a sex attack, or what they call a serial killer these days.
We were certain it was a local man,’ he said.
Police were unable to make an arrest because they lacked evidence.
‘People were very keen to see us make an arrest but there just wasn't enough information.’
May Thompson's death was the last murder Durham Constabulary failed to solve until Daphne Tork was killed at Aycliffe Village in 1989, and Ann Heron was murdered near Darlington in August 1990.
Mr Stephenson said he sympathises with Det Supt Keith Readman, who has spent the last 18 months trying trace Mrs Heron's killer.
Last night he said: ‘I wish Mr Readman luck.
The world is a far more violent place to live now than it was 40 years ago.’
A PENSIONER has told how positive thinking and determination pulled him through two strokes.
Morris Marshall, former chairman of Merrybent Parish Council, wrote down his devastating experiences to try and help others.
His graphic story has just been published in the Darlington Postgraduate Journal, edited by doctors at Darlington Memorial Hospital where he was treated after his second stroke.
Sixty-nine-year-old Mr Marshall, who has lived in Merrybent for 23 years, said: ‘I want people to know how I survived as an objective lesson to other people that they can get through it.
‘I never gave up; it was positive thinking and I never lost my enthusiasm.
‘The second stroke was terrifying because I knew I had escaped the trauma of the first, I was petrified.
But I said I would not become a cabbage and I did survive it.’
He was determined to regain as much of his former abilities as he could and each time he began his rehabilitation with as much vigour as he could muster.
Said Mr Marshall: ‘Having been forced to retire from business I nevertheless retained my unbounded enthusiasm for work and community service.
‘Together with my improving physical state it was not long before I was engaged in a voluntary capacity as business counsellor with the local Business Development Venture for which I served for five absorbing years quite happily.’
Mr Marshall was elected as parish council chairman in 1989, retiring last year.
A WOULD-BE robber apologised and tried to shake hands with his victim after she screamed.
Robert Floyd had walked into Binns in Darlington and handed a note to the 24-year-old assistant on the perfume counter.
The note read: ‘I have a gun.
Please give me your money.’
But when the girl screamed Floyd immediately gave up his attempt and tried to shake hands with her.
Yesterday Floyd, 36, appeared before Teesside Crown Court and  admitred attempted robbery.
Judge Angus Stroyan QC said: ‘This was no doubt an extremely unpleasant few seconds for the girl but really no more than a drunken antic.
If I thought it was a serious attempt at robbery there would have been a severe sentence indeed.’
Floyd, of Belfast, Northern Ireland, was given a community service order for 160 hours.
Tim Roberts, prosecuting, said Floyd had been arrested at the Darlington bus station ten minutes after the attempted robbery and it was obvious to the police he had been drinking.
Roderick Hunt, defending, said: ‘His antics on that day were the antics of a drunken oaf.
‘As soon as he realised the serious nature of what he was doing he stopped and apologised.’
SCHOOLS Minister Michael Fallon yesterday denied that there had to be any cuts in the education budget in Northumberland.
Darlington MP Mr Fallon is under increasing pressure in the face of the £4m savings the county council says it is being forced to make to comply with government spending targets and avoid charge capping.
And he said he had not yet received a letter sent by Dr Roger Vaughan, chairman and chief executive of Swan Hunter shipyard on Tyneside.
Dr Vaughan, whose firm employs 3,800, had asked the MP to look closely at the cuts issue.
But Mr Fallon said: ‘The charge capping rules allow Northumberland to increase their expenditure from April by five per cent on this year's budget so there's no need for cuts of that nature.
There's no need for any school budget being cut.’
Meanwhile, Dr Vaughan's letter has been welcomed by education chiefs at county hall.
Chris Tipple, education director, said he was pleased at Dr Vaughan's intervention.
The letter to Mr Fallon represented ‘wholly unsolicited support’ he said.
He added: ‘It is an indication of the breadth of concern that is being expressed across the county not only by parents and governors but by all who are touched by education.’
Parents of nearly 50,000 schoolchildren have been sent letters warning of cutbacks by the county council, which fears bigger classes and less choice for sixth formers.
MILKMEN in Darlington have started a major collection for hungry families in Russia.
The initiative is part of Durham's appeal for food and medical aid for the county's twin town of Kostroma.
Darlington council's town twinning officer, Michelle Le Neveu, approached a dairy wholesaler asking if milkmen would be willing to help out with a door to door collection.
Last night Richard Bond, 27, was out with his float collecting milk money and gifts from people on his round who have agreed to help out with the appeal.
The council has asked for nonperishable food and basic medicines to add to the convoy of aid soon to depart for Russia.
Mr Bond said: ‘There are 33 independent milkmen who are all helping out by picking up food around the town.
I've distributed leaflets on my round.’
Staff and councillors at the town hall have praised the generous efforts of the milkmen who will inevitably have to spend extra time picking up the gifts.
Mr Bond, whose round covers the West End of the town, said all the milkmen were happy to help.
Morrisons and Presto supermarkets are also doing their bit to help the people of Kostroma by leaving trolleys for shoppers to put tins of food in.
At a full council meeting in Darlington members heard the appeal is going well.
Firemen bring welcome release
FIREMEN have made their second handcuff rescue in two weeks.
In the latest they were called to the home of a man in his early 20s in Frenchgate, Richmond, but found they needed more equipment so took him back to the Richmond Fire Station and released the cuffs with a hacksaw and vice.
Two weeks ago firemen freed a woman after a practical joke ended in her unable to release herself.
THE YMCA yesterday unveiled a £1m scheme to tackle Darlington's homelessness problem.
The association announced it would start work early next year on a purpose built home for 30 homeless youngsters.
Michael King, regional secretary of the YMCA, said the home, comprising 30 self-contained units, would be built in Melland Street, near the Civic Theatre.
The project will involve the borough council's housing committee.
Chairman Bill Dixon (Lab), said he was delighted to be involved in a scheme which would help ease the town's critical housing shortage.
Money to back the development will come from the Government's Housing Corporation.
Coun Dixon said the corporation's support proves that Darlington is widely considered to have a housing crisis.
The nearest YMCA centre is in Ripon and Mr King said it was an article in The Northern Echo which first made him consider establishing a YMCA home in Darlington.
‘I read an article which described how the town faced a housing crisis particularly among young people.
I approached the council's housing department who were very positive about the our idea,’ said Mr King.
‘This will not be a hostel.
This will be a home for 30 people between the ages of 17 and 25 who need a start,’ said Mr King.
IN AN attempt to ban speeding motorists from Darlington's Skerne Park estate, Durham County Council proposes to introduce traffic calming measures including ‘sleeping policeman’ ramps.
But Darlington Transport Company and United Buses are threatening to withdraw their services to Skerne Park if the speed humps are put in.
They say it would make journeys too uncomfortable for passengers and slow their journey times, making services uneconomical.
But many of the people in Skerne Park say they need the buses.
Public transport is seen as a vital link to the shops and services of the town centre.
Skerne Park offers no big supermarkets and no dentists, doctors or pharmacies.
Many families don't have a car and some say they cannot afford taxi fares.
June Scott, Hammond Drive, ‘It's not a very good idea at all.
A lot of us would have to walk.
I use the buses regularly; nearly every day to go into town shopping.
It would be especially bad for the old folk who can't walk very far — they couldn't walk to a bus stop outside the estate could they?
I admit it is uncomfortable when buses go over these road humps so I think they shouldn't put them in.’
Barbara Baines, Esk Road, ‘I think the buses should still come up here.
How else will we get the shopping?
I use them a lot to get around and a lot of other people do and I can't afford taxis.
But I think the road humps are important there are so many accidents up here with speeding and all the cars going fast.
It's especially worrying when you see the kids playing in the street.
David Webb, Tyne Crescent, ‘I have a car so it doesn't matter at all to me.
And I think the buses should be banned anyway because they go so fast.
My dog was run over by one of them; the bus was going so fast it didn't even stop.
The way the buses fly around they're a constant danger to the children.
We managed perfectly alright a couple of years ago when the buses didn't come up here, we could manage now.’
John Bolam, Arkle Crescent, ‘I drive a car and all my family drive a car, so I wouldn't be concerned personally, but I still think the buses should come up here.
A lot of people use them, families with young children and elderly people who all need to get to the shops.
If the buses came as far as Clifton Road it would be alright but any further away and people would have practically walked into town by the time they got to the nearest bus stop.’
Joanne Durham, Esk Road, mother of three young ‘I need the buses.
I go into town four times a week; taking the bus and getting the taxi back with the shopping — it's too far to walk from the bus stop with all the bags on the way back.
But all the taxi money adds up and if I had to take taxis both ways I couldn't afford it.’
Wilma Taylor, Eden Crescent, young ‘How would we get the shopping?
No one up here can afford taxis so the buses are vital.
How would the OAPs get down town?
My husband works for a bus company but he hasn't said anything about this.
It would be terrible.
It wouldn't be on walking much further to a bus stop somewhere else, especially in the winter when it's raining and snowing.’
I SAT in disbelief as Darlington's planning applications sub-committee approved the building of a golf course attached to Redworth Hall Hotel.
This now hands to the developers the authority to destroy a substantial portion of ancient woodland, currently a refuge for deer, badger, pheasant and other wildlife species.
The developers have already demonstrated their disregard both for the environment and for planning regulations by commencing landscaping and tree-felling operations before the planning application was approved Both the Durham Wildlife Trust and English Nature have expressed concerns regarding the future of this woodland, but have been ignored.
The really sad reflection is, that if we must have a golf course at Redworth (and only one lone voice was allowed to speak in opposition at the meeting), there is absolutely no need to remove any trees at all.
Plenty of land adjacent is available.
As an additional thought, the developers are going to be asked to manage what remains of the woodland.
The only management we have seen to date has been with the aid of a chainsaw!
I am sure with a little thought and effort we can do better than this.
Can't we?
J.M. Holme, Park House Farm, Heighington, Darlington.
AN APPEAL for homes for six unwanted puppies has had a great response.
RSPCA staff say they have been inundated with inquiries about the dogs at Sadberge kennels following an article in The Northern Echo.
The puppies were given as Christmas presents but were rescued by the RSPCA when the owners could not cope.
Maisie Ibbotson, an RSPCA volunteer in Darlington, said: ‘We have had a very good response.
I have visited lots of homes this week.’
All people who apply to give the dogs a home are vetted by the RSPCA.
Mrs Ibbotson said the dogs should be found a suitable home by the end of next week.
A FURNITURE recycling scheme celebrating its first anniversary has established itself as a lifeline for a town's needy families.
A year after the Darlington Help Furniture project was launched, volunteer workers are still busy organising furniture switches throughout the town.
Chairman Cecil Robinson said that in its first 12 months the group collected furniture from 949 separate addresses and delivered 666 items around the town.
The scheme involves unwanted good quality furniture being offered to families or individuals in need and its continuing success means it is now operating self-sufficiently with a small excess of income over expenditure.
Darlington Help Furniture mainly serves the central area of Darlington, benefitting many people in financial difficulties, but its workers have given advice to help start other groups elsewhere.
— Anyone wanting more information about the scheme or who wants to help by offering furniture should telephone Darlington .
DARLINGTON councillors have re-affirmed their decision to ask the Government for a re-examination of the town's status as an intermediate development area.
They believe the town lost an important factory development because other parts of the country are able to offer better financial incentives.
If Darlington was ‘downgraded’ to become a full development area the authority would be able to compete with other areas on equal terms.
The town's MP, Michael Fallon, argues that such a move would be an economic disaster.
He believes the council is in danger of giving Darlington a bad image as an unemployment blackspot.
One can understand why the local authority was understandably miffed at losing the factory development by U.S. firm Kimberley Clark to Humberside.
But councillors are keen to stress how Darlington has everything a company could want in terms of infrastructure and amenities.
They are also hoping to boost the town's tourist trade with a new accommodation brochure which says Darlington is the perfect venue for a foray into the Dales or a trip across the North York Moors.
The town has a major shopping centre close to completion, a grand leisure complex in the Dolphin Centre and ambitious plans for the future.
No mention of massive unemployment, deprivation or any of the other factors which have to be taken into account when the Government considers making a town into a development area.
It seems as though the council wants to have its cake and eat it.
On the one hand claiming Darlington is in such a bad state it needs more Government help, on the other claiming the town is a thriving local centre.
Of course, the truth lies somewhere in between .
Darlington does have problems but they do not compare with other areas of the country hit much harder by this recession and long-term industrial decline.
The relative prosperity of the town does not justify Development Area status it's as simple as that.
WHEN sunbather Ann Heron was murdered 18 months ago, her husband Peter offered a reward of £500 for information leading to her killer's conviction.
In the early days of what was a massive police investigation, officers were confident the killer would be found and the £500 sum was considered appropriate.
But so far many thousands of man-hours later the killer who left 44-year-old Mrs Heron in a pool of blood on her living room floor has remained at large.
The dead woman's husband has always maintained some-one knows who killed his wife.
He firmly believes the killer's wife, girlfriend or mother is protecting him.
What better time then for the Community Action Trust, the organisation behind the Crimestoppers scheme, to put up a reward of £5,000 for the same information?
Det Supt Keith Readman, the man leading the hunt for the murderer, rightly says it does not get any easier for the relatives.
Surely someone somewhere knows who killed Ann Heron and that person could ease the pain for her heartbroken family.
A woman who spoke to detectives last year could have a vital clue, but be too terrified to telephone again.
Couldn't the new incentive of a £5,000 reward act as a trigger for the vital information detectives need to set justice on its way?
The crime in question is no trivial act.
Mrs Heron was murdered in cold blood in a crime which to date has appeared to have no motive.
LABOUR Party branch members in Crook let it be known that they are looking for new blood to inject a little life and optimism into their ranks.
The branch is still reeling from the losses suffered at last year's polls.
And members are still less than enamoured with their district council group leader, Coun John Richardson from Willington, who led them to the disastrous defeat.
Was Crook Labour Coun Olive Brown's emphasis on the need for young blood and new ideas a little sideswipe or just a straight forward plea for members?
Decide for yourself.
Rethink plea
I WAS very sorry to hear that the Albert Hill bus service was to be taken off.
I have lived in Grey Street for over 30 years and we have never had a bus service in all that time, so when it was introduced last year everyone was delighted.
It was ideal and saved people walking up the bank with heavy shopping, also it was handy for the post office (which by the way, we haven't one on Albert Hill) as it stopped at the end of Albert Road and was quite near to the post office on North Road and everyone welcomed that.
I would urge DTC to reconsider their plans and leave the 11.17 service alone, perhaps every half hour would suit.
There has been a petition and a lot of signatures collected, so on behalf of Grey Street residents, please keep the 11.17 running.
Thank you.
Mrs N. Raper,.
Taking hump
I REFER to the report about bus companies threatening to boycott the Skerne Park estate in Darlington over speed calming measures (Echo February 7).
Once more poor old Skerne Park comes in for more grief.
DTC have already subjected us to a six-day, 20-minute daily service and a half hourly evening service.
I must, however, give United credit for a ten-minute service daily with a half hourly service evenings and Sundays.
No cribs there.
However, it would seem Andrew Guest of United is jumping on the bandwagon to give poor Skerne Park a kick in the pants along with Mr Hylsop of DTC.
I sympathise with both United and DTC.
The speed humps are not the solution to the problem of speeding.
Perhaps a chicane placed at intervals would be better.
Nobody should be subject to bouncing over humps in heavy vehicles which do not possess the suspension of a motor car, be it passenger or driver.
The spinal column and the neck take enough punishment with the existing road surfaces without having speed humps inflicted on them.
I urge the bus companies and council to get together and discuss the problem T.H. McCullagh,.
No surprise
I REFER to the threatened boycott of Skerne Park by the bus companies if speed restrictions, ie ramps, are introduced (Echo February 7).
Disgusted as I am that an estate full of innocent people can be used as pawns in a much more complex and devious game, this threat comes as no surprise to me.
Before she was even elected to serve the people of this estate, Coun Ms Buttle was already threatening industrial action by the buses at the first public meeting we attended a year ago.
I hope compromises can be achieved.
If other measures can work then fair enough.
But we've all kinds of reckless drivers including so-called joyriders to deter.
Mr Guest of United says his buses can only negotiate the ramps at 15mph.
Good.
Isn't it the aim of these measures to slow traffic down?
Bethany Megan Robinson,.
Waste plea
I NOTE that in Durham County Council's publication Charter for the Environment it is stated that the council intends to reduce domestic and industrial waste by preparing a recycling plan for County Durham and encouraging district councils to collect waste for recycling.
It would appear however, that their Labour counterparts on Sedgefield District Council either have not got the message or more likely have decided to turn a deaf ear.
This is proven by the fact that they have recently given the go-ahead to introduce a wheelie-bin scheme which envisages no recycling whatsoever and at a cost to poll tax payers of £1.25m.
I believe that spending money on continuing to dump our rubbish into holes in the ground is an act of gross irresponsibility and shows just how green the Labour Party really are.
Coun Garry Huntington, Lib/Dem District Councillor, 5 Central Parade Shildon.
AN MP has welcomed plans to open six more nursery units at schools in County Durham.
The move is part of a programme to improve nursery provision throughout the county six nursery units have opened and work is already underway on another eight due to open in September.
Now 26-place units are likely to be provided at Consett Moorside, Burnhope, Springfield in Darlington, Evenwood in Teesdale, and Crook Peases West primary schools and Trimdon village infant school.
Hilary Armstrong, Labour's education spokesman and MP for North-West Durham, said she was delighted at the news.
‘I know that parents in Moorside at Consett, and Burnhope and Peases West will be delighted.
The need for a nursery in each area has been raised with me on several occasions.
‘Kenneth Clarke has said that nursery education is not a priority and commitment to a nursery place for every three and four-year-old is a mistake.
‘Durham County Council and Labour know that it is the best way for children to start their educational life.’
In a report to the schools subcommittee, director of education Keith Mitchell said more than £1m was available for the development of nursery schools over the next two years.
Pay and display a plus
IN reference to your Public Opinion feature (Echo, February 10) on car parking in Barnard Castle.
I have not the slightest doubt that a Pay and Display system for both the cobbled stone area in the middle of the town and the larger car park now available behind the Raby Arms Hotel would be both effective and easy to operate.
The system works, it ensures that parking areas are used effectively and it is simple and cheap to operate and supervise.
Once people have become accustomed to the idea they will be very happy to pay 20p for a vacant parking space in such a delightful town as Barnard Mr D M Mockford, Yeast House, The Bank, Barnard Castle.
DARLINGTON has become a blackspot for cycling accidents according to road safety officials.
More children are seriously hurt in bike accidents in the town than anywhere else in the county, Darlington Cycling Forum heard.
Geoffrey Hillcoat, Durham County Council group traffic manager for road safety, said incidents in Darlington accounted for more than half the total cycling accidents in County Durham last year.
‘Nearly 90pc of these accidents happened in the main urban areas of Darlington, inside the 30mph speed zones,’ said Mr Hillcoat.
There were 3.4pc more bike riders in Darlington than any other town in County Durham.
The toll of serious accidents among young people in Darlington last year was 14, three more than the previous year.
But there were no fatalities and the number of accidents for older riders was falling.
Nearly all the accidents in Darlington occurred at junctions where cyclists were waiting to set off, or just starting to pedal, said Mr Hillcoat.
Some of the notorious places for accidents included roundabouts on Northgate, Bondgate, Parkgate and North Road, he added.
Graham Hamilton, of Darlington Freewheelers, said car drivers were often to blame for accidents and called for new measures to raise awareness.
‘Most accidents happen in daylight, so are we doing enough to make sure drivers are aware of pedal cyclists?
‘There should be warning signs to educate drivers driving without due care at places like Neasham Road, Yarm Road and Langdale Road,’ he said.
Coun Bill Stenson called for more schools to take on cycling proficiency and road safety courses for children.
‘We have a very large amount of information and facilities to offer but not all schools are involved,’ said Coun Stenson.
He added that demands placed on teachers by the national curriculum often meant there was not enough time for cycling lessons, but many of the town's primary schools were involved.
THE creation of a new group has triggered an appeal for people from all walks of life to help protect local wildlife.
Darlington Wildlife Trust is the latest branch of the Durham trust, which was set up in the Sixties.
Animal lovers and green fingered volunteers are needed to help the new trust look after the flora and fauna in and around Darlington.
Fourteen people attended the first meeting last week but Phyllis Horsley, a member of the Darlington Trust said: ‘There is room for everyone; we need more people who can help with conservation work, people who can help record data on local animals and plants, and older people who just want to help raise money.’
Durham Wildlife Trust already owns scores of nature reserves around the county.
The second meeting of the Darlington trust will be on March 12, at 7.30 pm, in Walkington House, Vane Terrace.
There will be a talk from Durham Wildlife Trust development officer Richard Wood.
‘Later in the spring there will be outdoor meetings at local places such as Rockwell Passages an area in North Darlington with ponds, ideal for a lot of wildlife we need people to help us record the plants and animals there,’ said Mrs Horsley.
Anyone interested should go to the meeting or ring  or .
DARLINGTON MP Michael Fallon is ‘out of touch’ with the town's house repossession problem, it was claimed yesterday.
Coun Bill Dixon (Lab) spoke out after Mr Fallon failed to respond to a challenge over a unique mortgage rescue package.
Last November, the Two Castles Housing Association and Darlington Council set up a mortgage rescue scheme for people who found themselves threatened with repossession after falling into arrears.
The £100,000 initiative thought to be the first of its kind in Britain aimed to keep at least ten Darlington families from eviction.
Coun Dixon, chairman of the council's housing committee, challenged Mr Fallon to persuade the Government to match Two Castle's funding.
But yesterday he said the MP had ‘failed miserably’.
‘Mr Fallon refuses to accept there is a problem with mortgage repossessions in Darlington,’ he said.
‘But we have had the biggest increase in home repossessions in the North-East from 101 in 1990 to 238 in 1991.
He is out of touch with the real situation.’
But Mr Fallon said the Government had already funded Two Castles and given the council £27.8m in revenue support grant.
‘We are funding Two Castles in the first place.
Their Government grant has doubled to £3.7m.’
ONLY one in 115 of Darlington's long-term unemployed finds work, it was revealed yesterday.
Figures released by Labour's prospective parliamentary MP for Darlington Alan Milburn said just 42 out of 4,845 long-term jobless found jobs as part of the Restart programme from April-December last year.
Mr Milburn said: ‘These shocking figures add up to the misery of lives going to waste, skills left unused and hopes being dashed.
‘Darlington's unemployed are being fed a starvation diet of dead-end schemes and cuts in training budgets.’
Long-term unemployed have to attend Restart interviews if they have been out of work for six months.
But only one out of 115 interviewed last year found work compared with one out of 52 the previous year.
Mr Milburn added: ‘The current slump has claimed 1,300 manufacturing jobs in the town and the Conservatives have let another 3,000 jobs go begging by refusing to back Darlington with proper regional assistance.’
He said the figures came hard on the heels of the news that there were just 202 job vacancies for the 4,685 unemployed in the Darlington district.
But Darlington MP Michael Fallon said the numbers working in Darlington had gone up ten per cent in the last ten years.
He said: ‘Throughout the 1980s more people have been working each year in Darlington.
Unemployment is one third lower than in 1987 but the key point is that the number in work keeps going up.
‘To paint Darlington as a jobs blackspot is not just factually wrong, it is also very damaging to the work the council and I are doing to attract new investment.’
A NURSE who suffered two miscarriages is launching a support group to help others who have gone through the same tragedy.
And to help mothers come to terms with their grief, money from the Telethon fundraising appeal has bought a special leatherbound Book of Remembrance in which the names of unborn babies can be recorded.
Sandra Cooper, 33, midwife and founder of the Darlington Miscarriage Association, said: ‘Women who have had a miscarriage experience grief but they have no record of their unborn child.
This book will be a focus for their grief.’
Three years ago Mrs Cooper, from Darlington, suffered two miscarriages at 12 and nine weeks and realised how little support was available.
She said: ‘Because I was a midwife I knew what was happening in my body so I was able to rationalise it, but it was still a shock.’
‘My husband and I had decided we wanted a baby it takes time to unthink yourself pregnant.
I felt really down when the baby was due and there's still a sense of loss.’
She decided to use her experience to help others and teamed up with Darlington GP Dr Ruth Dunlop and midwives at the Darlington Memorial Hospital to provide the service.
Child care manager Lucy Wheatley said: ‘It is not usually at the time of the miscarriage that the woman suffers but several months later.’
The group have already started a hotline run by community midwife Ann Kirkpatrick where women can get more information.
They may be offered counselling, visited by a health visitor or referred back to their GP if the problem is medical.
The Miscarriage Support Group will be launched next Tuesday in the Darlington Memorial Hospital.
For more information ring Sandra Cooper on Darlington .
For those in the Forces, the news had a special significance — they now had to swear allegiance to a Queen
: I was on duty in the RAF at Ismailia when word came through of the King's death.
The plotting room was suddenly silent and the flag was flying at half mast for all to see on the garrison church at Moascar, Ismailia.
: I was playing football on the playing field at HMS Ganges when suddenly a long bugle call playing the Still sounded from the tannoy system.
The referee then went off the field to consult an officer at the touchline who waved us off the pitch.
The flag at the famous Ganges mast was dipped — all activities and games cancelled.
The King is dead could be heard all over and everyone knew within minutes.
: A bunch of us whose ages ranged from 151/2 to 17 were in our billet waiting to go to on parade and were listening to the billet radio system.
We were doing our first two weeks square bashing in the RAF as boy entrants.
: I was aboard the troopship HMT Dilwara bound for Singapore.
We were leaving England and as the boat sailed down the Solent past the Needles everyone was mustered on deck to be informed that the King had died.
: I was serving in the Med fleet in HMS Saints sailing to Tobruk.
I was on watch as quartermaster on the forenoon watch on February 6 when the officer of the watch asked why HMS Glasgow and HMS Liverpool were flying the flag at half mast.
Just then the signalman came down to say the King had died.
: I was the WRAF Recruiting Officer in Cardiff.
I was telling about a dozen girls what would happen to them when they arrived at RAF Wilmslow.
I had just got to the part when I told them ‘You will have to take the oath of allegiance to…’ when one of my staff tapped me on the shoulder and said ‘Ma'am, the King is dead.’
Of course there was a buzz of conversation for about five minutes, and I then decided I had better resume my briefing.
I re-capped ‘You will have to take the oath of allegiance to — the Queen.’
It did sound odd at the time.
: I was a naval rating at HMS Excellent when it was announced that the King had died.
Within one hour there was activity at this base as the gun carriage that was to carry the King's body was held at this unit.
Hours of rehearsal took place before the party left for the funeral.
Ten ratings were chosen to stand at selected points along the way.
I was lucky enough to be one of the ten.
: My husband was steward cook on board a motor mine sweeper approaching the Forth Bridge after spending the morning practising a mine sweeping run.
He was preparing lunch at the precise moment.
I myself had celebrated my tenth birthday the day before and was still getting cards and presents that arrived late.
: My husband was in the Royal Air Force and we were living in a flat in Singapore.
Our neighbour from the next door flat, a Dutch Javanese married to a Scotsman, came rushing in to see if we had heard the news.
: I was in Singapore with my husband who was in the services.
We had a miserable week afterwards for all that was on the radio was martial music of the Death March kind.
: I was on leave from the WRAF and waiting at a bus stop in the town on my way to visit my grandmother.
I think my first thought was a black armband to wear on my uniform I was so proudly wearing at the time of the news.
: I was serving with the Army in Malaya.
On parade Major Clark-Kennedy MC informed his troops life would go on just the same under a Queen.
: I was on an administration course at Bircham Newton RAF unit, about five miles from Sandringham where George VI breathed his last.
A few days later all the officer cadets were given the opportunity to go to Wolferton station to see the old King's coffin on its way to London.
PLANS to bring pre-school nurseries to six more schools in County Durham have been welcomed.
The move is part of a continuing programme to improve nursery provision throughout the county six new nursery units have opened, and work is under way on another eight due to open in September.
Now 26-place units are likely to be provided at Consett Moorside, Burnhope, Springfield, Evenwood, Crook Peases West primary schools and Trimdon village infant school.
Hilary Armstrong, Labour's education spokesman and MP for North-West Durham, said she was delighted at the news in a report from director of education Keith Mitchell.
‘I know that parents in Moorside at Consett, and Burnhope and Peases West will be delighted.
The need for a nursery in each area has been raised with me on several occasions.
‘Durham County Council has put the needs of young children first.
Kenneth Clarke has said that nursery education is not a priority and commitment to a nursery place for every three and four-year-old is a mistake.
‘Durham County Council and Labour know that it is the best way for children to start their educational life,’ he said.
Nursery units will also be welcomed at Springfield school, Darlington, and Evenwood, Teesdale, where parents have been campaigning for better nursery provision.
In a report to the schools subcommittee, director of education Keith Mitchell says more than £1m is available for the development of nursery units over the next two years.
Staff for the units are being provided by reducing the number of staff per pupil at existing nursery schools and units in the county.
Recent reports have shown the North leads the country in provision of nursery places.
The county's schools sub-committee will consider the report tomorrow.
A PLAN to divert a public footpath over farmland will go to a public inquiry.
The hearing into the application by Major William Trotter, of the Deanery, Staindrop, to divert the path through his land near Cleatlam, will be held at the Staindrop village hall on April 8.
The inquiry follows objections by Teesdale District Council and the Ramblers Association to a decision by Durham County Council's special rights of way sub-committee to allow the plan.
Darlington Ramblers spokesman Alan Hutchinson, who accused the committee of favouring landowners in rights of way issues, said the suggested change at Cleatlam which would skirt fields rather than cross them would offer inferior views and be longer.
But Maj Trotter said he knew most of the walkers using his land, adding that most preferred the more circuitous route alongside a beck.
CAMPAIGNERS fighting to preserve an historic railway line in Darlington from road plans have won transatlantic support.
Darlington Environmental Watch received an official proclamation issued by residents of Darlington, Pennsylvania.
It pledges their support for efforts to protect the Stockton Darlington Railway Line.
The document begins: ‘Be it now proclaimed by the Board of Commissioners of the County of Beaver under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania’ and goes on to support the work done to try and preserve the line as a ‘national monument of historical importance’.
Dew members fear the planned cross-town route will destroy the remains of the world's first commercial railway.
The impressive document issued in Beaver County, Pennsylvania the first passed outside the U.S. by the authority was sent to Darlington Mayor Coun Rita Fishwick, who passed it on to Dew.
Coun Fishwick said there was not a lot she could do with the proclamation, adding it was county council business anyway.
But, she said, if Dew members wished to they could present it back to her and she would ensure it went through the proper channels for presentation to the borough council.
Dew spokesman Maggie Bosanquet, welcomed the gesture by residents of Darlington U.S., saying: ‘This is an ideal opportunity for Darlington, County Durham to make contact with its counterparts in the U.S. Both towns have links with railway history.’
‘We would be delighted to be vehicle for this to happen.’
AN OPERATION to move 250 pensioners from eight doomed council care homes is a third of the way through.
Peter Kemp, Durham County Council's director of social services, said so far around 90 elderly people had been found new homes.
Although most residents were being relocated in any of the 34 remaining council homes for the elderly, some had gone to private homes and some had gone to other counties to be closer to relatives.
A handful had returned to independent supported living.
Council staff and independent advocates had interviewed all the rest, if possible with their relatives, in an attempt to match them with other accommodation.
He pledged that pensioners using the earmarked homes for short stays and for day care would be found alternative facilities.
Mr Kemp said that since the announcement to close the homes in Durham City, Station Town, Chester-le-Street, Stanley, Newton Aycliffe, Darlington and Bishop Auckland, staff had continued to work hard.
He said: ‘I have got to express my admiration to residential staff,’ but added, ‘no matter how much support we give, it's clearly a very distressing time.’
THIEVES tried to break into a pensioners' community centre just hours before a tombola to replace a stolen karaoke machine and cash.
Residents at Wesley Court, Darlington, held the event on Saturday to help pay for day trips and to replace their karaoke machine stolen last month.
Just hours before, thieves tried to break in but left empty-handed when they were disturbed.
One resident, Edith Vivian, 66, said: ‘It's quite frightening for us to be broken into like this.
We need some sort of security.’
PC Dave Fishwick, of Darlington police, said he would contact the council about putting in a security system at Wesley Court.
‘We hope for some sort of strengthened glass and double locks,’ he said.
CLAIMS that waiting list times have been slashed at Bishop Auckland General Hospital were yesterday greeted with scepticism by the town's MP.
Opposition Chief Whip Derek Foster, Bishop Auckland's Labour MP, welcomed the news no one should have to wait longer than two years for treatment but called for reassurances that figures had not been ‘massaged’.
More than £150,000 of Northern regional health authority and South West Durham District Heath Authority cash has been allocated towards eliminating two-year waits and there has also been a significant reduction in those waiting between 12 and 23 months.
Bishop Auckland General Hospital was one of the first three units in the district to achieve its target and Erika Wallis, chairman of South West Durham Health Authority, paid tribute to consultants, nurses and staff for their ‘commitment and hard work’.
But Mr Foster said yesterday he knew of situations in other parts of the country where waiting lists had been reduced by unacceptable tactics.
‘I want to congratulate Bishop Auckland General Hospital for making an improvement in what is one of the thorniest problems of the NHS,’ he said.
‘But I have heard in other parts of the country that people have been moved from the waiting lists because they would not get an appointment within the set time limit.
‘Others have not been getting initial appointments and have not been put on waiting lists because they are so long.
‘One would hope to be reassured by the hospital that this kind of tactic has not been employed here.
‘But if the figures do stand up it is a remarkable achievement which shows what can be done by a hospital which decides to remain in the health service and not move into trust status.’
South West Durham Health Authority chief executive David Ryan said there was clear evidence the people of the district were benefitting and he hoped further progress could be made.
Bishop Auckland General Hospital targeted orthopaedics with an allocation of £88,000 £58,000 from the regional health authority and £30,000 from South West Durham which benefitted 180 patients.
Over 100 South West Durham residents had oral surgery services at Darlington Memorial and North Tees General Hospitals with extra funding of £23,000.
The regional authority provided £40,000 for ophthalmology and £10,000 has been identified for general surgery.
Mr Ryan said it was hoped to target 12 to 24 month waiting lists and eventually no one should wait longer than a year for treatment.
He added: ‘We have targeted this and we will look next at reducing waiting times to 18 months across the board and eventually hope to get it down to less than a year.’
Val Bryden, acting chief officer at South West Durham Community Health Council, said she welcomed the news.
‘I am sure the people who have been treated would say this has been money well spent,’ she said.
AN OPERATION to move 250 pensioners from eight council care homes which are closing down is one third of the way to completion.
Peter Kemp, director of social services for Durham County Council, said yesterday he was ‘satisfied’ with the way the elderly were being moved in the aftermath of the county's controversial decision to close the homes.
Mr Kemp said that so far around 90 elderly people had been found new homes most in other council-run establishments.
Council staff and others had interviewed all the rest, if possible with their relatives, in an attempt to match them with other accommodation.
Mr Kemp said the atmosphere of despair which swept the homes after the closure announcement on January 9 had now gone.
He said: ‘Once one group of residents goes, the others want to go fairly quickly because they can see their homes are being wound down.’
Mr Kemp said that since the closure announcement staff at the homes in Newton Aycliffe, Durham City, Darlington, Bishop Auckland, Station Town, Chester-le-Street and Stanley, had continued to work hard with residents.
He said: ‘I have got to express my admiration to residential staff who are trying to be positive and ensure the residents don't suffer.
They are keeping them buoyant.’
But he said: ‘No matter how much support we give, it's clearly a very distressing time.’
Although most residents were being relocated in any of the 34 remaining council homes for the elderly, some had gone to private homes and some had gone to other counties to be closer to relatives.
A handful had also returned to independent, though supported, living.
Mr Kemp pledged that pensioners using the earmarked homes for short stays and for day care would be found alternative facilities once they had closed.
The Labour-run county council claimed the closures were forced on them because of insufficient Government subsidies.
The announcement provoked a storm of criticism and anxious residents voiced concern over their uncertain future.
Mr Kemp said: ‘Given the scale and complexity of the closure programme, I think it is going as well for residents and staff as it could be at this stage.’
He said it was important that the pace of change was ‘right’ but refused to say when he expected the last of the doomed homes to say goodbye to its last resident.
AN ANIMAL welfare group's claims of cruelty to cats in Coundon have been denied by the community.
Local councillor Michael Wigley said since the village was included in the blacklist of Darlington Cats Protection League, many residents had come forward to protest.
The league said it would not send cats to Coundon as it had heard of a case of a kitten being used as live bait for dogs.
But Coun Wigley said he was in contact with a lot of local people and had there been such an incident he would have heard.
‘I have spoken to a lot of residents who feel very strongly that this sort of statement is irresponsible,’ he said.
‘I believe rather than suppressing cruelty it can actually encourage it and the people who made the claims should have substantiated them by giving names.’
The Cats Protection League has also said it will not rehouse cats in Darlington's Skerne Park and Firth Moor estates as well as the Woodhouse Close estate in Bishop Auckland.
The league says while the majority will suffer for the minority, it is not prepared to put an animal at risk.
THE fight for the return of Barnard Castle auction mart's licence to certify cattle has taken a step forward with the involvement of the town's MP.
Labour's Derek Foster said he would lobby Agriculture Minister John Gummer to overturn a decision by the Intervention Board to take away the licence for certifying steers castrated bulls.
The move follows an unsuccessful bid by Mr Foster to get the board to reinstate the facility Teesdale farmers regard as essential.
Mr Foster, who took up the issue on behalf of farmers and operators, said: ‘I am deeply disappointed that the Intervention Board has not accepted the strong arguments put forward in favour of the facility.’
Teesdale cattle farmers now face the more expensive journeys of taking their steers to Darlington, Bishop Auckland and Tow Law.
The Intervention Board withdrew the facility with six weeks notice, because it maintained, it was uneconomical it noted that last year the average weekly throughput for steers was less than four animals a week.
The government agency withdrew facilities for 160 centres countrywide, because the beef they handled was deemed below the required level.
Phil Barber, Barnard Castle National Farmers' Union branch secretary, condemned the Intervention Board's decision, saying the operators were particularly upset because they had just spent a lot of money to improve the facilities to offer a better service to customers.
He rejected the argument that keeping the facility for steers in Barnard Castle would be costly, saying it only involved a bit of paperwork by one of the officials at the mart.
He added: ‘The operators should have been given at least another 12 months, rather than having to face a judge and jury overnight decision by someone on the Intervention Board.’
DARLINGTON people have backed a ballot by the town's animal welfare group for a Europe-wide ban on cosmetic testing on animals.
The ballot was carried out to coincide with a debate among Euro-MPs which also agreed to the ban in principle.
HUNDREDS of Darlington Council employees are being briefed about how they can give the best service to customers and chargepayers.
The borough council has launched a customer care and quality service programme aimed at giving good service to the people who pay for and use its amenities.
A CLIMBDOWN by the British Government brought a multimillion pound cash windfall to the North-East yesterday.
Trade and Industry Secretary Peter Lilley's decision to abide by European Commission rules on the distribution of regional aid from Brussels immediately unlocked £18.9m of investment earmarked for the stricken former coalfield communities of Durham, Tyne and Wear, and Northumberland.
The money, under the EC's Rechar programme, has been frozen for 18 months while the political dispute raged on.
The row came to a head last month when EC Commissioner Bruce Millan said he would consider blocking all European regional aid to the UK unless Whitehall changed its stance.
This threatened the go-ahead of several major developments in the region, including the £8m first phase of the Darlington Cross Town Route.
In a statement to the Commons Mr Lilley said that, following discussions with Mr Millan, the Commission had agreed to release £121m worth of Rechar grants to the UK, of which £8m goes to East Durham.
The feud centred on the issue of ‘additionality’.
The EC accused the British Government of denying the regions its share of the Rechar money.
The British Government retained most of the cash, insisting it had taken Rechar allocations into account when determining local authority and development agency budgets.
The ending of the deadlock means Rechar money will almost immediately be put to use to finance the first phase of a £158m 10-year action plan drawn up by the East Durham Task Force.
It includes road-building, factory developments and reclamation programmes aimed at attracting 8,000 new jobs to the area, savaged in recent years by pit closures and job losses.
Task Force chairman Kingsley Smith, Durham County Council chief executive, said last night: ‘It is very good news, provided there are no catches, and it is to be genuinely additional money.
‘We will be able to use the £8m to develop new industrial sites and new factories, to help finance environmental improvements, and for business and community support schemes.’
Mr Lilley told the Commons: ‘The threat to future regional funds has been lifted and the coal mining areas will receive money to which they are entitled.’
But Labour's front bench energy spokesman Frank Dobson accused ministers of a humiliating climbdown, after being caught with ‘their hands in the till’.
FEARS Darlington could lose its Neighbourhood Watch scheme coordinator were allayed yesterday.
Richard Collin, director of central services, said the borough council would continue to fund the job of Diane Rymer as Neighbourhood Watch coordinator for the next financial year.
Darlington has 131 of the crime combatting schemes and some volunteers feared they could fold if the council did not come up with its share of the funding Durham County Council provides the other half.
But Mr Collin said: ‘There is £4,500 provision in next year's budget for our contribution towards the Neighbourhood Watch coordinator.’
Mrs Rymer's contract runs out on March 31 but the council said it will be renewed.
Mrs Rymer said: ‘I am relieved this is going through as 50,000 houses rely on our work.
It would have been disastrous if we could not continue.
We have been making great progress as people sometimes prefer to talk to civilians.’
She said the Neighbourhood Watch scheme had helped make ten arrests over the last few weeks.
Coun Jan Taylor, Labour chairman of the finance committee, said: ‘Crime prevention is a high priority of the council.’
History lessons
I READ that some people (HAS January 30) would have us believe that history did not take place in Hitler's Nazi Germany.
Likewise, Pam Lightfoot (HAS January 29) would have us deny Whitby's history through the promotion of its whaling past.
Please stop wailing over the dead Pam and concentrate on turning past atrocities into subjects of education and development, not by denying them, but promoting them in ways which will continually enlighten and in many ways, benefit today's society.
Skeletons in the closet are never really a good idea.
Clive Seabrook Simons, 27 South Church Road, Bishop Auckland.
PITY:
ONE must feel sorry for Sharon Griffiths.
Her ‘traditional’ primary education restricted her and she only became a professional journalist (Echo February 4).
What would she have become, one asks, if she had had a ‘progressive’ paint-and-play beginning?
Joe Corrie, 45 Barnes Road, Darlington.
Name drain
WHILE the doolally correspondence continues with old India hands by the dozen becoming involved, other words meaning idiot, and more or less exclusive to the North-East, are drying up.
A last fling could be the rather charming ‘tatie kite’ which apparently has rural roots.
The tatie of course what it says, that vegetable having been traditionally associated with stupidity.
The kite refers to a beer belly.
To be called a tatie kite thus means you are both stupid and fat.
TEESDALE'S other Hauxwells, Hank and Dorothy, own three pubs.
Long at the Bridgewater Arms in Winston, they've more recently taken the Black Horse at Ingleton and, last year, the Bridge on Whorlton green.
The first two, and maybe the Bridge as well, have a reputation for cheap and cheerful food, weekend queues and plenty of visitors.
The Bridgewater, once the village school, has a pleasant bar decorated by mock pikes (or halberds, or something) and warmed by a mock coal fire.
The aroma of cooking was everywhere without, the smell of vinegar most places within.
Maybe there was the reputed mix of locals and visitors, too.
An old chap in wellies called almost everything a ‘doofer’; two elderly ladies in tweed rhymed ‘bath’ with ‘hearth’.
The menu, wholly predictable except for Danish curry pancakes and Danish savory pancakes whatever they are carries adverts, among others, for a retirement home and a ‘more mature’ ladies fashion shop.
Perhaps they reflect the clientele.
Chicken supreme, £3.50, arrived with rice, par-fried chips and the vinegar bottle.
Treacle sponge, £1.50, had custard but no vinegar.
There are no starters, and no children in the evening.
‘Francis T Hauxwell’ it said above the door, but he wasn't in.
Too long a winter or no, the Hauxwells must be about it.
— WE spent part of Friday morning on Hartlepool railway station, a pretty loveless place enhanced as ever by the Train Stop Caff.
The caff now seems to have more customers than the railway, and would do better still if they cleared the tables.
Because of its home made excellence we had the usual: a quiche for Valentine's Day.
— OWNED by the Indescon construction company, the up-market Bishops House restaurant in Darlington is for sale.
‘I regard it as a Darlington institution,’ says Indescon chairman Derek Waiter.
‘We wanted to retain a restaurant of this standard in the town, but if people don't want it there's no point in persevering.’
Waiter bought the restaurant after hearing that it was set to become a pizza parlour.
‘I've nothing against pizza places, but there were plenty in Darlington already.
This was a little haven, but it's not making big bucks.’
He has rejected the option of running it himself.
‘My cooking's probably even worse than yours,’ says the chairman.
Periodically praised in most food guides, the restaurant has been presided over by the urbane Tom Jones, formerly manager of the Scotch Corner Hotel.
A couple who dined the other Friday report both food and ambience as appealing as ever.
Sadly, they were the night's only customers.
— THE THF owned Golden Fleece in Thirsk has moved up a notch or two, both in the kitchen and on the cash register, since last we were there.
(Herriot's restaurant remains.)
In the bar a decent onion soup was £2; ‘oven baked’ chicken (where else, for heaven's sake) had a particularly good chasseur sauce, as for £6.75 it should have done.
Beef in beer pie was more predictable, vegetables crisp and sideplated.
Two courses, £16 for two.
— ONE jump ahead as usual, the eldest bairn rang to ask what a frog's favourite sweet might be.
A lolli-hop.
ELIZABETH JOHNSON, sales receptionist and senior union shop steward.
AS a sales receptionist at Radio Rentals in Darlington my job entails a variety of different aspects.
I have to take payments from customers, take service calls and deal with customer queries.
I am also the Electrical and Engineering Staff Association union representative for the North.
My role as union representative is run in conjunction with my fulltime job on a day-to-day basis, but day meetings and week-long courses are occasionally organised.
Fellow workers approach with any problems they might have and managers as well throughout the North.
I represent approximately 288 members of EESA within branches ranging from Carlisle to Blackpool.
One recent week was spent down at one of the two training colleges the union owns Cudham Hall at Seven Oaks in Kent.
The course was aimed at improving negotiating skills which are needed because I must be capable of negotiating with management over pay and conditions.
I travelled down on Sunday afternoon and arrived late Sunday night.
On Monday the day started with a course on behavioural and negotiation techniques.
This taught us how to tell what a person is feeling by merely observing their body language and facial mannerisms.
The afternoon was spent practising national negotiation.
This involved group of thirteen splitting into two.
One side represented the management of Thorn UK and the other side played the role of the union.
The group could then practice negotiation techniques.
The following day we studied tactics and ploys for the successful negotiator.
This course aimed to show how to use body language to your own advantage.
That is you could portray yourself as plausible by using the correct mannerisms.
After that exercise we spent an hour and a half preparing for the case study which we would have to accomplish the next day.
The case study involved a set situation.
A member of staff was to be disciplined by the management and you had to defend the employee as best as you could.
Your performance depended on how well you had prepared and on your ability to negotiate.
On the Thursday morning there was a lecture on the communications policy within Thorn EMI.
It was taken by the national organiser for information distribution.
It is her responsibility to make sure any relevant information is passed on to the regional managers.
They in turn must inform the shop managers who then pass it onto the shop staff.
The EESA is part of the Electrical Engineering Telecommunication and Plumbing Union (EETPU).
The main body of the union represents the technical side and EESA control the staff and clerical side.
Some days when I attend a day meeting I can start at 5am and finish at 9pm including travel.
Any days missed off work because of the union are paid as normal by Radio Rentals.
THE merest mention of the word Hippodrome here a fortnight ago brought the memories flooding back to Derek Mason who was a regular at the theatre from a very young age.
The county councillor remembers one act in particular possibly because the ‘jokes’ were so convoluted.
CATH and Geoff Thompson are proud of their traditional Darlington pub.
They are also proud they have managed to build up a good trade but after 15 years service at the Travellers Rest, Cockerton, the couple plan to quit in June.
They are just two of dozens of landlords in the town affected by new 20-year leases issued by Grand Metropolitan, a property company which bought the pub estate of John Smith.
Grand Met maintains the leases give landlords better security of tenure and more control over their pubs.
But landlords say they have sent rents rocketing and forced many out of business.
Regulars at the Foresters Arm, Coatham Mundeville, looked on in astonishment last year when bailiffs came in and stripped the pub of furniture and fittings.
The landlord Les Helm could not afford the rent payments under the new lease as his rent had gone up sevenfold.
Geoff Addy, from the Old Dun Cow, left his pub last month after his annual rent went up to £76,000.
And on Wednesday Judy Robinson is set to leave the Grey Horse pub, Bank Top Judy's rent has gone up from £13,000 to £25,000.
Beer drinkers predict more than half of the town's 28 John Smith landlords will be out of their pubs by the end of the year.
And they fear it could mean the end of traditional pubs.
Cath Thompson, from the Travellers, said: ‘We are just pigs in the middle.
Grand Met say they have brought out these leases because of Government policy.
Yet the Government says it is not at fault.
‘They are losing good, experienced landlords by introducing these leases.’
Under the 20-year lease the Thompsons' rent would go from £20,000 to £48,000 a year.
‘This means I would be working for £1.50 an hour,’ said Cath.
The Brewers Society code which is a voluntary arrangement says tenants should be paid compensation if their tenancy is terminated.
But Cath said it was unlikely they would get any compensation for their 15 years service.
‘We tried to take Grand Met to a tribunal but they refused.
They say if we sign the lease, then they will think about negotiating.
They have no scruples.’
Glennis Park, from The Comet, Hurworth, is on a temporary six-month lease which runs out at the end of June.
But Grand Met could ask her to leave with just one month's notice if they find a taker for the 20-year lease.
‘It's impossible to meet the rent,’ said Glennis, 43.
‘I have to pay £1,600 rent a month before bills.
No one seems to want to take it on.’
Grand Met maintains it had to issue the leases after a Monopolies and Mergers Commission report which said the six big brewers could not own more than 2,000 pubs.
It says two Darlington pubs the Hole in the Wall and Lascelles Park are operating well under the new leases and that they are a unique way of putting pubs on a proper commercial footing.
Spokesman Mike Newman said: ‘The rent increases reflect the increased commercial opportunities open to tenants and is calculated on a fair open-market basis.
‘It's a shame that much of the debate so far has focused on rents because this is not really the issue.
The real issue is the best way forward for pubs.
‘Licensed retailers have now got the kind of security they have long desired and the chance to take their own business into their own hands and reap the rewards, by being able to play to their strengths and provide what their customers want.
‘That means good service, value for money, atmosphere and ambience.’
But Brendan Boyle, spokesman for the Darlington branch of the Campaign For Real Ale, fears the leases could mean the end of many traditional pubs.
‘This is turning out to be a complete disaster for Darlington.
Some of the best pubs in the town are affected.
We urge the Government to do something about this urgently.
It is no good just blaming each other.
Changes in legislation are needed now before pubs are ruined.’
Darlington MP Michael Fallon said some form of legislation may now be introduced to stop brewers behaving ‘unreasonably’.
‘The more evidence we accumulate of their unreasonable behaviour the more likely it is the Government will legislate.
This may be the only way to sort it out.’
He hopes to arrange a meeting in Darlington with Inntrepreneur, the markets arm of Grand Met, and all the John Smith landlords in the town.
NURSE Toral Sharan is busy organising a major charity event just days after giving up work to take maternity leave.
Toral, a nurse at Darlington Memorial Hospital, is due to have her first baby in April.
But she could not stand the thought of doing nothing for two months.
She decided to organise a big fund raising effort for the anaesthetic unit at the Memorial.
On Sunday diners are sitting down to a meal at the Garden of India restaurant in Bondgate.
All profits from £20 ticket sales will go to the anaesthetic unit.
A DARLINGTON woman who failed to supply exotic food hampers tried to creating some food parcels of her own, a court heard yesterday.
Sheila Wennington, 36, of Tweed Place, Darlington, yesterday admitted theft at Darlington Magistrates' Court.
Wennington worked as an agent for the Home Farm Hamper Company, the court heard.
Her work entailed taking orders and payments for hampers, but when she was asked to supply hampers to one customer she kept the money and did not deliver the hampers.
Lorraine Gabriel, prosecuting, said Wennington received more than £260 for a number of hampers from the customer.
In return she supplied one proper hamper.
Ian Boddy, for Wennington, said she had serious financial and marriage problems.
Magistrates ordered Wennington to pay compensation of £213.67 and costs of £25.
A PEDESTRIANISATION scheme which has angered disabled groups in Darlington has been given the go-ahead.
Skinnergate and High Row will be closed to traffic on an experimental basis, despite claims the town's disabled could be driven out of Darlington.
The county council highways and transportation committee yesterday agreed to the scheme which excludes all traffic, including cyclists, between 10.30am and 4pm.
And it approved the recommendation by Darlington Council not to have special exemptions for disabled drivers.
Coun Derek Mason (Con) added: ‘This is depriving 2,000 people of access to Darlington.
It is a ludicrous situation.’
But Coun Bob Pendlebury, deputy leader of the county council's ruling Labour group, said potential problems would be dealt with as they arose.
A hotline is to be set up to deal with complaints.
A TRAFFIC calming scheme on a Darlington estate has been modified after bus companies threatened to boycott the area.
United Buses and the Darlington Transport Company said they would stop serving the Skerne Park estate if speed humps and a 20mph speed limit were introduced.
They claimed the bumps could damage their vehicles.
County councillors yesterday agreed the scheme should be introduced, with modified humps specially adapted for the buses on the main routes along Coleridge Gardens and Hammond Drive.
These will be less steep and longer, so the whole bus can rise onto the ramp before the front starts to descend, avoiding damage to the underside.
The bus companies have agreed to continue running while the measures are introduced to see how vehicles are affected.
Residents have campaigned for a long time for a speed restriction and traffic calming in Skerne Park, which has a high accident rate.
Around four pedestrians a year are injured, many of them children.
The county's director of environment David Newbegin said there would also be some road closures, but gaps would be left so cyclists could get through.
He added the closures might mean emergency services took longer to reach the estate but those services felt they would still be within their legal limit.
Community workers on Skerne Park last night praised the county council's decision and welcomed an end to the threatened bus boycott.
They were concerned the council estate could be cut off if United and Darlington Transport Company had stopped all services because of the speed humps.
Joyce Standing, a community centre volunteer worker, said a bus ban would have made life impossible for many residents.
County Coun Ray Flowers (Lab) said: ‘This is great news for Skerne Park.’
He said he was convinced the buses would continue to serve the estate but added the 20mph speed limit may not go far enough.
A DIRECTOR whose company illegally dumped lethal paint stripper told a court yesterday: ‘I am not a cowboy operator.’
Darlington magistrates fined David Humphreys for a series of pollution offences, but he said he could not pay the fines and faced bankruptcy.
Humphreys, 47, and the company he managed, Tancare Ltd, pleaded guilty to a total of 16 charges of depositing controlled waste illegally and failing to provide proper consignment notes.
Patricia Holding, from Durham County Council, told the court more than 30 drums of hazardous paint stripper were taken to a dump at Heighington Lane, Newton Aycliffe.
Tests revealed it contained formic acid, which a doctor from Newcastle University said could be lethal to a child if only teaspoonful was swallowed.
Mrs Holding said the company had been using the chemical to remove PVC from Ferryhill Leisure Centre.
She said it was Humphreys' responsibility as managing director to follow the correct procedure for getting rid of toxic waste.
But Humphreys, who was not legally represented, said the warnings about the chemicals had been sent by fax to a 17year-old trainee at his office who failed to pass them on.
He said: ‘I am not a cowboy operator.
I would never just dump chemicals in a hedge.’
He blamed the suppliers of the chemicals and British Steel, who contracted him to do the work, for not warning him about the safety procedure.
Tancare has since gone into liquidation.
Mr Humphreys, who lives at Market Drayton, Shropshire, was fined £150 for each offence.
He faces a total bill of £2,255.
A MAN appeared in court yesterday accused of stealing nearly £4,000 of Christmas Club savings.
Peter Leonard Bishton, 34, is charged with stealing £3,934.82 from the Christmas savings fund of the Comrades Club in Richmond between January 1 1991 and December 31 1991.
Richmond magistrates adjourned the case until March 10 and Bishton, who lives in a guest house in Corporation Road, Darlington, was remanded on bail.
TWO student chefs from Darlington College have won through to the finals of a national catering competition.
Gillian Elders, 19, and Michael Pearson, 28, both won their sections in the British Gas Caterbility competition in Newcastle.
Michael, a chef for the Ministry of Defence at Catterick, won the culinary art section while Gillian, of Grove Farm, Bradbury, won for her ideas in kitchen planning.
She said: ‘It was hard work but because it's all my own work I'm delighted.’
Both students have qualified for the national finals in London next month.
Michael, of Wyville Grove, Hunton, near Bedale, wants to further his cooking career in Australia.
His recipe for roast lamb triumphed in the regional heats and he hopes it will be picked again next month.
Darlington College has never had a winner in the national finals but course leader Alan Brookfield thinks this could be the lucky year.
RESIDENTS set to lose their bus service to and from Darlington have been given fresh hope.
It was revealed yesterday another company, not yet named, is to provide a service between Prebend Row in the town centre, up Haughton Road to Albert Hill.
Darlington Transport Company decided to axe its three-bus-an-hour 11a route from February 24 after research showed the average number of passengers was three.
But hundreds of residents signed a protest petition stating buses were crucial for people living in the Albert Hill area.
The new service is expected to run twice an hour six days a week from Monday to Saturday between 9am and 5.30pm.
Yesterday Ray Flowers, a member of Durham County Council, said contracts had not yet been signed but the former DTC service was expected to be replaced.
Alan Milburn, Labour's prospective Parliamentary candidate for Darlington, who pushed the case for a bus service, said he was delighted at the replacement service.
A TERRIER found decapitated on an unofficial dump could have been the victim of a dog fight, it has been claimed.
Richard Parkes spotted the carcass near Hurworth Moor cottages on the outskirts of Darlington while walking his own dog.
The British Telecom phone engineer, who alerted Darlington Council's environmental health department of the discovery, said the creature was also surrounded by several dead rabbits and rabbit skins.
But yesterday Maisie Ibbotson, auxiliary secretary of Darlington RSPCA, said: ‘This is horrific.
I would imagine this dog has been used in dog fighting.
‘I'd think the rabbits would have been used to feed the dogs.
The type of people who are involved in this kind of thing can't afford to give them dog food.
They go out snaring and feed the dogs on rabbits.’
Jim Lilico, principal environmental health officer for Darlington Council, said the authority was aware of the fly tipping on the British Rail owned land, but had not known about the dead animals.
PLANNERS came under attack yesterday for allegedly being inconsistent in the way they deal with applications.
Former Hambleton district councillor and Mayor of Northallerton, John Bacon, called into question the whole planning ethos and the way lay men decided whether schemes get the go-ahead.
The attack came on the second day of a planning appeal on behalf of the town's Sundial Hotel.
Owner Fred Davies is challenging the council after being refused permission to convert the ailing hotel into a nursing home.
But Mr Bacon said the issue was much wider and standards of management of all planning applications needed to be improved.
‘I believe the time is now fast coming for a fresh look at the way we grant planning applications,’ he said.
‘There should always be a presumption in favour of development unless there are specific reasons.
They shouldn't be turned down because some councillor decides he doesn't like the colour of the windows and doors.’
He said the Sundial was a very pleasant environment but unfortunately takings were barely enough to cover the electricity bill.
The council had a responsibility to local businesses and should respond positively by allowing the change of use.
He said the appeal must have cost the Sundial thousands of pounds.
‘Mr Davies has every right to call upon the public purse to reimburse the costs,’ he said.
Mr Bacon also highlighted some of the council's past inconsistencies.
They granted themselves permission for Stonecross offices which was against the local plan, he said.
They also gave Gateway the go-ahead for a supermarket outside the retail area and allowed offices in Elder Road to be turned into retirement apartments near a nightclub.
Mr Davies, who opened the Sundial, in Darlington Road, two and a half years ago, wants to convert the hotel into a nursing home.
He says the alternative is to close as the room occupancy rate is just 26.5pc.
But Hambleton District Council opposes the move as the property lies in the heart of the town's industrial estate and it says it is noisy and unsuitable for the old.
A TRAFFIC scheme which has angered disabled groups in Darlington has been approved.
Skinnergate and High Row will be closed to traffic on an experimental basis, despite claims that disabled shoppers could be driven out of the town.
Durham County Council's highways and transportation committee yesterday agreed to the scheme, which excludes all traffic, including cyclists, between 10.30am and 4pm.
Councillors agreed with the recommendation by Darlington Borough Council not to have special exemptions for disabled drivers.
Darlington Tory councillors called for a rethink on the scheme after disabled groups complained even though the council has agreed to provide another 44 parking spaces for disabled drivers at Abbot's Yard.
Members of the Darlington Association on Disability expressed concern about how members were to reach their headquarters at the Friends' Meeting House in Skinnergate.
Yesterday, Coun Sheila Brown (Con) said: ‘There are over 2,000 badge holders in Darlington, not to mention the people who visit the town.
Those who can walk, but only with difficulty, will not be able to walk the full length of High Row.’
Coun Derek Mason (Con) said: ‘This is depriving 2,000 people of access to Darlington.
It is a ludicrous situation and we should go back to the drawing board and start afresh.’
But Coun Bob Pendlebury, deputy leader of the county council's ruling Labour group, said it was recognised that there might be problems, but they would be dealt with as they arose.
A council ‘hot line’ would be available for those who found the scheme caused them difficulties.
Now the Darlington Association on Disability has urged members to monitor the effects of the ban.
An association spokesman said it was vital the borough council was aware of the problems being encountered.
Security plea for old folk
SECURITY is to be stepped up at a Darlington pensioners' community centre following two break-ins.
Thieves broke into Wesley Court, off Wesley Street, on Saturday, just hours before a tombola to help replace a stolen karaoke machine and cash.
It is the second time in a month the centre has been broken into and elderly residents said they were concerned for their safety.
A PIONEERING rambler collapsed and died in the surroundings he loved the most the North Yorkshire dales.
John Aubrey Lear, 84, died after saying farewell to a group of retired friends off on a walk at Reeth in Swaledale, near Richmond.
A champion of public footpaths, he devoted much of his life to helping young people to begin walking.
He began by building up the scout movement in the NorthEast and eventually became a scout commissioner.
Lifelong friend Stan Cardwell said that when youth hostels were first set up in 1930s, Mr Lear helped form a Darlington branch and often used the hostels in his cross country expeditions.
He helped form Darlington's first rambling club the Rucksack Club and in 1942 formed a branch of the Ramblers Association in the North-East.
Darlington Ramblers spokesman Alan Hutchinson said: ‘The improvement in public access to the countryside and the preservation of the public rights of way network in the area is a tribute to his tireless work and a fitting tribute.
‘He had a commanding presence in meetings and was held in great esteem by all who had the privilege of working with him.’
He added Mr Lear, of Gilling Road, Richmond, was known by everyone as ‘a lovely person and a gentleman at all times’.
Mr Lear's lasting contribution to the pastime was the formation of an informal country walking club of retired gentlemen, the Midweek Walkers, and it was they he last bid farewell to.
A DARLINGTON landlady has left her pub after crippling rent rises forced her out of business.
Judy Robinson has decided to leave the Grey Horse, on Bank Top, as her rent will double from £13,000 to £25,000 a year under a new 20-year lease.
Judy, who has been at the pub for just over a year, spent thousands of pounds refurbishing the Grey Horse and it had been a long-time ambition to run a pub of her own.
But the rent rises under the Grand Met lease meant she could not afford to stay.
Judy, 43, said: ‘I made the choice myself to go.
I gave my notice in simply because I couldn't pay my way.
‘It is upsetting and I wished I could have stayed.
But I am trying not to get too down as at least I have a job to go to.’
Grand Met have offered Judy a temporary six-month tenancy at the Grey Horse, Haughton.
But she could still be asked to leave with just one month's notice if someone takes over the 20-year lease.
THE hospice is celebrating this week after winning a £10,000 grant from a London-based charitable trust to help fund structural alterations at its new home, Harewood House.
But the hospice also wants to extend its service and is appealing for people to undertake regular giving so it can support more ill people and their families.
Each week staff thank people for individual donations but also need donations on a continuing basis, such as covenants, give-as-you-earn payroll schemes, and increased income from charity shops.
For a minimum annual subscription of £5 anyone can become a member of St Theresa's Hospice and be kept informed by the quarterly newsletter.
But taxpayers can improve the benefit of their subscription at no extra cost to themselves by making a covenant.
The hospice can recover income tax on the covenant donation; currently for every £1 given by covenant the hospice actually gets £1.25.
Anyone who would like details of different forms of giving can telephone .
The three charity shops at Skinnergate, Arlington; Church Street, Shildon; and Galgate, Barnard Castle, are the hospice's most important source of funding and staff want to thank all the volunteers who help man them.
A special book has been illustrated by Sister Frances Therese at the Carmelite Convent to record every donation given to the hospice in memory of someone who has died.
TRAVEL agent Jacqui Ferguson came up with the right solution to land herself a dream trip round the world.
The 23-year-old senior flight centre consultant at Thomas Cook in Darlington won the globetrotting prize by answering 20 questions correctly in a quiz organised by the firm.
‘I was really chuffed.
I certainly didn't expect to win,’ said Mrs Ferguson.
‘I was so shocked I had to ring the organisers to check.’
A YOUNG mother yesterday claimed her daughter became ill because of a blocked chimney in her council home in Darlington.
Claire Garvey, 20, said her daughter Rachel, two, became choked at their Esk Road home after smoke filled her sitting room.
And she claimed Darlington Borough Council told her to unblock the chimney herself.
Claire said: ‘I had to take Rachel to the doctor's because she was so poorly.
This has ruined my sitting room and I have been onto the council about it but they have done nothing.’
Pauline Mitchell, director of housing, said workmen would visit Claire's home today to unblock the chimney.
‘They called out twice before but Claire was not at home,’’ she said.
A MOVE is being made to form a support group for a hospice.
A public meeting will be held to discuss forming a Richmondshire support group for the Darlington and District Hospice Movement.
The meeting takes place in Richmond Town Hall on February 27 at 7.30pm.
Various groups have been invited to send representatives but the meeting is also open to anyone interested in the idea.
Mary Lovell, who has arranged the meeting, said that as well as fund raising a support group would identify patients in the area, find people willing to sit with a patient at their home to give carers a break, and provide volunteers to drive people to the hospice or generally help at the hospice.
The movement, which covers Darlington, Richmondshire, Northallerton, Barnard Castle and Bishop Auckland, has acquired Harewood House in Darlington and intends opening it as a day hospice.
Mrs Lovell, who was involved in a hospice movement in Hampshire, chose the Darlington and district hospice movement, which already sits with carers and relieves carers, as one of her two charities to support when she was President of Richmond and Dales Soroptimists in 1990/91.
She said: ‘There are already support groups in Barnard Castle and Shildon and I feel people should know that people of Richmondshire are able to benefit from the Darlington hospice.’
A £550,000 scheme to give more toddlers in County Durham a head start at school has been saved from budget cuts.
Director of Education, Keith Mitchell told the county council's schools sub-committee that funding for six new nurseries has been preserved despite a very difficult financial year.
Primary schools in Moorside, Burnhope, Evenwood, Crook Peases West, Trimdon Village and Springfield in Darlington will each get a 26-place nursery unit.
They are part of a three-year programme that has already seen the opening of six new nurseries with a further eight expected to open later this year.
It is hoped that even more nursery places for the county's three and four-year-olds will be provided soon.
DARLINGTON Council was criticised yesterday for a continuing vermin problem in Hundens Lane.
Residents say rats are coming from the council's Hundens Lane depot and not from the allotments behind their homes.
Hundens Lane resident Ian Haszeldine said members of the allotment association had taken a lot of criticism about the way their land was kept.
He said: ‘We have often been accused that the rats are coming from the allotments but that is no longer the case.’
Mr Haszeldine has made a formal complaint to the ward councillors, saying the rats are coming from the depot because it is not kept clean.
‘Every Saturday the rubbish from the market is taken to the depot to be compacted.
It's an ideal place for rats to live,’ he said.
But Keith Atkinson, director of the council's environmental health department, remains unconvinced that the allotment owners are blameless.
He said: ‘We have had a string of complaints about rats from the allotments and they have been kept in a very poor condition.’
The council is in the process of trying to clean up the allotment area.
There is a thin strip of wasteland between the allotments and the depot which could be home to rats.
Local people have had to live with rats for some time and Mr Haszeldine said he is fed up with continually seeing rats scuttling around the houses.
‘It is not fair for the council to blame the allotment association.
I keep a horse there with straw and feed but I can guarantee there are no rats in the stable,’ he said.
Local Labour councillors Frank Robson and Alan Robinson have promised to look into the situation, which is still under review by the council's works and health committee.
ABOUT a third of dog owners who exercise their pets in the Darlington Denes are using the bins specially provided for dog excrement, a survey has revealed.
But about a third again admitted to researchers they never use the bins at all.
The Darlington Council survey into the ‘bin it and bag it’ scheme was carried out last December over several days at various times to determine future action over the project.
Investigators questioned a hundred people who walked their dogs in the area, where there are no enforceable controls to restrict dog fouling.
A report to the council's working party on the control of dogs on Monday reveals the introduction of pedal-operated bins might attract further users and most people interviewed were in favour of the bins.
But others felt the bins themselves presented a health hazard which was made worse by inadequate servicing in the summer.
THE tarpaulin sheet that was a homeless teenager's only shelter was stolen yesterday the day his plight was reported in The Northern Echo.
Since a family row three weeks ago, Robert Taylor, 18, has been sleeping in a field off the A167 near Newton Aycliffe.
Under the tarpaulin sheet he had two mattresses and a discarded school seat.
After yesterday's Echo story he was visited by a Sedgefield Council official who gave him money for a return bus trip to Darlington.
In Darlington, Robert visited an agency that told him it was unable to help him find accommodation in Newton Aycliffe.
By the time he got back to the field, all his belongings had gone.
He said: ‘I don't know what I'm going to do now.
Apart from the tarpaulin and the mattresses, I've lost a couple of sleeping bags, some tracksuit bottoms and some trainers.
I don't know who could have done this.’
Last night he was planning to contact Newton Aycliffe Coun Tony Moore, who has offered to take up his case, and officials of Sedgefield Council's housing department.
FEARS that a successful adult literacy course in Darlington could be in jeopardy have eased.
The Adult Basic Education Unit at Darlington College of Technology has been funded by a grant from the Department of Education and Science.
That grant is due to run out on March 31.
Unit organiser Kate Harker feared that without the Government money the service could be threatened.
Since the unit opened two years ago more than 600 people ranging from 16 to 70 have benefited from the specialist tuition.
Darlington college has now agreed it will subsidise the cost of employing a full time teacher so daytime classes can continue.
As well as teaching basic literacy skills the unit also teaches maths and numeracy.
Before the DES gave funding adult literacy classes were offered in the evenings only.
The college decision should mean the unit can continue with teaching five days and four evenings.
Mrs Harker said she had contacted Michael Fallon, Darlington MP and DES junior minister, seeking his advice.
‘He was very helpful and has worked hard to encourage the college to support the unit,’ she said.
THE head of a charity appeal to build a leukaemia unit in Darlington promised last night that all money raised would be spent as originally intended.
Some £270,000 has been given by people throughout South Durham to build the specialist unit at Darlington Memorial Hospital.
But none of the total reached last September has yet been spent.
The delay has led to fears that the leukaemia unit will never match the fund raisers' hopes.
The Northern has received telephone calls and letters from people who have contributed and want to know what is happening.
Questions are also being asked by people closely linked with the appeal committee itself.
Heather Scott, chairman of the Darlington Leukaemia Unit Fund committee, said she was anxious to put a stop to the speculation.
‘I will make sure that every penny raised for leukaemia patients will be spent on the new unit,’ she said.
It is not yet known what commitment Darlington Health Authority will make to day to day staffing and running costs.
The authority has appointed Dr Peter Williamson, a consultant from Southampton, to head the new unit.
He visits Darlington next week to discuss how the unit will run with hospital management and the fund raising committee.
Yesterday Dr Williamson said: ‘I am aware of a difference of understanding between some committee members and the health authority.
Until I find out more I do not want to come down on either side.’
David Anderson, of Darlington health authority, has confirmed a building company will be picked to build the unit by mid March.
He hopes work can start on the unit in roughly four weeks time.
THE Government last night moved to avert a threatened mass exodus of dentists from the NHS and put on ice plans to cut fees paid to them for dental work.
But dentists in the NorthEast said the delay had only given the profession a short breathing space.
Ministers have agreed to carry out a fundamental review of the way dentists are paid in order to avoid a repeat of the crisis.
The Government had planned to cut fees from April 1, claiming dentists treated too many patients last year and overspent their budgets by an average of £10,000.
Dentists, who only a week ago were awarded a pay rise of 8.5pc, reacted with fury to the proposed move which they claimed would mean an effective pay cut of 13.8pc and NHS treatment disappearing.
Yesterday's agreement to a review was reached after a series of crisis talks between the leaders of Britain's 18,000 dentists and Health Department officials.
The dispute stemmed from new contracts introduced in October 1990 under which dentists receive four-fifths of their income from carrying out a range of 300 operations.
The prices of the operations from fillings to complicated bridge work were set by independent experts so dentists would receive a fixed income set by the Doctors' and Dentists Review Body.
However, dentists have carried out more work than anticipated.
If this continued into this year, it would leave the Government with a £15m a month overspend.
Health Secretary William Waldegrave said he was pleased there had been agreement on a ‘practical way forward to examine this sensitive and complex issue’.
The British Dental Association has written to its members asking them to suspend their protests.
Rob Lemmon, of Teesside's Local Dental Committee, said: ‘They have clearly felt the weight of opinion.
They have promised talks, but I'm not holding my breath.’
Fifteen Darlington dentists are to hold an emergency meeting to discuss the plans on Monday.
Dentist Simon Allum, of Hurworth, near Darlington, warned that colleagues may resign en-mass from the Durham Family Health Services Authority if the matter was not resolved.
Police commend sharp eyed public
POLICE have applauded members of the public whose information has led to a series of arrests.
After a number of break-ins at a Darlington shop a sharp-eyed witness contacted the police with details of a car spotted nearby.
Two days later the car was stopped in North Yorkshire and youths from Darlington and Richmond were arrested.
PC Dave Fishwick, of Darlington police, said a substantial amount of property had been recovered.
A NEW supermarket planned for Richmond was thrown out by district councillors last night after a lengthy debate and a close vote.
Richmondshire District Council's development services committee dismissed the plans by 11 votes to seven after earlier rejecting a move to refer the issue to the full council.
Deerpark Securities' scheme to build a supermarket, doctor's surgery and parking for 310 cars on a former school cricket field off Quaker Lane Queens Road, Richmond, aroused fierce debate in the town and surrounding villages.
More than 1,500 people wrote or filled in forms, supporting the idea.
Nearly 1,200 and a petition of 467 names objected.
Conservation bodies such as English Heritage and the Royal Fine Arts Commission were appalled at the plan and said it would ruin the historic town.
Sports groups said it would mean the loss of open space that could be given to the public.
However, supporters said it was the answer to Richmond's declining trade and was the only available site in the town.
The scheme was against council policy which says the land should not be developed.
But Coun Roy Cross, council chairman, told last night's meeting that the boost for the long-term good of Richmond justified a change in policy.
‘I do not want Richmond to become a museum, a quaint town where tourists buy souvenirs,’ he said.
Some councillors said Richmond was becoming a ghost town and echoed his belief that the store would revitalise trade and bring back locals who shop in Northallerton or Darlington.
But others said the scheme would mean extra traffic and harm the conservation area and outlook on historic buildings.
Coun Oliver Blease said it would be an act of civic vandalism.
Coun Katherine Carr said: ‘We are the custodians of something so valuable and we forget it at our peril.’
Chief planning officer Bill Green recommended rejection on the grounds the lan was against policy, would damage the character of the conservation area, was in an open space that should be kept, and would create noise and disturbance for neighbours, including the Victoria Hospital.
The committee agreed to his recommendation and refused planning permission.
OLIVER Twist tales of hungry children being fed and clothed by North-East schools have been strongly denied by teachers.
The Victorian picture of teachers doling out porridge as poverty-stricken children go without shoes or coats is far from the truth, they say.
County Durham headteacher, Olwyn Gunn, a national executive member of the National Association of Schoolmasters and Union of Women Teachers, said: ‘I really don't know of any school where poverty is so bad that children are being treated like this.’
The reports are believed to stem from the ‘news’ that some schools start the day with breakfast a practice common in the U.S.
Firth Moor Infants in Darlington is one of three County Durham schools to provide a school breakfast every morning.
Between a dozen and 40 children some of whom have already breakfasted at home join teachers for a hot bowl of porridge to start the day.
Headteacher Margaret Sayer said: ‘Providing breakfast is part of our health education and nutrition programme.’
Meanwhile county school meals advisor Frances Tee has expressed concern that benefit changes reducing eligibility for free school dinners will deprive some children of their only nutritionally sound meal.
NEW office development in the centre of Darlington will not make parking more difficult, a planning officer has said.
Planning permission has been given for Conder, a Darlington construction company, to build offices on Russell Street car park beside the inner ring road.
But when the development is completed 75 parking spaces will have been lost to the public.
Conder's management has also asked to have spaces in the remaining car park reserved for its staff.
But Stephen Tapper, head of Darlington Council's planning department, said there would still be 150 spaces for public use, which is the number that are usually available during the week.
When the Cornmill shopping development opens in August it is possible the demand for spaces within easy walking distance of the new shops will increase.
There will be further negotiations between Conder and the council at which time planning officers will oppose the request for the company to reserve public spaces.
Estimates by town hall staff suggest there are seldom more than 140 cars in Russell Street car park apart from on Saturdays and Bank Holidays.
On those days the council will ask if the public can use the 58 spaces set aside by Conder for its own workers.
When work starts on the offices the car park will be the first area completed to minimise disruption to drivers who regularly use the car park.
THE head of a charity appeal to build a leukaemia unit in Darlington promised last night all money raised will be spent as originally intended.
More than quarter of a million pounds has been given by people throughout South Durham to build the specialist unit at Darlington Memorial Hospital.
But none of the money reached last September has yet been spent on developing the unit.
It is the delay which has led to growing fears that the leukaemia unit will never match the fund raisers’ hopes.
The Northern Echo has received a series of telephone calls and letters from people who have contributed and want to know what is happening.
Questions are also being asked by people closely linked with the appeal committee itself.
Heather Scott, chairman of the Darlington Leukaemia Unit Fund committee, said she is anxious to put a stop to the speculation.
‘I will make sure that every penny raised for leukaemia patients will be spent on the new unit,’ she said.
Legal contracts drawn up for the appeal also guarantee that all the money, which now stands at £270,000, must be spent on the unit.
It is yet to be seen what commitment Darlington health authority will make to day to day staffing and running costs.
The authority has appointed Dr Peter Williamson, a consultant from Southampton, to head the new unit.
He visits Darlington next week to discuss how the unit will run with hospital management and the fund raising committee.
Yesterday Dr Williamson said: ‘I am aware of a difference of understanding between some committee members and the health authority.
Until I find out more I do not want to come down on either side.’
David Anderson, of Darlington Health Authority, has confirmed a building company will be picked to build the unit by mid March.
He hopes work can start on the unit in roughly four weeks time.
A COUPLE who delayed their marriage because they were refused planning permission to build a home are appealing to the Department of the Environment.
Tony and Louise Armstrong, of Little Stainton, near Darlington, were refused permission to build a house in the grounds of Tony's home, Aragon, in October last year.
Their plan was turned down because it was not classed as infill development and the site lay outside the built-up area of the village.
Now Darlington Borough Council is asking villagers to send their comments on the plans to the Department of the Environment.
A WOMAN told yesterday how her life is being made a misery by youths who know she is defenceless.
Jacqueline Hamilton, 41, also claims the police have ignored her pleas for help.
She said yesterday her home in Louisa Street, Darlington, has become like a house under siege.
‘Every day I have kids tormenting me because they know I live alone,’ she said.
She split up with her husband some months ago and is now struggling to cope with two young children while facing continual abuse.
‘I know who the kids are but there's nothing I can do about it.
They just run and hide if I chase them,’ said Mrs Hamilton.
Yesterday Insp Ken Maddison, of Darlington police, said he had no knowledge of the incidents.
‘If this lady is having trouble she should come and tell me about it.’
But Mrs Hamilton said the police have ignored her complaints about vandalism and verbal abuse.
‘These kids are coming to my house every night.
They write graffiti on my walls, shout through the letter box and vandalise the house,’ she said.
And she claims neighbours have not offered any help.
‘They all know who is doing this but they just don't want to get involved.’
A NURSE who suffered two miscarriages is launching a support group for others who have gone through the same tragedy.
And to help mothers come to terms with their grief, cash from the Telethon appeal has bought a special leatherbound Book of Remembrance in which the names of their unborn babies can be recorded.
Sandra Cooper, 33, midwife and founder of the Darlington Miscarriage Association, said: ‘Women who have had a miscarriage experience grief but they have no record of their unborn child.
This book will be a focus for their grief.’
Three years ago Mrs Cooper, from Darlington, suffered two miscarriages at 12 and nine weeks and realised how little support was available.
She said: ‘Because I was a midwife I knew what was happening in my body so I was able to rationalise it, but it was still a shock.
My husband and I had decided we wanted a baby it takes time to unthink yourself pregnant.
I felt really down and there's still a sense of loss.’
She decided to use her experience to help others and teamed up with Darlington GP Dr Ruth Dunlop and midwives at Darlington Memorial Hospital to provide the service.
Child care manager Lucy Wheatley said: ‘It is not usually at the time of the miscarriage that the woman suffers but several months later.
They can suffer depression and grief and the feeling that they need someone to talk to even though the rest of the world feels they should have got over it.’
The group has already started a hotline run by community midwife Ann Kirkpatrick where women can get more information and other health professionals can find out more about who can help.
They may be offered counselling, visited by a health visitor or referred back to their GP if the problem is medical.
The Miscarriage Association believes that one in three pregnancies end in miscarriage often so early that even the mother is not aware.
When it happens at this stage many mothers receive little sympathy because there may be no visible signs of loss.
Miscarriage can be caused by foetal abnormality, maternal illness or exposure to toxins.
As a safeguard, the group advices pregnant women to eat healthily, cut down on drinking and avoid smoking.
For more information on the group ring Sandra Cooper on Darlington .
DARLINGTON Sixth Form student Paul Walker is off to Japan for a two week all-expenses paid trip.
The trip is to be funded by the Aeon group an educational organisation backed by major high street companies to encourage British students to broaden their overseas horizons.
Paul, from Gordon Court, Darlington, was one of 30 students from the college and 500 from County Durham who applied.
The party leaves on April 9.
POLICE in Darlington this week applauded members of the public whose information has led to a series of arrests.
After a number of break-ins at a Darlington shop a sharp-eyed witness contacted the police with details of a car which had been spotted nearby.
Two days later the car was stopped in North Yorkshire and youths from Darlington and Richmond were arrested.
PC Dave Fishwick, of Darlington police, said a substantial amount of property has also been recovered.
Raiders who broke into an office in East Mount Road, Darlington, were also caught because of information supplied by a member of the public.
PC Fishwick said these two incidents highlight the crucial role the public can play in helping the police to detect crime.
‘The more information we can get from the public the easier it is for us to tackle criminals and make life in the town better for everyone,’ he said.
He has appealed for more vigilance by staff in shops and offices to stop ‘sneak-in’ thieves who steal bags, purses and wallets during the working day.
There were three instances last week in offices in Duke Street, Whinfield Way and Faverdale.
Elsewhere in the town the number of burglaries remains high but there have also been a large number of arrests made in the last seven days.
Last week police arrested a total of 36 people for theft offences alone.
There were 37 attempted and full burglaries and once more hi-fi and electrical equipment has been top of the burglars' list.
A break-in at a house in Emley Moor Road resulted in a birthday cake being stolen.
A theft from a vehicle in Beaumont Street saw a diving enthusiast lose all his equipment valued at £1,145.
Three times last week cars were stolen by reckless drivers and then set on fire.
There are 16 stolen vehicles still unfound.
They range from a white Mercedes van (C434 YVN) to a green Kawasaki motorbike (H710 OVN).
Anyone with any information about stolen vehicles or any other suspicious incidents around the town should contact Darlington police on Darlington .
PUPILS at a Darlington school put on their dancing shoes to perform alongside professionals from a Tyneside company.
The choreographic experience took place at Haughton Comprehensive School, where youngsters proved to be fast on their toes.
The session on the artistry of dance was given by the Phoenix Dance Company, who taught the basic steps.
Pupils were then encouraged to move to the music to get them ready for September when the National Curriculum makes dance compulsory in primary schools and an optional physical education course for older pupils.
PUPILS, parents and teachers are to meet Labour's education spokeswoman Hilary Armstrong today when she tours a Darlington school.
Ms Armstrong, MP for North-West Durham, is to visit Springfield School, which is to have 52 new nursery places for under fives.
The decision by Durham County Council to provide 26 places morning and afternoon followed a campaign by Labour county councillors and borough councillors.
Ms Armstrong, Labour's front bench spokesperson on nursery education, is to be accompanied by Alan Milburn, Labour's Prospective Parliamentary Candidate for Darlington, who was also anxious to establish the extra nursery places.
Afterwards she will speak on the party's policy for women at Darlington Arts Centre, where she will also launch Labour's Woman Today magazine.
EARLY figures from the 1991 British census show a slight drop in population throughout County Durham.
Although the figures from the census have not yet been fully collated, preliminary findings show population drops of more than 4pc in some areas of the county.
The census office has warned that some of the information released could be misleading until it has been fully analysed.
A spokesman stressed that the census is a record of the number of people in a town on census day.
In Darlington the borough-wide population has remained pretty much stable since 1961.
The last figure ten years ago put the town's population at 97,800.
This time it was recorded at 96,700, a drop of 1.1pc.
The biggest population change was a reduction of 4.5pc in the Easington district where the population now stands at 96,300.
The population of some other local authority areas are: Durham; 85,000, Sedgefield; 89,200, Teesdale; 24,200 and Wear Valley; 62,100.
National statistics show there has been a general decline in Britain's urban population.
More people are living in the countryside and in new towns than ever before.
STAFF at Darlington College have pledged to continue supporting adult reading classes in the town.
Yesterday the deputy principal, Alan Dixon, said the college has earmarked between £15,000 and £20,000 each year to pay for a full time teacher at the Adult Basic Education Unit.
But Mr Dixon has warned that some of the non-teaching work done at the unit might have to be scaled down.
He explained that for the last two years the unit has been funded with money from the Department of Education and Science channelled through Durham County Council.
The teacher and part time tutors have combined their work on reading, writing and numeracy skills with liaising between the students and external agencies.
‘Quite a lot of the unit's work has related to co-ordinating teaching with requirements outside.
Unfortunately this side will probably have to be scaled down,’ said Mr Dixon.
He said it was important to maintain the teaching work done by the unit.
It is hoped links already established between the unit and other agencies will continue to thrive.
Originally Darlington College of Technology provided evening classes in adult literacy.
The decision to appoint a full time teacher will mean day classes can continue.
RSPCA thanks rescuers who fought for pony Rescuers who saved a foal from a watery grave were presented with top RSPCA awards at Darlington Town Hall this week.
Commendations went to vet Miss Jackie Paterson, RSPCA officer Mr Ian Jackson and Blue Watch from Darlington fire station.
The presentation on Monday came 18 months after they rescued the pony from a narrow underground sewer at Great Burdon Farm, on the outskirts of Darlington.
It had fallen backwards into the narrow eight-feet-deep pipe while grazing at night.
As the terrified animal stood in nine inches of stagnant water, Miss Paterson, aged 27, who lives in Stockton, climbed down to administer a sedative.
She was on leave from her Hartlepool practice when summoned to the scene.
With the help of Blue Watch and Mr Jackson a halter was fitted around the foal and its feet were hobbled.
Hydraulic lifting equipment was rushed to the scene and the animal was hauled to safety and housed in nearby stables until its owner was traced.
The rescue came in the nick of time as the sewer filled with flash flood water just minutes after the pony was brought out.
But sadly, two days after the dramatic rescue the six-month-old pony had to be destroyed because of the risk of tetanus infection from sewage water in a leg wound.
Coun. Mrs Rita Fishwick, Mayor of Darlington and well known for her love of animals, presented the framed certificates.
‘It is my pleasure to say thankyou to all involved in the rescue,’ she said.
‘It wasn't an easy task and shows members of the public it is not just fires the fire brigade attends and it is not just cats and dogs that vets deal with.’
Monday's award was the second of its kind for Miss Paterson.
She already holds a commendation for her part in rescuing a rottweiler dog.
The pony rescue in August 1990 was the trickiest situation she had come across in five years as a vet.
‘The horse was absolutely terrified,’ she said.
‘I couldn't believe how small a hole it had fallen through.’
Receiving the award on behalf of Blue Watch were Station Officer John Finlay and Firemen Michael Andrews, Colin Bage and Darryl Bartle.
Mr C.V.R. de Bues, branch co-ordinator for the RSPCA, praised the efforts of all concerned in the rescue.
‘Commendations are not awarded lightly,’ he said.
‘This one was given for sheer hard work and physical labour.’
The rescuers receive their commendations at Darlington Town Hall.
From left, back: Mr de Bues and Firemen Colin Bage, Darryl Bartle and Michael Andrews; front: Station Officer John Finlay, Coun. Mrs Rita Fishwick, RSPCA officer Mr Ian Jackson and Miss Jackie Paterson.
Youth project develops more than camera skill
Young photographers are converting an old caravan into a mobile darkroom to teach basic camera skills to rural residents.
Members of the Developing in the Dale project in Teesdale also hope to start work on a photographic comparison of rural and urban life.
A fortnight viewing of their first exhibition, A Rough Guide to Teesdale, finished yesterday at the Durham Room in County Hall.
The alternative view of Teesdale, featuring its night life, fashion and wildlife, opened at Witham Hall, Barnard Castle, before touring Manchester, Westminster and Beamish.
Ms Shirley Costigan, Teesdale youth and community worker, told Durham County Council youth and community sub-committee members last Thursday that the 15 young people chose the project after learning basic photography skills.
The committee awarded a £300 grant towards starting the project in December 1989.
In her report on the first two years, Ms Costigan said: ‘The area where they live is a tourist area and on the whole is a very beautiful area, but for the young people who live here it does have its drawbacks.’
For example, the Night Life photographic section advised: ‘If you want an exciting night life, catch the bus to Darlington.’
The young photographers have bought an old caravan with part of a £500 English Heritage Award for Youth Arts they won last March.
They are converting the caravan into a mobile darkroom and hope it will be on the road this Easter.
The Developing in the Dale project hope to organise photographic workshops for under 14s and adult groups.
They will visit Newcastle and London to start taking photographs for the new project on the differences between rural and urban life.
Three group members took part of A Rough Guide to Teesdale to Westminster when they represented Youth Clubs County Durham there last December.
They lobbied the House of Commons for more resources and support for youth work, and later enjoyed tea with Mr Derek Foster, the MP for Bishop Auckland.
Ms Costigan, describing the project title, said: ‘The play on words must now be obvious.
Not only does it refer to developing in a photographic sense, but to the development of a group of young people.’
An engineer's dilemma
An engineer in Darlington has six weeks to decide whether he wants to return to South Africa or head his company's plans to build a new factory in Russia.
Mr Joe Mukwala, aged 32, was sent to the Cummins engineering plant on the Yarm Road Industrial Estate by the African National Congress two and a half years ago.
He was one of ten black South Africans sent to British companies to learn the management skills they will need in the ‘new’ South Africa.
Now Capetown-born Mr Mukwala, who speaks ten languages, including Russian and English, faces a dilemma.
Cummins has offered him a senior position with the company and the chance to spearhead its attempts to break into the East European engine market.
The company plans to build a factory at a site 700 miles North of Moscow in conjunction with the Russian Kamaz engineering company and wants Mr Mukwala fluent in Russian after spending six years at Moscow University to help liaise with the local workforce.
But several prominent South African firms also hope to secure his services.
He was courted by a number of them when he returned to South Africa this Christmas, his first visit home since he was exiled along with his parents as a youngster.
He described the changes underway in the country as exciting and says he would like to be in the country at such a momentous time.
‘I would like to see the Russian Kamdiesel project through to the end,’ says Mr Mukwala, who lives on Easson Road in Darlington.
‘In South Africa I would not be able to set up a company like I will be doing for Cummins in Russia.
‘Despite what people say, I think it will be a long time until black people are going to be in a position to do that.
Officials allay budget fears over nurses’ pay rise
Extra money for nurses could mean cutbacks in other parts of the health service, according to a Northern NUPE spokesman.
But health officials in the Darlington and the Northallerton health authorities said their budgets had allowed for the pay rises.
Mrs Linda Hoffman, assistant divisional officer for the National Union of Public Employees, said the government was leaving the country's health authorities with a £35m. shortfall.
‘Agreeing the pay award is the easy part.
Funding the pay rise will be more difficult and we fear that hard-pressed services will suffer further.
The situation is now so serious that any economies are bound to affect patient care.’
Mr John Flook, deputy chief executive for the Darlington area, which includes Teesdale, said this would not be true for his authority.
‘We knew the way the government works from past experience.
When the government makes an award it normally provides all but about a quarter of a per cent of the extra needed.’
‘We knew the health authority would be asked to provide a certain proportion.
We planned for that this year and so we won't have to change our business plan.’
Mr Alan Barton, director of finance for Northallerton health authority, said he would expect to get the details of the award next week.
‘But there won't be any additional changes that have not already been taken into account.
Mr David Whitaker, acting director of finance at North Tees health authority, said he could not comment until the details of the award were released.
‘County is again playing politics with education’ Durham county council has been accused of playing politics with education by schools minister Mr Michael Fallon, MP for Darlington.
This week the council said the 7.5 per cent pay rise given to teachers left them with an education budget shortfall of £2.5m.
And although they maintained none of County Durham's 5,000 teachers would lose their jobs the higher than expected pay deal will make the county dig into its reserves to pay for the salary hike.
They may also appeal to Whitehall for more money.
But Mr Fallon has criticised the county for only budgeting for a five per cent salary increase.
‘We told everybody back in the autumn that spending on teachers would rise by 7.2 per cent,’ he said.
‘In the event teachers received slightly more than 7.2 per cent.
So the Government made £60m available to cover the difference.
‘Now County Durham are telling people they will need to cut education services because we haven't given them enough money.
It's a nonsense.
‘They simply ignored the advice they were receiving about the likely size of the teachers’ pay award and are now going around scaremongering.
‘I get tired of the way County Durham plays politics with education.’
A spokesman for neighbouring Cleveland county council said they had been ‘well aware of the Government's intention to raise teacher's salary well above the rate of inflation with a General Election coming up’.
Cleveland county councillor Mr Keith Legg said that ‘sensible and prudent budgeting’ meant the county council had come very close to estimating the actual pay rise when drawing up spending plans for the coming financial year.
‘We included in our budget plans an estimate of seven per cent for the teachers’ pay settlement and in fact it has turned out at 7.8 per cent.
‘That doesn't seem an awfully big difference, but in fact the cost in Cleveland will be around another million pounds.
‘However, we understand we shall be gaining a substantial amount of this from Government grant and the additional burden falling on our own resources will be in the region of £200,000.
‘That is an amount we shall be able to contain and there is no suggestion that it will either threaten services or jobs.’
North Yorkshire county council also moved to head-off fears about teacher redundancies.
Their estimate of 7.8 per cent was exactly what the teachers were eventually awarded.
‘North Yorkshire county council, unlike a number of other education authorities it would seem, has included within its contingency budget for 1992–93 sufficient funds to meet the teachers’ pay award,’said Mr Fred Evans, County Education Officer.
But a spokesman speaking for Mr Joe Walker, chairman of County Durham's education committee, rejected the suggestion tha t because two neighbouring figures guessed the teachers' pay rise, then they should have too.
‘The Department of Education and Science themselves said the teachers should not get more than five per cent that is what teachers have got in recent years.
‘John Major has been consistently talking about the need to keep wages down so we didn't expect a pay award twice the level of inflation.’
Durham county council's deputy leader, Coun. Bob Pendlebury, said: ‘We are making immediate representations to the Government, but if we do not get a favourable response, we will have to cut back our education budget by up to £3m. to find the extra money.
‘On the face of it, the Government appears to be putting more money into education through higher pay for teachers, but in reality looks set to claw it back by making education authorities find that cash from within their existing budgets.’
£1m.
YMCA home for Darlington youngsters A £1m. scheme to set up a YMCA home in Darlington town centre was unveiled yesterday.
In a joint press conference with Darlington borough council, the YMCA said it hoped the 30-bed hostel in Melland Street, off Borough Road would be open in spring, 1994.
Mr Michael King, regional secretary for the association, said it would provide accommodation where it was needed at the very bottom of the housing ladder.
Mr Andrew Harris, director of housing and hostels for the association's national council, said the YMCA already had about 60 such hostels in the country.
It would be open to both men and women, aged from about 18 to 25, with building due to begin in about a year's time.
At today's rates residents would be expected to pay less than £40 a week.
‘We expect that each person will have a room with a sleeping, living and cooking area,’ he said.
‘It will be a place he can call his own but it will be in a block with a single entrance point and a resident warder,’
Coun. Bill Dixon, chairman of the housing committee said the scheme would fill an important gap in providing independent living training for many youngsters in the town.
‘This is for people who are put out of their natural home without any living skills.
There are many people who are just not geared up to live independently.’
He said many people who were given council houses subsequently lost them because they did not know how to pay the rent and cope with bills.
‘We hope this will provide a stepping stone for those people.’
A board of management is to be set up with the Rev. Tom Barnfather, vicar of St. Herbert's parish, Darlington, as its chairman.
The board would bring together churches, charities and the Citizens' Advice Bureau to offer local knowledge.
‘The YMCA does not like to plant a home like this and then run it centrally,’ said Mr King.
THE people who raised £270,000 to build a leukaemia unit in Darlington knew exactly what they were working towards.
In a nutshell they wanted a dedicated, self-sufficient unit which would allow sufferers to be treated in the town rather than have them, and their families, shunted 30 miles up and down the A1 to Newcastle's RVI.
Understandably, it was an appeal which captured the imagination of thousands.
Now there has been real concern voiced about the delay in getting the unit off the ground.
The problem in all such charity-backed schemes is that, whereas cash has been raised for buildings and equipment, somebody is going to have to fund the day-to-day running and staffing.
That may mean taking resources away from other services.
The chairman of the fund-raising committee Heather Scott promised yesterday that she would make sure that every penny would be spent on the new unit.
We applaud her stance.
But only a full and detailed commitment from Darlington Health Authority will put people's minds at rest.
IN our many dealings with the police we have found that they can blow hot and cold.
Sometimes they are keen to have media help in solving a crime, other times they are more reluctant.
Now there appears to be a third tactic selectivity.
Last night a man who is wanted in connection with a building society robbery was named on BBC's Crimewatch.
Details of the crime, and even the suspect's picture, have been featured in this newspaper but all efforts to persuade the police to tell us his name have come to nought.
We are perplexed.
Instead of waiting for a slot on national TV, the police could have already put this man's name into the public domain.
True, it would not have been seen by people in Bristol or Birmingham but it might just have struck a chord with somebody in the area where the crime was committed.
That, surely, would have been a start.
WE KNOW you like shopping at factory shops.
It's becoming a favourite pastime, combining the thrill of the chase with the joy of the bargain which is why we regularly try and bring you news of the latest openings.
Gill Cutress and Rolf Stricker have made a career out of factory shops ever since Gill was made redundant there are, after all, probably only limited openings for zoologists specialising in ants and started to compile her own information.
Seven years later they've just completed their guides to all of mainland Britain, with some sections of it in their fifth editions.
The hardest part is finding the way to the factory shop in the first place.
If you've ever used one of their guides, you know that even with their excellent directions you can spend half a lifetime driving round vast industrial estates.
So spare a thought for their original research they speak with feeling of badly-signed junctions and of chaos over the A1 and its renaming round Tyneside.
‘Contrary to what people think we don't just spend our days idly browsing round shops.
It's very hard work,’ says Gill.
The latest edition of the Northern Guide (Durham, Cleveland, Tyneside and Cumbria) is out now.
The good news is that there are more factory shops opening in the North than anywhere else (although we're not sure if this is a good or bad indicator of economic health).
There are 30 new shops featured in the guide including the Icing Parlour in Washington, Beau Brummel in Seaham and Meritina at Langley Moor.
There's a new Yorkshire and Humberside guide out too.
This doesn't tell us much about North Yorkshire, but is excellent for the many and varied mill shops of the old West Riding and cutlery in Sheffield.
The only problem with the guides is that they tell you little of the quality of the goods in the shop.
But as factory shops can vary between visits anyway, that probably doesn't matter that much as you soon get to know your favourites.
We shall be continuing our more detailed look at factory shops in a few weeks' time.
In the meantime, if you want to set off with road map and cheque book, then get the new editions of the Factory Shop Guide.
Available in bookshops or by post from Gillian Cutress, 34 Park Hill, London SW4 9PB, for £4 incl p&p.
Details tel..
CLAIMS that a boy was hit by a teacher in front of his classmates may be the subject of an investigation.
Education officials have agreed to investigate the alleged incident at Darlington's Hummersknott School if the father makes a formal complaint in writing.
The boy's father, Bernard Grainger, of Melland Street, Darlington, has called for the teacher to be suspended pending the outcome of any inquiry.
Mr Grainger claims his 13-year-old son James was punched in the chest when he was caught larking about.
The father-of-seven said: ‘Nobody has any right to lay a hand on my son.
I won't rest until the matter is sorted out.’
A spokesman for Durham County Council said the allegations would be thoroughly investigated provided Mr Grainger reported his concerns to the authority in the form of a letter.
He added: ‘Serious allegations of this sort, if they are proven, have a bearing on a person's career and are always thoroughly investigated.
‘In such cases the documentation has to be correct from the word go and if Mr Grainger puts it all down in writing his account will be used as the basis for our inquiries.’
LABOUR promised a better future for British women yesterday at the Northern launch of the party's magazine for women.
Woman Today has been written and produced by the Labour party to highlight what it claims are the inequalities facing women under the Conservatives.
The colourful magazine is a one-off idea to get across the party's policies on a range of issues affecting women.
It features articles about the family lives of several prominent Labour politicians and a problem page written by Labour supporter and agony aunt Claire Rayner.
Yesterday North-West Durham MP Hilary Armstrong joined Darlington Labour candidate Alan Milburn to launch the magazine in the North.
Mr Milburn said: ‘The response to the magazine has been very good.
We are having extra copies printed to meet the demand.’
Part of Labour's election promise is a new Sex Equality Act to iron out loopholes and disadvantages not tackled by the Equal Opportunities Act.
The North-East has traditionally suffered from a stereotype image depicting the region as backward in its approach to equal opportunities.
Ms Armstrong said: ‘I'm NorthEast born and bred and it has not interfered with my career.
The situation throughout the region is improving but there is still work to be done.’
NURSERY education needs vital investment, a North-East Labour MP claimed yesterday.
Hilary Armstrong, MP for North-West Durham and party spokeswoman on nursery education, visited Springfield School in Darlington yesterday where a new nursery unit will open soon.
She said the extra places would be a lifeline to many of the families in the area who cannot find local provision.
The Haughton area has one of the fastest growing populations in Darlington but school places have not reflected the increase.
Yesterday, Darlington prospective Labour Parliamentary candidate Alan Milburn claimed his party's lobbying of Durham County Council had paid off with the offer of extra places.
After her visit Ms Armstrong joined Mr Milburn for a Press conference where she supported his plan to put Darlington forward as a key area for training nursery staff in Britain.
He said Darlington College of Technology already provided one of the best nursery nurse courses in the country.
But the number of applicants far outweighed the spaces available.
A Labour Government would help nursery nurses progress after qualifying.
Ms Armstrong said: ‘Good provision of nursery places for young children is crucial to allow women back to work.
This country cannot afford to waste the skills and talents of thousands of women.’
Darlington Tory MP and Schools Minister Michael Fallon, said: ‘It is ironic Durham County Council can find the money for a new nursery a few weeks before the general election.
Only two weeks ago they complained they could not afford to fund the teachers’ pay award.’
He said Ms Armstrong's promises about nursery provision were like ‘whistling in the wind’.
Shadow chancellor John Smith has made assurances about increased child benefit but Mr Fallon claims there is no financial commitment to the nursery school strategy.
FIFTEEN dentists' practices are to consider resigning from the NHS over proposed government funding cuts they fear could lead to bankruptcy.
More than 30 Darlington dentists will consider whether to hand in provisional resignation letters to Durham Family Health Services Authority when they hold an emergency meeting on Monday.
Dentists from Barnard Castle and Stockton will also attend.
The protest is over plans which could mean a 22.5pc cut in subsidies to all NHS dentists.
An outcry from dentists around the country this week forced the Government to postpone their decision on the payments until May 1.
Hurworth dentist Simon Allum said: ‘Despite the Government delaying the decision by a month we still have not been answered.
We have agreed a letter from all the Darlington dentists to express our views to our patients.’
Mr Allum added Department of Health claims dentists earned too much were false.
‘The hard truth is dental practices have cost too much money to run and are fast becoming a financial liability.
NHS dentists’ incomes have dropped in real terms by 40pc over the past ten years and the most recent savage cuts proposed, leave many practitioners worried about possible bankruptcy.’
CHILDREN at William House Nursery, Darlington have made this life-size picture of the queen to send to Buckingham Palace in honour of her fortieth anniversary.
Rebecca McCready, above, and the other under fives say they hope the queen will like it.
Picture: TONY BARTHOLOMEW
TEATIME viewers to ITV's results service last Saturday may have noticed a promising debut at the Sunderland-West Ham Cup tie.
The match summariser, identified simply as Jonathan Jennings, was in fact the Rev Jonathan Jennings until Christmas the curate of St Cuthbert's in Darlington.
On January 1 he became communications officer in the diocese of Manchester; shortly afterwards the Bishop resigned.
The two events are not thought to be connected.
Jonathan cut his media molars as part time religious affairs producer at TFM Radio: the 30 seconds to which ITV Sport restricted the newcomer was slightly shorter than his usual address.
Back home in Stockton his mum was videoing it ‘just to see if they spelled my name correctly.’
Known to some as the Capacious Curate because of his considerable appetite, he was doubly blessed at Sunderland by a visit to the Methodist church near the Roker End.
Apparently they provide a match day refreshment service: ‘it's marvellous stuff, like a Victorian soup kitchen,’ he says.
After a pie and a pasty and one or two other things (‘all home made, terrific’) he put a couple of sandwiches in a bag for half time.
‘I'd had nothing since breakfast,’ he laments.
Last night the incorrigible priest was back at Weight Watchers, where he is in line for the Recidivist of the Year award.
We are likely to be seeing even more of him on television.
A DARLINGTON solicitor is claiming a test case has been forged following a High Court ruling that a North-East farmer who challenged the occupation of a three-year Ministry Licence is a protected tenant and his term of possession is not restricted by Ministry approval.
As a result of the decision, which was handed down by a judge in Newcastle, the holders of all Ministry Licences could successfully contest the termination date of existing agreements.
Which means that owners who have released land under the licence system which was established in 1948 to allow land to be occupied and farmed without the owner being trapped by tenancy conditions may not be able to re-occupy it within the stated term.
It is estimated that there are ‘thousands’ of parcels of land currently occupied under Ministry Licence.
‘The High Court's judgement means that landowners who have sought Ministry consent for a Licence have unwittingly created a tenancy,’ said Christopher Hewitt, agricultural specialist for Ward Hadaway.
‘And several house building companies who have routinely offered temporary occupancy to farmers using three to four year Licences may find it is not as easy to establish their own occupancy as they first thought.’
The case was brought before the court by farmer Brian Manners, of East Brunton, near Newcastle.
In 1984 he took over the occupancy of 84 acres of land near Gosforth in Tyne and Wear which was owned by the Ashdale Land and Property Company.
The company had obtained the approval of the Ministry for an Agricultural Licence of up to three years.
‘However the document granting the Licence gave Mr Manners the right to exclusive occupation of the land and it was this that persuaded the High Court that occupation rights under Licence are no different from those under tenancy,’ explained Mr Hewitt.
‘Mr Manners farmed the land until 1987 and the landowner began to re-negotiate a further Licence period.
However disagreements arose between the two parties and after taking legal advice Mr Manners challenged the terms of the Licence and argued that his occupation had all the rights of a protected tenancy.’
When it handed down its ruling the High Court agreed that an arrangement offering the exclusive occupation of a Licence of land for a fee of rent was not a Licence but a tenancy instead.
‘This means that many landowners who have sought Ministry Licences are vulnerable.
It is not easy to remove a tenant,’ said Mr Hewitt.
‘The answer for the future is for the landowner and the farmer to seek Ministry approval for a tenancy of up to five years.
This alternative has been open to them since 1986 but unfortunately many landowners chose to seek the approval of Licences instead even though it is virtually impossible to arrange for land to be occupied without giving occupation rights.’
THERE have been many suggestions recently regarding a more suitable arrangement for the bus picking-up points in the town centre.
The latest suggestion of Crown Street prompts me to write an alternative which to my knowledge has not yet been considered.
What is wrong with Tubwell Row?
If action were taken early before the restoration of the pavements outside the Cornmill Centre there would be less work to be done on the scheme.
A one-way system down Tubwell Row for buses only being fed from the south-west down Blackwellgate with a dropping off point at the top of Horsemarket.
From the north down Bondgate and Northgate with dropping off points near junction with Commercial Street and by Marks and Spencer respectively.
I know there are difficulties.
How to integrate the private motorist.
Facilities for shops unloading and loading.
Access at the bottom of Tubwell Row to the ring road might have to be controlled by traffic lights.
Buses departing from the present bus station to be to the south only.
The width of Tubwell Row could allow for bus pick-up points on the pavements north side and extra pickups on a new platform down the centre.
A nice job for our town planners here.
Let's study it.
M.D. Robinson, 16 Festing Court, Darlington.
AFTER Darlington's poll tax was set at £300, well above the Government estimate of £257, it remains to be seen if steps will be taken to sweeten the bitter pill.
The poll tax (a.k.a. the community charge) has been discredited by almost all politicians, even Darlington's Conservative MP Michael Fallon, but for administrative and bureaucratic reasons it lumbers into its third year this April.
The timing is potentially embarrassing for the Government.
April, according to the clever money, is also the month when we will be going to the polls and the arrival of ‘Vote Conservative’ leaflets on doormats accompanied by hefty bills is clearly bad news for the Government.
Indeed, it is not beyond the bounds of possibility that the rise of almost £25, a chunky 9pc when inflation is running at 4.1pc, will act as a Labour Party reminder to the charge payer of past Tory gaffes?
Maybe we can now expect the Government to react with some form of moratorium, at least until after April 9.
But even if the money remains the same, it seems unlikely that the services will.
Labour councillors have already pointed out that spending restrictions imposed by the Government will mean crucial services could be cut back.
And the council also faces spending limitations because of the cost of renewing masonry at the Dolphin Centre.
These are added burdens on the charge payer which are no fault of his own.
We might be forgiven for keeping our fingers crossed that the Council Tax will represent a reprieve.
Sadly, that too looks unlikely.
Government estimates released last year suggest the lowest rate for Council Tax for people living in houses worth less than £40,000 will be £301.
Whatever the outcome it seems absurd that having supposedly wiped the poll tax off the political agenda, ministers are still saddled with it, Darlington council is still saddled with imposing it and, worst of all, ordinary people are still saddled with paying it.
SUPPORTERS of the Government's Care In The Community plans which will have a significant effect on South West Durham with the closure of Winterton Hospital were no doubt shocked to learn staffing at a travelling day hospital had been savagely cut back recently.
The hospital visits Bishop Auckland, Newton Aycliffe, Shildon and Crook, where trained staff deal with scores of mental patients who are making a new life for themselves in the community.
During the past 15 years patients have come to depend on the day hospital service.
But now the health authority has decided to cut back on staffing arrangements.
In future the travelling hospital will be staffed by a single sister.
If she is called away patients may have to look after themselves.
If this is the future of South West Durham's Care in the Community plans then things look bleak.
Everyone is agreed that looking after patients in the community is a more expensive option than keeping them inside a hospital, where all the facilities are available under one roof.
Trying to do things on the cheap only results in an inferior service.
If the day hospital is to stay, and one hopes it is, then a return to previous staffing levels are essential.
A MAN who had a triple heart bypass operation is now treading the boards in the hope of becoming a pop star.
Former taxi driver Paul Burrows, of Chandos Street, Darlington, discovered his talent for singing while convalescing from the life saving surgery last April.
And now the 39-year-old is becoming a hit in local clubs, singing Sixties hits solo as well as performing duets with his wife Margeurite.
He said: ‘Because of the operation I am restricted in the physical activity I can do, so I was just messing about with music tapes after the operation when I got around to singing.
‘I thought people would just laugh and criticise me but they seem to like it my singing.
‘Everybody knows I'm ambitious.
I've had my health put right so now all I'd like is to be rich and famous.
‘I would like to make a record so we're putting together some tapes this month and we hope to send them off to recording companies and agents to see if we can get a contract.
‘I'd like to go right to the top,’ said Paul, who sings under the name Paul James.
His first public show was at Branksome Community Club in Darlington where he was so popular they have asked him back.
His next show is at the club on Saturday.
TEESDALE enjoys the distinction of being an area with one of the lowest crime rates in the country and the further West you go the quieter it becomes, say locals.
But the increase in crime became a subject of hot debate when the area's MP Derek Foster said people were expressing a loss of confidence in the police.
He called for more street patrols after a 38pc increase in crime was reported, saying women and the elderly were afraid to go out after dark as well as some other men.
But police have assured residents there is no evidence to show they are at risk when walking the streets at night.
Barnard Castle chief inspector Malcolm Fordy said while the percentage rise was ‘massive’ it only represented 300 crimes more.
He said police were concerned at the rise in assaults 61 last year compared to 33 the previous year but 58 were detained shortly after the alleged crimes, indicating most victims knew their assailants and were not accosted by strangers.
Phil Hughes, a district councillor and parish councillor, who lives in Bowes parish.
I do not think we have enough police living locally.
I would like to see more police on the beat.
I have great sympathy for the police.
They are confronted by big problems.
Policing an rural area is always going to be difficult.
They cannot be everywhere at once.
It should not be a question of making do with what we have but a question of what we should have.
Nicola Savery, a shop assistant who lives in Zetland Road, Barnard Castle.
I would like to see more police on the streets.
I feel it is important there should be more contact between police and members of the public.
You hardly ever see them.
And when you do they are just riding past in their Panda cars.
One does not hear about much crime in the area.
But if they were about more on the streets it would be more of a deterrent.
Stephen Riley, a hairdresser who lives in Stainton Village and works in Barnard Castle.
Generally the policing is pretty good here.
I think that if they had just local lads to contend with there would be no problems.
They are caused by people coming from outside.
The police are here are fair and friendly and try to do community policing.
You have to be when you are working in a community like this.
Our crime rate is one of the lowest in the country.
Maurice Abrahams, businessman and chairman of Barnard Castle Chamber of Trade.
I have been a victim of crime four times in the last 12 months.
There should be more police walking about than present.
And we need more policemen living in Barnard Castle, rather than travelling in from Darlington, which a big proportion of them do.
When I was young we knew the local bobby lived in our midst and we respected him.
It is a hard area to police.
Sara Riley, a sixth form student who lives in Stainton Village.
The policing here is not so bad.
I come to town quite often at the weekends, when a lot of trouble is expected.
But you can see the police parked up at the trouble spots.
They patrol the streets quite regularly and there is always a police car there if you want one.
I feel quite safe walking the streets here in the evenings.
It is a lot quieter here than Derby, where I come from.
Jennifer Ireland, a shop manageress who lives in Barnard Castle.
The policing in the area is adequate enough.
There seem to be plenty of policemen about, especially at the weekends.
I do not think there is really any great crime problem in Barnard Castle.
I must admit I do not seem to know them as I used to years ago, apart from a couple of detectives who come into the shop.
A CAMPAIGN to prevent accidents among children has been launched by health officials after a unique study on likely dangers.
The in-depth report by Philip Mackie, epidemiologist with Darlington Health Authority, has taken seven months to complete and reveals head injuries and poisoning among the most common type of childhood accident.
But Dr Mackie said the report showed only the ‘tip of the iceberg’ as many incidents went unreported.
In poisoning cases girls of about 11 years old were usually treated after taking medicines while boys had usually taken substances such as alcohol.
Judith Taylor, district health promotions officer, said: ‘Preventative work is very difficult because everyone thinks accidents won't happen to them.
‘We have been telling people children shouldn't play with matches for years but the message isn't getting across.
We need to try a new approach.’
The report is the first step in a major project to change attitudes towards accident prevention among parents, schools, councils and health workers.
Publicity about accident prevention in Darlington is to be run from next month in conjunction with the national Play It Safe campaign which includes a television programme hosted by Anneka Rice.
The study shows preventable incidents as the major cause of death among Darlington and Teesdale children one in ten accidents occurring on the roads.
Dr Edwin Pugh, director of public health medicine, said: ‘Most accidents occur when children are in the street or straying on to the road as parents we must be completely vigilant.’
The report also uncovered the risk of eye injury from aerosols.
Dr Mackie said; ‘It's perfume sprays, cologne and the sorts of things left on the dressing table.’
‘Matches and fireworks and children, don't mix.
Keep matches locked away, not on the mantlepiece,’ he added.
Dr Pugh said equipment such as stair gates and fire guards could help cut down on accidents, but added: ‘The reality is most people can't afford a cycling helmet and the price of safety gates is quite horrendous.’
And he intends to call for loan schemes in a bid to make safety equipment available to everyone.
I SEE that our Labour candidate is now claiming (Echo February 14) that a ban on tobacco advertising would not damage Rothmans.
He claims that tobacco advertising was banned in Italy 30 years ago but that cigarette consumption had gone up.
What then is the point of banning advertising?
Do the Labour Party want it banned to reduce smoking or to increase it?
If a ban makes no difference, what is the point of it?
Perhaps the candidate could enlighten us.
Thank you, Bob
YOUR report on the return of Rev Bob Stevenson to Australia (Echo February 11) was much appreciated.
We have been enriched by his ministry.
Methodism in West Durham holds a unique status in the world church.
Nowhere has there been a greater example of ordinary men and women witnessing to their faith by their service to the neighbourhood.
The Chapel gave men and women who were often denied formal education the inspiration and obligation to serve their fellow citizens in voluntary activities, the Trade Unions and public life.
Bob Stevenson has been a worthy successor to Methodist leaders who stamped their personalities on the county.
However busy his duties kept him, he had time for those who needed him.
His visits to our homes and to those in hospitals will long be remembered.
We will miss him in the Wear Valley area and wish him well on his return home.
TAXES:
In June 1991, I and many more OAPs received a community charge payment card which detailed nine payments.
After making five payments I received another card demanding higher payments and for them to be paid in four instalments.
I then learned from the media that these payments would make up for the loss of revenue caused by people who could not or would not pay the community charge…
Then I learned that if I did not make these payments I would be registered as a debtor for a period of six years.
This in my opinion is a poor reward for honest persons like me.
AN investigation into bedsits, flats and guest houses in Darlington may be ordered by councillors as part of a crackdown on unscrupulous landlords.
The inquiry will take up to three years but councillors are determined to make sure properties come up to scratch.
Members of the housing committee are expected to approve the investigation at their meeting on Wednesday.
Officers have already drawn up a new code of standards for landlords.
The new regulations lay down rules concerning aspects such as living space, water supplies, lavatories and lighting.
Mike Bennett, the council's director of community services, wants to reinforce the code with a sweeping review of flats, bedsits and hostels.
In a report to committee he says: ‘The effects of carrying out action has implications for other departments, such as the housing division.
This strategy may therefore require revision at a future date.’
Any complaints from tenants will be swiftly followed up within one working day where possible.
The action will be carried out by officers from the council's environmental health division.
Food row:
A company which began serving up hot meals from an industrial unit on the Aycliffe Trading Estate has been taken to task by Sedgefield council.
The council says units 10 and 13, Leaside, on the estate started selling food without planning permission to do so.
FOR Darlington councillors to agree to have sheltered housing at the Court Arcade site is another bad decision.
It will not be pleasant for the elderly to live in the town centre.
Now councillors want to cash in on inspecting private homes.
This should be left to an independent person qualified in nursing the elderly.
N. Tate, 34 Harrowgate Village, Darlington.
‘Treat the brains of under-fives with the tenderest of tender loving care’
A RICHMOND teacher has organised a House of Commons meeting next month at which the political parties will be asked to declare their intentions on nursery education.
Ms Ela Robinson, who is in charge of the nursery class at Richmond CE School, is chairman of the National Campaign for Nursery Education, which was set up in the Sixties.
And, believing passionately in the campaign's aim of making state education available to every three-year-old, she has timed the meeting in the run-up to the expected April general election.
She is seen above with children from her Richmond class.
On March 11 the three main political parties will be invited to state their policies publicly, and 36-year-old Ms Robinson believes their answers could be a huge vote-catcher.
Labour MP Miss Hilary Armstrong and the Liberal Mr Matthew Taylor have already agreed to speak, but a reply is still awaited from the Conservatives, says Mrs Robinson, who wants to put Darlington's political contenders in the hot seat with a similar local meeting.
Ms Robinson, of Harmire Road, Barnard Castle, took over the campaign reins more than three years ago and regards her appointment as something of a coup for the north where she also hopes one day to stage a regional conference.
She heads an executive committee of about 20 and has herself instigated the Westminster meeting, which she describes as ‘my baby’.
Provision of nursery education is like a geographical lottery, says Ms Robinson, with as many as 68 per cent of Hounslow tots catered for, compared to a meagre 19 per cent in North Yorkshire.
‘Even in North Yorkshire, Cleveland and County Durham, three counties next to each other, there is complete disparity.’
Her school is the only one in Richmond to provide a nursery class for three and four-year-olds and she says: ‘We have places for 50 children but 100 more are waiting to be in.’
Delegations from Derbyshire, Norfolk and Bournemouth are to attend next month's London meeting and it is hoped as many others as possible will turn up to add weight to the issue.
‘It is difficult not to get political,’ added Ms Robinson, recalling how in 1972 the Tory government had shown sympathy to their cause but never fulfilled its promises.
Ms Robinson runs her class with the help of a nursery nurse Miss Kate Wise, and campaigners want similar teacher-nurse teams to become the norm nationwide.
Before taking over at Richmond 18 months ago, Ms Robinson ran the nursery unit at Middleton-in-Teesdale where her own daughter, Elizabeth, now 12, was once a pupil.
Ms Robinson trained at Darlington College of Education which then specialised in nursery teaching and the town, she says, was a pilot for nursery education.
It was only the second authority in the country to open a state-run nursery, George Dent's, which this year celebrates its 75th birthday.
‘We are looking at the all-round development of the child, not just narrow academic achievement,’ added Ms Robinson.
‘The first five years are the most rapid development.
In that time the brain develops 50 per cent.’
Ms Robinson's first placement during teacher training was at Aclet Close School in Bishop Auckland and besides Teesdale, she has taught in the nursery class at Firthmoor, Darlington, and has run playgroups at Staindrop and Gainford.
30 years of bracken-battling brings national recognition A THIRTY-year labour of love combined with new grouse moor management techniques have earned commendation for a Darlington country sports enthusiast in a national competition.
Mr James Briggs, of Coniscliffe Road, spends weekends battling with bracken and raising grouse on his family's 3,000-acre Ramsgill Moor in Nidderdale, and his efforts have been highly commended in the 1991–92 Shooting Times Conservation Awards.
Since the early 1960s Mr Briggs has cleared 450 acres of bracken by a variety of methods including aerial and knapsack spraying, and said: ‘The problems of over-grazing by sheep are well known.
I am trying to open up the moor by re-seeding and protecting the heather.’
An area of cleared moor was cordoned off with a wind-powered electric fence to allow heather regrowth, a method which could be repeated elsewhere; next year's plans for the estate, five miles north of Pateley Bridge, include protecting and encouraging the spread of bilberry, the indigenous upland plant which disappeared from large tracts of moor when bracken moved in.
Ramsgill Moor varies from 1,000 to 1,700ft. above sea level and has been in the Briggs family since 1946.
Mr Briggs, who is managing director of Tolwood Multifasteners on the Aycliffe Industrial Estate at Newton Aycliffe, took over ownership from his father in 1960.
He has seen a rise in the numbers of wild species in the area, including butterflies and birds snipe, curlew, green plover, skylark, merlin and kestrel.
Innovations in countryside management have always attracted Mr Briggs and medicated grit introduced about five years ago is used to dose his grouse.
‘It is a relatively new technique and a lot of people have been sceptical about it but I am a firm believer in the method,’ he said.
‘Grouse need grit to help them digest the heather and we need to spread the medicated grit where we see them pecking,’ he said.
‘That is often near a stream where they would drink.’
The fat-coated grit, which contains a wormer, is scattered as soon as the shooting season ends in November right through until April the following year so that worm build-up is stopped.
It could take about five years before definite results are known.
The technique was developed about five years ago by Dr Peter Hudson, Game Conservancy upland scientist.
Mr David Newborn of Richmond, a research scientist with the North of England Grouse Research Project, worked closely with Dr Hudson.
Mr Briggs and his keeper have carried out most of the work over the last 30 years with help from an apprentice, part time estate workers and contractors.
It was funded by let shooting days, government conservation and farming grants and tax relief.
Final results of the Shooting Times awards are to be announced at a prize-giving lunch at the London Dorchester Hotel on March 23.
The judges included Mr Tim O'Nions, Shooting Times editor; Viscount Arbuthnott, president of the British Association for Shooting and Conservation; and Mr Max Hastings, editor-in-chief of the Daily Telegraph and editor of the Sunday Telegraph.
Buried horses in the garden, harps in the bay window, pet pony in the folly: this is a house with a difference
THERE are always horses at Edelson House in Gainford if only because a part of the garden is a horses' graveyard.
Several horses are said to have been buried there, standing up, at the request of the eccentric vicar whose family had the house built in School Lane in Edwardian times.
The Rev. Joseph Edelson, a controversial Anglo-Catholic who gave his name to the house, was vicar of Gainford for 40 years but he also had other interests.
He was chairman of the gas works, which stood on the edge of the village, and he kept a large stud of racehorses, of which he was passionately fond.
So fond, in fact, that when they died, ‘Baron Montalbo’(as he was known) had them buried on site.
Unfortunately, no inscription was left to help historians accurately record these animals.
The noted cleric had lived in the nearby vicarage and some of the features of that property are reflected in Edelson House, says its present owner and one-time Darlington cricketer, Mr Richard Carter.
He and his wife, Kathy, moved from a large thatched house in Berkshire when they bought the property eight years ago.
Mr Carter, who is business development manager at ICI Billingham, says he knew the instant it was described to him over the phone that the property was just what they were looking for.
‘All our houses have been bought, mentally, within half-an-hour,’ said Mr Carter, who has learned that the splendid pillars, ornate ceiling panels and impressive fireplaces were imports from much grander homes.
These include Stanwick Castle and an older property at Streatlam which was probably being pulled down around the time Edelson House was built, he says.
‘We are the fourth owners,’ added Mr Carter, who had lived in Norton, Cleveland, at the start of his career, and bought Edelson House from a local builder, Mr Brian Richardson.
Before that it had belonged to Mr Surtees Raine, who was head of a private school at Norton, and who lived there from about the outbreak of the 1939–45 War.
After their father's death Alice and Robert Edelson continued to live at Edelson House, which has a 50ft-high monument in the garden, a memorial to two Edelson babies who died when only months old.
It is said that the vicar fell out with the church when, some years after his children's deaths, he was denied permission to erect a monument in the churchyard.
So he had one put in his own garden as near to the church wall as possible.
The monument was brought from Stanwick in about 1920, Mr Carter says, and it was put up by a local firm, Charge Brothers.
They were called back again later to concrete the area where the horses had been buried fears of health hazards had been expressed because Mr Edelson had not had the animals preserved in any way.
The Edelson family were traditionalists and Alice became one of Gainford's best-loved characters for her activities as both benefactor and conservationist with a deep interest in the history and heritage of the village.
Many unexpected features greet the visitor to Edelson House, among them the semi-circular oil-on-canvas paintings above the doorways into the attractive lounge and dining room.
The artwork, depicting scenes of Venice and Rome, is sadly not of any special value, says Mr Carter, who thinks the panels probably came from Stanwick Castle and were painted by a travelling artist.
‘With the passage of time, some things like shutters have disappeared,’ he said, ‘but mostly the house is just as it was when it was finished in 1906.’
A spacious hallway with attractive fireplace is a most impressive entrance to the five-bedroomed property.
Both main living rooms face south on to the well-tended garden which has two follies one now a stable for daughter Sonia's horse, Woody.
Other ground-floor rooms include a cosy library and accommodation believed to have been used originally by the servants, including a butler's pantry.
Edelson House now stands in 2 7 acres of ground, though in earlier days much more land belonged to it.
It used to have its own coaching house approached along a tree-lined route from the main house.
The elegant property is, surprisingly, not a listed building, says Mr Carter, who recalled a brief visit paid by a very businesslike member of English Heritage.
She declared the Gainford property to be very nice to live in but ‘of no serious interest’ because it was made up from bits and pieces of different vintage.
One of the nicest things about the house is that it is virtually as it was in 1906, and with all its rooms of manageable size.
Unusual features include an east-facing bay in the lounge, set at normal window level.
Alice Edelson is reputed to have played the harp sitting in the bay, where books of harp music were actually found by the Carters.
In the attic they uncovered an exciting collection of 19th century Cambridge University calendars year books which fit in with the fact that Mr Edelson was closely connected with Trinity College.
These were retrieved and now take pride of place in the library.
Mr Carter, who played cricket for Darlington over two seasons in 1985 and ‘86, says: ‘Everyone who visits us admires the house.
It is a very good house for a party.
And because the stone walls are 18 inches thick, it stays cool in summer and warm in winter,’
There are many other relics of the past evident around the house and gardens, including a quaint turret on the terrace: it contains a bell which was rung to call parties from the gardens and riverside at meal times.
— Below left, looking towards the point where the £3m. bridge is being built, linking Teesdale with Stockton town centre.
The barrage will be beyond it, round the bend.
Double celebration for town's adopted Scotsman and his singing bride
A MAN who has taken the town to his heart since moving to Darlington 12 years ago has double cause for celebration this week.
Mr Alasdair MacConachie's appointment as a deputy lieutenant of County Durham came just days before his marriage today at St Cuthbert's Church to Mrs Valerie Ashton.
Mr MacConachie, of Ashcroft Road, says he is highly honoured by the Royal appointment, which stems from his involvement in many community projects and charities.
The 45-year-old chief executive of Sherwoods in Chesnut Street holds many important roles within the community and says: ‘I get great pleasure out of helping charities.’
He believes it important to be seen to be a good community person and to put back in some of what we take out.
And besides his official engagements as a deputy lieutenant, which may involve him in royal visits and the like, he says he will continue with his community roles.
He is vice-chairman of the Darlington and district hospice appeal and president of the Rotary Club, the Chrysanthemum and Dahlia Society and the Friends of the Memorial Hospital.
He is also lay chairman of St Cuthbert's Parochial Church Council, a governor of the College of Technology, a trustee of Aycliffe School and a very active Freemason.’
A past governor of Haughton and Branksome Schools, he is also a past president of the lecture association.
Mr MacConachie insists: ‘I only do these things if they are after hours.
I don't like them interfering with my normal business day.’
Mr MacConachie took over Sherwoods 12 years ago and has built it up from a 34-man, £25m. business, to one which now employs 125.
In that time, car sales have rocketed from 180 a year to 2,000 new cars, about 1,500 used and 350 vans.
He was born in India, the son of a father with a distinguished military career in the Gurkhas, and was brought up in what was Rhodesia.
‘Being a soldier appealed to me,’ said Mr MacConachie, who came to England at 16 and joined the Army.
He served mainly in the Mediterranean, in Gibraltar and Tobruk, in Northern Ireland and in the Caribbean, with the Middlesex Regiment, later the Queen's Regiment.
He attained the rank of acting WO II during his eight years' service, after which he did a graduate trainee course with Anglo American/De Beers Mining in South Africa.
At about this time met his first wife, Mary, an infant teacher at Bradford-on-Avon, who died tragically three years ago after a brain haemorrhage.
At 26 Mr MacConachie went into banking with Lloyds and then into finance with the Ford Motor Company, rising to a senior management position during ‘ten very happy years’ working all over the UK.
A Ford colleague from Knaresborough had bought Sherwoods but things did not work out for him, says Mr MacConachie.
He took over the business with help from General Motors Holding division and his ‘silent’ partner is Mr Michael Banner of L.T. Banner and Co., of Halnaby Hall, near Croft.
Both his sons, James, 15, and Simon, 13, who are pupils at Durham School, are to be ushers at today's wedding, which will be followed by a reception at Redworth Hall.
Mrs Ashton, who comes from Hendon, London, is in corporate finance with a Newcastle bank and the pair met 18 months ago at a concert at Raby Castle.
Mrs Ashton is a friend of Mr MacConachie's bank manager, Mr David France, of the High Row branch of Barclays in Darlington, and he is to be best man.
Mrs Ashton used to sing with the London-based Salvation Army Songsters and has travelled the world with them, says Mr MacConachie.
She is now a member of the Carol Andrews Singers in Darlington.
Mr MacConachie's sister, Isla, and his 82-year-old father are travelling from Lauder, in Scotland, for the wedding.
His elder sister, Mrs Elspeth Borthwick, who is married to the son of Lord Borthwick, will also be there.
His other sister, Mary, lives in Hong Kong.
How lust for life defied two debilitating strokes
A stirring battle cry ‘I will not become a cabbage’ helped double stroke victim Mr Morris Marshall overcome disability.
Now the former chairman of Merrybent parish council has written about his struggle against heart disease in a medical journal.
The never-say-die 69 year-old widower is also taking piano lessons for the first time.
He has written about his experiences in the respected twice-yearly Darlington Postgraduate Journal which is put together by doctors at the Memorial Hospital.
Almost every hospital and health centre in Britain will receive a copy of the glossy journal as well as around 1,000 doctors in the North East.
Mr Marshall's contribution is a five-page description of his two strokes and their devastating after-effects.
The first heart attack occurred in 1984 during a board meeting in Scotland where Mr Marshall was the managing director of the Aviemore Ski Centre.
He explains how he felt a tingling sensation down his left-hand side but did not immediately call for help.
Instead he hurriedly told his fellow directors that he had an urgent appointment to keep collapsing into the arms of his secretary when he reached his office.
He was rushed to Inverness Infirmary where doctors saved him and dedicated physiotherapists nursed him back to health.
But a year later he had his second stroke.
This time he was taken to Darlington Memorial Hospital where he continued to be an outpatient for three years.
‘It was at this time that my silent plea possessively started; ‘I will not become a cabbage’ which I continually repeated mentally and verbally, as best I could, for a long time.
OBSESSIVE ‘It became my personal obsessive battle cry,’ wrote Mr Marshall.
‘I want people to know how I survived as an objective lesson to other people that they can get through it.
‘I never gave up; it was positive thinking and I never lost my enthusiasm.
‘The second stroke was terrifying because I knew I had escaped the trauma of the first, I was petrified.
But I said I would not become a cabbage and I did survive it.’
He was determined to regain as much of his former abilities as he could and each time he began his rehabilitation with as much vigour as he could muster.
Said Mr Marshall: ‘Having been forced to retire from business I nevertheless retained my unbounded enthusiasm for work and community service.
‘Together with my improving physical state it was not long before I was engaged in a voluntary capacity as business counsellor with the local Business Development Venture for which I served for five absorbing years quite happily.’
Mr Marshall was elected as parish council chairman in 1989, retiring last year.
His lust for life has now lead him to take piano lessons.
‘I have never played before but it is something which has always appealed to me, and it should be good for my powers of co-ordination,’ he said.
Mr Marshall has lived in Merrybent for 23 years, moving there from Aysgarth, Wensleydale.
Soviets honour Durham heroes of the Murmansk run
A group of eight County Durham war veterans may be the last recipients of medals given out by the former Soviet Union.
Veterans who served on convoys to Russia during the 1939–45 war received their awards last week.
The honour marked the 40th anniversary of the war's end and it is thought to be the last medal minted under the old Soviet administration.
One of the heroes who received the anniversary medal was Mr George Stevens, aged 68, of Yarm Road, Darlington.
At the age of 17 he found himself manning an anti-aircraft gun aboard the light cruiser, HMS Scylla.
In 1943 it was the flagship of a 35-strong fleet of vessels which braved the U-boat infested waters of the North Sea and Arctic Circle to get supplies through to Russians in Murmansk.
‘It was very, very cold.
The weather was so bad that we had to chip ice off the upper-deck almost round the clock.
Lots of the men got frostbite,’ said Mr Stevens.
Another man honoured by the old Soviet state is the secretary of the South Durham Russian convoy association, Mr John Connor, aged 70, of Hall Lane Estate, Wellington.
He made several of the two-week journeys to northern Russia aboard the sweeper, HMS Hussar.
‘Just a few weeks after I left the ship it was sunk by our own Typhoon fighters with the loss of 56 lives,’ said Mr Connor, whose son, Paul, saw front-line action as a medic in the Gulf War.
He was full of praise for broadcaster Mr Ludovic Kennedy, the patron of the Russian convoy association.
Mr Kennedy badgered Soviet authorities into ensuring all those who deserved the honour got it.
‘We owe a good deal of thanks to Mr Kennedy for all the effort he put into getting us the medals,’ said Mr Connor.
‘The Russians appreciate the difference made by the convoys.
Without our help they might not have been able to fight off the Germans as they did.
‘The supplies we got through were desperately needed.
Everything they had was out of date and food was in very short supply.
‘But even though they had nothing at the ports, if you offered one of them a bar of chocolate or a pack of cigarettes they would turn it down and tell you to send it to the Front.’
Other former sailors in County Durham who have received the Anniversary Medal are: Mr William Coley (HMS Furious), of Brinkburn Avenue, Darlington.
Mr Tom Waliss (SS Empire Galliard), of Atkinson Gardens, Newton Aycliffe.
Mr Wilfred King (HMS Opportune), of Pemberton Road, Consett.
Mr Bill Avery (HMS Opportune), of Richmond Avenue, Bishop Auckland, and Mr Donald Warner (HMS Apollo, The Riggs, Hunwick.
Mr Joseph Bronson (HMS Milne), of Helmington Terrace, Hunwick, is still waiting for his medal but is expected to receive it within the next few weeks.
Anyone interested in joining the Russian convoy association, which meets every two months at Bishop Auckland cricket club, should call Mr Connor on .
Friarage unit ‘could hit Darlington budget
Completion of a mental illness unit at Northallerton Friarage Hospital would cause a £600,000 drop in Darlington health authority income, health managers were to be told yesterday.
A report by Mr John Flook, Darlington director of finance and information, said the mental illness contract with Northallerton would cease on April 1.
Discussions on a bridging fund to help the authority weather the changeover would take place with the Northern Regional Health Authority, he said.
Darlington Memorial Hospital should see increased income from GP fund-holders in the coming year with a North Yorkshire practice due to become a fund-holder from April 1.
The rundown of Aycliffe Hospital would also affect the district budget although financial risks should be covered by a bridging policy agreed with mental handicap services throughout Darlington and Teesdale.
Pleasure to do business with you, sir
Mr Roger Curtis, a Darlington businessman, has spent the last three years having steel chair frames delivered to his Ridsdale Street base from Lancashire.
And about 500 yards away in Neasham Road, Mr John Atkinson, company director of Profix Fabrication, has been trying to find new markets for his steel products.
But the two companies did not know of the other's needs until they were brought together by Darlington Business Link.
Now one has a healthier order book while the other finds its delivery times and its storage needs slashed.
For Link project manager Mr Ken Lee, it is the first step in a scheme which he hopes will soon cover 600 Darlington companies and generate £2m.
for the local economy.
‘This particular tie-up is everything we stand for two companies just around the corner from each other which were dealing with firms from outside the area.
‘It's more convenient, it's probably cheaper overall and they can deal with each other face to face.
It's a lovely little example of what we hope to achieve throughout the town.’
Mr Curtis, managing director of Curtis Office Suppliers, and chairman of the Darlington and District Business Club, said he had previously tried to find a more local supplier.
But no-one had been able to match the Lancashire company's price.
‘So I was very surprised when Ken Lee phoned me.
Profix are a little more expensive but I am not having to take such huge quantities at once so I can save on my storage costs.
‘In fact I can almost operate on a just-in-time basis.
It's a lot more flexible.’
The Business Link scheme was launched last July by Mr Eric Forth MP, the minister for small firms; Mr Michael Fallon, MP for Darlington, and the mayor, Coun. Mrs Rita Fishwick.
‘Since then it's mostly been a case of building up our database.
It's only now that we are in the position where we can actually start to make the links,’ said Mr Lee.
He hopes to have up to 600 companies on the books within a year with larger companies looking for up to 100 products each.
Mr David Donovan, engineering purchasing manager for Rothmans, said he had received a list of 150 companies from the DBV this week.
‘It's the kind of thing that a busy expanding company like Rothmans can't always give as much time to as it would like.
But Ken has done the hard work for us.
This is an impressive list.’
‘It's early days, but I would think it will prove very valuable to us.’
It is comments like these that lead Mr Lee to say the sheer number of companies and the diversity of their needs will mean the number of links is set to snowball.
‘And if we can shift one half of one per cent of the products from outside the area to within, that alone will be worth £2million to Darlington.’
Memorial book for Darlington hospice
Painstakingly drawn colour pictures are part of a new memorial book being created to help raise funds for Darlington hospice.
Relatives and friends of patients at the hospice can now have their loved ones honoured in a leather bound In Memoriam volume by giving a donation to the hospice fund-raising appeal.
It has been created by Sister Frances Therese at the Carmelite convent, Darlington.
The convent has a long tradition of illustrating cards and books with delicate hand-crafted watercolours and inscriptions.
‘We get a lot of donations from relatives and friends of people we have nursed here and we have kept a record of them over the last few years,’ said Mrs Deidre Shaw, administrator for the appeal.
‘The book has a nature theme.
There are images of trees, flowers, squirrels, and birds.
They are very beautiful and delicate things.’
Sister Frances said: ‘I can get about 17 names to a page.
They list the name of the dead person and the years they were born and died.
I am glad to be able to help the hospice in this small way.’
The appeal also received a £10,000 boost this week from a London based charitable trust to help fund structural alterations at its new home, Harewood House.
The memorial book at the hospice.
Discussions on new leukaemia unit
Darlington's new consultant haematologist visits the town next week to discuss details of the specialist leukaemia unit due to open this summer.
Dr. Peter Williamson, who takes up the post at the beginning of April, spends two days in the town and meets the Leukaemia Unit Fund committee on Wednesday evening.
Coun. Mrs Heather Scott, fund chairman, said: ‘We will be discussing how work is progressing, the equipment needed and how he sees the unit developing.’
Dr. Williamson, currently based at the Royal Southants Hospital in Southampton, takes over from Dr. Dipnarine Maharaj who left Darlington last year to head a research team in Florida.
Building work on the unit, for which a public appeal raised £250,000, is due to begin in mid March.
Preliminary work had been completed and construction tenders were due in at the end of February, said Coun. Mrs Scott.
Down the line the Q-train quietly rolled: out fell cameras, pencils, and Deputy Dawg
Stephen Silk turns vigilante and is amazed at what goes on beside the railroad tracks
It was like the scene where Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid start to rob yet another ‘easy’ train, only to find an armed and mounted posse leaping out at them.
Of course Insp.
Graham Hobson of the British Transport Police would not like his highly trained men and women compared to reckless vigilantes.
And the Darlington to Hartlepool railway line is not the Wild West nor did Wednesday see it produce a huge number of train robbers.
But in the trackside wastelands near Stockton, Norton and Billingham the looks on their faces were exactly the same.
To start with it was pure cockiness.
Trespassers and vandals just do not expect to be brought to book by passengers on a train.
But then they looked again and saw that these particular passengers were all standing up facing them.
Some of them appeared to have police-type uniforms while others carried notebooks or cameras.
What was more the train appeared to be slowing down quite markedly.
Then as the electric doors swished open and three police officers jumped out on to the ballast, the awful realisation dawned.
For this was a Q train two normal-looking carriages that are a lot more than they seem.
According to British Rail press officer Sue McInstry the term was filched from the navy.
‘Fighting ships disguised as merchant vessels were known as Q ships and we've just done a straight lift from there,’ she said.
British Rail Transport Police has been running the anti-vandal and trespass trains in blackspots since the early 1970s.
The idea is that unadvertised, untimetabled trains cruise up and down lines where BR has experienced particular problems.
The driver has a lot of freedom to stop, start and reverse in response to events on the track.
He is accompanied in the cab by a police officer armed with binoculars, two cellphones and a radio, able to spot vandals hundreds of yards ahead.
By the time the train has reached them, it has already slowed to a crawl allowing a team of five officers to be at the trackside before the offenders know what has happened.
The officers are backed up by four police cars whose job is to try to keep up with the train on nearby roads and help catch the faster of the trespassers fleeing from their colleagues on the trackside.
On Wednesday the police decided to invite the press along to see just how bad the situation has become in many areas of the North East.
Ms McInstry said British Rail had recorded 40 cases of trackside vandalism in the region this year alone.
The Ferryhill area was struck twice last weekend, once on Friday and then again on Saturday.
On both occasion youths were seen placing cable across the track cutting all telecommunications.
‘It's just sheer wanton vandalism, and it's costing BR thousands of pounds in damage repairs as well as being incredibly dangerous,’ she said.
On our particular line the main problem was trespassing: we only once caught glimpse of a vandal.
As we passed a Stockton housing estate we saw a young boy who finished climbing a steep embankment just in time to throw stones at us.
The train couldn't stop in time and he wasn't there by the time we had reversed.
But on numerous other occasions during our six hour excursion the police tactics worked superbly.
Time after time both children and adults were caught red-handed.
The final tally was 41, with 12 reported for possible prosecution, six cautioned, and 23 others either talked to or extremely worn out after a long chase.
According to Insp.
Hobson, half the problem in the Stockton area is that trespassing has become an accepted part of life.
‘One guy we spoke to said he had been walking this route every day for the last ten years.
To him it was a right of way.’
That perhaps was the biggest shock most of the journalists had expected to see only children near the line.
And the sequence of events that started with an innocent wave to the train and ended with orange-bibbed coppers chasing youngsters across unofficial adventure playgrounds, rapidly became commonplace.
But the number of adults who quite clearly used the line as others would use a footpath, was a surprise.
One mother, near the Blue Hall estate to the north of Stockton, was dragging her three young kids along a trackside shortcut.
And you could see just from the body-language that she felt the policemen's warning was unjustified.
Yet it was the same stretch of line where a two-year-old boy Mark Gilbert died just five months ago.
‘To be honest we haven't got much chance with her,’ confided Insp.
Hobson.
‘We're just going to have to concentrate on educating her kids at school instead.’
For since the east coast main-coast line was electrified the police have spoken to a million children about the dangers of trespassing.
The start was a visit to every school in a ten-mile corridor along the line all the way from London to Edinburgh.
But that proved so successful the scheme has now been extended to all schools.
Every pupil should now be addressed by the police at least every two or three years.
Several children received a rougher form of education on Wednesday.
Three were dragged back on to the train and taken by the scruff of the neck from station to police car.
Others received a tough lecture on the dangers and might just have learnt to think again.
And on housing estates all along the line, residents came out to watch the strange scene.
Policeman scrabbling down embankments, trespassers fleeing into side streets and other, stranger-looking folk, leaning out of a stationary carriage with their notebooks, cameras and microphones.
‘When is a train not a train? when it is a Q train,’ said Insp.
Hobson at the end of the day.
‘That's the message I want to get across.
I want people to realise the train coming down the track might not be all that it seems.’
On Wednesday, along that uniquely unscenic stretch of line between Stockton and Billingham, he had definitely made his point.
Meeting change hits licensees' hopes
Pub licensees leading the campaign against massive rent rises fear hopes of a meeting in Darlington could be dashed.
Mrs Cath Thompson and Mrs Judy Robinson had been told senior officials from Grand Met, which owns 28 pubs in the Darlington area, would travel to the town to hear publicans' grievances.
But this week Mrs Thompson was told the meeting would be held miles away in Yorkshire and involve only her and Mrs Robinson.
‘I didn't know what to think when Grand Met telephoned me on Wednesday afternoon,’ she said.
‘I slept on it but I still wasn't sure exactly what was going on.’
Mrs Thompson and her husband, Geoff, run the Travellers' Rest at Cockerton and would be unable to meet rent rises when their contract expires in July.
Grand Met wants them and other tenants to sign new 20-year leases which increase rents and make publicans responsible for the upkeep of their pubs.
Mrs Robinson quit her pub, the Banktop Grey Horse, on Wednesday rather than face near doubling of her rent from £13,000 to £25,000 a year.
She had spent thousands of pounds refurbishing the pub which she took over a year ago.
This week she was considering a six-month temporary tenancy at the Grey Horse, Haughton Village, offered by Grand Met.
However, she could be made to leave with a month's notice if another licensee agreed to take on a 20-year lease there.
Mrs Robinson and Mrs Thompson travelled to London earlier this month with Mr Michael Fallon, MP for Darlington, to meet Mr Bob Williams, chairman of Grand Met.
Mr Fallon arranged the meeting after visiting Darlington to hear for himself the problems landlords had.
‘What I don't want is simply a repeat of that meeting,’ said Mrs Thompson.
‘That would waste my time and Mr Fallon's time.
We want to see Grand Met send someone to Darlington to a meeting which would include all the licensees affected by the rent rises and the new leases.’
She had been led to believe this was the case but a phone call from the office of Mr Ian Frost, regional director of Inntrepreneur, part of Grand Met, said the meeting would be in Tadcaster or Halifax.
If Grand Met refused to send someone to Darlington, tenants in the town may lobby a recruiting roadshow due to be held by the company in the NorthEast on March 6.
A spokeswoman for Inntrepreneur confirmed Mr Frost had offered to meet Mrs Thompson and Mrs Robinson in Halifax or Tadcaster but was unable to comment further.
Nursery nursing ‘centre of excellence’ plan for Darlington
Darlington could become a regional centre of excellence for nursery nurse training under a Labour government, the shadow spokesman on childhood services said yesterday.
Training of staff, provision of nursery places, child care and part-time workers' rights were the keys to equality for women, said Miss Hilary Armstrong during a visit to the town.
Miss Armstrong, MP for Durham North-West, officially launched the Labour Woman magazine in the North.
The 16-page glossy brochure based on commercial women's weeklies contained articles on Labour's policy to help working and stay-at-home mums.
At the launch at Darlington Arts Centre, Miss Armstrong said women should not be ‘side-lined, marginalised or treated as second class citizens.’
Although traditional attitudes towards women were changing gradually, a new sex equality act was needed to allow women to choose whether they worked full time, part time or stayed at home with their children.
A five-year career break would be introduced so that mothers could restart their careers when their youngsters started school.
‘Career breaks would enable women to choose to take five, six or seven years out to have their families but in that time they would be kept in touch,’ said Miss Armstrong.
‘Imagine someone who had given up teaching five years ago trying to get back into the profession now.
‘If a woman wanted to maintain the right to come back into a job she would have to take part in in-service courses to keep up to date with changes in the working world.’
Nursery provision would also play an important part in women's and children's lives.
Labour planned to ensure a nursery place was available for every three and four-year-old whose parents wanted it.
Darlington had a good record on nursery education with 70 per cent of under-fives catered for, compared with a national average of 48 per cent.
However, Labour wanted to improve on that record.
The town could also be a centre of excellence for nursery training, centred on the College of Technology where nursery nursing courses were already hugely oversubscribed.
More than 130 trainees enrolled on child care and nursery courses at the college this year and almost all last year's graduates had found jobs as nursery nurses, child minders or nannies.
Well over 100 applications had been received for 35 places on a new course starting this year.
‘We want to see Darlington become a regional centre for nursery training,’ said Mr Alan Milburn, Labour prospective parliamentary candidate for the constituency.
‘Expansion in nursery education will need expansion in training facilities and the college would be ideally placed to meet that demand.’
Nursery nurses would also have the chance to continue training and eventually become teachers if they wished, said Miss Armstrong.
Britain had Europe's poorest record in nursery education, child care and part time workers' rights and the position was worsened when Britain refused to sign the EC social charter, he added.
Immediately before the launch Mr Milburn and Miss Armstrong visited Springfield School, Salters Lane, where a 52-place nursery is due to open.
‘We are delighted this nursery is to open,’ said Mr Milburn.
‘Nurseries provide the best possible start for children and give women choices about returning to work or returning to training.’
Official figures showed 1,017 women were unemployed in Darlington, although Mr Milburn said the real figure was much higher.
Many working women were stuck in low-paid part time jobs without job protection, sick pay or maternity leave.
‘Under Labour policy those rights would be given to part time workers from day one,’ said Miss Armstrong.
‘They would not have to wait until they had worked for two years before being eligible for unemployment and sickness benefit or parental leave.’
Coun. Jim Skinner (Lab) said it was particularly fitting that the launch should take place in Darlington, where the first nursery provision in the country was made by Quakers.
The Arts Centre was doubly appropriate because the building was formerly a Quaker-run training college for teachers.
The magazine, which featured a photograph of and comments from Sedgefield MP and employment spokesman Mr Tony Blair, had been a great success, said Miss Armstrong.
The original print run had been snapped up and further copies would be printed.
‘Candidates have been ringing from all over the country wanting copies; I have only been able to get my hands on two copies yet,’ she said.
Although the women's magazine is a one-off, the idea could be copied for a special publication on care for the elderly, she said.
Peter Lavin (Echoes, February 18) points out the dangers of occultism, exhorting your newspaper to carry a health warning with every article written about psychic experiences.
I believe in a free Press, with rights to freedom of expression and to report that which is truthful.
In my opinion, there are too many attempts at gagging, preventing us from being aware of authoritarianism and mischief.
There is already witch hunting by bigots who don't use burning stakes any more — the law mercifully won't allow them to.
Instead they brew up such social hatred and stigmatisation until their modern burnings occur in the form of arson and firebombings, the latest attack inflicted upon The Bridge of Dreams new age shop in Lincoln being a sad example (Lincolnshire Echo, January 28).
Maybe a health warning should be added about the little dictators masquerading as Christians.
One does not have to resort to occultism to find dark forces.
These negative forces are all around us, presently very tangible and running rampant for all the world to see as our planet appears to enter its grand finale.
Its presence has been seen for 2,000 years throughout the acrimonious purgings of innocent human life in the witchcraft genocides; through the long systematic persecution then culmination in horrific holocausting of Jesus's own people — the tribe of Judah.
Throughout all the evils perpetrated in warfare caused by dictators, it is manifested in part in any ‘do as I say — I own the world and everyone in it’ attitude.
We all have a responsibility not to misuse or abuse anything, be it in any belief we may hold or driving a car.
Did not Jesus indicate that ‘the Kingdom of God lies within?’
Too many persecutors are much too busy shouting ‘burn the witch’ to be able to find it, let alone grasp its meaning.
—
I'VE committed myself to one of the most dubious business deals of the year by investing £25 in a square yard of Doncaster Rovers' football pitch.
This, you understand, is purely sentimental and wholly irrational.
Support for my ailing home town club extends a few years before the glorious 1964 10–0 victory over Darlington, part of Belle Vue folklore.
According to the sealed document sent in return for my cheque, the club has pledged that part of the pitch known as H24/V72 which consists of one square yard and subsoil to a maximum depth of two inches.
Without consulting the master layout plan I have no idea which square yard H24/V72 occupies on the pitch, once the biggest in England until former manager Billy Bremner lopped off a few yards because he thought it put the team at a disadvantage when playing away (they must now be regretting all those lost square yards they could be selling).
The club has covenanted to keep H24/V72 ‘in good condition and to deliver up upon the occasion the whole pitch being replaced by new turf or a synthetic surface; the club or its successors ceasing to exist; the club or its successors granting the supporter a date and time upon which H24/V72 may be removed.’
If things don't improve I may have to re-design my garden.
Football clubs and debt go hand in hand but few seem to go the same way as the hundreds of small businesses biting the dust every day.
Few companies, of course, can call on the kind of sentiment which keeps football clubs in business when they should not be.
Sir John Hall (who hasn't cottoned on to the sponsored pitch idea yet) said after assuming the chairmanship of Newcastle United ‘If this was a business it would have failed’.
I'm sure he didn't quite mean it like that.
But we all know what he means.
THE subject of minimum wages came up at The Northern/KPMG Peat Marwick Business Briefing when Sir Ian Wrigglesworth (CBI, Lib-Dem, ex-Labour) was the guest speaker.
It was a top class turn-out of local business leaders, none of whom seemed particularly keen on the idea of a minimum wage.
Forecasts of its affect vary widely the Tories claiming 1.5m job losses, Labour saying it would not cost jobs but would contribute up to £1.5bn in extra taxes to the Exchequer.
The Institute of Personnel Management says there would be job losses but puts the figure at 100,000.
A survey last year showed 51pc of personnel managers in favour of a minimum wage.
Chris Fleetwood, chief executive of Darlington-based Whessoe told the briefing that larger companies were unlikely to be significantly affected his included.
It's at the smaller end that the problems start.
Suppliers paying higher wages would be passed on in price increases.
Chris Ivory, chief executive at Bedale food firm Dalepak said he knew of a small company which would struggle to stay in business if it had to raise wages at the present time.
The issue is far from clear cut.
But there is evidence to suggest a minimum wage would contribute to greater productivity and industrial recovery.
And a better trained workforce which everyone wants would expect higher pay.
Re-tyred
AT first glance a charge for Environmental Tyre Disposal might seem like another way for garages to deprive motorists of cash.
Not exactly robbing, but not exactly being upright and honest citizens either.
It turns out not to be a wheeze, it is instead an honest, responsible approach by well-meaning people to a longstanding problem which has caused severe damage to the ozone layer.
Yes, this is garages we are talking about.
‘We could offer old tyres back to the people on whose cars they were,’ said the man at Charlie Brown's tyre fitting place in Darlington who was happy to give information but reluctant to give his name.
‘But then there'd be a lot of tyres lying round the place and that wouldn't be very nice, would it.’
Tyres were always burned, he said, but that was not environmentally friendly.
Environmentally savage, one thought.
A system had now been devised to get rid of tyres which was fairer to the ozone layer but was expensive.
He did not know what this was, but most tyre fitters were now part of it.
Environmental tyre disposal costs a customer 25p.
‘We pile up the tyres and a firm comes round to collect them.
They get rid of them.
But if people want to keep their old tyres they can.’
Sorry tale
THE sad saga of John McArdle and his treatment by British Rail has been concluded.
Not only has he received a cheque for £82.02 after his successful action against BR in the small claims court.
It was also accompanied by, wait for it, an apology.
The legal action came after Mr McArdle, a solicitor with offices in Hartlepool, Sunderland and Darlington inadvertently stepped on a train to which his tickets did not allow him admittance last autumn (the tickets were as usual in BR-speak and difficult fully to comprehend).
He was made to pay £40 excess and objected, as much to his treatment as the excess charge.
He duly won.
The letter with his settlement cheque says: ‘Once again I can only apologise on behalf of my clients for events that occurred.’
It came from BR's solicitors.
CONSUMER advice surgeries in four County Durham towns are to be axed because too few people are using them.
The surgeries at Crook, Peterlee, Consett and Chester-le-Street reopened 16 months ago on a trial basis for half-a-day each week.
The service has now been reviewed.
And county consumer protection officer David Holliday says despite extensive publicity only a trickle of people have been using them.
This has ranged from a weekly average of just 3.7 complaints in Crook to an even more meagre 2.3 in Chester-le-Street.
He will tell members of the county's public protection committee that at the same time it has become increasingly difficult to man the main consumer advice centres in Durham, Darlington and Bishop Auckland.
And with two advisers due to take maternity leave, his department will be unable to provide the surgery service beyond April this year.
‘Customers from outlying areas will be able to contact the main centres by telephone and officers will be able to visit customers at their homes in cases of difficulty,’ he says.
Second-hand cars continue to top the list of consumer complaints followed by clothing and fabrics, then home maintenance and repairs.
A WEEKLY clinic for young people, at Darlington's Park Place Health Centre, is continuing after a successful pilot project last year.
But its twin at the College of Technology has been scrapped after members of Darlington Health Authority were told that some people were embarrassed to attend in front of their peers.
A CALL has been made for an empty building near a town centre to be turned into a nursery.
Coun Doris Moses (People's Group), said the former Corn Exchange on Victoria Road in Darlington could be used for childcare facilities.
‘We desperately need a nursery in this area,’ she said.
‘There is a real need for these facilities as there are so many young mothers with children around there.’
The building's future is to be discussed by Darlington councillors tomorrow.
Authority officers have suggested it could be used as a private day care nursery or for church activities by the Christian Fellowship.
The nursery would be for children between two and four years old.
But officers have voiced concern about road safety, particularly when picking children up from Victoria Road and Waverley Terrace.
TALKS to decide the fate of a Sainsbury supermarket development in Darlington are set to take place in London later today.
The supermarket group is looking at a site occupied by the Caldaire bus company.
But the deal has stalled because Caldaire management claim a Government clause would make moving a financial disaster.
Caldaire management are visiting Westminster for talks with transport minister Roger Freeman who they hope will help overcome the financial hurdles.
A similar meeting scheduled for earlier this month was called off but company officials are confident today's talks will go-ahead.
The Sainsbury plans have received wholehearted support from borough councillors anxious to attract a prestigious development to the Grange Road site.
But the company has warned that time could be running out.
Supermarket rivals Safeway want to develop a £15m store on the outskirts at Bland's Corner.
If the rival plan goes ahead, depending on the outcome of a planning inquiry, Sainsbury has warned that it could scrap its Darlington development altogether.
CHILDREN'S wards in five North-East hospitals are to benefit from a charity night being held on Teesside next month.
Money from the show being held on Thursday, March 5, at St Peter's Roman Catholic social club, Normanby Road, South Bank, will go to North Tees, South Cleveland, Darlington Memorial, Hartlepool and Bishop Auckland general hospitals.
It is organised by Court Endeavour of the Independent Order of Foresters.
MAGISTRATES asked a man to defend himself yesterday in a bid to save his job.
John William Elsworth, of Hilton Green, Brompton, near Northallerton, admitted charges of having a defective tyre, no insurance, no test certificate and no excise licence at Darlington magistrates.
But Elsworth, who was defending himself, was reluctant to give evidence as he felt the case had ‘already been decided’.
Magistrates then asked Elsworth to step into the witness box to give his case and to show justice was done.
Magistrates said they could disqualify him from driving and asked Elsworth if he needed his licence for his job.
Elsworth, a wood turner at a factory, said he would lose his job if he lost his licence.
‘I have been working for 19 months and was on the dole for five years before that,’ he said.
He needed his car to get to work as the factory was 16 miles away and there was no public transport.
Elsworth, 56, was seen by police driving a Talbot Solara along the A167 last year with no insurance or certificate.
He said he only drove the car to Darlington to sell it.
‘I bought it as a deposit on another car and went on this journey for a reason,’ he said.
‘Otherwise, it had just been parked in the garden.’
Magistrates ordered him to pay £32 for a defective tyre, £200 and six penalty points for no insurance, £16 for the test certificate, and £58.33 for no excise licence.
Camera security bid to stop vandals
CLOSED-CIRCUIT cameras could soon be set up in the Darlington Arts Centre in a bid to stop vandalism.
Darlington council officers say £3,500 damage has been caused to works in the Myles Meehan Gallery.
Estimates have now been obtained to install a closed circuit television system in both the Myles Meehan and the Long Gallery.
ESTATE agents valuing every house in Britain for the new council tax have had many of their estimates thrown out by the Inland Revenue.
In York, 40pc of valuations have been rejected because the local Inland Revenue valuation officers believe they are wrong.
In Darlington 37pc have been queried.
The Department of Environment wants all houses in the country to be valued by the end of May.
Estate agents contracted to do the work are barred from inspecting properties in detail.
Because of the timescale the estate agents being paid up to £10.95 for each house valued are thought to be rushing the work.
An Inland Revenue spokesman said yesterday the estimates were rejected because they did not match records.
Mike Eveling, of the Inland Revenue, said: ‘If we iron out problems now we will reduce our own workload by cutting the number of appeals when the values are announced.’
Labour's local government spokesman, David Blunkett, has warned that the council tax is already showing signs of becoming as controversial as the poll tax.
He said: ‘Using estate agents to do this work is dangerous because they have a vested interest in giving high property values.’
He said that time pressure on the Inland Revenue to complete valuations could mean work being rushed.
Darlington's Conservative MP, Michael Fallon, said: ‘It is far more important to get the valuations right rather than fulfil time limits set down by local councils.’
He said the high number of rejected valuations proved the system was working.
‘We can't afford a system which would allow estate agents to do valuations without even getting out of their cars.’
Darlington's Labour prospective Parliamentary candidate, Alan Milburn, said: ‘It is not fair to blame the estate agents.
The council tax is looking more and more like a repeat of the ghastly poll tax.’
Estate agents have been asked to place houses in one of eight value categories.
Owners of high value houses will pay more council tax.
Mr Milburn says the system is flawed because the majority of people in Darlington live in houses valued in the bottom category of less than £40,000.
He said: ‘People living in houses eight times more expensive will only pay three times more council tax.’
David Ware, president of the National Association of Estate Agents, said: ‘It does not surprise me at all to hear estate agents are having problems.
What chance have they got of getting them all right when they can only inspect houses from the road outside?’
A SAFE stolen from Darlington Health Authority did not contain confidential documents about patients' health problems.
Police are still trying to trace the gang who broke into the authority's offices in Hollyhurst Road, Darlington, on Friday night.
It is believed there must have been at least three people who knew exactly what they were looking for.
Yesterday Mike Dodd, of the authority's finance department, said the thieves broke in through a store room window.
They broke through a series of locked doors until they reached the finance department.
The big safe, which is bolted to the floor, was ripped out.
Mr Dodd said: ‘The safe contained a collection of blank, unsigned cheques, stationery and stamps worth £98.
There was also a bunch of keys.’
He stressed that none of the secret information about health issues or spending plans were kept in the safe.
‘All confidential material is kept in a fire proof store,’ said Mr Dodd.
The safe was recovered in Arnold Road, Darlington.
It had been forced open.
A security review will be made at the offices.
A CHIEF Constable yesterday spoke of the growing public clamour for more policemen on the beat.
And Durham force head Frank Taylor pledged that if he was successful in persuading the Home Office to allow him to recruit an extra 20 officers then all of them would be directly employed on the streets in the sub-divisions.
The bid approved by the county's police committee is for 18 extra constables and two more sergeants to be taken on from 1993.
A similar move for this year was turned down by the Home Office.
Mr Taylor told the committee yesterday that an analysis of the force's requirements based on the increasing workload showed a further 184 officers were needed at all levels; but he was submitting a reasonable request.
Talking of the growing demands for extra beat officers, he said: ‘Everywhere I go it is the main thing that is brought to my attention.
People are seeking the reassurance of police officers walking round their areas.
‘The chairman has received many letters, as have I, from MPs and people in the local community who see this as the first need for the force.’
It is estimated that the extra costs involved in employing the extra 20 officers would be £331,700.
As part of his future strategy, Mr Taylor also put forward plans which could see people visiting County Durham police stations finding themselves dealing with civilians.
He is proposing a pilot scheme to take uniformed officers away from front desk duties as one of the latest for putting civilians into jobs which in the past have been filled by officers in order to free more for the fight against crime.
The pilot scheme bid backed in principle by the committee yesterday is proposed for Darlington and Durham.
If successful, it could spread elsewhere.
Mr Taylor says it would release six constables for other duties and told the committee: ‘We do know that some forces have undergone civilianisation of these posts.
‘There are some demerits.
Many people wish to see police officers when they attend a police station.
But having this pilot scheme should mean we will be able to evaluate that directly.’
DARLINGTON MP
Michael Fallon said yesterday the expansion of overcrowded Catholic schools in the town can begin in April.
Mr Fallon, the Schools Minister, hopes he has finally ended months of controversy over Government funding of building work at St Bede's and St Augustine's RC primary schools.
He said although he can never give an absolute undertaking on public expenditure, he has assured diocesan officials that the schools are expected to satisfy new funding criteria for 1993–94.
‘I very much hope this clears the way for an early go-ahead in time for work to commence from April,’ he said.
If his assurance satisfies the Church, start-up costs for building work would come from the £243,000 Mr Fallon allocated for church school repairs in County Durham this year.
That grant provoked a constituency row in December when he refused to accept the ‘basic need’ for building work at St Bede's and St Augustine's because there are empty desks in nearby county schools.
Catholic constituents warned Mr Fallon he would lose their vote in the general election unless he had a change of heart.
Meanwhile, in Birmingham an 18 month dispute between Catholic authorities and Mr Fallon over the rebuilding of a Catholic primary school led to similar threats in three Conservative marginal constituencies.
Policy changes announced two weeks ago by Education Secretary Kenneth Clarke to allow the expansion of ‘popular schools’ were immediately condemned as a ‘vote-catching con’.
Now Mr Fallon is preparing a consultative document so the Churches can comment before the new rules for capital funding are finalised.
He said: ‘I am proud to be the Minister who changed the rules and delighted to be able to benefit schools in my own constituency.
Other Church and non-Church schools will benefit too.
‘I always wanted to tackle the overcrowding in Darlington which is why I provided the £243,000 in the first place.
If Durham spends some of that cash in Darlington the Government should be able to help in the second and third year of development.’
DARLINGTON police have launched a campaign to recruit more Special Constables.
Specials share almost all the usual police responsibilities and just a small insignia on the epaulette distinguishes them from their regular colleagues.
Most Specials mix their part-time police duties with a full day's work.
Special Constable Dave Barker, 25, has done the job for two years.
His goal is to join the regular force but he is happy to have the experience before making his mind up.
‘For anyone who is considering joining the police becoming a Special is an ideal way of getting first hand experience of the job,’ said SC Barker.
‘After a few months you will know whether it really is the right job for you,’ he said.
At present he combines his voluntary police work with a job driving for the Post Office in Darlington.
He admits that since joining the Specials he thinks like a policeman.
‘If I'm driving and I see someone commit an offence or something a bit dodgy I always make a mental note,’ he said.
He is one of 17 Specials based at Darlington.
The numbers have dropped since five of them left to take up regular positions in the police force.
Sub-Divisional Officer Max Craggs said: ‘We are looking to recruit some more Special Constables in Darlington.
Ideally we would have between 25 and 30 Specials based here.’
Although the minimum age is 18, Mr Craggs believes it is important applicants have some experience of life before they join.
Anyone wanting more information about becoming a Special Constable should write to SDO Max Craggs, c/o Darlington Police Station, St Cuthbert's Way, Darlington.
TALKS to decide the fate of a Sainsbury's development in Darlington are due to take place in London today.
The supermarket group is looking at a site occupied by the town's Caldaire bus company.
But the deal has stalled because Caldaire management claim a Government clause would make moving a financial disaster.
Caldaire management are visiting Westminister today for talks with transport minister Roger Freeman.
They are hoping to enlist the minister's help in overcoming the financial hurdles.
Sainsbury's plans received wholehearted support from borough councillors anxious to attract a prestigious development to the Grange Road site.
But the company has warned that time could be running out.
A CHIEF constable yesterday spoke of the growing public clamour for more policemen on the beat.
Durham Chief Constable Frank Taylor pledged that if he was successful in persuading the Home Office to allow him to recruit an extra 20 officers then all of them would be directly employed on the streets in the sub-divisions.
The proposal approved by the county's police committee is for 18 extra constables and two more sergeants to be taken on from 1993.
A similar move for this year was turned down by the Home Office.
Mr Taylor told the committee yesterday that an analysis of the force's requirements based on the increasing workload showed a further 184 officers were needed at all levels; but he was submitting a reasonable request.
Talking of the growing demands for extra beat officers, he said: ‘Everywhere I go it is the main thing that is brought to my attention.
People are seeking the reassurance of police officers walking round their areas.
‘The chairman has received many letters, as have I, from MPs and people in the local community who see this as the first need for the force.’
It is estimated that the extra costs involved in employing the extra 20 officers would be £331,700.
As part of his future strategy, Mr Taylor also put forward plans which could see people visiting County Durham police stations being dealt with by civilians.
He is proposing a pilot scheme to take uniformed officers away from front desk duties as one idea for putting civilians into jobs which in the past have been filled by officers in order to free more police for the fight against crime.
The pilot scheme backed in principle by the committee yesterday is proposed for Darlington and Durham.
If successful, it could be used elsewhere.
OWNERS of unregistered dangerous dogs are moving their pets from house to house in a bid to prevent the animals being seized by the police, it has been revealed.
Bill Westland, environmental projects manager for Darlington Council, disclosed the ploy to the authority's working party on the control of dogs yesterday after announcing there were still up to 50 unregistered dangerous dogs, such as pit bull terriers and Japanese Tosas, being kept in the town.
But the 130 dogs registered is high compared to other areas.
‘After talking to officers from other authorities that appears to be quite a significant number of dogs,’ said Mr Westland.
‘But we still suspect there are at least another 25 and up to 50 still unregistered.
‘They are causing a problem.
At the moment officers are dealing with police.
It will require a combined approach.
The owners are being contacted in writing and advised of the situation so they have the option to surrender the dog.’
At least ten pit bull terriers have been destroyed after having been collected by the dog wardens.
A MOVE to protect Darlington children from being attacked by dogs is to be stepped up.
Fencing and advisory signs were put up at seven Darlington play areas, which were also provided with dog faeces bins.
The aim was to protect youngsters from dogs, as well as from possible infection from dog faeces.
But an inspection earlier this month showed three sites had damaged or missing signs, two had damaged or missing dog fouling bins, three had damaged fencing and one had dog excrement.
Now another survey is to be carried out to establish the amount of damage and the expected costs of maintenance.
Mr Westland said: ‘The fencing doesn't appear to have fared well in its first three months.’
But Darlington councillors fear the new charge to be introduced in April will put certain owners off collecting their dogs.
Yesterday the working party agreed the operator at Deerness Kennels at Langley Moor, near Durham, would administer the charge on behalf of the council after a contract had been drawn up.
Working party chairman Coun Eleanor Young said: ‘It does worry me as we're going to get cases where an old lady, for example, can't afford to get her lifelong friend back.
Between £30 and £40 in a lump sum is a lot.’
A SMALL number of dog owners refuse to dispose of their pet's excrement, according to Darlington Mayor Coun Rita Fishwick.
But she told the meeting she was pleased at the number using special dog dirt bins in her ward at Harrowgate Hill, Darlington.
A recent council survey carried out in the Denes showed about a third of dog owners use the bins.
FOR no grave reason, the column's old mum had an out-patient's appointment last week with an eye surgeon at the Memorial.
‘I don't like being in hospitals,’ she complained to the consultant.
‘Neither do I,’ he said gently, ‘but I can't make a living tipping horses.’
It's blokes like him who get the National Health Service a good name.
WE share the concern of Mrs Heather Countley, way out at Harwood-in-Teesdale, over the 55 minutes it took an ambulance to reach her injured son.
But what about the explanation from the Durham County ambulance service general manager that the Middleton-in-Teesdale ambulance was on its way to an emergency in Newton Aycliffe at the time?
If it raises some alarm for ambulance provision in a scattered community like Teesdale, the implications for a town of 35,000 people like Newton Aycliffe are positively terrifying.
WHILE trimming its expenditure by £200,000 mainly by reducing staff bills Sedgefield District Council refuses to cut a penny from its chairman's hospitality allowance.
The allowance, incredibly, is £40,100 (see Corr Notes) a year £800 a week.
‘We are encouraging industrialists to come here and we should be able to give them tea and biscuits,’ says veteran councillor John Kitson.
We've a recollection that Coun Kitson is teetotal.
But if anyone else believes that all that's consumed in the Sedgefield council chairman's room is tea and biscuits they must be stoned out of their tiny little brains.
THE Darlington area has 2,000 ‘orange badge’ holders, reveals Durham County Council drivers considered sufficiently seriously disabled to warrant special parking exemptions.
Some orange badges, quite obviously, are gained by telling white lies.
And since the town is now totally overrun with lead swingers, how come that survey the other week claimed it was just about pollution free?
OFFICIAL notices that have somehow come into our possession reveal vacancies on the governing bodies of both Mowden and Skerne Park infants schools in Darlington.
For the umpteenth time they have arisen because Labour nominees have failed to attend a single meeting in the previous 12 months.
This time the absentees are district councillor Hazel Hague and Maureen Flowers, wife of County Coun Ray Flowers.
There have been many more.
On many occasions the Conservatives have nominated a governor at the same time.
Inevitably their nomination is beaten.
When children are taught about democracy, this is what is meant.
A YOUNG mother has hit out after being offered a council house with a garden which she claims is in a dangerous state.
Linda Watson, 22, launched the criticism against Darlington Council after being told workmen will clear a pile of rubbish outside her back door in Whorlton Moor Crescent after she moves in.
But she says the pile of rubbish, which looks like manure, is potentially dangerous to her seven-month-old son Daniel and year-old daughter Charlene.
She is planning to move into the house on Monday from the home she rented in Eldon Street, Darlington.
Her father Joseph Watson, of Elizabeth Place, Darlington, said yesterday: ‘The back garden is in a deplorable state.
It's a forced move and I just can't bear the thought of her and the children having to live like that.’
But Pauline Mitchell, head of Housing at Darlington Council, said that repairs were normally carried out in council houses up to a reasonable level before letting.
‘With things like rubbish, if it's outside the property, we don't feel that would interfere with the moving in,’ said Mrs Mitchell.
‘We would normally do it on the day she moves in.’
DENTISTS say they will not leave patients in pain if they are forced to take action in a cash row.
Many of Britain's 18,000 dentists say they will refuse to take any more NHS patients if the Government cuts subsidies.
Some are already working on contingency plans to make sure patients in the North-East are referred for treatment.
Sufferers who cannot register with a local dentist will be referred to the Family Health Services Authority — which is responsible for dental treatment.
The FHSA may be forced to use school dentists or mobile surgeries if they cannot find a practice to take new NHS patients.
Dentist Simon Allum of Hurworth village, near Darlington, who spoke of his fears in yesterday's Northern Echo, said: ‘I have no intention of watching people suffer if they come to me with toothache.’
The Government has suspended moves to cut subsidies pending the results of a joint inquiry but many dentists say they will quit the NHS if the issue isn't scrapped.
Darlington's MP, Conservative Michael Fallon, has pledged to fight for a fairer payment system.
A MAN caught drinking and driving was so anxious about his punishment he absconded for six months, a court heard yesterday.
Kevin John Porter, 28, was stopped by police in Commercial Street, Darlington, last summer after drinking with a friend who asked him to fill up the car.
He gave his friend's name after failing a roadside breath test.
A later test showed he had drunk almost twice the legal limit.
He admitted his real name and gave his address as Randolph Terrace, Evenwood.
Investigations revealed he was driving without insurance or a licence.
His solicitor said Porter's common law wife had just had a miscarriage.
He felt he could not risk being sent to prison and leaving her to cope.
He admitted the offences but did not return to court for sentencing.
Porter was arrested last week and charged with absconding.
He was fined a total of £650 and banned from driving for 18 months.
A MINISTERIAL assurance of Government cash to extend two Darlington schools is not worth the paper it is written on, Labour's education spokeswoman, Hilary Armstrong, claimed yesterday.
Schools Minister Michael Fallon has ‘assured’ Catholic education officials that extensions at St Bede's and St Augustine's RC primary schools are expected to satisfy new funding criteria for popular schools next year.
Consequently he wants Durham County Council to divert some of the £243,000 earmarked for church schools elsewhere so building work can start in his Darlington constituency in April.
However Ms Armstrong, MP for North-West Durham, said: ‘Mr Fallon should not be misleading people in this way.
He cannot make such a commitment.
‘The next round of funding is up to the next Government of whatever political party.’
Ms Armstrong also disputes Mr Fallon's claim in a written reply to a Parliamentary Question, in which he said it has been the policy of successive governments to refuse funding for church school expansion when there was room in non-church schools nearby.
However Ms Armstrong says no such rule existed when her father Ernest Armstrong was Education Minister in 1974–75 or at any other time under a Labour government.
A POSTMAN who admitted stealing parcels and a credit card from the mail was conditionally discharged by Darlington magistrates yesterday.
Paul Andrew Tunstall, 18, of Harcourt Street, Darlington, admitted two charges of theft and three of obtaining property by deception.
The incidents, which occurred while Tunstall worked as a postman in Darlington last October, came to light after an internal investigation.
But Tunstall's solicitor told the court the crimes were an uncharacteristic blemish on an otherwise clean record.
He has since been praised by managers at his new job with Smith's Dry Cleaners for his honesty.
Tunstall was ordered to pay £150 costs.
HOME owners angered by new council tax valuations should appeal against them immediately, Darlington's Liberal Democrat prospective parliamentary candidate urged last night.
Peter Bergg, claimed the valuation process was being rushed and said estimates had already been challenged by the Inland Revenue.
‘Home owners should not hesitate to lodge appeals if they are in any way unhappy,’ he said.
‘I am sure many people will be angry when they receive their bills.’
The valuation process will not be completed until May.
Local councils will then have to collate the information and send out bills with details of the valuations put on houses.
And Labour's PPC for Darlington Alan Milburn warned the council tax looked likely to cause more administrative problems for councils than the poll tax if the Tories were re-elected.
Mr Milburn said: ‘Appeals will not be dealt with until three months before the tax is due to be paid.
I can foresee a crisis situation where councils are unable to collect any money because of delays with appeals.’
He said the council tax bill for expensive properties would be a much smaller percentage of the house value than it would on cheaper housing where the majority of people live.
The Labour Party wants to reinstate a comprehensive rating system which would be continually updated.
‘It would take up to two years to collect the information and in the meantime we would restore the old rates,’ he said.
Bryan Gould, shadow environment secretary, has said the ‘Fair Rates’ system would be related to people's ability to pay for local services.
Mr Bergg said he did not want to see law breaking but he believed home owners should use the system to insist on fair valuations which had not been rushed through by estate agents.
A Department of Environment spokesman said: ‘There will be a system for appeals but the details of how it will work have not yet been finalised.’
TRADERS have welcomed plans for shop units in one of Darlington's historic town centre yards.
But they have requested the two-storey shop units in Clark's Yard are not used for the same type of shops already there, to prevent competition for existing business.
And they have stressed enough space must be left for servicing and emergency vehicles.
The L-shaped block is part of a programme of developments outlined to the committee designed to spruce up Clark's, Bucktons and Mechanics Yards.
Copies of a draft brief about the proposed development on the south side of Clark's Yard were sent to 27 interested people and organisations.
The traders' views were set out in a letter to Darlington Council from the Clark's Yard Traders Association and the planning brief was approved.
A VITAL, hitherto forgotten point was raised yesterday as preparations were made for a controversial public inquiry.
No answer was immediately forthcoming to the delicate question but investigations will now doubtless continue amid fears of a Government cover-up.
The query, seemingly innocuous, came at Northallerton community centre midway through a pre-inquiry meeting about plans for a grid of electricity pylons stretching from Teesside to York.
Barristers on all sides had already explained how they proposed to present their cases.
Then the session was thrown open to the public.
A man in the middle of the room, who looked to be in his mid-thirties, spoke.
He demanded to know of Trevor Graham, the inspector from the Department of the Environment if Mr Graham took walks in the country.
It was in the interests of fair mindedness.
Or was the furthest the inspector walked, asked the man (who had the relaxed tones of an old-fashioned weekend hippy and said he was a representative of the people) from the underground station to the office?
It was important to know what the inspector's values were.
Clearly the interrogator saw Mr Graham's walking habits as being crucial to the case.
The question was asked three or four times.
But on each occasion Mr Graham skilfully evaded an answer.
He talked about pylons and electricity.
The inquiry will begin in May.
It will make recommendations on whether the National Grid Company should be allowed to build a series of pylons from Lackenby on Teesside to Shipton, near York.
There are, not unnaturally, many objectors.
Mr Graham's ambulatory habits apart there was one other moment of excitement in yesterday's proceedings.
Ian Frank, representing one of the pressure groups against the plan, wanted to know if the National Grid barrister was actually a barrister.
He, at least, was successful in eliciting an answer.
It was confirmed that the Queen's Counsel was indeed a Queen's Counsel.
Inquiries must continue, however, to discover if Trevor Graham, a chartered surveyor, takes rural walks.
It promises to be electrifying stuff.
POLICE in Darlington have launched a campaign to recruit more Special Constables.
Specials share almost all the usual police responsibilities and just a small insignia on the epaulette distinguishes them from their regular colleagues.
They are a group of men and women who give up their own time to do their bit to maintain law and order.
Most of them mix their part time police duties with a full day's work.
Being a Special is unpaid and therefore commitment to the job is all important.
Special Constable Dave Barker, 25, has done the job for two years.
His goal is to join the regular force, but he is happy to have the experience before making his mind up.
‘For anyone who is considering joining the police becoming a Special is an ideal way of getting first hand experience of the job,’ said SC Barker.
‘After a few months you will know whether it really is the right job for you.’
At present he combines his voluntary police work with a job driving for the Post Office.
He admits that since joining the Specials he thinks like a policeman.
‘If I'm driving and I see someone commit an offence or something a bit dodgy I always make a mental note,’ he said.
He is one of 17 Specials based at Darlington.
Their numbers have dropped since five of them left to take up regular positions in the police force.
Sub-divisional officer Max Craggs said: ‘We are looking to recruit some more Special Constables in Darlington.
Ideally we would have between 25 and 30 Specials based here.’
He stressed that anyone who is interested must have a commitment to the police force and ‘the idea of keeping law and order’.
Unlike the Territorial Army, where volunteers receive a bounty payment, Special Constables just get basic expenses.
SC Barker said: ‘No one becomes a Special for the money, because there isn't any.’
But what he does get is the satisfaction of working alongside regular officers in the knowledge that his contribution is a genuine benefit to the work being done in Darlington.
He dismissed some of the popular images of the Specials which he said were off the mark.
‘I've watched the TV series Specials, but to be honest it's a load of rubbish.
They make out we are all stupid and completely useless that's not true.’
He accepts that every Special Constable has to go through the process of gaining the confidence of his regular colleagues.
‘It varies according to the individual, but as long as you show you've got some common sense and you're not going to go blabbing information, you soon settle in.’
Special Constables are issued with warrant cards and have the same powers to make arrests as police.
For the public they are a welcome addition to the number of foot police regularly patrolling the town.
In Sedgefield, Specials have started to take part in a victim support scheme and frequently visit crime victims to improve relations between the community and the police.
SDO Craggs said: ‘We want to hear from young people in their early 20s.
Anyone who seems suitable will receive an informal visit and then come down for a more formal interview.’
Although the minimum age is 18 SDO Craggs believes it is important applicants have some experience of life before they join.
— Anyone wanting more information should write to SDO Max Craggs c/o Darlington Police Station, St Cuthbert's Way, Darlington.
SHOPKEEPERS in the North-East will take a tough line on the sale of solvents in a bid to clamp down on glue sniffing.
They have sworn to follow guidelines contained in a new booklet produced by campaigners from Re-Solv the national society for the prevention of solvent abuse.
More than 700,000 copies of the booklet will be distributed to traders throughout the country in the next few weeks.
Businessmen in the North-East hope the latest campaign will stem the rising tide of youngsters who have become trapped in a sordid world of solvent abuse.
Last month The Northern Echo uncovered a shady underworld of drug addicts who were using the streets of Darlington as a haven for their habit.
Our investigation uncovered a growing network of abusers who are being sucked into a dangerous sub-culture which ends with hard drugs like heroin and crack.
The latest initiative will be launched at the Royal Pharmaceutical Society's headquarters in London next Monday.
Re-Solv's plans have received a cash boost from the Department of Trade and Industry and supermarket giant Sainsbury.
Re-Solv's chairman, Barrie Liss, said: ‘Solvent abuse is a serious and escalating problem.
Retailers can and should try to help prevent it.’
Norman Campbell, president of Darlington's Chamber of Trade, welcomed the initiative but warned it would be virtually impossible to stamp out solvent abuse altogether.
He said: ‘There are so many products that can be used for intoxicating purposes it would be impossible to lock them all away.
‘Darlington does have a solvent abuse problem, there's no doubt.
We have had children trying to buy all kinds of intoxicants, even seemingly harmless things like cycle repair kits.’
Mr Campbell added: ‘Anything which goes some way to alleviating this problem has to be a good thing.’
Home bid:
J E Smith has applied to partially demolish, alter and extend a dwelling at 38 Durham Road to provide a replacement dwelling.
FUNDRAISERS have issued a cry for help in their efforts to set up a hospice in Darlington.
Members of the town's hospice movement say trade has fallen dramatically at their charity shop.
Volunteers have been forced to leave the movement's centrally situated shop in Skinnergate while renovations are carried out by council workers.
Although they are operating from temporary premises in the nearby Court Arcade the number of visitors has fallen.
Hospice administrator Deidre Shaw said: ‘Our shop is a most essential source of income and can only operate well if it is given support by the public.
‘If anyone has secondhand clothes or bric-a-brac, they can call our office on  and we will arrange for collection.
Please don't let out of sight become out of mind.’
Despite this problem, donations still pour in from other sources.
Darlington pensioner Ailie Annan hit on a novel fund raising idea.
She has asked friends to make a donation to the hospice movement instead of buying presents for her 80th birthday.
Members of the Weardale Round Table donated £500 and a Canon camera to the fund raising effort.
Mrs Shaw said: ‘We have been able to help many patients referred from Weardale through our sitting service and are very grateful for this demonstration of appreciation and support.’
Members of the High Coniscliffe Women's Institute have chipped in with a £200 donation and the Darlington Chrysanthemum and Dahlia Society raised £100.
Peter Wiffen, who works for Darlington's social services department, collected £100 through a sponsored slim.
Mrs Shaw also thanked relatives who made contributions in memory of relatives, in particular those who sent donations in remembrance of the late Tom Herring, of Merrybent, Ken Green, of Darlington, and Cyril Gargett, of Newton Aycliffe.
A FORMER Darlington businessman has made a big contribution to a health appeal after sophisticated equipment saved his life.
Graham Tennant, 81, was cured of cancer because a scanner machine at the South Cleveland Hospital identified a kidney tumour early enough for action to be taken.
Now Mr Tennant, of The Royd, Yarm, is fighting fit and enjoying his new lease of life to the full.
He said: ‘The scanner saved my life.
There are thousands of people who are still having to wait.
I was lucky I was scanned pretty quickly.’
Mr Tennant, former chairman of the office materials company Graham Tennant Ltd, Darlington, had his kidney removed after the scan identified the cancerous growth.
He has backed an appeal to raise enough money for a scanner machine for the North Tees health district.
The lifesaving equipment can pinpoint parts of the anatomy which need surgery without a patient having to undergo investigative surgery beforehand.
Already £155,000 has been raised towards the £600,000 target set to buy the scanner.
SAILORS from HMS Hurworth will enjoy a packed programme when they visit their village namesake next month.
The Hunter minesweeper is due to dock in Hartlepool on March 6 prior to a five-day programme of activities in Hurworth.
Members of the 40-strong crew will play rugby with a local Darlington club, as well as golf with the Dinsdale Golf Club, squash at Newbus Grange, and a friendly football match with locals.
A social and sports quiz takes place in the village on March 7 and on March 8 residents from the St John of God Hospital, Scorton, will visit the ship at Hartlepool.
Sailors will also be joining classes at Hurworth junior and infant school.
A FORMER businessman has made a big contribution to a health appeal after sophisticated equipment saved his life.
Graham Tennant, 81, was cured of cancer because a scanner machine at the South Cleveland Hospital identified a kidney tumour early enough.
Now Mr Tennant, of The Royd, Yarm, is fighting fit and enjoying his new lease of life to the full.
He said: ‘The scanner saved my life.
There are thousands of people who are still having to wait.
I was lucky I was scanned pretty quickly.’
Mr Tennant, former chairman of the office materials company Graham Tennant Ltd, Darlington, has backed an appeal to raise enough money for a scanner machine for the North Tees health district.
A ROADSHOW into new pub leases takes place near Darlington next month.
About 30 John Smith landlords have been invited to the Grand Met event at the Bay Horse, Hurworth.
Organisers say it is a chance for landlords to get information on the new 20-year leases.
The leases have brewed up a storm in Darlington as landlords say they could mean the end of many traditional pubs.
Licensees say they have sent rents soaring and already forced many out of business.
But Grand Met says the leases give greater security of tenure and mean landlords will have greater control over the running of their pubs.
Geoff Thompson, from the Travellers Rest, Cockerton, said he would attend the meeting on March 6.
Geoff, who has been at his pub for 15 years, plans to leave in June.
His rent would go up from £20,000 to £48,000 under the new leasing system.
‘I intend to go along and hear what they have got to say,’ he said.
‘But it seems it is just a bit of a publicity thing.
It is not going to be anyone high up from Grand Met.’
Darlington MP Michael Fallon said he welcomed the roadshow.
‘It is time they showed up and faced the music,’ he said.
THE COST of redeveloping a dilapidated shopping arcade into flats could spiral out of control, a councillor has warned.
Two Castles Housing Association is working on plans to build a block of flats on the Court Arcade site in Darlington's town centre.
Funds will be available through the Housing Corporation but Tory councillor Tony Richmond has claimed the project could become a financial black hole.
He says the cost of building pensioner's accommodation on the site could rocket to £50,000 per unit.
But Coun Bill Dixon, the borough council's housing chairman, rubbished the figures, saying each flat should not cost more than £30,000.
Coun Richmond believes the authority squandered the opportunity to create a shops development in part of the town centre which could be hit by the new Cornmill shopping complex.
He said: ‘If the Labour group had followed our recommendations they would have gained a prestigious shopping development and made some money for the poll taxpayers into the bargain.’
But Coun Dixon accused his Tory rival of ‘showing a remarkable ignorance of local government housing finance.’
He said the cost of building on the site would be met by Two Castles Housing Association.
‘We believe the development will cost somewhere in the region of £450,000 with a unit cost per flat of approximately £25,000 to £30,000.
Not one penny of that money will come from the borough council,’ he said.
THE National Farmers' Union is to help horticultural growers in North Yorkshire and County Durham to set up a group to promote business marketing.
Alison Pratt, the union's regional horticultural policy adviser, said the first meeting will be held on March 3 and the second on March 17, both at Agriculture House, Darlington.
RAIL travellers passing through will soon have a more attractive view of Darlington thanks to a £700,000 Government handout.
The money £200,000 more than Darlington usually receives is to be used on three major improvement schemes alongside the main East Coast railway line.
And the remaining cash is to be set aside to clear up the old Blacketts brickworks off Alexander Street, Darlington, where residents have complained of fly tipping.
The windfall was part of a £12.5m handout for reclamation and revamping North-East land.
Yesterday, Ray Sunman, projects and administration manager for Darlington Borough Council, said: ‘We have been very fortunate this year.
I would like to think it's because we have shown our ability to spend the money well in previous years.’
MYSTERY surrounds more race hate mail sent to several households in Darlington.
On each occasion a different British University's name has been used on the heads of the letters signed by an unknown student group.
Several families in Darlington have been angered and confused by the letters, which say the white race is in danger of being ‘polluted by inter-breeding’.
It tells readers to circulate the letter widely.
But most recipients who contacted The Northern Echo have been sickened by the views expressed.
The signature is attributed to a Verity Bough, of the Students Of Europe Patriotic League.
But anti-fascist campaigners said yesterday they were convinced it was a pseudonym and the organisation was in fact a front for the ultra-right wing British National Party.
The letter asks readers to ignore both Labour and Conservative candidates at the forthcoming election, saying ‘both parties will fail to complete the work Hitler tried to achieve’.
The universities mentioned in the most recent letter: Strathclyde, Newcastle and Balliol College, Oxford, yesterday all flatly denied any knowledge of Bough or the organisation.
A spokeswoman for the Tyne and Wear Anti-Fascist Association said the university names have been used to give the letter ‘spurious credibility’.
She said people receiving the letter should not worry that they have been singled out for any genuine reason.
‘The evidence is that this is purely random hate mail sent to addresses plucked from the telephone directory.’
Anyone genuinely concerned about the letters, which have a Glasgow postmark, has been advised to report it to the police.
Oxford University yesterday stated emphatically that a zoologist called Dr John Baker, quoted in the letter, is not employed at the university.
YOUNGSTERS at a Darlington school exchanged their uniforms for casual clothes to raise money for the RSPCA.
Pupils Leanne Hyde, Jane Munford and Clare Hobson received permission to organise a casual day at Polam Hall School.
Their efforts raised £113 which was presented to Massie Ibbotson of the South Durham and North Yorkshire branch of the RSPCA.
The girls, from the left, Leanne, Jane and Clare are pictured handing over the cash to Massie.
A SECOND-HAND dealer went through an 80-year-old widow's home opening cupboards and drawers to look at her possessions, a court heard.
Kenneth Bruce then handed over £125 for the furniture, jewellery and other household items even though she did not want to sell them.
And later an auctioneer estimated that the objects were worth around £1,420.
Yesterday Bruce, 45, appeared before Teesside Crown Court and denied theft.
But Keith Miller, prosecuting, said Bruce appeared on the doorstep of Jenny Knight's home in Middleton St George, near Darlington, after first putting a leaflet through her door.
And when Mrs Knight said she had some costume jewellery in the house he followed her straight into her bedroom where he started going through her drawers.
Mrs Knight said Bruce's daughter joined him in the house and cleared out a bureau which she had in the bedroom.
She said: ‘He asked about the bureau and I said I had nowhere to put the things from it so he went into the wardrobe and cleared a shelf and said put it in there.
I didn't want to sell the bureau.’
But the bureau was emptied and taken.
Bruce, of Ireshopeburn, Weardale, also took jewellery, jugs, an occasional table, decanters and other items, the court heard.
The case continues.
A MAN who swapped his beloved BMW for sex with his wife said yesterday that it was her idea.
Teesside Crown Court heard how blonde Julie Spence agreed to four sex sessions with her husband when they split after ten years of marriage.
In return he signed over the entire household possessions and his BMW.
Yesterday, 33-year-old Steve Spence told how he still loved his wife.
He said she feared she would look like a money-grabber if she went to court to get the possessions after the divorce so he agreed to sign them over.
He said: ‘I love my wife and she consented to the sex.
She wasn't reluctant to sleep with me.
‘I signed the receipts so she would have proof to say that she had bought the car off me.’
After the final session he signed over all the household possessions to his wife and their three children.
But Mrs Spence claims he then turned nasty and threatened her with a pistol and syringe full of morphine.
Mr Spence, of Brunel Way, Darlington, County Durham denies threatening to kill his wife, having an imitation firearm and causing an affray.
His barrister Barrie Stewart accused Mrs Spence of lying about the threats.
He said she was jealous that her husband had taken another girlfriend and was encouraged to split from him by her parents.
Asked why she had never fled when she first felt in danger from her husband she replied: ‘I was too frightened to get any help, I felt like a prisoner with nowhere to go.’
But Mr Stewart said: ‘You are a liar and you have made up the story about the gun and the threats to kill.’
The case continues.
A PEDESTRIAN who died in an accident as he walked home from the pub had a high level of alcohol in his blood, an inquest heard yesterday.
A pathologist's report showed Paul Adrian Hughes had 275mcg of alcohol in 100ml of blood more than three times the limit for driving.
Mr Hughes, of North Cottages, School Aycliffe, was involved in a collision with a pick-up truck on his way home from a Shildon pub.
The Bishop Auckland inquest heard the accident happened soon after 10.30pm on an unlit stretch of the Redworth road.
Work colleague Melvyn Robinson of Bouch Street, Shildon, said he believed Mr Hughes had been drinking all afternoon.
Driver Christopher Cooper, of Harewood Hill, Darlington, said he did not see Mr Hughes.
The inquest heard there were no footpaths and Mr Hughes had been wearing dark clothing.
Mr Penna told the inquest: ‘A fact which obviously must be considered is that the deceased by any standards had consumed quite a lot of alcohol.’
He recorded a verdict of accidental death.’
THE chairman of a committee which aims to set up a unit in Darlington for leukaemia sufferers has renewed her pledge that all money raised will be spent as originally intended.
Heather Scott, chairman of the Darlington Leukaemia Unit Fund, stressed the commitment to the project after a meeting Dr Peter Williamson last night.
Dr Williamson, a consultant from Southampton, is to head the new unit, for which South Durham people have already given more than a quarter of a million pounds.
Coun Scott, who is also a Tory member of Darlington Council, said: ‘The plans for the unit are proceeding as expected and we would expect the tender documents to be in within a few days.’
She added work was expected to start early next month.
Coun Scott spoke out last week to allay fears that the project would never match the fundraisers' hopes because none of the cash had been spent.
Joining forces to preserve wildlife
ENVIRONMENTALISTS are teaming up to help preserve a Darlington wildlife spot.
Members of the British Trust for Conservation Volunteers and Oxfam are hoping to tackle the problems at Drinkfield marsh, off Whessoe Road.
A Trust spokesman said the volunteers were hoping to remove grass from the marsh so reeds can spread across the water.
COUNCIL tenants who have  move house for repairs will now receive a £100 one-off payment.
Councillors said the money would go towards the distress and disturbance caused by a move.
The system replaces the old scheme where tenants were allowed to live in temporary accommodation rent free Darlington was the only authority in the region to operate such a scheme.
Tenants will receive the money in a lump sum but will also be charged a low rent while repairs are carried out.
Housing in Darlington faces a difficult year because of lack of Government funding, committee chairman Coun Bill Dixon claimed.
Members agreed the council should now concentrate on priority housing and repairs.
Security at sheltered accommodation in Darlington is to be improved with battery back-ups at nine sheltered blocks which have a security-code door entry system.
More than 2,600 housing repair cards were sent in to Darlington Council last month.
But by the end of January only 108 repairs were outstanding, the committee heard.
Neighbourhood houses could soon be set up on many housing estates in Darlington, Coun Bill Dixon said.
The run-down Court Arcade, off Skinnergate, should be tidied up to prevent accidents, Coun Heather Scott said.
Dealing with the Sundial
I WAS concerned to read your report ‘Planners attacked at hotel inquiry’(Echo February 19), in which former councillor John Bacon was quoted at length.
Readers may have assumed that your reporter was quoting what Mr Bacon said at the planning appeal inquiry, w here Hambleton's refusal to allow The Sundial Hotel to be converted into a nursing home was under consideration.
I was present on both days of the inquiry.
Mr Bacon was not there at any time.
Your report is most misleading in implying otherwise, but perhaps that was because your reporter wasn't there either!
Mr Bacon is out of date in his comments.
Hambleton District Council has reviewed the way in which it deals with planning applications.
The system has been streamlined and statistics prove that the speed and quality of our decision-making compares favourably with other local authorities.
The alleged inconsistencies which Mr Bacon referred to, including the permission for the Council's own Headquarters, were not inconsistencies at all.
These matters were dealt with quite properly; and where departures from the Local Plan were permitted, this was after advertisement and reference to the Secretary of State for the Environment, who could have intervened, but chose not to do so.
Editor's Note: The report was misleading in suggesting Mr Bacon's remarks were made at the inquiry.
We apologise for the error.
A FARMER has launched a campaign to make children ‘think green’ and learn about the countryside and environment.
Joseph Dods has begun setting up clubs in County Durham schools to help youngsters learn about the natural world around them.
Secretary of Heighington Young Farmers Club Mr Dods wants school children to get a taste of the country and wildlife first-hand.
He already visits Aycliffe junior and infant school where he helps the pupils make bird and bat nesting boxes and hopes they will start a School Club, along with Woodham School and Longfield Comprehensive, in Darlington.
Mr Dods hopes children who have enjoyed Schools Clubs will join Young Farmers.
Mr Dods, of Coatham House Farm, Coatham Mundeville, said: ‘When I was young I would barely get on a bus on my own but I got so much out of Young Farmers.
It helped me do all sorts of things I wouldn't have done otherwise.’
Mr Dods, 30, said: ‘Some of these children have never seen a cow being milked or anything on a farm.
‘The clubs will bring more awareness of what is going on around them.
‘I'm hoping to set up a river watch for the Skerne with one of the schools to monitor the wildlife and pollution,’ said Mr Dods.
VANDALS wrecked a policeman's car while he was investigating a £1,000 house burglary.
The officer rushed outside to discover the Ford Fiesta's front nearside door panel smashed in with a rock and a three-foot plank of wood but the culprits had fled.
Now police have issued an appeal for information about the incident which took place at Bisley Court on the Red Hall estate in Darlington at about 6.30pm on Wednesday.
The policeman had been investigating a burglary in which a Midland cash card, a portable CD player, a Hitachi portable television set, a silver bracelet, an 18-carat gold chain and St Christopher and five silver necklaces were stolen.
But he left the house immediately after hearing a loud bang outside.
Yesterday a Durham Police spokesman said: ‘The officer searched the area but did not find whoever was responsible for the damage.’
Anyone with information can contact Darlington Police on Darlington .
SECOND-HAND dealer Kenneth Bruce told a court yesterday how an 80-year-old woman willingly opened cupboards and drawers to show him her possessions.
Bruce, 47, said she happily accepted the £125 he paid her for furniture, china and jewellery.
The prosecution at Teesside Crown Couret claims Bruce walked into Jenny Knight's home in Middleton St George, near Darlington, and began looking at her belongings and putting aside pieces he wanted.
Mrs Knight said she did not want to part with her belongings but was ‘dumbfounded’ by Bruce's actions.
The items taken were later given a conservative value of £1,420 by an auctioneer.
Bruce, of Main Road, Mickley, Stocksfield, Northumberland, has denied theft.
He said he had followed Mrs Knight into her bungalow at her invitation and was shown pieces of costume jewellery which he was not interested in.
But she then took him through the house pointing out china and furniture which he was interested in.
Bruce said he wanted to buy a writing bureau which she had in her bedroom and Mrs Knight helped clear out her belongings from its drawers.
In the living room Bruce said he asked about any old china she might have had.
He said: ‘She had a cabinet with two cupboards at the bottom.
She went down on her hands and knees and was bringing stuff out for us to look at.’
He said there were items which he had wanted to buy but Mrs Knight did not want to sell and he did not take them away.
Bruce, a second-hand dealer for 15 years, said he had taken away the items in a van but returned the next day because he wanted to buy a chest of drawers.
Mrs Knight's neighbour joined her and he left without the drawers.
The police were called the next day.
When Bruce was interviewed by the police he said Mrs Knight had been willing to part with her possessions.
He refused to say where he had sold the items he had taken from the house.
He said: ‘If I tell you where I sold it you are going to go to those people and I won't be able to sell to them any more.
‘I know it's not stolen property.
They change their minds all of a sudden.
I have had people ring me up at weekends and luckily I've had the stuff and taken it back.
I'm always careful.’
The case continues.
A PIONEERING scheme to boost police manpower on the streets of Darlington could be extended throughout County Durham.
Chief Constable Frank Taylor plans to employ civilians in key posts releasing more officers for patrol duties.
He has selected Darlington and Durham city for the pilot programme which, if successful, could be extended to other towns in the region.
Mr Taylor has already appealed to the Home Office for an extra 20 men in a bid to boost the number of bobbies on the beat.
Ministers are still considering the request, which will cost £331,700.
Police spokesman Martin Wallwork said: ‘In police stations civilians will do the duties of officers who man the front desk giving us the opportunity to redeploy them on the streets.’
Last year 12 police posts were filled with civilians and under this year's programme 20 more officers will be released for crimebusting duties.
Senior officers are watching the pilot programme carefully with a view to including other areas.
ALMOST 1,000 inquiries have already been received at a six- week-old community project.
But anger is growing that the success of the Skerne Park Neighbourhood House project in Darlington cannot be repeated in the town's other council estates.
Darlington Council's housing committee agreed to make a big cash commitment to establishing the drop-in advice centre in Hammond Drive, on Skerne Park.
Last night Darlington Labour candidate Alan Milburn said he had visited the site and was impressed with the work being done there.
But, he said: ‘When I see how well the Neighbourhood House is being used it annoys me that the obvious move to expand the service is thwarted by lack of cash.’
He said the housing committee could not implement similar plans in Red Hall, Firth Moor and Branksome because the Government had cuts its cash allocation to a quarter of that requested.
A MOTHER campaigning for a change in County Durham's education policy for dyslexic children plans to take her appeal to the House of Commons.
Margaret Beamson, from Brookland, Bishop Auckland, wants to lobby MPs as part of her campaign.
Since The Northern Echo highlighted her campaign on Monday, she has had other concerned parents contacting her.
Mrs Beamson's eight-year-old son has been diagnosed as suffering from severe dyslexia and she claims the county's education policy will not make adequate provision for him at secondary school level.
‘I have heard that a teacher from the Dyslexia Institute is being brought in to give advice to teachers here.
‘Things have moved forward and that is good news but I am still not optimistic about the future.’
Schools minister and Darlington MP Michael Fallon is giving a talk on dyslexia next week and Mrs Beamson said she planned to attend.
County Durham education authority says the special needs of all children with acute learning difficulties are catered for and dyslexics fall under this umbrella.
EYE patients at Darlington Memorial Hospital are having to wait more than a year for an appointment with a specialist, it has been claimed.
The number of patients waiting at the end of last year rose to 990 and the average waiting time had risen from 35 weeks to more than a year.
Alan Milburn, Labour's prospective Parliamentary candidate for Darlington, wants urgent action.
‘Medical staff tell me that they are simply being swamped with people requiring eye treatment.’
said Mr Milburn.
‘But the department lacks any middle-tier doctors to help the consultants cope with demand.
‘I fear peoples’ sight is being put at risk because the hospital simply does not have enough cash to treat all the patients who require help.’
But Darlington Tory MP Michael Fallon hit back saying there was no crisis and Mr Milbrun's comments were ‘a slur’ on staff at the hospital.
‘Waiting lists are falling.
Staff working flat out are not helped by this sort of comment from a political candidate,’ he said.
Mr Milburn has called on the Government to make more resources available to Darlington after it was revealed the town received the lowest funding allocation in the whole of the North last month.
Jim Brydon, deputy unit manager, said the ophthalmology department was concentrating on reducing waiting times for patients needing inpatient treatment.
A MEETING is being sought between a public health group and Durham ambulance service in a bid to cut delays in response time.
Darlington Community Health Council yesterday discussed the problem of delays in reaching patients who live in the more remote areas of Teesdale.
Growing publicity over ambulance response times to the area has led to several people contacting Teesdale councillors with their own stories of delays.
The problem came to light when an ambulance was delayed attending an emergency at Harwood-in-Teesdale, just before Christmas.
A spokesman for the county ambulance service has already stated how the weekend duty rota works, but CHC members decided further discussion is necessary if the problem is to be resolved.
The secretary of the committee will write to the ambulance service requesting a meeting between CHC members, Teesdale councillors and senior officers of the service.
A MEETING is being sought between a public health group and an ambulance service to cut delays in response time.
Yesterday members of the Darlington Community Health Council discussed the problem of delays in reaching patients who live in the more remote areas of Teesdale.
Growing publicity over the subject of Durham Ambulance response times to the area has led to several people contacting Teesdale councillors with their own stories of delays.
The problem first came to light when an ambulance was delayed attending an emergency at Harwood-in-Teesdale, just before Christmas.
A spokesman for the county ambulance service has already stated how the weekend duty rota works but CHC members decided further discussion is necessary if the problem is to be resolved.
The secretary of the committee will write to the ambulance service requesting a meeting between CHC members, Teesdale councillors and senior officers of the service.
A GROUP of Norwegians are to view courses at Darlington College as part of a Vocational Education and Training Project.
Co-financed by the Norwegian Ministry and the Northern Council in Newcastle, which focuses on the North-East of England, the project aims to help college administrators and curriculum planners identify changes.
The move will also aid course learning programme design to ensure keeping pace with comparable courses at other colleges in Europe.
Monday's visitors will include representatives from the Norwegian Association of Local Education Authorities and Godmund Folstad, principal of Hercy School.
CLOSED-circuit cameras could soon be set up at Darlington Arts Centre in an attempt to stop vandalism.
Members of Darlington recreation committee yesterday heard how more than £3,500 worth of damage had been caused to art works in the Myles Meehan Gallery over the past few months.
Council officers say the vandalism has been consistent and meant the present exhibition Funny Energy had to be open for restricted hours only.
They said constant invigilation was impossible as it would severely limit opening times.
Estimates have now been obtained to instal a closed circuit television system at the centre.
MORE eye patients at Darlington Memorial Hospital are having to wait more than a year for an appointment with a specialist, it has been claimed.
The number of patients waiting at the end of last year rose to 990 and the average waiting time had risen from 35 weeks to more than a year.
Alan Milburn, Labour's prospective Parliamentary Candidate for Darlington, has called for urgent action.
‘Medical staff tell me that they are simply being swamped with people requiring eye treatment,’ said Mr Milburn.
‘But the department lacks any middle tier doctors to help the consultants cope with demand.
‘I fear peoples’ sight is being put at risk because the hospital simply does not have enough cash to treat all the patients who require help.’
But Darlington Tory MP Michael Fallon hit back saying there was no crisis claiming Mr Milbrun's comments were ‘a slur’ on staff at the hospital.
‘Waiting lists are falling.
Staff working flat out are not helped by this sort of comment from a political candidate.’
Mr Milburn has called on the Government to make more resources available to Darlington after it was revealed the town received the lowest funding allocation in the whole of the North last month.
Jim Brydon, deputy unit manager, said the ophthalmology department was concentrating on reducing waiting times for patients needing in-patient treatment.
At the end of September 143 people had been waiting more than a year.
But that was reduced to 118 by the end of January and he hoped the figure would be nil by the end of March.
’ Fantastic’cut in waiting lists as doctors do weekend operations
Members of Darlington Health Authority praised ‘fantastic’ waiting list cuts when they met last week.
Doctors have been working over weekends to reduce the time patients have to wait for operations.
A report by Mr John Flook, the authority's deputy chief executive, showed that those waiting two years dropped from 74 in December to 43 last month.
Those waiting a year for surgery fell from 367 to 293 in 12 months.
Mr Flook was confident that the authority could meet the March 31 deadline set by the Government for getting the wait for in-patient or day surgery down to a maximum of two years.
Dr. John Marshall told the meeting: ‘We are actually doing some operations on Saturday mornings.’
Fellow member Mr Clive Owen said the committee was impressed by the efforts made by doctors and consultants in getting waiting times down.
He said it had been a fantastic achievement.
— Young people seeking advice on contraception and Aids are making use of a new health clinic.
Almost 20 people aged 16–25 attended the Young Persons' Health Clinic at Park Place Health Centre when it opened for two hours on February 7.
The meeting heard that the clinic was open from 5–7pm each Friday.
— A major step forward in plans to reduce junior doctors' working hours was outlined.
Members heard funding had been given for a fourth ear, nose and throat surgeon.
This will also have the effect of improving ENT care within Darlington and Teesdale.
— Social workers and other local authority staff who visit people in their own homes might be used to educate parents about the dangers faced by their children.
The suggestion came during a debate on What's Harming Our Children a 32-page report compiled by Dr. Edwin Pugh and Mr Phil Mackie, of the public health department.
Its aim is to provide the first comprehensive study of childhood injuries in the district and form the basis of an accident prevention drive.
Dr. Pugh suggested health workers could give advice to families on how to safeguard their children.
Doctor in charge
A FORMER Darlington man has landed a top job with Grampian Health Board.
Dr Richard Scorgie, whose mother, Peggy, lives in Flora Avenue, is a consultant in geriatric medicine at Woodend Hospital in Aberdeen; he has also been appointed associate unit general manager (medical administration) and vice-chairman of the unit management board.
Dr Scorgie's late father was a GP in Birmingham where the young Richard grew up, moving to Darlington after his father's death in 1961.
Mrs Scorgie, a Darlingtonian whose grandfather, Frederick Markham, had a wine and spirits shop in the Market Place, returned to the town when her only son was ten.
She was secretary to the Conservative agent in Darlington for 17 years.
The young Richard became head boy at Hurworth House and was educated at Durham School before winning a place at Edinburgh University.
A Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, he became a consultant in Edinburgh at 28, the youngest in the country.
Before taking up his post at Aberdeen about nine years ago, Dr Scorgie had a short spell in Canada as associate professor of medicine at the University of Saskatchewan.
Now 41, he is married with three sons Donald, 11, Angus, nine, and Duncan, seven.
His wife, Kathleen, a nurse, also works part-time at Woodend.
Readers please write
NOTEBOOK readers could provide the missing human element in a book being compiled by two members of a group dedicated to the study of the First World War.
Mr Graham Stewart, of 111 Barnes Road, Darlington, and Mr Gordon Weston, of 28 Racecourse Lane, Northallerton, are members of the Western Front Association.
They are working on a publication concerning the raising of the Tyneside Scottish Brigade the 20th 23rd (Service)
Battalions, Northumberland Fusiliers and the actions in which it took part during the 1914–18 War.
They want to hear from readers who had relatives serving in the war with the 1st, 2nd, 3rd or 4th Battalions, Tyneside Scottish, and who may have relevant diaries, letters or photographs in their possession.
‘To date we have amassed large amounts of official information but lack material of a more personal note,’ says 37-year-old Mr Stewart, whose great-grandfather and three great-uncles fought in the war, two uncles being killed in action.
‘This is this sort of material we are seeking to make the publication more readable,’ added Mr Stewart, an air frame fitter at Alanbrooke Barracks, Topcliffe, who had six years' service in the Royal Navy and is a TA member with 124 Recovery Co. at Newton Aycliffe.
The pair want to hear from anyone who had relatives serving with the Tyneside Scottish even if they can only give the name, rank, serial number and home address.
‘We are trying to produce a nominal roll of original members,’ said Mr Stewart.
He and Mr Weston, whose wife's relatives served with the Fusiliers, have already spent three years on the book and expect to take up to two more years to finish it.
DEMOLITION:
What with the new game of Guess the Election Date (a thrill-packed pastime with no prizes) and at long last the opportunity for change, we reflect on the last 12 years.
Was the Thatcher Revolution a success or disaster?
Indeed, those who have profited from grocer's shop economics would answer unreservedly ‘yes’.
Yet, and particularly in the North where lost jobs, lost homes and lost hope have been the real consequence of this disastrous period, the answer is a resounding ‘no’ or an attitude of resigned apathy.
Bernard Levin coined the phrase Pendulum Years to describe the swinging Sixties, while the Seventies were hangover years as the hopes of the previous decade proved illusory.
But how will we describe the Eighties?
‘The Thatcher Years’, to glorify its principal personality and her creed?
I think not.
Perhaps a more apt title would be the Demolition Years, as not only whole industries, jobs and homes were destroyed, but also an attempt was made to change our whole way of life.
The triumph of greed; an Antiques Roadshow society in which our most prized assets were sold off for profit.
Peter A. Gledhill, 15 Katherine Street, Darlington.
Last Friday Jacqueline Fletcher was freed from prison.
She had been served four years of a life sentence for the murder of her baby son.
The Court of Appeal decided that her original conviction was wrong.
Her son was almost certainly the victim of a ‘cot death’.
Over recent months we have seen several convictions for serious crimes overturned.
Many must be questioning what has being going wrong in the British system of justice.
The nightmare of being wrongly accused and convicted of a crime certainly sends shivers down my spine.
But what about the things which we do each day which ARE wrong?
Perhaps far from criminal but unpleasant and hurtful all the same.
The nasty comments we make or think, our bouts of temper or sulks, our fits of jealously, our greed, our pride and our selfishness.
Things we all do yet know we shouldn't.
How should a system of justice deal with these?
The Christian faith teaches us that any sentence we should serve for all our sins, small and large, has already been served.
Jesus was wrongly convicted and wrongly sentenced.
He was totally innocent, yet he was crucified just like a common criminal.
And because of this he has paid the price for my sins and your sins.
We have all done things which are wrong in God's eyes but through Jesus God has ensured that any punishment we deserve has already been served.
God doesn't stand over us like an angry judge wanting to convict us and sentence us; rather he watches over us with love and tenderness, always willing to forgive us for our misdemeanours and mistakes.
Yet we so often feel guilty and uncomfortable; we feel like children, afraid to own up because of what might happen.
But the ‘what might happen’ has already happened to Jesus so we have nothing to fear.
If we come before God sorry for our wrongdoings we will always be met with his love and forgiveness, no matter what.
THE anniversary of the Gulf War ceasefire has been commemorated by 35 members of the Darlington Gulf Support Group who gathered in the town hall.
Treasurer Marie Taylor presented the mayor Coun Rita Fishwick with a scroll naming the 66 townspeople who served in the Gulf.
THE Home Office is to consider deporting a man who carried out a series of cheque book deceptions around the country.
Yesterday Judge William Hannah jailed 37-year-old Parvis Yousefi for 18 months and recommended he should be deported from Britain.
Yousefi, of Southfield Crescent, Norton, Stockton, had denied four offences of obtaining a pecuniary advantage by deception, five offences of obtaining property by deception and one offence of attempting to obtain by deception but a Teesside Crown Court jury convicted him.
Judge Hannah said: ‘You are a phoney, dishonest and clever rogue.
‘There was evidence from your passport in the trial that you travelled worldwide going to Madrid, Tokyo and the United States.
You said the travel was being financed by the your family in Iran.
I have considerable doubt about that.’
Yousefi had set up a false bank account in the name of Momen Garawand at the Darlington branch of the Royal Bank of Scotland.
He then collected cheque books for that account and used them to obtain over £7,000 in cash and property.
He was finally arrested in London as he attempted to cash a cheque.
Duncan Smith, defending, said: ‘It appeared to be a fairly well laid out scheme which was used successfully over a considerable period of time.
‘Yousefi has a wife and three children who will of course suffer the same fate if the Home Secretary's decision is to deport him.’
Yousefi is originally from Iran and when he was arrested property bought with the false cheque books and a ticket to Iran were discovered in a van.
COCKROACHES could save the thousands of endangered sea turtles which are slaughtered every year so Japanese artisans can create spectacle frames and hairpins.
International conservationists have forced the country to seek alternatives and cockroaches have similar shells, it has been found.
THE British Trust for Conservation is looking for volunteers to carry out nature work in County Durham and to correct an imbalance.
‘It's strange, but at the moment we have no women volunteers,’ says organiser Dean Heward.
‘Yet women have really been at the forefront of the Green movement.’
The volunteers are currently working on a Darlington wetland site to improve vastly its appeal to wildlife and migratory birds.
Anyone interested in lending a hand should call Darlington  for details.
A FUND has been set up to save the giant northern hairy-nosed wombat.
Only 70 are still in existence, living in the Epping Forest National Park in Queensland, Australia.
CONSERVATIONISTS rearing captive barn owls to release into the wild are to be licensed by the Government because so many of the birds are dying.
Barn owls have been declining in Britain for years as hedges where their food lives are ripped out.
There are now only 3,000 breeding pairs in the wild, but there are up to 30,000 in captivity.
The British Trust for Ornithology estimates that about 90pc of owls freed die within 10 months, usually from starvation or collisions with vehicles.
THE number of mute swans in Britain has risen dramatically since the banning of lead weights used by anglers.
There are now 25,000 swans on waterways compared with 19,000 in the last count in 1983, according to the Wildfowl and Wetlands Trust.
The ban was imposed in 1987, when it was found that up to 4,000 swans were wasting away every year because of lead poisoning caused by swallowing discarded weights.
CHEMICALS which have been found in the River Clyde pose a threat to otters all over Britain, the World Wide Fund For Nature warned this week.
The toxic PCBs are present in many of the country's rivers, says the WWF, and are largely responsible for the decline of the species which in England is now only found in Northumberland, the West Country and a small area of East Anglia.
The WWF believes the PCBs, used as coolants, are being illegally secreted into British rivers and into the fish and eels the animals eat.
PCBs wiped out all otters in Holland.
THE Country Landowners' Association is calling on local planning authorities to help farmers understand new planning controls on farm and forestry buildings.
The new regulations, introduced in January, affect the design, materials and siting of developments on farms of less than five hectares.
‘Many farm businesses are under pressure just now, so we would urge planners to heed advice from the DoE and bear in mind the needs of farm enterprises in this period of great upheaval for the farming industry,’ a spokesman said.
TWO Ashington schools have benefited from a green scheme run by students on a health studies course at Northumberland College.
The students conducted a market research campaign for suggestions about environmental improvements, and the result has been a wildlife garden and a flower and bird project.
SAVE THE WORLD:
THE unwanted ‘junk mail’ we get through our letterboxes every year accounts for millions of wasted trees used for paper.
You can remove your name from direct mailing lists by writing to the Mailing Preference Service, Freepost 22, London W1E 7EZ.
Companies are also obliged by law to stop sending mail to you if you ask them.
DID YOU KNOW:
OVER a third of British household rubbish is made up of packaging.
Bomb unit deal with moor mortar
AN ARMY bomb disposal unit was called out over the weekend to destroy a live Second World War mortar bomb.
A police spokesman said the bomb was discovered on the North Yorkshire Moors near Osmotherly by a hiker and his son on Friday.
He said the two spotted fins sticking out of the ground.
The bomb disposal unit destroyed the bomb with a controlled explosion.
The spokesman said a number of mortar bombs had been found in the area in the past and he urged anyone finding similar items to contact the police immediately.
HOMELESSNESS has reached crisis proportions in Darlington following a 300pc increase in the number of families seeking help.
Since 1988 the number of applications from people who say they have nowhere to live has soared from 160 to 629.
But Darlington borough council has seen the number of vacant properties for all housing applicants fall during the same period from 930 four years ago to 660 in 1992.
Councillors say they are doing the best they can but Bill Dixon, chairman of the authority's housing committee, admitted: ‘We are operating on a knife edge.’
The council has already been forced to fall back on accommodation in the town's Arts Centre in a bid to keep people off the streets.
But with no sign of a slowdown in the housing crisis, Coun Dixon warned: ‘It is going to get a lot worse before it gets better.’
Darlington council has garnered a reputation for innovative housing schemes with its recent mortgage rescue package and a plan to use vacant shop flats for would-be tenants.
But Coun Dixon warned: ‘There is only so much we can do.’
Tory group leader Tony Richmond refuted the figures, saying: ‘There have been more new houses built in Darlington during the past few years than at any other time in the past.
‘When we were in control of the council we positively encouraged housing associations and the private sector to build in the town.
Sadly, that is something the Labour group no longer wants to do.’
A BUS company is anxiously waiting to hear if a Government minister will break the deadlock over a deal which could bring a Sainsbury superstore to Darlington.
Management from Caldaire have already held talks over a Government clause which stalled negotiations on the future of the firm's Grange Road site.
Developers want to buy the land for a Sainsbury superstore.
But the Government clause which says Caldaire can only keep 35pc of any purchase price above £1.3m makes a move virtually impossible.
Management say Caldaire would need at least £3.7m if it is not to end up out of pocket.
In order to do that, a buyer would have to stump up at least £8.5m for the site.
Mike Widmer, Caldaire's managing director, believes a Government promise to waive the clause could be a significant breakthrough.
But he is worried Transport Minister Roger Freeman will reject the appeal in case the move set a precedent.
Mr Widmer said: ‘Our meeting was very productive.
We came away with an assurance that the Government wouldn't force the company off the Grange Road site.’
DARLINGTON is fast becoming one of the country's favourite venues for disabled sports, according to a national association.
Simon O'Connor, spokesman for the British Sports Association for the Disabled, said the town's Dolphin Centre had gained a reputation as one of the best lei sure complexes in the country.
Speaking after BSAD's national junior swimming championships, Mr O'Connor said: ‘We have been coming to Darlington for eight years now and I can honestly say it gets better every time.
‘The Dolphin Centre is the perfect venue for us because it has a top class pool and excellent facilities for disabled swimmers.’
Over 100 junior competitors from throughout the country took part in BSAD's national finals at the weekend.
Fierce competition meant officials had to re-write the record books after the final event yesterday afternoon.
A PLAN to teach food hygiene in Darlington schools could help combat the number of illnesses in the town, it has been claimed.
Darlington councillor Eleanor Young has welcomed the proposal which would enable youngsters over 13 to study for the Basic Food Hygiene Certificate.
‘We're hoping this will do a lot towards preventing the outbreak of illnesses such as salmonella,’ said Coun Young, chairman of Darlington Council's Works and Health Committee, which will discuss the issue today.
‘I will be delighted if it goes ahead.
A lot of schoolchildren work in restaurants in their holidays and will benefit from such a course.
‘In the case of others, having this qualification might help them to find a job.’
According to a report to today's meeting the course could be made available to nine secondary schools in Darlington.
COPIES of a register which is aimed at maintaining hygiene standards are likely to go on sale.
Restaurateurs have already been warned they could face hefty fines if they fail to join the Darlington Council register before April 3.
Letters have been sent to scores of businesses which are subject to regular environmental health checks.
In a report to Darlington Council's works and health committee Michael Bennett, director of community services, recommends £1 be charged for a copy of an individual entry and the full register be made available for £250.
A DISABLED woman was rushed to hospital after she was overcome by gas fumes at her council house.
Ruby Atkinson, of Wordsworth Road, Darlington, collapsed after she could not breathe.
She was taken to Darlington Memorial Hospital and detained for three nights.
Yesterday her husband Alan Atkinson, 47, called on Darlington Council to move them to another house.
‘Ruby couldn't breathe at all,’ he said.
‘She was getting no oxygen.
This damp and the gas fire has affected her health, as she has bronchial asthma.
We have had enough and just want to move.’
Mr Atkinson, who is also disabled, said his wife was now receiving medication.
Pauline Mitchell, director of housing, said the council had received a doctor's note that the heating in the house could be detrimental to Mrs Atkinson's health.
‘There is not a problem with the damp though, it's just the central heating,’ she said.
‘Mrs Atkinson's doctor has advised us that we should consider a transfer.’
She said she hoped the couple could move to another home soon.
MORE than £10,000 worth of stolen antiques, office equipment and other goods have been found during police searches at a house in Newton Aycliffe and a Darlington business.
Newton Aycliffe police are appealing to members of the public who have lost goods in burglaries from antique shops, offices, vehicles and homes to come forward and try to identify the goods.
DC Steven Millward said the haul included water colour paintings, valued at £300, which had already been returned to the owner after a burglary at a Darlington antiques shop a year ago.
Other goods already identified were stolen during burglaries in Bradford in 1990 and an antiques shop in Leyburn last month.
‘There's also property we know has come from Darlington and Thirsk.
We have a lot more and we would ask people to come forward and try to identify anything they have had stolen.
‘We have some prints, a photocopier, a lampstand, Victorian picture frames et cetera,’ said DC Millward.
Members of the public can contact Aycliffe CID on .
STOLEN property from a burglary was loaded into a taxi, a court heard.
But the taxi driver pulled over when police began following and his two passengers were arrested.
James Butt, 36, appeared before Teesside Crown Court and admitted burglary and handling stolen goods.
Mr Recorder Paul Worsley QC sentenced Butt, of North Road, Darlington, to 27 months imprisonment.
Deborah Sherwin, prosecuting, said Butt had broken into a house in Eldon Street, Darlington, and taken over £2,000 worth of property.
When a house in Coniston Street, Darlington, was burgled, Butt was one of two men who put the property into a taxi.
When the taxi driver spotted the police he asked about the goods but was told to keep driving.
But when police illuminated their blue light he pulled over.
DARLINGTON has always prided itself on its railway heritage and is nationally known as the railway town.
Yet one of the major events in its railway history looks set to go unnoticed because of lack of council funding.
Darlington Council says it cannot afford to celebrate the 150th anniversary of North Road station due to its ‘extremely difficult’ financial situation.
Railway enthusiasts, understandably, have let off steam about the matter and say the town has lost out on a major tourist opportunity.
Surely it would not have cost the council a fortune to mount a modest event to mark this anniversary.
A Victorian theme would attract many people and possibly put money back into council coffers.
The council was informed about the anniversary two years ago but has dragged its heels over putting it on any agenda.
A bit of forward planning would have ensured a sum was put aside in the budget.
The borough council only needs to look to the example of Durham County Council which has given £100,000 to the Bowes Museum for its centenary celebrations to see how important local heritage is.
Darlington is a poor neighbour in comparison.
Its centuries of railway history, it seems, are worth nothing.
has reached crisis proportions in Darlington following a 300pc increase in the number of families seeking help.
Since 1988, the number of applications from people who say they have nowhere to live has soared from 160 to 629.
But Darlington borough council has seen vacant properties for all housing applicants fall during the same period from 930 four years ago to 660 in 1992.
Councillors say they are doing their best but Bill Dixon, chairman of the authority's housing committee, admitted: ‘We are on a knife edge.’
The council has already been forced to fall back on accommodation in the Arts Centre to keep people off the streets.
Families favour the Arts Centre over bed and breakfast accommodation because it offers a greater privacy.
But with no sign of a slowdown in the crisis, Coun Dixon warned: ‘It is going to get a lot worse before it gets better.’
Darlington mirrors the national picture with more housing applicants and fewer homes to go round.
In 1978 local authorities built 64,500 houses for tenants throughout the country.
Last year that figure had fallen to just 7,800 properties.
Housing Associations are now responsible for helping fill the gap created by local government's enforced withdrawal from property development.
But the associations only built an extra 14,500 homes in 1991 — not enough to keep pace with demand, according to Coun Dixon.
Darlington council has garnered a reputation for innovative housing schemes with its recent mortgage rescue package and a plan to use vacant shop flats for would-be tenants.
But Coun Dixon warned; ‘There is only so much we can do.
The Government has to realise that the only way out of the current crisis is to let local authorities take the initiative.’
Tory group leader Tony Richmond refuted the figures, saying: ‘There have been more new houses built in Darlington during the past few years than at any other time in the past.
‘When we controlled the council we positively encouraged housing associations and the private sector to build.
Sadly, that is something the Labour group no longer wants to do.’
Coun Richmond said: ‘Where are all these people who are supposed to be homeless?
There are thousands of council houses in Darlington.’
THE RSPCA is trying to find homes for two dogs with pedigrees.
Bruce and Siddy the boxers are eight years old but can no longer stay with their present owner.
Paula Wilson, regional officer with the RSPCA, said: ‘They are beautiful, lovely natured and house-trained.’
The dogs need lots of exercise, but because they have now reached their age of retirement and have been reared as pets they are not suitable for shows.
Anyone interested in offering the animals a home will receive a visit from an RSPCA official.
All prospective owners are vetted to make sure that the animals are going to be properly cared for.
For details telephone Paula Wilson on  or Ray McKinley on Darlington .
SHOPKEEPERS in the North-East have backed a new initiative to combat glue-sniffing.
They have vowed to take a tough line on solvents after The Northern Echo uncovered glue abuse in Darlington.
And they have joined a national campaign launched in London yesterday by Re-Solv, the national society for the prevention of solvent abuse.
Re-Solv plans to distribute 700,000 copies of a new booklet to shops and businesses throughout the country.
It reminds traders of their obligations under the law and tells them how to spot a sniffer.
Chairman Barrie Liss said: ‘Shopkeepers have a duty to help prevent solvent abuse and this initiative will help them do just that.
With their help we can make a big impact on the problem.’
Re-Solv's efforts have received support from Darlington's Chamber of Trade.
Chamber president Norman Campbell acknowledged Darlington had a problem with glue sniffers but praised police for reacting to complaints from traders and members of the public.
A spokesman for Durham constabulary said: ‘Anything which aims to tackle the problems posed by solvent abuse has to be a good thing and would get our whole hearted support.’
Cleveland County Council hopes an attempt it made to stop solvent abuse is taken up by other authorities.
The council claims more than 100 traders have joined its initiative, launched in 1990.
TWO barmaids claimed social security benefit while working at a Kiki's bar in Darlington, a court heard yesterday.
Lisa Julie Davies, 18, of Lowmoor Road, and Susan Winifried Davies, of Kempton Court, both Darlington, admitted making false representations to obtain benefit when they appeared before the town's magistrates.
Both were given conditional discharges and ordered to pay £50 costs.
CAMPAIGNERS fighting road plans which threaten the remains of a historic railway line have won support from a second sister town in America.
Darlington Environmental Watch, which is opposed to the cross town route, received a letter from the mayor of the city of Darlington in South Carolina.
The boost comes weeks after support for Dew's efforts was sent to the Mayor of Darlington, Coun Rita Fishwick, from Darlington, in Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
Dew member Dr Robert Upshall, who started the drive for support from seven Darlington's worldwide, welcomed the news saying: ‘Their mayor remarks on their regret for destroying their heritage.
This is what could happen in Darlington here.’
Dew members say the cross town route, designed as a fast link from the A66 Southern Bypass to the A1(M) through Darlington, is unnecessary and would destroy the track bed of the world's first public steam railway.
The mayor of Darlington in Pennsylvania, J Ronald Ward, wrote: ‘I heartily support your efforts to preserve the historic Stephenson's Stockton Darlington Railway line.
As mayor, I understand the importance of losing items of historic interest.’
Mr Ward said his town's courthouse and city hall were razed in the 1960s to make way for modern buildings.
He said: ‘The citizens of Darlington reflect on the old buildings and wish today that they remained.’
HOSPITAL officials yesterday opened the doors to a showpiece mental health unit.
The £4.3m department at Northallerton's Friarage Hospital will take its first patients next week.
It will provide the best facilities in the area for people suffering from mental health problems.
Princess Alexandra will formally open the unit on June 4.
Staffed by 40 extra nurses, it will offer a 36-bed ward for adults and 21 beds for the elderly suffering from dementia.
There are also day hospital for both groups of patients and an administration section.
The massive boost to the area's mental health facilities has been funded by the regional health authority with money saved through hospital closures.
Patients will no longer have to travel to Darlington and York for treatment and the new facilities are expected to attract people from outside the area.
The administration is being transferred from the Ruston Hospital in Northallerton High Street while 14 beds will be transferred from the independent Scorton Hospital at Scorton.
The unit will also provide a base for teams which work in the community.
Chairman of Northallerton Health Services Trust Caroline Thorton-Berry said: ‘We want to provide a full local service for the people.’
Director of mental health Jonathan Mumford said concentrating services in one place would make it more effective and mean less travelling time for staff, patients and families.
The public will get a chance to see the new unit at an open day on Saturday from 10am to 3pm.
NINE Darlington secondary schools could soon benefit from courses in food hygiene, according to the borough council.
The council aims to offer basic Food Hygiene Certificates to pupils over 13.
Council officers told the works and health committee that the scheme would help the many pupils that became involved in the food industry after leaving school.
Teachers would be trained on an Institution of Environmental Health course and schools would be given booklets on food safety.
Coun Eleanor Young, chairman of the committee, said: ‘I think this is an excellent idea.
And it is good that other agencies are being involved.’
IMPROVING safety standards at workplaces in Darlington could cost £60m.
The borough council is to visit up to 1,500 business premises in the town to check safety and health standards.
The move follows EC legislation to cut down on work-related illnesses such as repetitive strain injury and eye problems.
Last year more than 100,000 upper limb disorders caused by using a keyboard were reported to the Health and Safety Commission.
Keith Atkinson, senior environmental health officer, said it would cost £42 to check each work-station in Darlington.
And all installations had to comply with the legislation by 1996.
He said the EC guidelines included looking at design and layout of offices, eyesight tests, rest facilities for pregnant women and separate rest areas for smokers and non-smokers.
Mr Atkinson said the work would cost £60m over the first four years and between £11m and £15m over the next nine years.
But Coun Bryan Thistlethwaite (Lab) feared it could cost more.
‘This is a can of worms and really needs to be looked into carefully,’ he said.
SUNDAY trading laws were branded a ‘farce’ yesterday by Darlington councillor Bill Dixon.
Coun Dixon (Lab) said the borough council had paid up to a week's salary in overtime in November and December last year for officers patrolling shops on Sundays.
He said: ‘We lose one staff week by monitoring Sunday trading.
And monitoring is all it is as we cannot prosecute.
This really is a farce and the Government needs to do something about it.’
Under the 1950 Shops Act the council has a duty to prosecute shops which trade on a Sunday.
Since June last year environmental officers have regularly visited shops including Presto, Gateway and Morrisons.
But many shops continue trading on Sundays as they maintain they are entitled to open under the 1957 Treaty of Rome.
Council officers told yesterday's Darlington works and health committee they would continue to visit shops once a month collecting evidence with a view to prosecution.
Petitions for lighting in the back lanes of the Denes area and in Great Stainton were handed in.
They will be passed to the county council.
A register of food premises in Darlington will be available from May.
North of England Newspapers will work with the council to provide individual entries for £1 and registers for £250.
A float to mark No Smoking Day will parade through Darlington on Saturday.
A petition for street-lighting in Great Stainton was handed into the committee.
Members agreed to pass it on to Durham County Council.
New covers for stalls in Darlington market will cost £4,600.
AN ADVERTISING campaign to attract shoppers to Darlington is to be launched by the borough council.
The council hopes to encourage shoppers to visit the market place as part of a major Darlington promotion.
Coach trips will be targeted to come on market days and the council hopes to introduce special theme days based on Darlington's history.
John Buxton, director of property services, told the council's works and health committee: ‘This would have great benefits for the town.’
He said other Darlington attractions like the town museum and yards should also be promoted to shoppers.
The Market Federation has suggested having a market fair day based on the Ox Roast.
The committee was told a similar event in Stockton had been a great success.
‘Better image’— Increased police presence in Darlington market place has seen a decrease in crime.
The committee welcomed the police's higher profile and said it had improved the image of Darlington town centre.
A VILLAGE church eager to fly its standard has called in a fire turntable to help rethread its flagpole lanyard.
Fire engine collector Dr Barry Hutchinson has agreed to put his 1967 AEC Merryweather turntable ladder at the disposal of Middleton Tyas's St Michael and All Angels.
Church council treasurer John King said the parish had been unable to fly its St George cross since the lanyard broke about a year ago.
Climbing up the pole was too dangerous as the pole was at the edge of the tower, he said.
The church approached Darlington fire sub officer Brett Clayton who lives in the village and is himself a collector of fire engines.
He in turn contacted fellow collector Dr Hutchinson, of Ponteland, who will be visiting the church at 2pm on Saturday.
A GROUP from education establishments in Norway arrived in Darlington yesterday to view courses at the technical college.
The visit was organised as part of a vocational education and training project which has joined the college in Cleveland Avenue with Norway through the Department of Employment.
The project aims to help college administrators and planners identify changes and if necessary redesign learning programmes to ensure they keep pace with comparable courses at other colleges in Europe.
Yesterday's visit centred on the caring sector at the college which involves the training of nursery nurses, volunteer care for the elderly, nannies and auxiliary nurses.
A DARLINGTON bar worker was yesterday recovering after being threatened, bound and gagged in a £10,000 robbery.
Barry Glenn, assistant manager at Perry's Brasserie in Darlington, had just returned to his home in Harris Street on Sunday night when a raider struck.
He was approached from behind by a man who shoved a sharp object into his back and ordered him to return to the bar in Beaumont Street.
Mr Glenn, 21, drove the robber back to Perry's in his own car and once there was forced to open the safe containing the weekend takings.
The raider then bound and gagged Mr Glenn before making off with over £10,00 in cash in Mr Glenn's gold Volkswagen Passat estate.
Even though he was gagged, Mr Glenn managed to dial 999 and the call was traced by police back to the brasserie.
They believe more than one person could be behind the robbery.
Mr Glenn was uninjured but was badly shaken and was yesterday off work recovering.
Perry's manager Sally Dickinson said at one point Mr Glenn had tried to switch on a light to raise the alarm but had been threatened with violence.
‘I'm glad he wasn't being a hero, that would have been stupid,’ she said.
Security at the bar would now be stepped up.
Detectives are anxious to interview anyone in Beaumont Street between 11pm and midnight on Sunday or who saw Mr Glenn's car, later found abandoned in Falmer Road, Darlington.
JOHN Hawkridge, who has overcome remarkable difficulties and shown great strength and courage, will tell his story next week.
John was born crippled and with cerebral palsy but could run, walk and jump.
However experimental surgery on his legs when he was ten left him in a wheelchair.
But he refused to sit back and taught himself to walk again.
He built up his stamina by playing football on crutches and progressed to using walking sticks.
He also took up fishing, fellwalking and sailing and in 1988 he climbed the Himalayas.
John tells his moving story to members of the Darlington Lecture Association next week.
The illustrated talk at the Darlington College of Technology on Monday will include stories of his climb up Kala Patar in the Himalayas.
John has published two books of autobiography and was the star of a BBC documentary called Everest the Hard Way.
A MOTHER who lost her twin daughters has set up a counselling agency to help bereaved families.
Karen Grundy is hoping to start a branch of the Stillbirth and Neonatal Death Society Sands to help families who have lost babies.
Mrs Grundy, who lives in Whitby Way, Darlington, decided to launch the group after she lost her twins in the 24th week of her pregnancy.
A similar group already exists in Northallerton and Mrs Grundy hopes to encourage other volunteers to help with the Darlington service.
Sands will also raise funds for the maternity ward at Darlington Memorial Hospital.
Anyone who would like to help or needs counselling should call Mrs Grundy on .
SMOKERS:
Can smokers really complain if more tax is put on cigarettes in the budget?
The extra money is needed by the NHS to treat them.
N. Tate, 34 Harrogate Village, Darlington.
Pupil poll
BY last night two teachers were outstripping all others in the race to be Teacher of the Year.
This is a poll which does not necessarily take into account diligence, ability to pass on knowledge and devotion, as the one with the highest number of votes wins.
Come to think of it, something similar will apply in the General Election.
But in the teacher contest the electors can cast as many votes as they wish.
The leaders in the TFM Radio section of the poll (26 local radio stations are taking part with Woolworths) are remarkable not simply for the number of votes they have received but because they both teach at Northfield Comprehensive School, Billingham.
Leader Stephen Burge has 173,062 votes while colleague Joanne Tate has 128,054.
Pupils from Grangefield Comprehensive, Newton Aycliffe dropped in with a measly 70,000 votes for their Miss Foster yesterday.
Burge and Tate lead throughout Britain.
Northfield homework, one suspects, may just be taking a temporary back seat.
BANNED Darlington assistant manager Mick Tait will miss the Third Division derby clash with Hartlepool United at the Victoria Ground a week on Saturday.
Tait will be ruled out after being sent off for two bookable offences against Chester City in Saturday's 1–1 draw at Feethams.
Quakers' manager Ray Hankin has yet to be informed of the FA verdict but the punishment could only be a one-match ban.
An FA spokesman said: ‘A player dismissed for two bookable offences receives a one-match ban, unless his second offence is for violent conduct.’
Tait, however, will hold nothing back in tonight's home game against Stockport County.
He said: ‘Everybody gave their all on Saturday.
If the lads continue in the same vein, then we can climb out of trouble.
Everybody wanted the ball, to tackle and to play.
‘We know how bad we've been lately, but when things go wrong it's hard to explain how confidence drains.
‘It looks as if players are hiding, but they don't hide deliberately.
‘It will be a similar sort of game against Stockport, who are much like Chester.
But the lads have been tremendous, and there's a buzz around the club now all we want now is for them to show the same attitude tonight.’
Darlington face a tough challenge from promotion-chasing County.
Only Fulham and West Brom have won more away matches in the Third Division.
They will particularly have to be wary of the aerial threat posed by striker Kevin Francis, at 6ft 7ins the tallest player in the Football League.
Hankin was happy with the commitment shown against Chester but is looking for improvement in the survival fight.
‘The commitment was terrific but there is room for improvement.
There is still a lot of to work on if we are to get out of trouble,’ he said.
Fitness checks will be made on Andy Toman and Kevan Smith before a final team choice.
Darlington (from): Prudhoe, McJannet, Cook, O'Shaughnessy, Smith, Tait, Gaughan, Toman, Cusack, Mardenborough, Pickering, Cork, Coverdale, Sunley, Borthwick.
THE father of one of two men killed in a minibus crash told how he knew his son was involved the moment he heard a radio report.
Gary Hutchinson, 26, was driving home a minibus of Newcastle United fans following Saturday's away game at Port Vale when it was in collision with a car on the A66 near Bowes, Co Durham.
The car driver, Brian Edward Boyle, 37, of Howe Hill Close, Yafforth, Northallerton, was killed at the scene.
Gary died later from his injuries.
Gary's father, Frank Hutchinson, of Frederick Street, Meadowfield, told an inquest in Darlington yesterday that as soon as he heard the news on the radio he was certain his son had been hurt and immediately contacted police.
An hour later a police constable went to the house to confirm Mr Hutchinson's fears.
His son, who lived with the family, died in Darlington Memorial Hospital late on Sunday night.
Mr Hutchinson stayed at his son's bedside throughout Sunday but Gary never regained consciousness.
Dr Paul Newman, consultant pathologist, said the young stonemason died from head injuries.
Mr Boyle was driving a Vauxhall Cavalier west along the A66 when the crash happened just after 8am on Sunday.
He was working as a civil engineer in the area after moving from Dumbarton, Scotland.
Police closed the road for four hours.
Eight other passengers in the minibus needed hospital treatment for various injuries.
The inquest was adjourned for further inquiries to be made.
DIABETICS have criticised Darlington Health Authority for failing to provide specialist staff for sufferers.
Members of the British Diabetic Association say Darlington's Memorial is one of the few hospitals which does not have a diabetic liaison nurse.
They have called on the authority to set aside extra money for diabetic patients.
But management say that while they would like to employ specialist staff they simply have not got the money.
Yvonne Simpson, honorary secretary of the BDA's Darlington branch, said many hospitals had now gone beyond special staff and set up diabetic units staffed by consultants.
And she added: ‘Northallerton has two specialist nurses, and so have Bishop Auckland so why are they not available at Darlington's Memorial hospital?
‘We have been asking for this specialist help at the Memorial hospital for a long time now, but there has been no movement from the health authority over this matter.’
Joan Fox, head of patient services at the Memorial hospital, said the health authority had considered extra specialists but its hands were tied.
‘We agree with the BDA that specialist nurses would be an excellent idea but unfortunately the money just isn't available,’ she said.
Darlington health authority's budget has been frozen for the next four years prompting a review of spending priorities.
‘In future, when more resources become available we can look at the question of diabetic specialists again,’ promised Mrs Fox.
Until then Darlington Health Authority has given one member of nursing staff extra training in diabetic problems.
It is hoped she will help and advise patients who need special treatment.
Mrs Fox added: ‘The NHS only has so much money.
We have to try and spend that to the maximum benefit of patients.’
DARLINGTON councillors have asked developers planning an office block in a town centre car park to retain as many parking spaces as possible during the work.
Conder Projects has planning permission to build a three-storey office on part of Russell Street long stay car park.
The office will occupy an acre of land and will cut the number of parking spaces from 225 to 208, of which 150 will be for public use and 58 for office workers.
COUNCILLORS are to hold further discussions on improving access for disabled people to key public buildings in Darlington.
Yesterday's meeting of the borough land and property subcommittee discussed a report on a Service Call system in selected council-owned properties.
Under Service Call buildings are fitted with a receiver costing £74 which is attached to a window.
Wheelchair-bound and other people with disabilities then buy a handheld £20 transmitter.
When it is pointed at the receiver and pressed staff hear a bleep warning them someone needs help getting in.
Service Call is already in place in six sites in Darlington and Newton Aycliffe.
Council officers conducted a survey to see where it could be usefully installed and decided on the railway centre and museum in North Road, Civic Theatre and booking office, Tubwell Row museum and offices at Houndgate.
Young consumers:
Age made little difference when fifth formers at The Avenue Comprehensive competed against a team from Durham Sixth Form Centre in County Durham's Young Consumer of the Year competition.
The Newton Aycliffe teenagers were close runners-up to the winners from the sixth form centre.
GRAFFITI lines the walls near Regeneration House, the headquarters of British Rail's King's Cross Project: ‘The DPP was here.’
Inside the office building, 60 staff are endeavouring to ensure that, unlike the hapless Sir Allan Green, by the turn of the century no-one need slow to a crawl at King's Cross.
Rail travel from the North-East to the South and the Continent will be revolutionised over the next decade by the transformation of King's Cross and St Pancras stations into one of the country's biggest-ever civil engineering projects, says BR.
While the Channel Tunnel grabs the headlines, the King's Cross Project is seen as being an equally important development for many passengers travelling from Newcastle, Durham, Darlington, York and all stations south down the East Coast main line.
No more will they curse the need to haul luggage and children onto the London Underground and off at another station to catch their next train.
No more will they find the King's Cross rush hour the worst part of the whole journey.
Or so British Rail confidently predicts.
BR is equally confident that the King's Cross Railways Bill, promoted jointly with London Underground, will gain Royal Assent this year, allowing the six-year construction works to begin in 1993 and King's Cross to become ‘the railport of Europe’ by 1998.
The Government's expected manifesto commitment to privatise is not an issue, said BR communications manager Bob Smalley.
‘There is cross-party support for this project because of its unifying nature.
If you believe in public transport, as everyone says they do, this development is inescapable and very desirable.
‘It doesn't matter who wins the election, it is going to happen.
It doesn't matter who owns BR because everyone can see the benefits.
It is no short-term measure it is the most important development for more than 50 years and it will be around for the next century.’
A 135 acre site between King's Cross and St Pancras will become a major interchange where passengers from the North-East and North Yorkshire will be able to change for trains to destinations as diverse as Brighton and Brussels or Portsmouth and Paris.
Direct trains from the North-East will also pass through the station on new tracks below ground, offering five-hour journey times to the French and Belgian capitals from Darlington, said David Oakley, communications development manager for the project.
Eight extra platforms will be built in a new low-level station beneath the existing station for international through trains serving the North-East, Thameslink and other Network SouthEast services, and extra platforms will be provided at St Pancras for Inter City services.
It is now clear that direct through trains from the North-East to the continent will not run until two years after the Channel Tunnel opens in 1993.
During that time, passengers will have to cross to a new international terminal at Waterloo.
Even in 1995, the two direct trains in each direction a day between the North-East and the continent will follow the tortuous North London line, circuiting the capital via Kensington and Clapham Junction.
According to David Oakley, this is where the major benefits of the King's Cross development will be felt by North-East travellers.
By 1998 a simple change of platforms in airport style comfort will offer passengers a full range of destinations and, together with the new rail link to the coast, lop an hour off journey times to the continent.
East Coast main line Inter City 225s with extra coaches will run at their full 140mph capacity and line and signalling improvements, plus the new layout at King's Cross, will further speed journey times.
In addition to the 60 people now working at Regeneration House, the project is expected to create 1,800 construction jobs and when complete the station complex will provide 1,720 extra jobs.
Land behind the two stations will also be redeveloped, acres of sidings and derelict buildings transformed and new life breathed into the Regents Canal, says BR.
The Great Northern Hotel may make way for the new concourse but its loss will compensated for by the refurbishment of the grade one-listed St Pancras Hotel.
British Rail chiefs argue that the impact will be a dramatic improvement to the seedy King's Cross area, with its reputation for prostitution and kerb crawling.
Many passengers will be grateful for not having to stop in the vicinity longer than necessary and residents will be grateful for others not wanting to.
HOUSING officers have stepped in to help a mum who says her three children are virtual prisoners in their new home.
Glynne Linley has been forced to keep her children inside their house, in Headingley Crescent, Darlington, because the front door won't open.
When the youngsters want to go outside and play they have to leave via the backdoor which opens on to a busy road.
Mrs Linley, 36, said: ‘The only time they can go out is if I am around to escort them to our front garden.’
Although Mrs Linley has a front door key it will not operate the lock forcing the family to use the back entrance.
Mrs Linley, who has waited more than a year to swap her previous house in Trafford Close for a larger property, feared she might have to replace the lock herself.
And she said: ‘I have spent all my money on getting the house into some kind of order.
If I had to replace the lock myself it just wouldn't get done.’
Darlington council's head of housing, Pauline Mitchell, has promised to review the case.
She says that, whatever happens, Mrs Linley won't end up out of pocket.
Mrs Mitchell added: ‘When you move into a new house you could reasonably expect all the locks to work.
‘I don't think it is fair to expect this lady to pay for a new lock.
We will be getting in touch with the previous occupant to sort something out as a matter of urgency.’
Mrs Mitchell said the previous occupant would receive a bill for the work if council staff had to carry out repairs.
CHILDREN and elderly people could be at risk if a new traffic scheme goes ahead, it was claimed yesterday.
Residents from Lakeside, Darlington, say plans to narrow their road will make it more dangerous to cross and to park.
And they plan to hold a residents' meeting today to protest at the Durham County Council scheme.
Angela Kielly, a Lakeside resident, said: ‘We feel the scheme will increase the volume of traffic and create a danger, especially for children and pensioners.’
Durham County Council plans to close the junction at Hammond Drive and Lorraine Crescent, making Lakeside and Coleridge Gardens the main entrance into the Skerne Park estate.
Yellow lines and speed humps would be put on the narrow road and a mini roundabout set up at the junction of Lakeside and Parkside.
Ms Kielly, 37, said this would make it extremely difficult for people to get in and out.
‘If we have yellow lines, we will have nowhere to park.
It is bad enough as it is at the moment.
We cannot park at the weekend and people are already parking on the grass verge.’
She has written to Darlington MP Michael Fallon about the matter.
Bill Ward, assistant director of the department of environment at county hall, said: ‘We know very well about local objections and will look at the scheme again to see if there is any way we can still have a scheme whilst taking account of local feeling.’
STUDENTS who gained National Awards will be honoured when Darlington College of Technology holds its first ever Graduation Ceremony.
Full academic robes will be worn by the students at the Higher Awards Ceremony which will be held in the college hall in Cleveland Avenue tomorrow.
The deputy director of Teesside Polytechnic, Dr Oliver Coulthard, will make the presentations.
The ceremony will also be attended by Darlington Mayor, Coun Rita Fishwick.
Darlington College principal Peter Shuker said: ‘The awards ceremony reflects the college's continued commitment of educating significant numbers of students to high level awards.’
A WOMAN who stole thousands of pounds from a pub's Christmas savings club has moved out of town to start a new life, a court heard yesterday.
Patricia Lee has left Barnard Castle after losing her friends and job, the town's magistrates were told.
Mrs Lee, 43, formerly the secretary of the club at the Golden Lion Hotel, Barnard Castle, began taking the cash entrusted to her by paying for a telephone bill.
Brian Farrell, defending, said the action ‘set the rot in’ and as time went on she took larger sums of money, spending it on alcohol, cigarettes, clothing and bills leaving her with nothing tangible to show.
Lee, who took £11,486 from friends and customers and paid only £6,774 into an account over a 48week period, surrendered herself to police on the day she was due to pay the money out.
Yesterday she was given a two year probation and ordered to pay £1,000 compensation, after admitting three specimen charges amounting to £1,252 and asking for 27 similar offences to be taken into account.
Mr Farrell said Lee, of Mount Eff House, Westwick, near Barnard Castle, had taken full responsibility for the scheme in 1986, running it without a problem for four years.
She had asked if someone else could take over the responsibility, but no-one was interested, he added.
Mr Farrell said Lee, who expressed her sincere remorse, had intended repaying the money every penny had been recorded and the money was from personal friends and people who knew her, he added.
He said she had left Barnard Castle and moved to Darlington in search of a fresh start.
Chairman John McBaine, passing sentence, labelled it a ‘tragic case’, adding it was difficult to realise what suffering Lee had been through in the last few months.
‘You have lost your job your self esteem and are not feeling very well,’ he said.
Mr McBaine said, however, that she had been in a position of trust.
£20,000 appeal for fourth bus DARLINGTON'S special bus service for the disabled yesterday launched an appeal to buy a new bus.
Members and supporters of the Darlington Dial-A-Ride scheme gathered at the Town Hall yesterday to watch a video about the service and hear plans for the appeal.
If successful the group will have a fleet of four vehicles specially designed to take disabled people around town, people who might otherwise be confined to their homes.
Service spokeswoman Rosemary Sandford said: ‘It's a very important appeal and it reflects how popular the service has been up to now.
We need £20,000 and we have already started making plans as to how that money will be raised.’
BURTON has further signalled its withdrawal from the property market by selling a shop investment in Newcastle.
Its Property Trust arm received nearly £1m for  from Belfast-based developer and investor Ewart.
Burton Property Trust is the developer behind the Cornmill shopping centre in Darlington.
According to Christopher Rice of Sanderson Townend & Gilbert, which acted for BPT, the deal was clinched in the face of interest from other parties.
‘It was a fair figure for the investment.
There are quite a few people in the market for similar retail interests,’ he said.
Richard Fisk of Fuller Peiser, which acted for Ewart, said his client was attracted by an initial yield of around 7pc, rather than its Newcastle location.
AN abattoir in the heart of some of North Yorkshire's finest scenery is to stay open and treble in size despite protests.
Hambleton planners yesterday voted 10–8 in favour of a £300,000 expansion at The Abattoir, Kilburn, near Thirsk, which was vital to its future.
EC laws would have closed the business down next January unless the work had been allowed.
More room was needed to provide preparation, storage and refrigeration areas.
Locals wanted the plan scrapped because the building would be too large for the village, near the famous white horse of the North York Moors.
Coun Dennis Howey told the planning committee that if it closed then local butchers and farmers would have to travel to Darlington and York.
Coun David Smith said having made the original planning blunder in permitting the abattoir they should not compound this by allowing the work.
Coun John Coulson said the abattoir could move to an industrial estate rather than close.
But Coun Susan Latter said they should support the application as it was part of the local industry.
AIRLINE Captain Jak Frost flies at full throttle carrying vital organs and heart transplant teams all over Britain and Europe.
But when he gets to his destination he swaps his turbocharged Navajo for a motorised skateboard.
Jak, 45, of Middleton-St-George, Darlington, bought his runabout machine for a couple of hundred pounds.
He said: ‘When I park my aeroplane it can be a couple of miles from the terminal building so I hop onto the skateboard and whizz off at 20mph.
‘I get a lot of laughs from everyone who sees me, especially when I'm going across long grass and all they can see is an airline captain coming towards them at great speed with exhaust smoke coming from my rear end.
‘The machine originally comes from the States and is powered by a 20cc chainsaw engine which does 300 miles to a gallon of fuel.
‘My aeroplane, which also comes from the States, only does eight miles to the gallon.’
Jak, a former Air Force Squadron Leader and now captain of Aircam based at Teesside Airport, added: ‘It's better fun that flying a Buccaneer.’
SCHOOLS Minister Michael Fallon has reacted angrily after he was accused of abusing Parliamentary privilege by sending party information to Darlington's Conservative Association.
The MP for Darlington said that the matter had been investigated and dealt with satisfactorily, but had been confused by the media.
Labour MP Don Dixon had said in the Commons on Tuesday that he believed Mr Fallon could have abused Parliament's pre-paid mailing facilities.
The allegation followed claims that fellow Tory MP Francis Maude has been presented with a bill for the postage on 4,552 pre-paid envelopes.
Mr Maude's constituency party has handed over £1,406 for stationery, envelopes and first class stamps.
But Mr Fallon yesterday said he had explained the incident to the full satisfaction of Whitehall watchdogs in the Serjeant at Arms department.
Accusing the media of ‘confusing the issue’ he said: ‘The matter has been completely cleared up.
No prepaid envelopes were used and there was no abuse of privilege.’
MPs are allowed to use headed paper for political purposes as well as constituency matters but they must pay for any stationery used.
Mr Fallon said he submitted a quarterly account to the Serjeant at Arms as per normal Commons practice and paid the bill for using Commons stationery.
‘Labour members saw the letter I had sent and automatically assumed I had been misusing the Commons franking machine.
They were wrong.’
Mr Dixon, who is also Labour's Deputy Chief Whip, said he was surprised at the speed with which Mr Fallon's complaint had been resolved.
He said: ‘I wrote to the Serjeant at Arms on March 2 asking for a full investigation.
If they have finished the investigation no one has written back and told me.’
The Labour MP for Jarrow said investigations into alleged abuse of the postal system were carried out as a matter of routine.
These matters are dealt with through the usual channels,’ he added.
Normally I would never have raised the matter in public but the Tories persistently use Points of Order to accuse Opposition members of misdemeanours.’
A spokeswoman for the Serjeant at Arms department said: If you what to know what has happened I suggest you try and ask the people concerned.’
— Yesterday The Northern Echo reported that Mr Fallon had issued a statement through his secretary claiming the investigation had been dropped.
Mr Fallon said last night that the full statement issued on the subject was: ‘The investigation has been completed and the Serjeant at Arms was satisfied that the matter had been dealt with properly.’
The Northern Echo is happy to make it clear that the issue had been investigated and dealt with and had not been ‘dropped.’
FIVE members of a charity group have accused a health authority of breaking its promises.
More than £270,000 has been raised throughout South Durham to build and equip a Leukaemia Unit at Darlington Memorial Hospital.
But members of the fund-raising committee now believe it will not be run as they had hoped.
Dave Till, spokesman for the Leukaemia Unit Fund committee, said: ‘We are getting fed up with delays and we want to see a definite commitment from the health authority.’
With four other committee members he has written to Darlington MP Michael Fallon and Labour candidate Alan Milburn asking for their intervention.
But yesterday Geoff Nichol, health authority chief executive, said the ‘scare stories’ were having a bad affect on leukaemia patients.
‘We would deny any suggestion we have backed down on an agreement.
We are still as committed to the leukaemia unit as we always have been.’
The suggestion that the health authority has not kept its side of the bargain was unfair.
He said: ‘They came to us with the scheme in the first place.
We did not ask them to raise £250,000 to fund our project.’
But the LUF committee splinter group says it has information which suggests the health authority has never supported the unit.
Mr Till and the other signatories Liz Metcalfe, Nancy Ilett, Joan Corrigan and Joan Scotter, all accept the unit will be built.
But they say: ‘It seems the in-patient service, which was at the heart of the Leukaemia Unit Fund appeal, will not be provided in the new unit for quite some time.’
Next week the first £50,000 cheque is due to be handed over to the health authority by the fund raising committee chairman, Coun Heather Scott.
She has said she will not give a penny until she is entirely satisfied the unit will go ahead as planned.
COLLEGES in County Durham are joining a national campaign to get grown-ups back to learning ways.
Next week is national Adult Learning Week and Darlington College of Technology among others is opening its doors to people who want to find out more about education.
The college is taking on extra staff to make sure that anyone who visits or telephones the college can have a confidential chat with adult education experts every day next week.
Peter Tickner, director of planning and marketing at the college, said: ‘It is aimed at the unemployed, anyone who feels their education was lacking, or anyone who wants want more qualifications, such as mothers who want to get back to work after having children.’
And the college has a special unit for people who want basic education anyone who is not numerate or wants help with reading or writing in a one-to-one lesson.
‘The college is on alert it's open house next week and our client support unit will be working to answers everyone's queries,’ said Mr Tickner.
The college also offers a creche for two to five-year-olds so that parents can leave children in safe hands.
Bishop Auckland College, The Greenfield Centre in Newton Aycliffe, and Fishburn Skills Project () are among other colleges also running events for Adult Learners Week.
POLICE have urged owners of mountain cycles to have their property post-coded following a spate of thefts over the last week.
More than £3,500 worth of bikes have been taken from garages in Darlington and surrounding villages.
The most valuable, worth £750, was stolen from a garage in Linden Avenue.
Others were taken from yards in Kitchener Street and Wales Street and garages in Woodland Road, Cleveland Terrace, Meadowfield Road and Ravensdale Road.
Bike thieves also struck in Church View, Sadberge, where a mountain cycle was stolen from a garage.
‘If people come down to the police station with their bikes we will postcode them.
It might also be helpful if people noted down the frame numbers,’ said PC Dave Fishwick, of Darlington Police.
‘If they keep their bikes in garages, they should consider removing a wheel and putting it in the house.
Even the handlebars could be removed.’
A VANDAL-PROOF stained glass window is to be installed in a village church 30 years after the original was vandalised.
Dennis Heslop has arranged for the large ornate circular window to be set up at St. Paul's church in West Witton near Bishop Auckland.
And its central design will be a rose in memory of his mother Rosetta.
The original stained glass window was destroyed by vandals in the 1960s and replaced by a plain glass one.
But the new £1,500 window, designed by local artist Patricia Hudson Moses, will be specially coated to stop vandals smashing it.
Mr Heslop, of Stanhope Road, Darlington, said the original was put up in honour of Roland Bradford, Britain's youngest-ever brigadier general.
Roland, from West Witton, won the Victoria Cross and was one of the famous Fighting Bradford brothers.
He was killed in a tank battle in France in 1917.
The new window will continue to bear tribute to him as it will contain the symbol of Roland's regiment, the Durham Light Infantry.
Rev. Nicholas Beddow, from St. Paul's, said the new window should be in place by Easter.
THE ANNIVERSARY of a Darlington landmark might still be celebrated despite fears it would go unnoticed.
The Northern Echo reported last week that Darlington Council had not made a contribution to celebrate the 150th anniversary of the opening of the North Road railway station.
Barrie Lamb, chairman of Darlington Railway Preservation Society, said it meant Darlington had lost out on a major attraction to the North-East.
But the council has had a change of heart and is now looking at ways of funding the event.
Norman Maltby, head of the council's leisure services, said: ‘We plan to discuss the possibility with the railway society of applying to Durham County Council for a tourism enterprise scheme.
‘The event could then be celebrated at the Railway Carnival in September or at the steam weekends.’
Darlington Council said it could not afford to finance the celebrations itself because of its financial situation.
Mr Lamb said: ‘It wouldn't take a lot of money to celebrate the event.
I would be delighted if we could do something.’
But he was concerned that it could be too late to arrange something.
‘I have been badgering the council about this since 1990.
There is not going to be a lot of time to organise something.’
The society hopes to re-enact the opening of the station with Victorian period costumes.
Mr Lamb said the North Road building, which is also a museum, is the oldest station in the country still in use.
SCHOOL governors have given a cautious welcome to news that the go-ahead has been given to expand Darlington's overcrowded Catholic schools.
The Diocesan Schools Commission has accepted assurances from Darlington MP and Schools Minister Michael Fallon that plans to extend St Augustine's and St Bede's primary schools will satisfy new criteria for Government funding next year.
And it expects him to keep a promise made to local priests that he intends to ‘provide a Catholic desk for every Catholic pupil in Darlington where there is proven need’.
On the strength of those assurances, the commission says it is now prepared to pay for initial design work at both schools, starting next month.
However the construction of extra classrooms and toilets depends on the success of a new bid for funding which will decided by the next Government at the end of this year.
The planning costs will be taken from the £243,000 allocation made by Mr Fallon in December for work in Catholic and Church of England schools throughout County Durham.
His refusal to grant extra funding on the grounds of ‘basic need’ at the two schools in his own constituency created a political storm which threatened to deprive him of the Roman Catholic vote in the general election.
Last month he was accused of vote catching when Education Secretary Kenneth Clarke cleared the way for expansion in Darlington by ‘changing the rules’ to allow popular schools to expand.
Then Labour's education spokeswoman, Hilary Armstrong said Mr Fallon's assurances were worthless because he cannot make commitments for the next Government.
DARLINGTON police have issued a warning after anti-depressant tablets were lost in a town centre store.
The 28 Fluanxol pills are pink, round and sugar-coated and were in foiled paper in a cardboard box.
They were lost in Marks and Spencer in Northgate on Wednesday.
PC Dave Fishwick, of Darlington Police, said: ‘They can cause drowsiness if taken in any great quantity.
We would also not want them to fall into the hands of children.’
Anyone who sees the tablets should contact Darlington Police on Darlington .
DESPITE mounting general election fever political awareness seems to remain at a low ebb in Darlington.
In a survey by journalism students in Darlington only half of the people questioned could name the town's MP.
The public opinion survey was carried out in the centre of Darlington just six weeks before the expected date of the General Election.
Men were slightly better informed in the sample group of 100.
Of the 50 men questioned 27 knew that Michael Fallon is the Conservative MP and that he is standing again at the election.
By comparison only 23 out of the 50 women interviewed were able to name Mr Fallon.
Women also did considerably worse when it came to identifying his main election rival, Labour's Alan Milburn.
Only five women out of 50 knew about Mr Milburn while 14 of the male interviewees had heard of the Labour candidate.
The students from Darlington College of Technology are doing a yearlong course before starting full time work with newspapers.
None of the sample group were asked to name the candidates standing for the Liberal Democrats, Green Party and British National Party.
They are respectively: Peter Bergg, Dr Robert Upshall and Dr Donald Clarke.
SOLICITORS in Darlington start industrial action today in protest at proposed changes to the legal aid system.
Members of the Darlington duty solicitors scheme have unanimously decided to suspend all court and 24hour duty until April 3.
They say their action is a protest at the Government's proposals for fixed fees in legal aid cases and the 3pc increase in legal aid fees.
A statement issued by the group said: ‘Members of the scheme are aware that this action may cause inconvenience and possibly hardship but the decision was taken after careful consideration.
‘It was felt that the Government's proposals could only lead to inadequate funding which would inevitably force many practitioners to leave duty solicitor schemes and indeed the criminal practice permanently.’
Solicitors also fear the changes could reduce public access to legal aid and increase the likelihood of a miscarriage of justice.
Under the changes solicitors will receive a flat rate for each legal aid case rather than for the amount of time spent on individual cases.
Darlington solicitor Graham Hunsley said: ‘I was surprised how strong the feeling was.
We all unanimously felt we should take action.
‘We are not prepared to go ahead with the Lord Chancellor's proposals about fixed fees.
This would remove 90pc of all criminal legal aid from being assessed.
This philosophy is not justice, it is economics.’
Solicitors on Teesside are taking similar action today and it is believed it could spread to North Yorkshire and Bishop Auckland.
Last year the Automobile Association took over operation of the scheme, which puts police in touch with local duty solicitors.
But the scheme ran into difficulties in the beginning and was criticised for sending solicitors to police stations miles away from their area.
Mr Hunsley said it was now up to the AA to find other duty solicitors.
‘I was sent out on some ridiculous calls at Christmas,’ said Mr Hunsley.
‘But the question now is who will replace us.’
SOPHISTICATED life-saving medical equipment will be installed in hospitals throughout the North-East as part of a £20m health service boost.
Darlington's Memorial Hospital will be among those to receive a body scanner which can identify brain tumours and liver complaints much earlier than conventional X-ray equipment.
Similar scanners have also been earmarked for South Tyneside and North Tees hospitals.
Hospital administrators at South Cleveland and Newcastle have also been told they will receive linear accelerators which are used in the treatment of cancer.
The new programme was announced yesterday by health secretary William Waldegrave.
Government ministers hope the equipment, which will be installed during the 1992/93 financial year, will play a vital role in the battle against cancer.
At Darlington's Memorial Hospital, Dr Abdul Jaleel, a BMA representative, said: ‘We are absolutely delighted with the news which will improve the quality of service we can provide to our patients.’
An American company Health Images UK has already installed a body scanner, which uses a magnetic field to detect problems, at its medical centre on Darlington's Yarm Road Industrial Estate.
The £800,000 machine will be available to NHS as well as private patients but Dr Jaleel said he believed the scanners would complement each other.
Darlington MP Michael Fallon said: ‘The health authority and I have been lobbying health ministers for some months and I am delighted Darlington is to get this scanner.
‘It will cut out very painful journeys to Tyneside and Teesside for patients.
It's very good news.’
Energy school:
Renewable energy will be the subject of a weekend school at the adult education department in Durham on March 22 and 23.
For details tel..
Green critics:
Durham Green Party has criticised the Government's plan to stabilise carbon dioxide emissions at 1990 levels by the year 2000, and has called instead for a 50pc reduction.
Catholic schools
IN December Michael Fallon allocated £243,000 to the aided schools sector in Durham for minor works.
He said he expected a substantial part of that money to be used as a ‘starter’ sum for Darlington schools St Augustines and St Bedes.
The Diocese had hoped that separate money would be forthcoming for these basic needs projects.
However the DES stated that specific funding could not be made while there were empty places in neighbouring county schools within two miles.
In the ensuing confusion the Catholic community locally and nationally saw this as an abnegation of the 1944 Education Act.
However, in his press statement of February 11 Minister Kenneth Clarke bluntly changed this rule, promising consultation with the churches.
‘In future there will be no such rule.’
Afterwards Mr Fallon assured me in a letter that he was confident that both Darlington projects would satisfy the new criteria.
In a recent meeting with the Darlington Priests he stated: ‘It is my intention to provide a Catholic desk for every Catholic pupil in Darlington where there is a proven need.’
On the strength of these assurances, the Diocesan Schools Commission is now prepared to allocate a substantial portion of the minor works allocation to start the Darlington projects.
St Augustines and St Bedes were in any case, top of the original submission list of 25 projects.
Father John Caden, Member Diocesan Schools Commission.
High-speed risk I refer to the report about the court case in York concerning the fatal road accident involving an ambulance and a cyclist (Echo February 21).
One important point has not been reported or made clear.
Was the condition of the patient already in the ambulance so critical, so life threatening as to justify the ambulance driver going through the red traffic light at such a speed, that the victim was carried 30 yards on the bonnet?
Almost certainly not.
In 99pc of cases once a patient has been attended by an ambulance crew the fast blue light, siren-screaming journey is not necessary.
In fact, a comfortably, steady and quiet ride is more stabilising and beneficial.
In truth, many emergency service drivers from all three services enjoy the adrenalin-pumping thrill of the high speed drive through crowded streets.
As a retired hospital charge nurse I respect the men and women of the emergency services.
They do a dirty and often dangerous job, but this wild driving should be curtailed before others are killed.
J.D. Manton, 88 Emerson Drive, Newton Aycliffe.
PUBLICANS said they had made progress in a campaign against big rent rises after a stormy meeting yesterday.
But fears remain for the future of dozens of businesses because of the dispute over leasing arrangements with Inntrepreneur, the estates arm of Grand Metropolitan.
More than 20 landlords from John Smith pubs in the Darlington area met at the Bay Horse pub, Hurworth, to protest at changes which they say threaten their livelihoods.
Inntrepreneur arranged the meeting as a chance for landlords to hear the benefits of new 20year leases.
But two licensees Albert Liddle, from the Unicorn, Richmond, and Les Helm, former landlord at the Forester's Arms, Coatham Mundeville were refused entry.
It was only after protests from landlords that they were allowed to have their say.
Bailiffs stripped the Forester's Arms last year when Mr Helm could not keep up rent payments.
Mr Liddle was faced with an eviction order last month because he could not keep up payments on a new lease.
Cath Thompson, from the Traveller's Rest, Cockerton, said the meeting had taken a step forward as Inntrepreneur had agreed to negotiate rents.
Mrs Thompson said her rent would go up from £20,000 to £48,000 under the new leases.
Ian Frost, regional director of Inntrepreneur, said the leases offered big advantages over the short-term agreements.
They gave greater security and flexibility.
‘More than 3,700 pubs are already operating under the new leases, which provide maximum opportunity to develop the full commercial potential of the pub.
‘We firmly believe the best way to achieve this is through the skills of individual lessees,’ he said.
DARLINGTON Health Authority yesterday pledged to have a special unit for leukaemia patients open and fully staffed by August.
The promise was made after five members of the charity committee which raised money for the unit said they felt betrayed by hospital managers.
They sent a letter to Darlington MP Michael Fallon and Labour candidate Alan Milburn asking them to intervene.
But the Leukaemia Unit Fund committee chairwoman, Coun Heather Scott, said yesterday the letter was unnecessary.
‘I am very disappointed that they wrote when the committee had made an agreement to take a non-confrontational approach with the health authority,’ said Coun Scott.
Her comments were backed by David Anderson, health authority support services manager.
He said: ‘A full unit will be available for use by haematology patients around late July or early August this year.’
The fund raising committee splinter group warned that the health authority would not provide enough money to staff the unit once it was built.
They said the health authority had an obligation to fulfil its side of the bargain.
Mr Anderson believes the problem has arisen from a communications break down.
‘Their letter relates to an earlier position when we were looking at a phased opening because we had not identified full resources,’ he said.
He said the health authority has since finalised plans for finding the cash to make the unit function as originally intended.
THE opening shots have been fired in a £4.5m legal battle over repairs to a crumbling leisure centre.
Darlington Borough Council yesterday issued a writ for damages arising out of the £12m construction of the Dolphin Centre.
The leisure centre has been at the centre of a compensation wrangle since serious building defects were discovered last year.
Officers say they hope the council will not be forced into a lengthy court battle which could cost tens of thousands of pounds.
But they have made it perfectly clear that the council is prepared to fight for compensation if the companies it holds responsible do not pay up.
The authority is seeking damages from building contractor Wiltshier Northern and a number of other defendants including Stockton engineering consultants Simpson, Coulson and Partners and a roofing firm, Broderick Structures.
Borough Solicitor Peter Kearsley said a writ had been issued against a number of parties ‘for damages arising out of, or in connection with , the design, construction and supervision of the Dolphin Centre’.
The council also believes it was not given sound advice on the design and construction of the Dolphin Centre between 1978 and 1984.
Serious structural problems have blighted the building almost since it was opened by Sir Roger Bannister in 1983.
A council investigation uncovered a series of defects including weaknesses in the mortar and brickwork on external walls; distortion of aluminium panels on the pitched roof; and weakness in the internal walls.
Repairs are expected to cost at least £4.5m and work is due to get under way in the next few weeks.
Mr Kearsley said the writ would be served on defendants as soon as the council had finalised its statement of claim cataloguing all the alleged problems in detail.
He repeated the authority's hopes for an early settlement, adding: ‘Whether or not this actually goes to court depends on the reaction from the defendants.’
Last night none of the defendants were prepared to speak about the matter.
A spokeswoman for Simpson, Coulson and Partners, said: ‘We have absolutely no comment to make at this time.’
And a statement issued by Wiltshier Northern's managing director said simply: ‘No comment.’
Help
Children's Society:
Volunteers are needed for a Children's Society house to house collection in Catterick Village, near Richmond, in April.
Contact Sheila Crick on Richmond .
Today
EVENWOOD:
Bingo and disco night, WMC, Manor Street, 7.30pm.
FROSTERLEY:
Cottage Crafts, Old Church Hall, 1.30–4.30pm.
Details, tel .
STANHOPE:
Open Day, Crosshills Nursing Home, 2a Paragon Street, from 10am.
ONE in five poll tax payers in Darlington have received court summonses for non-payment, it was revealed.
By the time the tax is abolished next year it will have cost Darlington council almost £2m to administer.
This year poll tax bills in Darlington will rise to £300, of which £19 is a surcharge to make up for people who have not paid their bills.
Already a number of regular and prompt charge payers have warned they will withhold the £19.
But Richard Collin, council officer in charge of collecting the tax, has warned anyone who does not pay in full will be taken to court.
Mr Collin said this year's poll tax bills will not be prepared until after the Budget tomorrow.
A SEMINAR on dogs in the community is to be held at Darlington Arts Centre.
The event, which costs £15 per delegate, aims to tackle the social and health issues concerning dogs, including the role of the dog warden and the risks of toxicara.
The day, which runs on March 27 from 10am until 3pm, has been organised by the Tidy Britain Group in partnership with the Department of the Environment.
Leukaemia rethink plea
WE ARE members of Darlington's Leukaemia Unit Fund committee who can no longer stand by and watch our dream dissolve.
Since Darlington Health Authority's operational policy document was first drafted and given to committee members last year the goalposts have been moved, and Our wonderful new unit, which thousands of local people have worked so hard to raise money for, seems doomed to become a white elephant, admitting day patients only.
It seems that the in-patient service, which was at the heart of the Leukaemia Unit Fund Appeal, will not be proved in the new unit for quite some time.
We are very disappointed to learn that leukaemia and other haematology patients needing inpatient treatment will continue to be admitted to a general ward, despite the empty beds which will be available in the new unit next door.
We find ourselves in an impossible position.
We do not want to veto the building of the new unit after so much money has been raised.
On the other hand we cannot forget the trust placed in us by the general public, nor can we watch the gradual erosion of the original plans without a public protest, and a public request to the health authority to please think again.
Three years ago Darlington Health Authority entered into a commitment with the Leukaemia Unit Fund that if we raised the £250,000 required for building and equipping a new unit they would provide the necessary staff and resources.
We have raised more than the amount stipulated, and we plead with them to keep their side of the bargain.
Dave Till, Nancy Ilett, Liz Metcalfe, Joan Corrigan, Joan Scotter.
Treading green path
AFTER seeing your article (Echo February 20) about the proposed Darlington cross-town route, I was surprised to see that councillors have agreed to a bridleway between Haughton Road and McMullen Road.
How can this be agreed with the present proposal for the new crosstown route?
Is this bridleway to run alongside this new road?
Could we possibly be going to have a bridleway instead of a new cross-town route?
Some hope.
But would it not be much more environmentally friendly to have a bridleway instead of yet another new road which in my opinion is not wanted or needed by the people of Darlington.
Mrs S. Orton, 7 Southwell Green, Darlington.
Goodwill call
THE Labour leader of Darlington Borough Council is reported (Echo March 4) as defending a decision to snub a delegation from the South African government visiting the North-East.
Coun Williams refuses to have any contact with the South Africans although for months President de Klerk has been sitting down with Nelson Mandela and immense steps are in train towards early power sharing.
‘Let's wait and see what happens,’ says Coun Williams, displaying a breathtaking blindness.
The democratic vision of President de Klerk needs the support by all people of goodwill in the forthcoming referendum.
At the battle of El Alamein, the South Africans played a vital role, but had he been there, I don't suppose Coun Williams would have been on speaking terms.
Basil Noble,.
Bad form
ONCE again Liberal Democrat Cun ben Ord has shown by his public utterances that he is wholly unsuitable for public office (Echo February 25).
He does not understand the meaning of discretion.
His obnoxious remark about the female sculpture in Spennymoor town centre is an affront to the dignity of the entire female population of Spennymoor which it represents.
I hope the chairman of Sedgefield District Council will at the earliest opportunity demand an apology from Coun Ord and if he fails to respond, to ban him from the council chamber.
Thomas Conlon,.
Bus praise
I WOULD like to sing the praises of the United Bus Company.
I travel very early in the morning from Crook to Ferryhill, changing at Bishop Auckland.
The connection time was very tight and there were some weeks when I rarely caught the 7 o'clock bus to Ferryhill and had to wait for the 7.15am bus which takes a longer route and delayed my arrival even more.
I found this increasingly frustrating and eventually felt compelled to write to Mr Guest, the managing director.
Mr Guest has been extremely helpful, first sending an inspector out to review the situation and then arranging for the 6.45am bus from Crook to Bishop Auckland to be rescheduled to arrive in Crook five minutes earlier.
The Ferryhill driver has also been instructed to wait for the arrival of the Crook bus before pulling out.
There are not many companies around who would be prepared to accommodate the needs of the individual in this way and Mr Guest deserves to be highly commended for doing so.
Elaine Brown, 18 Coniston Crescent, Crook.
ANGRY Darlington dentists will voice their fears over Government plans to reduce the amount it pays them for NHS work in a meeting with the town's MP tomorrow.
Members of Darlington Dental Society arranged the session with Conservative Michael Fallon to discuss the funding plans which have caused outcry among dentists.
They fear patients will suffer if new arrangements under consideration are introduced in any shape or form.
Ministers want to reduce the subsidies paid to dentists for NHS patients because they are treating more people than expected, causing a £15m a month overspend.
But dentists say if funding is cut they will no longer be able to afford to do NHS work.
They warn some practices will go private and their patients will face a massive increase in costs, while other practices may refuse to take on new NHS patients.
Under the present system NHS patients have 25pc of their costs met by the Government.
New funding arrangements due for introduction on April 1 would have reduced the subsidy and given dentists an effective pay cut of up to 13.8pc.
The Government was last month forced to shelve its plans after dentists threatened a mass exodus from the NHS.
In a letter to Mr Fallon, Darlington Dental Society chairman Malcolm Smith asks Mr Fallon to help resolve an ‘impossible and unfair situation.’
He writes: ‘Our efficiency and hard work is to be penalised rather than rewarded.
‘Although you have assured us the massive cut in income will not now occur, the fear among our members is any compromise will result in an inevitable fall in the standard of care we can offer to patients in the future.
This is clearly a consequence which is unacceptable to us.’
A joint inquiry into funding arrangements is now being carried out by the Department of Health and British Dental Association, and the findings will be announced in May.
A VINTAGE fire engine was pressed into service at the weekend so the St George Cross can again fly proudly over a village church.
For the last 18 months a snapped rope on the church flagpole in Middleton Tyas near Darlington meant no colours could be hoisted to celebrate special days.
Villagers were at a loss as to how to repair the frayed rope, or lanyard, as the flagpole is on the edge of the medieval church's tower and is too dangerous to climb up to.
Fireman Brett Clayton, who lives in the village and collects old fire engines, was asked for advice and he in turn contacted Dr Barry Hutchinson, a fellow enthusiast.
Dr Hutchinson, of Ponteland in Northumberland, offered to lend the village a 1967 AEC Merryweather turntable ladder to raise Mr Clayton up the tower at St Michael and All Angels so he could rethread the lanyard.
Church committee treasurer John King said yesterday the delicate operation had attracted a crowd of spectators, including one or two who had seen the fire engine and thought there was something wrong.
He said: ‘The turntable ladder only just fitted into the churchyard by a few inches.
‘We had the flag flying afterwards which wasn't very appropriate since it's Lent but we wanted to check everything was in order.
‘We are indebted to Dr Hutchinson and to Brett, otherwise this would have cost us a lot of money,’ he said.
‘Messy builders’ clean up the act BUILDERS who made residents' lives a misery have cleaned up their act.
People living near a new flats development in Sun Street, Darlington, complained to Darlington council about the noise and mess caused by builders.
But contractors for the Re-Roof Housing Association have now sorted out the problems.
CLAIMS that the Government is letting down Darlington's unemployed were hotly denied by the town's MP last night.
Conservative MP Michael Fallon said the decline in training places in the Darlington area reflects the fact that unemployment is not the problem it once was.
He was answering criticisms from Darlington's prospective Labour candidate Alan Milburn, who says cash cuts in adult training have halved the number of places available on training courses.
Mr Milburn says this has happened at a time when unemployment in the constituency is going up.
He said figures from the Durham Training and Enterprise Council show the numbers of training places has dropped from 1,295 in 1990 to 675 at present.
Employment Training is the Government's system for helping adults who have been out of work for more than six months.
Mr Milburn says the number of Youth Training places has dropped by almost 200 in the last 12 months.
He added that this has happened against a background of 1,000 more jobless in the last two years.
Mr Fallon refuses to accept the charge that his Government is spending less on training.
‘We consider training to be crucial and we are spending more on it now than we were during the last recession,’ he said.
Darlington's Liberal Democrat candidate, Peter Bergg, said he supported the Labour arguments.
‘Cutting training budgets is crazy,’ he said.
THE chairman of Darlington Health Authority has announced he intends to retire at the end of March.
John Tholen, 67, took over the chairman's position in 1988 after ten years as chief executive of the Tees and Hartlepool Port Authority and before that war service in the Royal Navy.
Staff in the health authority have paid tribute to the enthusiastic way Mr Tholen approached his job.
He knew little of health administration before accepting the position but has become an expert during four years of radical change in the NHS.
Mr Tholen will spend his retirement indulging one of his other great loves gardening.
While chairman of the health authority he was instantly recognisable by the fresh, home-grown carnation he wore to work every day.
He also intends to spend more time in the air as he holds a pilot's licence.
he took the test after being told that at more than 50 he was too old to learn.
A WOULD-BE postie has criticised the Royal Mail for a second class service following a mix-up over job interviews.
Bridget Stokes had pinned her hopes on landing a job delivering letters in Darlington.
The 31-year-old job hunter was delighted when she received an appointment for a job interview.
But when Bridget turned up at the town's sorting offices staff told her she was a month too late.
‘I couldn't believe it,’ said Bridget, who lives in Haughton Road.
‘Somebody had got the month wrong and all the jobs had been snapped up.’
Post Office management say the mix-up was the result of an administrative error.
Middlesbrough-based personnel manager Dale Haddon said the mix-up didn't mean the end of Bridget's chances of landing a Post Office job.
MOBILE wardens are to monitor playing fields in Darlington.
The Springfield playing fields have been ploughed up by cars driving on them, horses cantering and people playing golf.
Ward councillor Nick ThorneWallis (Lab) said: ‘The area is in a real mess.
Somebody has locked the gates there and people who come to exercise their dogs cannot get through and are pushing through the hedges and railings.’
Wardens will now patrol the area.
And Darlington council plan to put tree stumps around the area to stop cars getting through.
The padlocks on the gates will also be removed to allow pedestrian access.
Norman Maltby, head of leisure services, said: ‘All the work should be complete within two or three weeks.
MEN working for Darlington council have been urged not to be shy about reporting incidents of sexual harassment.
Labour councillor Pat Buttle welcomed a new strategy for the council which is aimed at tackling the problem of sexual harassment at work.
The code of practice has been formulated by the European Community.
So far only one in ten British companies have adopted the code and experts fear the problem could be widespread.
Already Darlington's Labour-controlled council has hit the headlines with its stand against workmen who ‘intimidate’ women with wolf whistles and unwanted comments.
Coun Buttle told members of the personnel committee: ‘It's important to stress that men as well as women can be victims of harassment and sometimes it's harder for them to admit it.’
Statistics show that those particularly vulnerable to harassment and abuse are divorced and separated women, women in non-traditional jobs, women from ethnic minorities and gay men.
The European Community says the problem of sexual harassment can lead to lost productivity and large amounts of sick leave being taken by staff unwilling to face torment in the office or on the shopfloor.
Councillors agreed that sexual harassment is unwelcome interference ‘distinct from friendly behaviour or sexual attention which is welcome and mutual.’
TWO Darlington councillors are joining forces to banish the menace of midnight car racing from an otherwise peaceful neighbourhood.
Residents of Albatross Way have been suffering sleepless nights, plagued by rogue drivers racing their cars behind Presto supermarket.
Coun Alan Robinson and Coun Frank Robson have already asked police for extra night-time patrols and asked Presto to tighten up car park security.
Coun Robinson said: ‘We have had complaints about the noise and disturbance from young people driving wildly around the car park sometimes as late as 3 am.
‘People tell us their sleep is seriously disrupted — we have had similar complaints over many years,’ said Coun Robinson.
Supt Alan Sadler at Darlington police said extra patrols would check the area whenever possible.
‘We will respond if we can.
We are here to serve the people of Darlington and if there is a problem we will try to address it.’
George Taylor, spokesman for Presto stores, said the company had already put in a security barrier and were about to finalise talks with businesses which share the car park.
‘We intend to have the barrier brought down to block off the car park at nights,’ he said.
DARLINGTON Arts Centre says it no longer wants to host the town's annual beer festival.
Organisers of the 12-year-old event are now desperately seeking an alternative venue to keep the increasingly popular festival alive.
Last night a spokeswoman for the Arts Centre said the festival has become a victim of its own success.
She said: ‘Too many people want to go to attend and we have just not got the space to accommodate them.’
But Brendan Boyle, of the Darlington branch of the Campaign For Real Ale, said the news is a sad blow to all real ale fans.
He thinks Camra will struggle to find a suitable alternative in Darlington.
The Arts Centre's spokeswoman said: ‘This is not a decision we have taken lightly or gleefully.
There are no hard feelings between ourselves and Camra.’
Last year 1,000 people attended the three-day festival and on the Friday and Saturday nights Arts Centre staff were turning people away by 8.15pm.
The previous year regular Arts Centre visitors complained they had been kept out because of the festival.
Since the festival began in 1979 it has attracted a growing band of support.
Each year popular ales have sold out early and Camra has had to order more beer every year.
Mr Boyle said: ‘We have considered a number of alternatives and nothing is immediately suitable.
The Arts Centre was ideal.’
Camra has written to Coun Dot Long, chairman of Darlington Council's recreation committee, asking for her help in keeping the festival in Darlington.
Last night Coun Long (Lab) said it was too soon for her to comment.
She did say it would be a pity if Darlington were to lose what is clearly a very popular event.
Speculation that the Dolphin Centre could be used as a substitute has been ruled out by Mr Boyle as too expensive.
He added that unlicensed premises would be a risk because Camra would have to order thousands of pounds worth of beer with no guarantee of being granted a licence.
AFTER our recent surveillance of Darlington's next-to-useless Neighbourhood Watch schemes, here is another distinctly fishy story.
On February 19 we wrote of the chap round Carmel Road way who'd installed security lighting after two burglaries further up the street.
Among those it failed to deter was a predatory heron which discovered that by activating the light it could purloin a splendid fish supper from among the transfixed koi carp in the garden pond below.
Koi by name but forthcoming by nature.
Soon, reports our man in the black wellies, all he had left were four golden orfe and a koi.
A net was then stretched over the pond.
Last week, however, his wife dashed back into the house to report an orfe average length 12–17 inches dead on the pool bottom.
‘I went for a net to get it out and, to my amazement, found it in the tight embrace of a frog.
‘I lifted it out onto the pathway and had quite a job to prise the frog from the seemingly lifeless fish.’
When he'd parted them both fish and frog began animatedly to flap around.
The fish was returned to the pond, the frog ‘despatched elsewhere’.
The next day the same thing happened again.
Again a fatality (or something even worse) was narrowly avoided.
‘Needless to say,’ adds our man with the scales of justice, ‘the remaining frogs have been found a new home by the Tees.’
Unique in his fish-keeping experience, he wonders if other Gadfly readers have encountered similar savagery.
Such piscatorial matters are not normally the column's province, of course.
It just felt like it was an orfe day.
…and since this is the nature page, readers may just have noticed a Conservative Party pre-election poster featuring a giant, savings-sucking mosquito.
‘Months have been spent finding a truly vicious, gruesome, Socialist looking mosquito and this one is a brute,’ says a Central Office spokesman.
We wish it to be known that the mosquito is no relation to the Gadfly.
The poster first appeared two weeks ago, unveiled by Norman Lamont.
Like the insect, its span has been short and it has already been superseded by the Double Whammy campaign.
‘Our posters are up and down like yo-yos,’ says a chap at Tory regional office in Newcastle.
At Saatchi and Saatchi, where young men earn large sums for dreaming up such things, someone called Tim promised to send us a ‘mini-proof’.
There are 3,000 species, however, and it's impossible to tell which this is.
An Amosquito, however, it is most adamantly not.
Wear Valley Council may only have promised Stanley United FC two footballs (Gadfly March 4) but the hidden agenda looks more promising.
Faced with an annual poll tax demand of £380 ‘for which we don't even get the bin emptied’ says secretary/manager Vince Kirkup the club wrote to the new Lib-Dem administration seeking relief.
An 80pc reduction now seems likely.
Kirkup ‘a Socialist, I suppose’ had made a similar appeal when Labour was in control.
He was told times were hard and there was no chance.
‘The letter I got back brought tears to my eyes,’ he says.
‘I felt so sorry for the council I almost sent THEM a fiver.’
Council leader Chris Foote Wood, meanwhile, has been outlining the terms under which Wear Valley will help the district's four Northern League clubs.
They'll get £8,000, but only if they first raise a similar amount.
Coun Foote Wood has been in power since last May.
‘God helps those who help themselves,’ he says.
Whatever can He mean?
Speaking of God and related matters, we are grateful to the Darlington and Stockton Times for making clear the new clergy job contracts.
A ‘spokeswoman for Durham diocese’ explains that the old freehold parishes were created ‘to stop bishops throwing priests out of their parishes to make way for their distant relations.’
The spokeswoman for the diocese the Bishop of Durham's first press officer is definitely not a distant relation.
She is his daughter, Rebecca.
About 30pc of visitors to last year's Darlington show got in without paying, it was disclosed last week.
The day previously a town centre poll had revealed that only 50pc of Darlingtonians could name the town's distinctly high profile MP.
Is this the origin of the phrase ‘as thick as thieves’?
Residents of Middridge, a pleasant enough village if you like Whitbread's beer, will pay £243.56 poll tax in the coming financial year.
In urban Newton Ayclife, barely two cow fields away and also part of Sedgefield District, they must pay £280.76.
The difference is that Newton Aycliffe must also maintain a wholly superfluous ‘Town Council’ in considerable style and in inaccessible offices.
Virtually nothing that Great Aycliffe Town Council undertakes couldn't be done equally efficiently and at much less overall cost by Sedgefield District.
So for how much longer will this third tier charade be allowed to continue?
Those who find walking the pavements a hairy-scary experience at the best of times will be interested to hear that Durham constabulary now advocates cycling there, too.
Discussing the number of child cycling accidents, PC Dave Hogg told Darlington's road safety forum last week that they'd rather see children under ten pedalling on the pavement.
‘The feeling is that it's much safer for them there,’ added PC Hogg.
Whether it is much safer for the elderly, infirm and short-sighted was not disclosed.
…and finally, we sneaked into a do last Friday evening at which the comic turn was the award winning Bob Ritchie.
Formerly landlord of the eponymous Comedian pub at Sunniside, the ever-buoyant Bob has gone downhill to Crook.
At any rate, the night's most repeatable joke concerned the three bairns talking in the playground about whose dad had the fastest job.
‘Mine's a train driver,’ said little Jimmy.
‘He can get from Darlington to London in just over two hours.’
‘Mine's an aeroplane pilot,’ said Tommy, ‘he can do Teesside airport to London in an hour.’
Billy was unimpressed.
‘Mine's a council binman and he's faster than any of them,’ he said.
‘Though he's not supposed to finish until half past four he's back home at one o'clock every day.’
(Editor's note: this is not, of course, a reflection on any of the binmen in Gadfly's circulation area.)
A HEADMASTER has called on schools to join forces in a bid to stamp out the menace of solvent abuse in the North-East.
Torquil Cowan, head of Longfield comprehensive in Darlington, has already written to some parents voicing his concern about the number of children roving the streets.
Now he has called on other schools in the town to unite in a crusade against violence and drug abuse.
The headmaster praised The Northern recent investigation which exposed Darlington's underworld of drug abuse and petty crime.
Writing in the school bulletin, he said: ‘I wholly applaud The Northern stance on this particular issue.
It was brave and it was also right.’
Mr Cowan, who has an 11-year-old son, plans to call a meeting to discuss ways of tackling the problem.
‘I am not a missionary,’ he said, ‘but I do believe schools have an important part to play.
We are an essential part of society and should be taking a lead on things like this.
‘I don't think Longfield has a problem this is something which confronts us all.
‘When I drive through the town on a night I see large groups of youths standing around on street corners.
I would be alarmed if my son was spending his time in such groups.’
Mr Cowan believes young children can get sucked into a world of petty crime and solvent abuse as a result.
‘They are associating with much older children and, in some cases, adults.
That is the start of the slippery slope as far as I am concerned.’
CONTROVERSIAL plans to build a livestock market and housing estate outside Darlington have taken a step forward.
Representatives of the Darlington Farmers Auction Mart have met the borough council to finalise conditions on their plans to move the market from Clifton Road to Holdforth Grange in Hurworth.
Stephen Tapper, director of development services, said: ‘We looked at problems with access to Snipe Lane, drainage and landscape as well as various other issues.
The Farmers Auction Mart has now gone away to look at these and will report back to us.’
The new site off Roundhill Road would include a car park, service road and landscaping.
And up to 600 houses will be built on a 44-acre site adjacent to Neasham Road and the A66.
Hurworth and Neasham parish councils have objected to the plans and Darlington Environmental Watch feels the development would be wrong for a rural area.
Mart officials say the move is long overdue.
The current site was built in 1860 for livestock walking into the market or coming off the train.
Work is expected to start later this year.
A ROW has broken out between private and council residents over plans for a traffic calming scheme.
Residents on the Skerne Park estate, Darlington, say Durham County Council's plans to reduce the speed limit and introduce speed humps on Lakeside would improve road safety.
But their neighbours on the private Lakeside say the scheme will cause more traffic and could be a danger.
The county council plans to close the junction at Hammond Drive and Lorraine Crescent, making Lakeside and Coleridge Gardens the main entrance into the Skerne Park estate.
Yellow lines and speed humps could be put on the narrow road and a mini roundabout set up at the junction of Lakeside and Parkside.
Lakeside residents say this will make it difficult for emergency vehicles to get through and would be dangerous for children and pensioners.
They also fear it could lead to parking problems and more traffic.
But Durham County Council says the increase in traffic would be minimal.
And it plans to put up a 20mph limit along the road.
Council tenant Joyce Standing, from Tyne Crescent, said many residents on the estate welcomed the proposals.
‘I am in favour of the measures,’ she said.
‘I welcome anything that helps child safety.
‘By closing off Hammond Drive it would make Lakeside into a cul-de-sac and would be safe for children.’
Mrs Standing said two public meetings about the proposals were held in Skerne Park Community Centre but only one Lakeside resident turned up.
‘When it comes to the crunch they didn't want to go to Skerne Park,’ she said.
But Lakeside resident Ron Howe said they were not against the traffic calming proposals for Skerne Park.
‘We are 100 per cent behind the scheme for Skerne Park,’ he said.
‘But we are against the problems it will cause on our road.
The county council is creating a traffic problem which wasn't there before.’
A NEW safety strategy aimed at reducing the risk of accidents is likely to be adopted as part of Darlington council policy.
A group of health authority staff, council officers and community workers are drawing up guidelines to help cut accidents by a third by the year 2000.
Last night's meeting of the borough's home and leisure safety forum agreed to ask the works and health committee to adopt its draft report.
Once that happens council officers would then be able to look at specific ways of reducing the risk of accidents in Darlington and help make the borough a safer place.
Works and health committee chairwoman Eleanor Young said she was delighted the report was being taken on board.
Village trees:
A £17,000 tree planting scheme for Tudhoe village is to get a £3,648 boost from Sedgefield District Council.
The money will help the hedge and tree project for Chair Lane, Tudhoe Mill Lane, and Partnerships Lane.
Bungalow refusal:
Plans to build three bungalows at Village Farm, Trimdon, have been refused.
Sedgefield District Council's development committee turned down the application by the Redfern family because there would be an inadequate access and it would change the character of the village.
DARLINGTON dentists have met the town's MP to discuss their concern over Government plans to reduce the amount it pays them for NHS work.
Conservative Michael Fallon last night told more than 30 members of Darlington Dental Society the Government is fully committed to supporting NHS dental surgery.
Mr Fallon also heard the dentists call for the service to be ‘properly and adequately funded’, and promised to put their points before Health Secretary William Waldegrave.
Local dentists called the meeting after learning ministers wanted to reduce the 25pc subsidies paid to them for NHS patients.
The Government said dentists were treating more people than expected, causing a £15m a month overspend, but the profession argued if funding was cut they could no longer afford to do NHS work.
The new arrangements had been due for introduction on April 1 but the Government was forced to shelve them last month after dentists threatened a mass exodus from the NHS.
Society chairman Malcolm Smith said his members would now want to see a written reply from the Department of Health confirming the proposed arrangements would not be introduced.
‘The Government was wrong because it hadn't taken into account the huge increases in our workload since new contracts were introduced encouraging people to register,’ Mr Smith said.
He added members wanted the Government to find a new way of paying for NHS work, and hoped a joint inquiry by the Department of Health and British Dental Association would come up with a solution.
Mr Smith added the society would continue to lobby the Government and medical bodies until the issue was resolved.
Mr Fallon said he had reassured the meeting the funding proposals had been withdrawn and could not be introduced without the joint agreement of the dental profession and the Department of Health.
‘We have got to get the system changed, it's crazy to forecast what dentists’ expenses will be and then adjust them afterwards.
‘I shall be asking William Waldegrave for a firm assurance that their 8.5pc pay increase will go ahead in April irrespective of any negotiations about any alleged overpayment,’ he said.
ENVIRONMENTALISTS have set their questions for a panel of politicians for a Green Question Time.
The event has been set up by Darlington Environmental Watch who want the representatives of the three major parties to answer hard-hitting questions about their green plans for the town.
Maggie Bosanquet, spokesman for DEW, said: ‘We want to know exactly where these people stand on issues which affect the town and the globe.’
The panelists will be Conservative MP Michael Fallon, Alan Milburn, Labour prospective Parliamentary candidate for Darlington, and Peter Bergg, Liberal Democrat PPC for the town.
DARLINGTON council has drawn up a list of businesses which are helping people stop smoking.
Officers hope the leaflet will encourage other firms in the town to slap a no smoking ban on their premises.
Copies of the leaflet were distributed in the town centre on the run up to yesterday's National No Smoking Day.
Barry Pearson, the council's principal environmental health officer, said: ‘More and more firms are adopting no-smoking policies nowadays.’
Health promotion officers have been encouraging people to give up smoking with the help of a scene from the classic movie Casablanca.
EFFORTS to revitalise a hard-hit housing estate in Darlington have been given an unexpected financial boost.
Members of the Skerne Park Community Action Group are to receive £2,000 from the TSB Foundation a charitable group set up in 1986 to encourage good causes.
The cash will be used to help set up a family action centre on the estate and give young people the opportunity to improve their future.
Skerne Park Community Action Group was set up in 1989 to improve the quality of life for people living on the estate.
The estate has a high crime rate and an investigation by Northern Echo reporters last year uncovered deprivation and despair.
Members of the Action Group are helping redress the balance with local initiatives to improve the area.
Chairman Coun Hannah Straition will accept the cash from David Morgan, manager of the TSB's Darlington branch, on Wednesday.
The TSB Foundation is one of four independent charitable bodies established in the banking group which have distributed over £12m to 4,000 UK charities.
A SENIOR schools inspector has been called in to investigate claims that a young boy was hit by a teacher in front of his classmates.
Education officials have ordered a formal probe into allegations the pupil was struck at Darlington's Hummersknot School.
A spokesman said the inspector would report back to the boy's father, Bernard Grainger, of Melland Street.
Mr Grainger claims his 13-year-old son James was punched in the chest when he was caught larking about in lessons.
The father of seven has called for the teacher to be suspended but education officials say they do not plan any drastic action.
When the investigation is complete a copy of the report will be sent to Keith Mitchell, Durham's director of education.
The spokesman said: ‘I can assure Mr Grainger that we take these sort of allegations very seriously indeed and the matter will be thoroughly investigated.’
Mr Grainger said: ‘Nobody has the right to lay a hand on my son.
I won't rest until this is sorted out.’
RADICAL plans to reform health service provision in the North-East have come under attack from worried union officials.
Members of the Northern Regional Health Authority have backed proposals to create seven powerful purchasing authorities by allowing districts to join forces.
Gary Smith, the RHA's head of business strategy, says the new consortiums will give district managers the financial clout to negotiate the best deal when buying services and awarding contracts But union officials believe the moves are part of a hidden agenda which will change the face of health care in the region.
They say the emergence of large purchasing consortiums could lead to the merger of the Northern Region's 16 districts into six super districts, leading to confusion and prompting some staff to quit.
A local consortium has already been set up between Darlington and South West Durham.
As part of the plan a chief executive could be appointed to take control of the authorities' purchasing powers.
It is not known how any new chief executive will liaise with existing district managers.
Meanwhile, Geoff Nichol, head of Darlington health authority, has been offered the chance to work on a special project looking at community care.
He will also continue as chief executive at Darlington.
Mr Smith, who drew up the report into purchasing powers, said the moves did not mean the end of existing district health authorities.
But Phil Lenton, assistant divisional officer for Nupe, remains to be convinced.
He said: ‘It looks as though this could be the first step towards merger.
We are looking at another reorganisation of the NHS in the northern region with all the demoralisation and uncertainty that creates.
But things are being done by stealth.’
AN elderly man told his family he had been thrown out of hospital just two days before he died.
Yesterday relatives of Charles Prattley told a coroner they were disgusted by the way he had been treated by staff at Darlington Memorial Hospital.
Mr Prattley, 78, of Berry Court, Sadberge, had suffered ill health because of respiratory problems for some time.
He had been to hospital many times before doctors decided there was nothing they could do for him.
He was discharged from hospital and within 48 hours he was dead.
Last night his daughter, Dora Gooding, of Trafalgar Terrace, Darlington, said: ‘None of the doctors would speak to him and no one bothered to tell us that he was terminally ill.’
Mrs Gooding, a former nurse at the Memorial, said she often used to have to tell relatives that a patient was terminally ill.
She said: ‘I thought my father deserved better than what he got.
Before he died he asked us not to make a formal complaint, that was the sort of man he was.’
Dr Ceri Williams, consultant pathologist at the hospital, said Mr Prattley had died from fibrosis of the lungs.
There was no evidence of industrial disease.
He had worked as a farmer and it was feared his long term exposure to pesticides may have led to his ill health.
The coroner recorded a verdict of death from natural causes.
Last night David Anderson, of Darlington Health Authority, offered the authority's sympathy to the grieving family.
He said: ‘Clearly we are very upset to hear of the death of a patient.
There will be no investigation of the gentleman's treatment unless the authority receives a formal complaint.’
THOUSANDS of Darlington children will learn how to stay safe in dangerous situations by acting them out under police supervision.
Every child aged between seven and 11 living in the borough will be invited to take part during the two-week summer campaign organised by Darlington police.
A meeting of the home and leisure safety forum heard more than 5,000 youngsters will be asked what they would do in a variety of risky situations and be given advice on the best responses.
PC John Hall said youngsters would go through a series of simulated scenes of potential danger including a building site, railway tracks and a stretch of water.
The fortnight of workshops, which starts on June 29, has been called Darlington Children's Safety Carousel because youngsters rotate from one situation to the next.
It will be held at the Territorial Army Bradford Barracks in Neasham Road.
STUDENTS at Dance In Studio, based at Polam Hall School, Darlington are the first in the area to take the new and highly-acclaimed Royal Academy of Dancing exams.
Plight pack for Easter
CHILDREN in Catholic schools from the Tees to the Tweed are expected to raise around £30,000 by Easter as they consider the plight of people in need.
The diocesan welfare agency, Catholic Care North-East hopes all its schools will use its education pack for Lent I'm Important, You're Important to discuss problems of social and economic disadvantages in today's society.
A NEW wildlife group which met in Darlington last night is a great success.
More and more people are becoming interested in the Darlington Wildlife Trust, formed last month, and membership is growing.
A series of outdoor meetings is planned for the summer.
A DARLINGTON schoolboy travelled to Thirsk for a purse stealing mission, a juvenile court heard yesterday.
Darlington magistrates heard the 14-year-old was involved with thefts from three handbags while their owners worked in shops.
The youth pleaded guilty to two charges of burglary and five motoring offences.
Magistrates gave him a conditional discharge and disqualified him from driving for two years.
ONE OF the most luxurious hotels in the North-East is being rented from a council for less than £350 a week.
A single room including breakfast and VAT costs £76 a night at Darlington's Blackwell Grange Moat House Hotel.
A double room at the 100room former home of the Havelock-Allan family is £98.
But because of a contract signed by Darlington Borough Council and the hotel's former leaseholders in 1974, the rent paid by the company running it is only a fraction of its market value.
Council leader John Williams yesterday sought an explanation from the authority's chief executive, Clive Owen.
After a private meeting, Coun Williams said: ‘A 99-year lease was granted to Grand Metropolitan in 1974, and it was subsequently assigned to Queen's Moat Houses.
‘Initially the rent was £12,000 a year.
Currently it is £18,000, which includes £2,000 for the recently built leisure facilities.
‘The next review is due in 1999, when the rent will be fixed at 18pc of the market value current at that time.
In 2013 it will go up to 20pc of the market value.’
Coun Williams went on: ‘I am told that when the property was first leased it required considerable investment by the developer to convert it into a hotel, and that the terms of the lease reflect that.
‘It's easy to be wise in retrospect and to throw stones at those who negotiated the lease in 1974.
But it is always difficult to get things right when assessing a future commercial market.
‘I'm sure whoever was responsible at the time acted in what they thought was the best interests of the council.’
The Northern Echo reported in the early 1970s that the conversion project was costing Grand Metropolitan £450,000.
The work was actually carried out in 1971–72, although the lease did not take effect until February 1974 just two months before the old county borough ceased to exist at the time of local government reorganisation.
Jaundiced eye
LIKE Hartlepool, Redcar seems to be the butt of sarcasm and unjustified put-downs, and your reporter (Eating Owt Echo February 26) adopts the same jaundiced stance.
The fact that Redcar is not a yuppie haven nor affects green welly pretension like certain places nearer Darlington make it an obvious target for sarcastic wit.
Indeed, Redcar is not pretty nor twee, but at least it is honest, down-to-earth and rejects shallow affection.
The Redcar Bowl may be ugly but there is worse nearer home: the penitentiary-like charm of the Cornmill and the flyaway Dolphin Centre, to mention two.
As for British Steel's monolith, at least it still stands to give a little reassurance against Teesside's depression and unemployment; it may be recalled that Teesside steel made North-Eastern strength.
Your reporter's jaundiced eye also falls upon the Bay View; an eating place from which my wife and I have derived particular pleasure.
Not only are meals of excellent value, but the atmosphere is friendly with a genuine courtesy which some more pretentious establishments nearer home would do well to copy.
Peter A.
Gledhill, 15, Katherine Street, Darlington.
Omen tome
THIS is being written, nervously, a mere six hours before embarking on a search for ghosts and spectres round the cemeteries of Sunderland.
If the dead become the undead and rise up to do dreadful things then you will never receive the report.
By way of preparation for this Friday the 13th escapade somebody handed over A Dictionary of Superstitions, which is not the sort of inspiration one needs.
Partly penned by the South Shields linguist and folklore buff Moira Tatem (Tatem, that is, not Totem) it is sufficient not only to prevent you undertaking a midnight jaunt through graveyards but from ever getting out of bed again.
Bed actually receives five entries in the tome.
Getting out of it either backwards or on the left side is considered to be unlucky.
Sitting on it means that bed is where you will be next, suffering from some malady or other.
Opening the book purely at random is to discover that most human activities appear to be the subject of superstition.
These include opening books at random.
Generally speaking, this is deemed to provide some clue as to one's destiny.
Whatever the entry says is what lies in store for the opener.
It is a bit difficult to tell what lies in store when one opens a book at random and finds a section on opening books at random.
Perhaps one's life is fated to be utterly haphazard.
Upon trying again, several entries on red cropped up.
Red is lucky to card players and red cars are also lucky, while red flowers and red hair are unlucky.
The colour is also unlucky to lovers.
As The Fellow's jockey wore red in the Cheltenham Gold Cup yesterday and several quid from this direction were riding on it, red is at present especially unfortunate.
Disposing of hair is dodgy, as is buying a broom in May or at Christmas.
It is also considered unlucky to pay the whole of a doctor's bill, a superstition which may prove important as the years go by, considering what some people say is happening to the NHS.
Burning eggshells, itching elbows, cutting Christmas cake, hairy caterpillars, ironing shirt hems and having one's photograph taken are all either good, bad or indifferent.
If you read this be prepared never to go out again.
Beware the Ides WHILE it might be bad enough this being Friday the thirteenth it is also the Ides of March on Sunday.
The Ides of March ides was linked in the Roman calendar to the full moon in 44BC was when Julius Caesar was stabbed to death.
It has often been a warning to beware the Ides of March, though the ides of May, July and October seem all right.
They do not, however, appear in the dictionary of superstitions, so that might be a better day in future, if there is to be a future, for graveyard rambling.
Clarity and charity
WITH the water bill which arrived with impeccable timing yesterday there was one piece of bumph which trumpeted that water services have never been better.
It cooed about sewage treatment, environmental improvements and coastal waters.
There was another piece which asked the simple question: ‘How far are you prepared to go to turn on a tap?’ which was an appeal for cash help to provide water supplies, any water supplies, in the Third World.
This appeal is called Water Aid.
Northumbria Water was pleased to announce that its drinking water quality is the best of the ten privatised water companies and that investment in environmental improvements was higher than ever.
It omitted to mention how much of its ever-increasing charges it contributed to WaterAid.
PUB landlords in the North-East have criticised proposed changes to the licensing system.
They fear plans to widen the availability of alcohol licenses could see off many traditional pubs.
Last week employment secretary Michael Howard announced he was looking at a range of measures to boost tourism in Britain currently worth £25bn a year.
He says many foreign visitors are frustrated by laws barring their children from pubs and he wants landlords in England and Wales to be able to admit youngsters under 14 with their parents.
Mr Howard also wants cafes to be able to serve alcohol another move aimed at families.
Although the plans are on hold until after the General Election, they could form the basis of a consultation document should the Conservatives be returned.
Mr Howard has pledged to consult landlords before going any further, but members of the Licensed Victuallers Associations in the region greeted his ideas with scepticism.
Beryl Holland, chairwoman of Durham City LVA and landlady of Nevilles Cross Hotel, said she was concerned about increasing the number of alcohol outlets.
‘If licenses proliferate you might see the end of the good old English pub,’ she said.
‘With the recession the whole concept of drinking has changed, people are going out less often and drinking more at home.
‘Also I can't see cafes catching on in the North, we haven't got the weather to sit outside.’
Mrs Holland stressed any changes to the existing system would require close consultation with the trade.
And she would want to see monitoring of any pubs admitting children, with premises carefully vetted before permission to let in youngsters was granted.
Joe Harris, chairman of Darlington LVA and landlord of the Half Moon at Barton, described the idea of cafe licenses as ‘totally out of order’ as the increase in competition would hit hard pressed publicans.
Mr Harris said existing laws governing when children could go into pubs were confused and needed to be clarified.
Anita Adams, senior vice-president of York LVA and landlady of the city's Golden Slipper pub, was also against the creation of cafe licences.
She said she wanted more freedom for licensees to decide their opening hours, and believed children would learn about alcohol by going into pubs with their parents.
NEW crime beating initiatives will be discussed by Darlington councillors next week.
Recorded crime has almost doubled in County Durham in ten years, with a 20pc rise during 1991.
The Home Office has nominated 1992 Car Crime Prevention Year.
Council officers in Darlington have looked at ways of supporting the campaign.
Among their findings to be presented to Tuesday's meeting of the policy and resources committee they suggest:
offering employees who buy cars with a council loan the chance to include security devices in the amount they borrow.
giving higher priority to the lighting and security of public car parks.
having free registration etchings at public car parks.
carrying out regular visits to car parks for checks on lighting.
training all council staff who could help spot car thieves.
MOST people, when they reach the age of 80, would be enjoying the fruits of retirement but Father Anthony Cunningham jumped at the chance of a new job.
And a glint came to his eye when he said he would be carrying on with his pastoral work for many years to come.
The sprightly priest, who has taken over the parish of St Paulinus in St Helen Auckland in County Durham, said: ‘As long as I am fit as the way I am now I will continue to serve the community.’
He did come close to going on pension once at the age of 75 he sent off a perfunctory letter asking for retirement.
‘But I never got a reply.
And I did not want a reply anyway,’ he laughed.
Bubbling with enthusiasm, Fr Cunningham, 80, said it was the opportunity to work with children which prompted him to accept the latest offer of as a ‘first step to retirement’.
He said it was not going to be a quiet post either, adding: ‘Once I settle in there is going to be quite a lot of work to do.
As well as St Helen Auckland my parish covers the villages of Cockfield, Woodland, and Butterknowle.’
Speaking about children, Fr Cunningham's face lit up and beaming smile crossed his face; being with them is a passion which has remained with him since his days as a teacher, and later a headmaster.
He has already become a familiar figure at St Wilfrid's Primary School, which he regularly visits both for pastoral duties and to enjoy the company of the pupils.
He is also chaplain for St John's Comprehensive School.
He said: ‘My relations with children are very important to me.
They are very easy and relaxed and they are direct and open.
In a sense they have kept me young.’
Younger children will always be the same, he observed, but the older children have changed with the times.
Fr Cunningham was born in India and went to school in the North-East, where a priest suggested he consider going into the ministry.
In 1929 he went to Ushaw College and in 1936 started as an assistant priest in St Cuthbert's parish, West Hartlepool.
Fr Cunningham then spent four years at Cambridge University and returned to teach in Hartlepool.
In 1947 he was appointed headmaster at St Mary's Grammar School in Darlington, where he remained for 12 years.
He worked as parish priest at St Wilfrid, in Bishop Auckland, before accepting his post at St Paulinus.
Fr Cunningham has been told that whenever he feels he has had enough he can retire to the house he's living in.
That will not happen soon if he can help it.
A DOCTOR spent last night shivering in a frozen food store room in preparation for some cold nights ahead.
Dr John Apps, whose practice is in Neasham Road, Darlington, is training for a trip to the Arctic starting on April 5.
Last night he was trembling among cases of frozen prawns in a store room in Newcastle.
He was accompanied by 18-year-old student Nick Scott who will be making the trip with him.
Dr Apps' wife Jane, who was looking after their three children at home in Elton Road, Darlington, said: ‘Tonight it's only going down to about minus 23 degrees centigrade.
In the Arctic the temperature is more like minus 40.’
Dr Apps is going to the Arctic with the British Schools Exploration Society to research the Ozone layer.
DARLINGTON'S new health authority chairman yesterday said he was looking forward to the job.
Ian Cordial, 64, takes over from retiring chairman John Tholen at the beginning of April.
Mr Cordial has been a member of the health authority since 1990 when he decided his previous duties with Yorkshire Regional Health Authority were taking up too much time travelling from his home in Barton.
Originally from Inverness, Mr Cordial and his family have been living in Durham for 40 years.
He worked for many years with Darlington firm Paton and Baldwin, rising to the position of chairman of sales before his retirement.
£50,000 play area plan considered COUNCILLORS are being asked to approve a £50,000 safe play area for Preston Park, near Stockton, which officials claim is of an innovative design.
An old play area was uprooted to allow work to begin on the building of a Butterfly World hothouse bug collection and free flying area.
Councillors will tomorrow be asked to consider importing equipment for a relocated play area from the continent.
The equipment leisure officers have in mind is mainly made of wood, treated against vandalism and decay, while its lay-out means children using it will at no time be more than one and a half feet off the ground.
A TYNESIDE man who has worked for the Ministry of Defence for nearly 30 years will be awarded a medal on Thursday.
Jimmy Ward, 65, will be presented with the Imperial Service Medal by Brig Conrad Garton, Commander of Catterick Garrison.
Mr Ward, of St John's Road, Hipswell, Catterick Garrison, has worked for the MoD for 29 years.
He was born in Walker, Newcastle, and started his working life in the shipyards of the Tyne.
He went to live in Catterick in 1961 and joined the accommodation services unit, Royal Army Ordnance Corps in January 1962 as a labourer.
From 1983 until his retirement last September he worked at HQ Training Group Royal Signals and Catterick Garrison.
He and his wife, Maisie, have one son who lives in Darlington.
A CONTROVERSIAL report which says Darlington is in the middle of a severe recession has been attacked as political propaganda by outraged Tories.
Conservative leader Tony Richmond said the study by chief executive Clive Owen had ignored crucial evidence.
He believes the report could damage Darlington's chances of attracting more jobs and industry by painting an unnecessarily bleak picture of the town.
Coun Richmond said: ‘The controlling Labour group are selling Darlington short.
It is their actions, and reports like this, that are discouraging new business and investment in our town.’
Coun Richmond said the number of people in work had increased by 10pc since 1984.
The town's sitting MP Michael Fallon added: ‘Since the last election unemployment has fallen by 30pc.
Six years ago there were 6,211 out of work in the Darlington constituency, in January there were 4.365.
‘Darlington has become a magnet for new companies of all kinds, especially new technologies.’
LIFE was hard for a Teesdale lead miner in the 18th century.
The work was backbreaking and poisonous, and conditions harsh.
But on a spring day in the late 1700s, toil was a long way from John Binks' mind.
He was high in Upper Teesdale, walking with his eyes pinned to the ground.
A little man, ‘looking like a smart French doctor’, he was searching for hidden treasure.
Occasionally he found it the tiniest glint of deep blue.
To the miner, it meant two things: a rarity discovered and bread for his table.
For Binks was a plant collector, sending his finds to several eminent gentlemen in the Darlington area who paid him for his keen eyes and diligent legwork.
And although little is known about him, his importance to the world of botany has not been forgotten; some of his finds are being restored in Sunderland Museum today, as part of a nationally-important plant collection.
Binks' discoveries include the particularly scarce Spring Gentian.
Half-a-dozen 18th century specimens, still retaining their colour after more than two centuries, lie pressed on paper sheets at Sunderland.
Principal keeper of natural sciences Alec Coles shakes his head a little at the thought of picking such rarities.
The only place they can now be found in the entire country is in Upper Teesdale.
He says: ‘They were rare even in Binks’ day, but the strange thing was that there was a tradition among the people who lived up there in those days to make a ball out of clay and cover it with spring gentians.
Then you put it on the window sill for people to admire so heaven knows how many went that way.’
Binks, born in Middleton in 1766, died at the age of 51.
But in that time he was credited with the discovery of three rarities the spring gentian, the mountain avens and the bog orchid, which was then lost again and only recently rediscovered.
One of the gentlemen he supplied with specimens was Edward Robson, a Darlington man who made the collection which is now being rehoused and documented at Sunderland.
Robson was a botanical pioneer, a Quaker and a founder member of the foremost botanical body the Linnean Society and the publisher of an important paper on the rarities of Upper Teesdale.
He also added to the work of his uncle, Stephen Robson.
Stephen was born in 1741 and may have influenced the boy Edward, although he died when his nephew was just 16.
‘Stephen was a linen weaver who had premises in Northgate, Darlington,’ says Alec.
‘He taught himself Latin and Greek so he could study botany, and he published a book, The British Flora, in 1777.
Although it didn't sell very well at the time it is significant because it was the first to be published in English using the naming system which we use today.’
NEPHEW Edward revised his uncle's rare plants paper, discovered a new currant species and accumulated a collection which includes the type specimen for that species the actual pressed flower which was described when recording the new discovery.
But his collection lay undiscovered for decades, until a careful piece of botanical detective work brought it to light.
‘This list of rare plants in Durham turned up in various correspondences, but it was always assumed that it was Stephen Robson's list,’ says Alec.
‘But a number of the plants on the list are rare Upper Teesdale species that Stephen had not included in his Flora, and therefore could not have known about.’
Stephen, indeed, had written in 1771 to another botanist saying ‘our country produces but few uncommon plants: we have no mountains, few woods or marshes.’
But was Edward's collection still in existence, hidden away somewhere?
Experts discovered that it was, the victim of another misconception.
‘It had always been thought that the collection was part of the Edward Backhouse collection,’ says Alec.
Backhouse was another Darlington man who founded a bank in Sunderland and collected prodigiously his work, donated to Sunderland Museum in 1907 runs to 11,000 specimens of butterflies, molluscs, birds and plants.
Edward's 800 specimens had been easily absorbed.
‘Then it was realised that the collection couldn't be part of Backhouse, because a lot of the specimens had been collected before Backhouse was even born.’
Now Robson's plants are being removed from their original folders, documented and re-housed in acidproof wrappers to give scientists better access.
‘Collections like these are unsuitable for display, but they are a vital resource to researchers,’ says Alec.
And an invaluable inheritance from lead miner, linen weaver and gentleman scientist.
PLANTATIONS of trees in the tropics may not be the answer to global warming, Friends of the Earth have warned.
Commercial growing of trees has been touted as a potential answer to the cutting down of the rainforests, but the pressure group says it could lead to monocultures with little ecological diversity.
Foreign trees such as eucalyptus would also need pesticides and fertilisers to grow, and would eventually erode the soil quality, they say.
RICHMOND Royal Park in southwest London has been designated a Site of Special Scientific Interest because of the wildlife preserved there since it was created three centuries ago.
ALL substances which destroy the ozone layer should be eliminated in Europe by 1996, the EC commission has said.
The proposed deadline, five years ahead of current targets, would mean the chemicals would be cut by 85pc by the end of next year, with total abolition by the end of 1994.
The commission cited alarming studies showing that ozone was disappearing in winter over densely populated areas of Europe and north America.
An American Nasa report has also predicted the creation of an Arctic ozone hole.
The proposed ban follows an informal decision by the EC's 12 environment ministers, and an independent announcement for Britain by Environment Secretary Michael Heseltine.
ELEVEN kilograms of highly enriched uranium which went missing from Dounray nuclear processing plant has been tracked down.
A routine inspection in December showed the loss.
Accounting errors were to blame for eight kg, but the plant was shut down and part of it cleaned out to find the rest.
Plant owners AEA Technology say the process has found measuring inaccuracies accounting for a further 1.2kg.
A spokesman said the remaining 1.8kg unaccounted for was considered an acceptable level, and the Department of Energy is satisfied.
The European Commission has warned AEA that it must correct its accounting and measurement systems before the plant reopens.
SELLAFIELD'S nuclear reprocessing plant, due to be in operation by the end of the year, is already storing some of the 7,000 tonnes of material it will recycle in its first decade.
Critics say the £1.8 billion nuclear factory the UK's second biggest civil engineering project after the Channel Tunnel is a giant white elephant.
But last Wednesday, BNFL unveiled the completed plant and said it would recoup its costs in ten years and make a £500m profit.
THE British Trust for Conservation Volunteers in Darlington need a new environment they are moving from their present offices and urgently need an alternative.
They require garage space of around 600sq ft, preferably with a water supply.
Ring Dean Heward on .
Before you throw away the plastic strap which holds a four-pack of cans away, snip each ring the straps can end up in ponds and rivers, where they catch around the legs of waterfowl and wildlife, with potentially lethal consequences.
IF everyone in Britain placed one day's rubbish in Trafalgar Square, the pile would reach up to Nelson's feet.
EVERY year the Northern Region Councils Association produces its State of the Region report.
And every year the report's findings are roundly condemned by Tory politicians for being excessively negative.
This year Darlington MP Michael Fallon went further, suggesting all its findings would be Labour propaganda.
While Mr Fallon will probably not have had the chance to read the report, we think it unwise for him to dismiss it out of hand.
He is certainly wrong in saying the report's publication has been timed to coincide with the start of the General Election campaign.
The association published its 1991 report in exactly the same week last year.
True, the association is dominated by Labour but that does not mean everything within this extensive report is included for party political reasons.
We devote a significant part of The Northern Echo today to the report because it draws together information to give a picture of the region unavailable in any other form.
It presents, quite objectively, a vast amount of data drawn from official Government sources and elsewhere which cannot be feasibly challenged by Mr Fallon or anyone else.
Low wages, high unemployment and rising crime are facts of life in the North, more so than many other parts of the country.
Mr Fallon says that everyone knows living standards have risen in the North over the last ten years.
Well, yes, they have in cash terms and for a proportion of the population they have in real terms too.
But the North still lags behind the rest of the country by a significant margin and, crucially, some people are no better off than they were ten years ago.
We do not suggest that the Conservative Government has been responsible for that, we doubt that a Labour Government would have done any better.
Indeed, it is interesting to speculate what sort of state the region and the rest of the country would have been in now had James Callaghan's moribund administration held on to power in 1979.
There is no doubt tremendous strides have been made in certain sections of the North's economy but that progress has been partial and there have also been many setbacks.
There remain many long-term structural problems which require major private and public sector investment to solve.
The North will not get that investment if certain influential people keeping banging on about how wonderful things are.
This constant sweeping under the carpet of all information which does not fit in with the Tory vision of a new North does no-one in this region any favours.
Leukaemia unit will bring a full service from the start
LUF breakthrough Mrs Doris Ledger, left, and Mrs Jenny Metcalfe, members of the fund raising committee, signal the start of building work by knocking out the first brick.
All six in-patient beds will be available in Darlington's new leukaemia unit as soon as it opens, hospital officials confirmed this week.
Mr Peter Stewart, unit general manager at the Memorial Hospital, said the district health authority would raise additional money to ensure full in-patient services from day one.
The announcement, made on Wednesday as the first £50,000 raised by public appeal was handed to the health authority to start work on the unit, came after a group of fund raising committee members expressed concern that the unit would open in phases.
Mr Stewart said it had been feared haematology in-patients would have to share a general medical ward while undergoing treatment in Darlington.
Happiest day ‘However, the health authority has now raised some additional money so that in-patients will be in this part of the unit,’ he said.
Mrs Doris Ledger and Mrs Jenny Metcalfe, two members of the fund raising committee, officially signalled the start of building work by wielding a hammer to knock out the first brick in a wall on Ward 42.
‘This is one of the happiest days of my life,’ said Mrs Ledger, who raised thousands of pounds towards the £250,000 target by selling raffle tickets.
Mr David Anderson, support services manager, said agreed staffing levels would be met by the time the unit opened in August or September.
Builders move in during the next two weeks and work should be complete in 20 weeks, he said.
Public open days were planned to enable all who helped raise money to see the new unit when it was ready for use.
Coun. Mrs Heather Scott, chairman of the Leukaemia Unit Fund, officially presented the first cheque to Mr Stewart and Sister Joan Meek, of the haematology department.
She paid tribute to all who helped raise money for the appeal which now stood at £280,000.
The Darlington committee and its Teesdale counterpart, which raised £20,000 in a year, were thanked along with event organisers from Hummersknott School, Darlington College of Technology and other individuals and groups.
Mr Stewart echoed the praise for all who gave time and money to the appeal, launched three years ago.
‘All the money that has been raised, whether it was a 50 pence piece, a child's pocket money or a substantially larger donation, has all gone together to make this enormous total,’ he said.
‘This is a very exciting day, not only for the fund-raisers but for the hospital and the population of Darlington and Teesdale.
I cannot say thank you enough for the effort that has gone on.’
Mrs Joan Corrigan, a committee member and one of five worried that the health authority was not fully committed to the unit, thanked Mr Stewart for his guarantee.
‘Our overriding aim of all of us with the rest of the LUF has always been local provision of a self-contained stand-alone unit specifically for leukaemia and other haematology patients,’ she said.
‘We agree there has been a breakdown in communications but hope that from now on we can work together in an open and constructive manner towards our common goal a first class haematology unit run by a first class team of doctors and nurses.
‘We already have the latter thanks to Sister Meek and Dr. Gillian Baird.’
The outcome has removed strains between members of the committee which last week resulted in Coun. Mrs Scott expressing ‘disappointment’ that some other members had written to local politicians about the unit while she was away on holiday.
They urged Mr Michael Fallon MP and his Labour rival for the Darlington seat, Mr Alan Milburn, to intervene to ensure that in-patients were fully catered for from the start.
A D and S report spoke of the ‘mischief-making’ our words not Mrs Scott's but both she and the five who signed the letter were happy that health authority financing would remove the need for the inpatient beds to be phased in.
IT is a fact that having to deal with all aspects of VAT can give rise to considerable costs for businesses.
This particularly applies when disputes occur with Customs and Excise.
Routine control visits by VAT inspectors frequently raise queries on business' VAT returns.
Often this results in the issue of a substantial VAT assessment.
These days, interest charges are automatically levied with penalties being applied to more substantial errors.
When a dispute arises Customs and Excise suggest that taxpayers should contact their local VAT office to request a review of the decision.
Indeed many VAT disputes can settled by this method.
However, there is an increased tendency for disputes to drag on over weeks and months.
In such cases there is no automatic entitlement to costs.
Where a taxpayer appeals successfully to an independent VAT tribunal costs are generally awarded.
There is then a strong argument for submitting a formal appeal at an early stage.
This was illustrated by a recent tribunal case (R M and D J Jarratt).
A husband and wife partnership ran a chemist's shop.
VAT returns were submitted monthly, based on the computer records of the business.
During a control visit a VAT officer queried the VAT returns of the business.
It was suggested that too much VAT had been claimed over the previous two years.
No obvious explanation was available and Customs and Excise raised an assessment.
As a precaution, the Jarrett's accountant lodged a formal appeal.
At a subsequent meeting Customs agreed that the VAT returns were correct and the assessment was withdrawn.
This left the couple facing a bill for professional costs through no fault of their own.
Customs refused to meet the costs claimed but the chairman of the tribunal disagreed.
He ruled that the costs were justified and Customs were directed to pay in full.
This goes to demonstrate a point that I have long argued businesses should not be hit in the pocket when a dispute arises through no fault of their own.
Anyone facing a VAT assessment which they consider unreasonable should consider seeking professional advice they could see the assessment thrown out and recover the costs if the circumstances are right.
THE Darlington and Stockton Times is a weekly newspaper within this company's selfless sorority, with a reputation as the farmer's bible.
Those who take it (and those who don't miss a treat) will know that in the best possible sense it is conservative.
It was therefore something of a surprise last Wednesday to amble into Darlington's new Thai restaurant and find four-fifths of the D&S editorial staff seated serendipitously to lunch.
Tables kept being added, seats moved, as more foreswore the serried Amstrad army.
‘It's not that we're always this awkward,’ the lady deputy editor told the waitress amidst the musical chairs, ‘just that we usually are.’
The Cottage is opposite the Civic Theatre, a pretty good place for a restaurant to be, in premises that latterly belonged to a double glazier and some time before that were a three ball, fully paid up pawnbroker's.
The North-East has four or five Thai restaurants now, including one in the Metrocentre run by a Thai lady from Easington Colliery and another in Pink Lane, Newcastle which helps fund a Buddhist monastery in Northumberland.
The Hole in the Wall, a once basic pub in Darlington Market Place, has also become a popular place for a Thai break.
The Cottage, which may well become the best of all, is run by Malinee Burachati whose husband, another Thai, has a roofing business in the town.
They're known as Mal and Dan, which is probably as well.
Mal worked in Boots; friends she'd entertained at home suggested she'd do better dispensing authentic grub to a wider circle.
She'd be well advised, though, not to repeat last Wednesday's courtesy of exchanging a meal simply because an untutored customer didn't like what she'd ordered.
The transformation, including an area with low tables and cushions for the seriously supple, is impressive.
Like much of the decor, the chef is Thai too via a five star hotel in Bangkok.
Vegetables are imported each week into Heathrow.
A lengthy menu is characterised by sweet and sour combinations, variable amounts of chilli, expensive soups, coconut milk and crates of spices with seven items vegetarian and salad sections to complement lots of meat and shellfish.
Aromatic thom yum hed (£4.10) is a piquant hot and sour mushroom soup set off with lemon grass.
Other soups might be spicy chicken in coconut milk or minced pork and jelly noodles with mushrooms and green vegetables.
A main course of fried roast duck with chillis and various other things was agreeable too, though not exactly piled high for £8.
First timers might be better off eating, as our colleagues did, from a special lunch menu that includes excellent dim sum (we purloined some) and several much appreciated noodle dishes.
Two courses are £4.95, three only £5.40.
The hour to which we journalists strictly ration ourselves at lunchtime had already passed and the mart reports wouldn't sub themselves, but a selection of citric sorbets proved worth the extra 45p.
And you might as well be hanged for a sheep as a lamb, as doubtless they say on the Darlington and Stockton Times.
A FORMER toilet roll tester has been taken on to teach the art of creative writing.
Author Kevin Wilkins once worked in a factory near his home town of Barrow-in-Furness where he tested the quality of toilet tissue.
The 41-year-old writer said: ‘We had machines which determined the precise strength of the toilet paper by seeing which way it would stretch.
It was an unusual job but I found it quite interesting.’
Now he is forging a new career as a poet, author and songwriter.
He has been installed in his new role as writing development worker at Darlington Library and plans to inspire aspiring authors to follow his example.
‘I have been amazed by the amount of creative talent to be found in Darlington,’ he said.
‘It would be great if we could organise some kind of writers’ festival sometime in the future.’
THE SKERNE Park Neighbourhood House project received a cash boost yesterday with a presentation from the TSB Foundation.
The new advice centre in Hammond Drive has been given £2,000 by the TSB Foundation towards the cost of a project officer.
David Morgan, presenting the donation for the bank, said: ‘I'm delighted that we can be of any assistance.’
Labour ward councillor Hannah Straiton said: ‘The residents are delighted with the centre.’
A COUPLE plan a sponsored walk to raise funds for a new counselling group for bereaved parents.
The Stillbirth and Neonatal Death Society offers help for families who have lost babies and has just set up a Darlington branch.
Jeanette and Simon Edwards, who lost two babies in three years, want to show their support for the new group by giving it a cash boost.
The couple, of Elton Parade, Darlington, plan to raise money next month by spending a fortnight walking the 190km trek from Robin Hood Bay to St Bees in Cumbria.
Simon said: ‘We knew that the group needed cash and this seemed a challenging way to raise it.’
THREE Mars bars a day will help Dr John Apps work, rest and play.
Dr Apps is off on an expedition of a lifetime to the Arctic Circle next month and three chocolate bars are part of his daily diet.
The explorers have to eat 5,000 calories each day double the average intake to keep their body temperatures normal in the freezing conditions.
‘We've already sent the food out there in containers,’ said Dr Apps.
‘It's a planned diet with some pre-packed meals we just have to heat up.
There are also some high calorie biscuits, which taste pretty disgusting and are like cardboard.’
He leaves for Spitsbergen, an Arctic island with just 1,000 people, on April 5.
The island is 700 miles from the North Pole and the team of explorers will arrive just as the ice seas start to melt.
‘It will be minus 30 when we arrive but it will gradually rise to zero degrees,’ he said.
‘We expect to see reindeer, Arctic foxes, Arctic hares, seals, Barnacle geese and polar bears.
There are about 3,000 bears there and they could be a hazard if they come out of the dens and haven't eaten for a few months.’
Dr Apps will join five other leaders and 24 students on the expedition, organised by the Royal Geographic magazine.
Dr Apps, the oldest in the group at 33, said he was well prepared for the cold conditions.
He spent a year in the wilds of Canada working with the air ambulance and has cycled through Iceland, Finland and Sweden.
And earlier this month he spent a night in a frozen food store.
He will leave his Neasham Road, Darlington practise for three months and is paying for the trip himself and funding a locum doctor when he is away.
‘Some people think I am crazy but I thought I had better do it now while I have the chance.’
He also leaves his wife Jane and three children James, six, Clare, five, and Simon, two.
‘In one way they are excited for me and in another they don't want me to go,’ he said.
Dr Apps will be the main medical officer with the Arctic group and said he was well versed on coping with frostbite.
‘I've got all the thermal clothes.
But it's important not to sweat if the clothes get wet it could cause problems.’
The group will monitor wildlife in the area and compile reports when they get back.
‘We'll be counting seals and looking at reindeer as well as looking at affects on the environment.
I think it will be the trip of a lifetime.’
HEALTH watchdogs yesterday welcomed news of a vital body scanner soon to be installed at Darlington Memorial Hospital.
Earlier this month Health Secretary William Waldegrave announced extra funding so the sophisticated CT scanner could be bought for Darlington.
The equipment can identify brain tumours and liver complaints much earlier than conventional x-rays and will spare patients from travelling to Newcastle or Teesside for tests.
At yesterday's meeting of the local Community Health Council chief officer Reg Watson said he was delighted by the announcement.
James Williamson, director of estates with Darlington health authority, said the keenly-awaited scanner should be in place by the end of the year.
‘This will be of great benefit to the people of Darlington and Teesdale.
There is a lot the consultants will be able to do with the equipment and it will be used across almost every specialty,’ he said.
A DISPUTE broke out yesterday over the state of the River Skerne in Darlington.
Coun Tony Richmond, leader of the Tory group on Darlington council, says litter and pollution in the river is as bad as ever and has called for swift action.
‘It is full of rubbish even though the Labour group gave a commitment to keep it clean.
‘They have not met those commitments,’ he said.
But John Buxton, director of property services at the Town Hall, said: ‘The river is being cleaned much more regularly now than it has been before.’
And Coun Eleanor Young (Lab), chair of the works and health committee, said: ‘The council cannot afford to do any more.
‘There is a quarterly clean up when we take out all the rubbish and weekly cleans of larger items like shopping trolleys.
‘Coun Richmond has seen a shopping trolley and complained but that trolley won't have been there more than a week, yet when his party were running the council there were ducks nesting in trolleys,’ said Coun Young.
Coun Ken Walker (Lib Dem) said: ‘The state of the river is better than it was two or three years ago but I would like to see more resources spent on the worst sections; in the town centre.
‘There should be more attention given to anti-pollution education for the people of Darlington — after all they are the ones to blame,’ said Coun Walker.
£1,000 to beat badger baiters Cash rewards totalling £1,000 have been offered by North Yorkshire conservationists in their battle against cruelty to badgers.
Members of East and North Yorkshire Badger Protection Group joined forces with the Yorkshire Wildlife Trust, York Badger Group and Ryedale Badger Group to offer the rewards, and their efforts were boosted by a donation from an anonymous businessman.
‘We have £750 for information leading to the prosecution of badger diggers and baiters, and a further £250 from the Yorkshire Wildlife Trust upon conviction,’ said Mr Ken Wood, of the ENYBPG.
Posters will go up to advertise the reward scheme and the animal lovers hope some of the shocking facts and figures included would spur the public into action.
Every year more than 10,000 badgers are dug from their homes throughout the country and are battered with spades or have their jaws and legs broken before being put into baiting pits.
‘Yorkshire is one of the worst places in the country, particularly the Scarborough area,’ said Mr Wood, of Seamer, near Stokesley.
‘It is not just the diggers and baiters we want to catch, it is the people who are paying money for the badgers.
‘Some gangs actually take the badgers up to Scotland for baiting.
You are talking about at least £1,000 for a live badger.’
The group has just officially opened a badger nursery where young injured and orphaned animals can be raised and returned to the wild.
Until now the group has used animal homes throughout the area.
One successful operation involved a cub found wandering in the centre of Darlington, taken to a refuge at Throckley, near Durham, and returned to the group for release into the Yorkshire countryside.
Although the location of the nursery and release spots are kept strictly confidential, anyone finding abandoned badgers can contact the group via Mr Wood on Stokesley  or get in touch with the police or RSPCA which approved the nursery.
Cash donations are also needed to keep the group operating.
Mr Wood said members hoped to equip all watchers with two-way radios.
‘We do a lot of surveillance and at this time of year when the diggers are out it is not really safe for members to venture out without being in contact,’ he said.
‘A lot of our members are women and could be in even more danger.’
The group's next event is a talk by ICI ecologist Mr Ken Smith in Seamer village hall on Thursday (7.30), all welcome.
Candidates in wrangle over training funds Darlington training groups could be forced to pull out of a government scheme because of a lack of funds, the town's Labour's candidate predicted this week.
But his Conservative counterpart said the drop in funding only reflected the fall in unemployment levels since their peak in 1986.
Mr Alan Milburn said new funding arrangements from April meant companies and training providers would be paid £28 a week for each trainee a drop of £3 on last year.
The amounts for Category B trainees those who need special help would fall from £65 to £51 a week.
Since government rules said each trainee had to be paid £29.50 a week, the move meant companies would have to start subsidising the training.
He claimed his Conservative opponent had denied as ‘simply untrue’ claims that the Government had cut the training budget.
‘I am therefore issuing my second challenge to Michael Fallon: will he now withdraw his remarks and accept that real cuts are taking place in Darlington's training provision or is he scared of the truth about training?’
Mr Fallon said the Government was providing much more money for training than it had done in the last recession in the '80s.
And the figures quoted by Mr Milburn had been leaked; in reality, the total amounts being provided by the umbrella group Durham Training and Enterprise Council were still being discussed.
He said some training councils had increased their bids to take advantage of the political sensitivity of the subject.
‘The budget simply reflects that we have fewer people out of work about 30 per cent less than in 1987.
Therefore there are fewer people to train.’
He agreed that some training groups might pull out but others would take their place.
‘Some organisations leave and others start.
We want the best training.
We have to remember that nothing is forever.’
Mr Peter Bergg, Liberal Democrat, said improving training was essential if Britain was to come out of recession.
The Conservatives had ‘played’ with training.
‘They have not really seen training as an effective means of improving the country and there has been a steady decline in Britain's industry as a result.’
The Liberal Democrats would make education up to 18 compulsory although much of it could be done in the workplace rather than just in schools and colleges.
SINCE our feature on the subject we have had several enquiries about how to go about arranging a home birth.
We have also had a call from a Darlington doctor keen that we promote the use of GPs in home births.
Although he did not wish to have his name mentioned fearing his surgery would be swamped by expectant mothers, he has helped us write an eight point guide to having your baby at home.
1.
Make sure you are motivated: Many women who want home births have had unsatisfactory births in hospitals and now want to give birth in the dignity of their own home.
2.
Seek out sources of advice: Having confirmed your pregnancy with your GP raise the issue and sense out the response.
If it's negative you can contact the community midwives of whom there are five in Darlington.
3.
Make sure you have the minimum housing requirements for a home birth: A phone will be essential in case of emergencies and your doctor will insist there is adequate help from husbands or partners.
4.
Be prepared for difficulties: Seven out of every 1,000 home deliveries will go wrong, although most of these can be dealt with by your doctor at home.
One advantage of being at home is that you will be less likely to have a caesarian section, which is seen as a last resort while in hospitals around 12pc of all pregnancies will end in an operation.
‘Hospitals have all this hi-tech equipment so they tend to make sure they use it,’ said our GP.
5.
If you are equally worried about giving birth in both a hospital and at home you might prefer something in the middle: Some hospitals allow women to use water pools in the labour ward and you can arrange for your GP to help with the birth rather than hospital doctors.
6.
Expect a mess: Your doctor will expect your home to be clean but it is not necessary to sterilise everything.
Plastic sheets will help prevent permanent staining.
But don't expect it to cost any more by law a midwife must attend your birth and this will be provided by the NHS.
7.
If you are having a baby for the first time: Your labour may last for 24 hours.
Consider if you are fit and healthy enough to endure this or is there something you could do to improve the situation.
8.
For details: Contact The National Childbirth Trust (–8637) or Margaret Whyte at the Durham Society to Support Home Confinement ().
A MOTHER who says she is homeless has been told she will not be rehoused after refusing to move on to an estate.
Carol Connor turned down a house on Firth Moor estate, Darlington, over fears for her children.
Carol, 24, has two children; Charlene, seven, and Christopher, three, and is expecting a third in October.
Her son suffers behavioural problems and she is worried his difficulties could increase if the family moved to Firth Moor.
She has been living with her friend Jane Eager at Scira Court, Wylam Avenue, Darlington, since October and applied to the council as a homeless person last month.
Jane, who has three children, says the situation has become intolerable and there is not enough room for both families.
But after her refusal, Carol has received a letter from the council saying it has ‘discharged itself of the responsibility of rehousing her as a homeless person’.
PARENTS are to have the chance to discuss a pioneering after-school maths study class in Darlington.
The Kumon method involves children, from tots to teenagers, learning at their own pace.
So far, more than seven million youngsters worldwide have been through the classes designed to make maths fun and encourage youngsters to build confidence.
The classes are to start later this month and interested parents are invited to a presentation on Monday at Darlington Arts Centre.
WAITING lists at Darlington Memorial Hospital have dropped dramatically, a report has revealed.
John Flook, acting chief executive of Darlington Health Authority, said yesterday that two year waiting lists had fallen from 74 at the end of December to 24 last month.
And the number for March had gone down to single figures.
The number of people waiting 12 months or more had also fallen from 367 in December to 183 last month.
The health authority hopes that by next March no patients will have waited more than two years for treatment.
But Eddie Richardson, branch secretary of Nupe, was concerned operation lists had fallen because patients were not seeing consultants.
‘They keep pushing the operations back and back,’ he said.
‘I know someone who has been put off three times for an appointment in ophthalmology.’
AFTER reading the articles on dyslexic children it brought back this time last year when my son Steven, who is dyslexic, was trying for an engineering apprenticeship.
Time after time he was shortlisted because at the interviews the company managers liked him (he's quite intelligent, outgoing and friendly).
But then he would be turned down.
Why?
His exam results would not be all that good.
One manager told him to come back when he had a grade C in maths.
This, I am afraid, is almost impossible.
By the time he had read the question of say, how long will it take X number of men to dig a hole, he would have forgotten the start of the question.
Ask these young people questions straight out, not written down and they can answer most problems.
Come on employers, give these youngsters a chance.
Most are in the top 25pc for intelligence.
You might be pleasantly surprised.
Mrs Carole A. Catterick, 19 Alwyn Road, Darlington.
THE most memorable secretaries are not the ones who write shorthand at 185 words per minute but those who fall in love with their bosses.
None of either type quite come to mind at present but, still, it is the latter bunch who are likely to become rich or famous or both.
For some reason this sentiment, which will presumably bring a mass of redundant typewriters and used notebooks bearing down in this direction, goes unmentioned in a report published today.
This is one of those serious affairs, looking not at affairs but at ambitions and job satisfaction.
It has been prepared by that august body, the Industrial Society and indicates that many secretaries feel trapped in their jobs.
Their bosses view them as no more than glorified typists and they are denied career opportunities.
This comes as a surprise.
It seems to demonstrate that secretaries instead of being secretaries expect to become executives, which was presumably not in the job terms of reference when they applied.
Still, Juliet Hepburn, the IS's head of secretarial development who wrote the report after hundreds of interviews said: ‘The attitude of many managers is a recipe for keyboard blues.
Organisations are simply failing to capitalise on one of their major assets by not making the most of secretaries’ skills.’
It would have been quite interesting to get Juliet to expand on this but her secretary answered the call.
Either the message was not passed on, or it was ignored which indeed shows the power secretaries wield.
Sixty per cent of secretaries want to develop another career but only 15 per cent feel opportunities exist.
A VITAL search to help her baby 20 years ago has led Brenda Adey to a new career.
Brenda has started a practice in homeopathy an alternative medical system growing in popularity.
Brenda, of The Green, Richmond, first came across homeopathy while seeking help for her daughter, Angela, born with a severe heart condition, and now aged 20.
She looked at all sorts of alternative medicine and found that homeopathy was very effective for Angela's condition of breathlessness and collapse.
Brenda found out more about it and eventually took the plunge to take it up herself.
She ran a business and worked in a health shop to work her way through four years of study at the Northern College of Homeopathy, Gateshead, and has practised for the last six months under supervision.
Homeopathy, used by the Royal Family for generations, was discovered in the 1800s by German physician Samuel Hahnemann who found that treating like with like The Law of Similars worked.
For example, cutting a strong onion can produce runny nose, sore throat and stinging eyes, so a homoeopathic remedy made from onion is given to a patient with a cold and bad throat.
Homeopathy has more than 2,000 remedies, made from all sorts of plants and even snake venom.
Brenda's remedies are made by up by a pharmacist and sent to her.
The system has grown in popularity in recent years.
The nearest practices to Richmond include ones in Darlington, Thirsk, Yarm, Guisborough and Bainbridge, Wensleydale.
Brenda said: ‘I think people are wanting to take more responsibility for their own health.
They want to know why conditions occur.
‘Homeopathy takes the holistic approach and deals with diet, health, mental and emotional state of the patient as well as their particular symptoms.
It's complementary to orthodox medicine.
My daughter would not be here if it was not for orthodox medicine but I do believe her condition has been improved by homeopathy.’
HOLIDAY camps in the country will resound this summer with the dulcet tones of a group of children from a school near Darlington.
Nine pupils from Sadberge School went behind microphones at Tees Beat Studios, Stockton, to record a tape of songs for David Oliver, a freelance musical director working for holiday company Haven Warner.
The children sang songs to be relayed throughout the company's camps for members of its children's Tiger Club.
Those taking part were all ten to 11-year-olds and all had been chosen from volunteers at the school.
HOSPITAL fund raisers have hit back at claims that they were staging a begging plea in a bid to find more cash.
Nupe branch secretary Eddie Richardson launched the criticism after Darlington hospital workers were asked by letter to give donations to fund the health service.
But David Lowe, vice-president of the League of Friends of Darlington Memorial Hospital, which sent out the letters, said it was up to individual members as to whether they contributed.
‘Payroll giving is not a new thing and it is completely voluntary,’ he said.
‘If people do not like what they read they can put the letter in the bin.
We won't be offended.’
The letters, sent out last week, asked employees to make a regular donation to the charity.
Among the projects to benefit are a creche and health care bursaries.
If successful at Darlington Health Authority, the Friends told of their aim to target Darlington engineering, construction and commercial firms for cash.
But Mr Richardson said many Nupe members had money problems of their own without being asked to give money to the health service.
A ROYAL visitor is to see mentally ill people brushing up their social skills and learning relaxation techniques at a Darlington centre next The Duke of Gloucester will visit the Mind centre in Borough Road, Darlington, which was opened last year by the Bishop of Durham, the Rt Rev David Jenkins.
News of the royal visit, which will be on election day, April 9, marks the end of 18 months of hoping by the charity, which caters for the mentally ill.
‘When we were looking around for a royal to open the centre, we were promised as soon as someone was available for a royal visit, we would get one,’ said Peter Carberry, chairman of Darlington Mind.
‘We are happy one of the royals is taking an interest.’
The Duke is due to spend an hour and 20 minutes at the Mind headquarters before leaving for Bowburn and Durham City.
Mr Carberry said he would be shown the accommodation for nine above the centre and told of the residential project in Darlington town centre, which provides accommodation for three people.
An exhibition demonstrating the charity's work is also to be held.
‘We are all looking forward to the visit very much.
It will provide us with a great boost,’ he said.
Mind workers are now planning to set up a marquee in the garden in Borough Road for the royal celebration.
Staff at Darlington Memorial Hospital were justifiably angry last week after being asked to make donations to a charity based at the hospital.
The Friends of the DMH, a laudable group of people, hope to raise more than £30,000 for the hospital during this financial year.
Recently the Friends contacted hospital staff asking them to make regular payments to the charity, with the money funding schemes such as a creche and health care bursaries.
Union representatives reported that members, especially those on lower incomes such as porters, catering staff and domestics, were angered by the letters.
Their spokesman acknowledged the valuable role played by the Friends but argued the letters bordered on blackmail.
The Friends responded by saying individual members of staff can choose whether or not to contribute, and the services paid for by their collections would not be available through the NHS.
In recent years funding and management of the health service has become something of a political football.
But put aside the party point scoring and one indisputable fact emerges which will readily be agreed by all health service staff are a breed apart with their dedication to duty, willingness to work long hours and commitment to patient care.
Given the massive contribution made daily by dedicated staff at the DMH it seems more than a touch insensitive to expect them to dip into their own pockets for the place as well.
The Friends are understandably zealous in their pursuit of donations, but they should be willing to admit on this occasion their zeal was misplaced.
A SECOND candlelit vigil aimed at improving the health service is to be held in the grounds of Darlington Memorial Hospital next week on the anniversary of the NHS reforms.
At the first vigil there were ugly scenes when Tory councillor Peter Jones was accused of attacking Alan Milburn, the Labour candidate for Darlington.
Coun Jones had been visiting his mother-in-law at the hospital in October when he saw the Labour candidate among the crowd of protestors.
Now the NHS Support Federation has planned another vigil for Monday at 8pm in the hospital grounds.
Organiser Dr John Apps said the event was aimed at increasing funding for the NHS and at introducing a 10pc limit on private beds.
Protestors want to restore free dentistry and eye tests to the NHS and reduce the cost of NHS prescriptions.
They also want to ensure health authorities provide a comprehensive range of NHS services of a high quality and to discourage the growth of a two-tier health service by cutting tax privileges for private medical insurance.
Dr Apps has stressed the protest is not affiliated to any political party.
He said anyone who cares about the NHS is welcome.
Staff at a Durham hospital are also holding a vigil on Monday in protest against NHS reforms which have led to hospitals opting out of health authority control.
Dr Anne Dew, who is organising the vigil at Dryburn hospital, Durham, said: ‘There has been quite a bit of support for the vigil from staff in all areas of work at the hospital.
‘The national campaign points out that over the past year as more and more hospitals have opted out of health authority control a two-tier system in health care has developed.
‘It is time to realise that not every human organisation can be costed, fragmented and run as a business governed by market forces.’
She said the campaign was calling for a halt to the trend towards privatisation, and more funding to prevent cuts in services.
TRAINEES from a skills training scheme have been told their courses are to be chopped before they have had the chance to gain their qualifications.
Yesterday joinery and construction trainees at the New Careers centre on Darlington's Faverdale industrial estate were sent home as soon as they arrived.
The organisation has been negotiating with its local Training and Enterprise Council over their annual funding allocation, due to take effect next week.
Government cuts are forcing the TECs to cut the budgets made available to individual schemes.
Derek Holdsworth, 45, of Grainger Street, Darlington, is one of 32 New Careers trainees to face the chop.
He said: ‘I've been there a month and was hoping to get a City and Guilds qualification in joinery.
We just got told as soon as we turned up that the course was cut with immediate effect.
It look as though I'm back on the dole.
I feel very bitter about this, it seems as if I've been wasting my time.’
A spokeswoman for New Careers said no comment could be made at present.
Alan Milburn, Darlington's Labour candidate, said: ‘The need for training investment in Darlington has never been greater.
According to Government statistics, unemployment in Darlington is rising, and more than 1,000 people have joined the dole queue since John Major became Prime Minister.
‘Under these circumstances it is madness to cut training.
What we are seeing now is the result of training cuts made by this Government in the funding of their TEC.
Earlier this month Michael Fallon (the Conservative candidate) said claims that training budgets had been cut were simply untrue.
I now challenge him to withdraw his remarks and accept real cuts are taking place in Darlington.’
Last night Mr Fallon said: ‘Alan Milburn is a parasite on rumour.
None of these changes have yet occurred.
‘There is to be a redistribution of training places because the number of unemployed in this constituency has gone down since 1987 while in the south there has been an increase.
‘Every year there are changes, with old courses shutting down and new ones opening.’
A GUARDED pledge of improved service has been given to patients throughout South Durham.
Yesterday, Darlington and South West Durham health authorities unveiled their plans for the new Patient's Charter at a press conference in Darlington.
But both health authorities issued a warning that the charter needs support from patients if it is to be a success.
The local charter goes beyond the nine standards laid down by the Department of Health, with the authorities stressing the intention was to improve quality and promote openness in administration.
Dr Robat Williams, who has devised the joint charter, said the launch came at a difficult time because of the General Election campaign.
‘We do not want to make this a political issue,’ he said.
Patients nationwide have been promised a guaranteed service including an ambulance within 14 minutes in urban areas and 19 minutes in rural areas.
Emergency cases will receive professional attention immediately and more thorough treatment within 30 minutes.
In Darlington and South West Durham extra pledges made included: access to health records with guarantees that information is confidential; a health helpline with frank details of waiting lists; treatment within a maximum of 18 months; complaints responded to within five working days and better facilities for visitors and families with children in hospital.
Dr Williams said the charter would not be delivered to all patients but it would be widely available.
Both authorities are pleased with the arrangements to make sure patients know who is looking after them.
‘In my experience that is very important reassurance to most people who are ill,’ said Dr Williams.
But John Tholen, chairman of Darlington health authority, said: ‘It is crucial that patients play their part.
It is terrible the number of people who do not keep even appointments for surgery.’
Both authorities emphasised the importance of the health helpline to start from April 1 on  which would offer the chance of feedback from patients with grievances.
AN IMPROVED service has been promised to patients from doctors and hospitals throughout South Durham.
Darlington and South West Durham health authorities made their pledge while unveiling plans for the new Patient's Charter at a press conference in Darlington.
But both health authorities issued a warning that the charter needs support from patients if it is to be a success.
The local charter goes beyond the nine standards laid down by the Department of Health.
Both authorities stressed the intention is to improve quality and promote open administration.
Dr Robat Williams, who has devised the charters for both authorities, said the launch was at a difficult time because of the General Election campaign.
‘We do not want to make this a political issue,’ he said.
Patients nationwide have been promised an improved service, including an ambulance within 14 minutes in urban areas and 19 minutes in rural areas.
Emergency cases will receive professional attention immediately.
In Darlington and South West Durham, these extra pledges were made yesterday:— Access to health records with guarantees that information is confidential A health helpline with frank details of waiting lists — Treatment within a maximum of 18 months — Complaints responded to within five working days — Better facilities for visitors and families with children in hospital.
Dr Williams said the charter will not be delivered to all patients but it will be widely available.
He said producing the brochures for each authority had not been expensive.
The charter would make sure care is appropriate to the patient.
Children will only be in children's wards and parents will be able to stay with a child throughout treatment.
Both authorities are pleased with the arrangements to make sure patients know who is looking after them.
‘In my experience, that is a very important reassurance to most people who are ill,’ said Dr Williams.
John Tholen, chairman of Darlington health authority, said: ‘It is crucial that patients play their part.
It is terrible the number of people who do not keep even appointments for surgery.’
Mr Tholen and Erika Wallis, chairman of South-West Durham, agreed the charter will confirm most of the policies already in use by health authority staff.
They hope the charter will let patients know their rights and give feedback if the service is not working.
The Health Helpline number, which should be operational from April 1, is Bishop Auckland .
The helpline is for both authorities.
A ROW broke out last night over claims about waiting lists in Darlington as the local health authority launched its patient's charter.
Election candidates and doctors clashed over claims that waiting times have increased in the town.
Labour candidate Alan Milburn said figures from the Northern Regional Health Authority's guide to waiting times for GPs throughout the North show an increase in almost every department within Darlington health authority.
But Conservative candidate Michael Fallon dismissed the figures as Labour scaremongering.
‘This is just like Mr Milburn to feast like a parasite on the sick,’ he said.
He was backed by one local GP.
Darlington doctor Roger James said last night: ‘If someone needs urgent treatment they get it within a week.’.
Dr James said he was fed up with waiting lists being used to judge the authority's performance as they are not an accurate indication.
Mr Fallon said: ‘It is a nonsense to measure from the time of referral to the time of operation because not all out-patients require operations.’
But another Darlington GP, who asked not to be named, said the waiting list situation is getting out of hand.
‘Claims by the health authority that waiting lists are going down are absolute nonsense,’ he said.
Labour claim the health authorities have continually ‘cooked the books’ to give more acceptable waiting list figures.
Mr Milburn said: ‘These figures show how long a patient waits before he even gets on the official waiting list.’
The Darlington Patient's Charter promises to treat all patients within 18 months of going on the list.
Labour say the authority will be hard pressed to keep the promise when 13 of the authority's consultants have waiting lists of more than a year.
Liberal Democrat candidate Peter Bergg said the issue of waiting lists has been overpoliticised.
‘Most people on waiting lists are there because treatment is not urgent,’ he said.
Mr Milburn said he had spoken to an 81-year-old lady from Harrowgate Hill who has got steadily more blind while waiting two years for treatment for cataracts.
‘The health of people like her has not been and is not safe in Tory hands,’ he said.
In Darlington's ophthalmology department alone Mr Milburn says there are 897 local people waiting for treatment.
Mr Fallon responded: ‘A new consultant has been appointed in the ophthalmology department with extra money from central government.
This should make significant inroads into waiting times.’
IT IS no great secret, I suppose, that I am quite happily at home in the company of women.
So I can understand why women themselves should have a high regard for each other.
The problem here though and the show is quietly and very deliberately subtitled ‘Lesbians take photographs’ is that we rarely see a pairing of two sleek, longhaired and long-legged blondes.
One, it seems, must always be Eton-cropped and even muscular as though there has to be a male substitute.
In Tessa Boffin's five figure Knight's Move in a cemetery there is a female, somewhat butch, knight-in-shining-armour to set alongside the Knave, the Angel (very female) Casanova and the Lady-in-Waiting.
Since there have been so many hermaphrodite creatures in classical sculpture, I must admit that at times here I had to double check both top and bottom.
Not, you will understand, that there is anything unseemly here except perhaps the occasional rather coy toplessness.
Although the book of the exhibition contains the work of more than 30 women photographers, the number here is restricted to ten.
Among them, Jean Fraser with her Celestial Bodies calls upon the services of two nuns and a nude female to help recreate Manet's famous Dejeuner sur l'Herbe, while Deborah Bright makes her point by interpolating an ambivalent, bisexual figure into a number of famous film stills so that what was originally a one to one male/ female relationship now appears to be a menage-a-trois.
The Laing Art Competition Landscapes Polytechnic Gallery, Library Building, Newcastle (until April 10).
AT ABOUT this time of the year and for every year since 1973, the Laing Construction Company has set about the long and complex business of arriving at the six illustrations that will ultimately grace its calendar.
Ten separate regional exhibitions are held up and down the country and in Newcastle alone some 180 works have been submitted.
From this total, Karen Wallbank's bird's eye view of Farmstead, Evening under a lowering sky (016) has been selected as the £500 winning entry and this with 14 other selected works, three of them highly commended, will go to London with the chance of the overall prize of £5,000.
What then are the North-East's chances of scooping this year's pool?
Certainly there is much of interest here as the exhibition runs the whole gamut with further wide-ranging, bird's eye views through more down to earth transcriptions to a couple of urban scenes.
And last but not least is Ross Hickling's pastel study of the Gateshead Garden Festival (057) which, if his present run of good fortune still goes his way, might well scoop the pool.
Margaret Wiles, Syd G. Davison and Tom McAndrew Billingham Art Gallery, Queensway, Billingham (until April 16).
MESSRS McAndrew and Davison have long since discovered that, post-retirement, the world is their oyster.
They have also realised after a number of annual painting expeditions together that there is considerable mileage to be had from monastic ruins as well as both occupied and derelict castles.
The common link between all three exhibitors is Hartlepool and its Art Club and many of the works here might almost have been destined for those annual sorties into the Hartlepool Marina and the town's burgeoning renaissance.
There are thus adequate interpretations of the famous harbour and the sea wall, but it is Margaret Wiles who seems to have travelled farthest afield and lets us share with her the joys of a holiday in Greece with both watercolours and canvases of Lixouri, Kasiopi and Kephalonia.
At least ten works have already been snapped up at the private view, so my advice is to get to Billingham as soon as you can.
BRITISH National Party leaflets calling for the re-introduction of hanging and forced repatriation will be sent to thousands of homes in the next few weeks.
BNP activists are planning a mass leafleting campaign in a bid to get their controversial policies across.
The mail shots will be followed up by personal visits from the BNP's Darlington candidate Donald Clarke.
Dr Clarke plans to hold a series of public meetings in the town to harness right wing support.
He has also published a leaflet of quotes which will be delivered by BNP canvassers.
In the leaflet Dr Clarke says: ‘Darlington has yet to be a Leicester or a Bradford.
‘But let us not forget that when most of us were children Bradford and Leicester were themselves Darlingtons, recognisably a part of the same country as ours.’
He adds: ‘If you long for the day when Britain can claim to be the first mainly Afro-Asian part of Europe, vote Conservative or Europe.’
Dr Clarke claims ‘humane repatriation’ is the answer, saying: ‘It is our only defence.’
DARLINGTON'S Salters Lane special school is in the running for a Royal Anniversary Trust Award for helping open up Hamsterley Forest to people in wheelchairs.
Pupils are creating a nature trail, a boardwalk alongside a pond and writing an information leaflet.
Year's wait just to get on the list, says Socialist
Patients in Darlington can wait over a year just to get on a hospital waiting list, Labour's candidate said this week.
But his figures were later dismissed as ‘very misleading’ by his Conservative opponent Mr Michael Fallon.
Mr Alan Milburn said he had obtained a copy of The Waiting a secret document giving details of queues for each different consultant.
The quarterly report is used by GPs to decide where to send patients.
He said they revealed the true length of the queues.
‘The government is trying to fiddle the figures in an attempt to curry political favour just like it fiddled the unemployment figures.’
‘Its figures only measure waiting time from the day a patient is put on to a consultant's in-patient or day case waiting list.
‘But the Northern Regional Health Authority document shows how long patients have to wait before they even reach that list.’
He said the worst figures were in ophthalmology where patients had to wait between 48 and 71 weeks just to see a consultant for a diagnosis.
Total waiting time varied from 75 to 116 weeks.
‘The Labour government will immediately make available £1bn. to invest in the NHS.
That will improve the morale of staff and more importantly it will get patients treated.’
Mr Fallon said: ‘It's very misleading to measure waiting lists from the time of referral to the time of operation because many patients will go to a consultant as out-patients but don't need operations.’
He said the figures excluded urgent treatment cases and Darlington GPs had said to him that such cases could be dealt with in a matter of days.
‘In ophthalmology there have been some problems but a new consultant has been appointed thanks to increased funding made available by this government.
Now they expect to make significant inroads in patient waiting time.
‘None of the GPs I have spoken to has noticed any worsening in operation waiting times over the last 18 months.’
Mr Peter Bergg, the Liberal candidate, said the issue had become over-politicised.
‘Mr Milburn and Mr Fallon are playing with statistics because to a degree one is right and to a degree the other is.
‘But the question they are not answering is what are we going to do about the NHS.
It should not be in the political arena; it should be something on which we are all working together.’
‘Nightmare’ of life under Labour Mr Norman Tebbit, the former Tory Party chairman, came to Darlington on Wednesday and conjured up a nightmare vision of life under Labour.
He received a rousing reception from a partisan audience of about 90 at the public meeting held at Hummersknott School.
The speech was dominated by repeated references to the Labour government of the 1970s: a time, he said, when ‘big booted union bullies stalked the land’, strikes were the norm and ‘graveyards were locked against the dead.’
Mr Neil Kinnock, the leader of the opposition, was condemned as a man who had abandoned his principles.
‘Now he sails under a flag of convenience, prepared to change his views at the drop of an opinion poll.’
He said Labour had two manifestos one they published and another secret one to be produced if the party won.
Life under a Liberal-Labour coalition (‘the Neil and Paddy show’) would not produce firm government.
The tough decisions needed to fight the Falklands and Gulf Wars would not have been made and neither would the striking miners have been defeated.
Proportional representation was simply a lottery.
‘In Israel a tiny sectarian minority hold sway and prevent that government from reaching out for peace.
‘They had an election in Belgium eight weeks ago and they haven't even found out who has won yet.’
A wealth of excellence in the NHS
WE HEAR a great deal these days from the Labour Party about the shortcomings of the NHS.
I can only say that my own experience is quite the reverse.
Having recently had a pacemaker installed I have nothing but praise for the treatment I received both at the Friarage Hospital in Northallerton and the Freeman in Newcastle (a Trust hospital).
The morale was high, the nursing caring and good and the doctors could not have taken more trouble.
At the Friarage the doctor came at 5am to install a temporary pacemaker and I was sent up to Newcastle by ambulance with a doctor, a nurse and a paramedic.
I could not possibly have been better looked after in any private hospital and my thanks and appreciation go to all those who made my recovery possible.
H.C.
Henderson, The Manse, Thornton Steward, Ripon.
Good news
THE spring Town Crier came yesterday and what a terrific read it is now that it is being produced by Darlington College of Technology students.
Formerly it was stilted, boring, narrow in approach and poorly laid out.
It is now the complete opposite.
An eye catching layout, full of interest over a wide range of subjects, well written and hardly a hint of political bias.
All those at the college concerned in its production are to be heartily congratulated for giving the town a very impressive civic magazine of a very high standard which for once is good value for the public money spent on it.
R.K. Bradley, 125 Lunedale Road, Darlington.
MEDICAL patients in Darlington and South West Durham now have a set of guidelines of what to expect from their local health service.
The two health authorities covering these areas have launched their versions of the Patient's Charter.
They comprise pledges on national standards and a new set of promises specifically geared to the local area.
Critics might say the charters are merely PR exercises for pledges which should already be standard requirements of the health service.
But the local charters at least set down these requirements publicly and unequivocally for the patient.
And they do include new assurances.
We have been promised access to our health records and waiting lists which are no longer than 18 months.
Parents have been promised the right to stay in hospital with their sick children at all times.
A public statement of the existence of these rights is a written commitment to providing a public service and should be applauded.
The charter's real test is its ability to deliver its objectives and redress any failures.
There is a right to complain and to have complaints ‘properly investigated’.
But if its promises are broken there is no financial compensation on offer.
In fact, it is not clear what would be the consequences of the authorities failing to meet their own standards of service apart from publication in an annual report.
If the charter is to be worth more than the paper it is printed on we need guarantees that appropriate action will be taken to the satisfaction of the public, and in particular, the complainant.
The first round of reports will be scrutinised with interest.
MEDICAL patients in Darlington and South West Durham now have a set of guidelines of what to expect from their local health service.
The two health authorities covering these areas have launched their versions of the Patient's Charter.
They comprise pledges on national standards and a new set of promises specifically geared to the local area.
LAWS to tighten up control of strays take effect this week but anyone who expects to see the streets cleared of roaming dogs will be disappointed.
From Wednesday people allowing their dogs to stray will have to pay a new fee of £25 on top of the existing boarding charges if they want to retrieve their animal.
Failure to ensure dogs wear a collar and some form of identification in public places will be an offence and the legislation also requires those who find a stray dog to report it to the authorities.
Darlington Borough Council employs two wardens to deal with strays.
The dogs are taken to kennels at Langley Moor and destroyed if they're not claimed within a week and cannot be sold.
Few towns can boast they do not have a problem with dogs being allowed to roam the streets and Darlington is no exception.
While the Environment Protection Act will go some way to addressing the situation it does not seem to take into account those owners who will not care if their dog is impounded and destroyed and certainly will not pay to save it.
The legislation relies on the common sense and compassion of responsible people, along with the power to enforce it and prosecute offenders.
This well-meaning law will have little effect on the type of owner at whom it is primarily aimed.
BLIND people whose lives have been made easier by the work of a Darlington woman gathered this weekend to say thank you.
Rehabilitation officer Margaret Harding, 64, was not meant to know that a special presentation had been organised, but word soon got out.
Elsa Lawson, from Newton Aycliffe, who helped organise the event, said it was a mark of how well Mrs Harding knew the people involved that it was impossible to keep the presentation a secret.
On Saturday 70 of the people Mrs Harding has regularly visited came to the Spennymoor day centre to thank her for her work.
In the 19 years she has been working for Durham County Council's social services the number of rehabilitation officers for the visually impaired has dropped to one.
Now there is doubt as to whether the position will be automatically filled when Mrs Harding, of Barnes Road, Darlington, retires.
‘She knew all our problems and the best ways to solve them,’ said Mrs Lawson.
Mrs Harding said of her forthcoming retirement: ‘I imagine I will keep up some of the work and stay in touch with a lot of the friends I have made.’
ANGRY parents say they are ‘gutted’ after a playgroup was told it must leave its premises.
Parents in Middleton St George, near Darlington, have raised several thousand pounds to maintain the building which stands in the grounds of the village school.
Recently they raised 1,700 pounds in just six weeks to replace an old boiler.
Since moving in seven years ago they have put in new windows, new plumbing, sinks and lavatories.
The building has been carpeted throughout and furnished with new blinds and new lino.
They have painted the building twice inside and outside.
Now Durham County Council has told the group's chairwoman Liz Walsh the 30-year-old building which is suffering serious subsidence problems is beyond repair and must be demolished.
‘We're just gutted,’ said playgroup leader Lin Gales.
‘Seven years ago that building was all boarded up and wee took it over and transformed it.
It's the children who will suffer in the long run.’
‘We liked that site because it prepared the children for going to school.
It's also in a safe area.’
Mrs Gales said they are to have temporary accommodation in the Water Park Community Centre.
No one at Durham County Council was available for comment.
DELEGATES from across the region were in Darlington yesterday at a seminar tackling social and health issues associated with dogs.
The seminar was one of several held up and down the country in the run up to the introduction of Environmental Protection Act legislation on Wednesday.
Speakers included environmental health officers, dog wardens, veterinary representatives and medical spokesmen.
Police discussed the problems of stray and dangerous dogs and council officers talked about the implications of new duties for local authorities.
Patients suffering from skin cancer are to be asked to take part in research aimed at proving a link between the disease and the radioactive gas radon.
Around 400 people who have been treated for melanoma (skin cancer) will be asked to keep a radon-measuring device in their homes for a year as part of a £13,000 Bristol University project.
The research is funded by the Skin Cancer Research Fund, based at the South West's largest hospital, Frenchay in Bristol.
The patients are on the hospital data base.
The South West has some of the highest levels of household radon in the country.
The naturally-occurring invisible gas is present to some extent in every home in Britain.
World Health Day is on Thursday, April 2.
This year the focus is on the healthy heart.
Experts are urging everyone to give up salt for the day and thereafter cut down on salt to ensure a healthier heart.
They point to statistics which show that salt intake is ‘far in excess of need’ and may lead to raised blood pressure in susceptible adults, and that if everyone reduced salt intake by half a teaspoon a day, it could save 40,000 premature deaths per year.
For people who can't give up the taste of salt, health experts recommend switching to low-sodium salt alternatives.
Supporters of the National Eczema Society are hoping to start a branch in Darlington.
The society plans to form a fund raising group in the town.
Anyone interested should contact Val Bagnall on 091–236 5379.
Consumers Penguin, makers of the popular chocolate biscuit, have followed other confectionery competitors and launched an ice cream bar.
It is the first new product to be launched under the Penguin name since the biscuits appeared in the 1950s.
The new bar consists of a triple layer of chocolate ice cream inside a real milk chocolate coating.
It joins the growing market for new ice cream sensations demanded by the British public.
A recent survey shows Britons spent more than £750m on the stuff last year the equivalent of eating around seven litres per head more than Germany, France and Italy.
North-East pupils will be pitting their wits on questions about consumer affairs, safety and environmental issues in the regional finals of the Young Consumer of the Year contest at Gateshead on April 7.
Travel The East Anglia Tourist Board has launched the 50th anniversary celebrations of the arrival of the United States Army Airforces in Britain in 1942.
The USAAF Reunion will attract more than 20,000 U.S. war veterans and their families to Britain during 1992.
They will be greeted by local communities in East Anglia who have made arrangements to provide them with a very special welcome.
The reunion consists of a programme of events from April until the end of September.
The Duke of York, who is patron of the reunion, will attend a commemorative service at Bury St Edmunds Cathedral on Sunday, May 10.
The service will be followed by a fly-past of part of the Battle of Britain Memorial Flight.
Staff of the York-based Yorkshire and Humberside Tourist Board will be selling the region to some 2,000 tour and travel operators from all parts of the world at the new British Travel Trade Fair at Birmingham's NEC next week.
Assistant marketing manager Dinah Varlow said: ‘We are certain that the new show will generate good business for the region.’
The board will have one of the biggest exhibitions at the fair with 21 towns and holiday attractions taking part.
IT is not all work for children at Mount Pleasant primary school in Darlington, where children take a caring approach.
Distressed by mindless vandalism that destroys trees and flowers they are keeping a watchful eye on plant life.
The animal kingdom gets its fair share of attention as children learn how to care for pets.
A runaway hamster called Sophie takes pride of place where the school rat once roamed.
And they learn to care for themselves with a sociable cafe selling orange and biscuits before home-time every Friday.
LYNNE Humes has taken time off work as a staff nurse at Darlington Memorial Hospital to start a family, and her son Anthony was born in January.
The NHS is one of the main election issues for Lynne, who says she has seen many changes in the service over the last ten years.
‘Some were for the better but a lot were for worse.
Lack of funds has been a big problem, especially for research, but it always has been.
‘No one will ever put enough money into the NHS.’
Lynne voted Conservative at the last election and Labour in 1983, but this time is uncommitted to any party.
She will listen to what each side has to say before deciding who to support on April 9, although she says she is not keen on any of the three party leaders and preferred Margaret Thatcher to John Major.
‘All the parties have their good and bad points.
For Labour they want more people employed and that's to the detriment of taxes and inflation.
The Tories want the opposite, the Liberal Democrats are in the middle.
‘It's a hard choice.
People have to choose certain issues in each party that they like best.’
Lynne wants to see more workplace creches available and believes Labour offers the best policies for mums but questions how they will pay for some of their ideas.
She is unimpressed by the way the election campaigns have been conducted.
‘It's just like a circus.
I'm sick to death of it because it's all you hear about, but I know it's important.
‘I just hope whoever wins will do their best for the country.’
A CARE assistant last night lost her claim for unfair dismissal against Europe's biggest private nursing home.
Michelle Dixon had claimed she was sacked from the massive Trees Park Village home in Middleton St George near Darlington after expressing concern over allegations of mice and cockroaches on the premises.
But an industrial tribunal yesterday decided she was not unfairly dismissed from the complex near Teeside Airport.
Managing director Prabhdyal Sodhi told the hearing Dixon conspired to alert the health authority rather than go through the proper channels and complain to management.
He said he instantly dismissed Miss Dixon after she displayed a hostile attitude and claimed she might do the same thing again.
‘I thought Miss Dixon was effectively a danger to the company because she was taking the law into her own hands,’ he said.
He said he had received information from another member of staff that Miss Dixon had left a message on a telephone answering machine about an ‘untidy kitchen’ at the nursing home.
Miss Dixon, of Haxby Road, Middleton St George, claimed she had merely given moral support to a colleague who rang Darlington Health Authority for advice on mice and cockroaches seen in the corridors.
The hearing was told Miss Dixon was bound by a grievance procedure at the home which meant she must raise matters of concern internally rather than go to an outside body.
Mr Sodhi said he intended to give Miss Dixon a final warning but her attitude meant he felt compelled to sack her.
At the hearing he also raised claims about her being absent from work and using foul language to residents.
The decision ends a seven-month wait to settle the issue at the home which has been at the centre of allegations of declining standards.
Last year The Northern received letters from staff and residents expressing concern over care levels and changing working practices.
More than 80 staff joined Nupe when there were fears of job losses at the home which employs 450 care assistants and nurses.
Candlelit protest held at hospital
DARLINGTON Memorial Hospital was the scene for a candlelit vigil last night in protest at NHS underfunding.
The non-political event was organised by local doctor John Apps who wants to see free health service eye and dental checks and cheaper prescriptions.
At the last vigil in October Conservative borough councillor Peter Jones allegedly attacked the town's Labour candidate Alan Milburn who was with NHS protestors.
A CANDLELIT vigil demanding more funding for the NHS was held at Darlington Memorial Hospital last night.
The non-political event was organised by Dr John Apps, pictured above with Dr Sarah Finnie, who wants free eye and dental checks, and cheaper prescriptions.
At the last vigil held in October, Tory councillor Peter Jones allegedly attacked protesting Labour candidate Alan Milburn.
ENVIRONMENTALISTS opposed to Darlington's planned cross town route are celebrating a Department of Transport announcement which they argue will weaken the case for the road.
Engineers from the DoT are to look at the southbound-only A1(M) and A66(M) interchange near the town to see if it can be adapted for northbound traffic.
Campaigners fighting the cross town route have argued the junction could be altered to remove the need for the new road.
The cross-town route proposed by Durham County Council would link the A66 from Teesside with the A1(M), via a new road through Darlington coming out on the A68 past Faverdale on the edge of the town.
But protestors who say they are prepared to defy the bulldozers argue that traffic from Teesside could use the existing southern A66 by-pass round Darlington to Blands Corner on the edge of the town then head for the A1(M).
At the moment traffic using the A66 interchange can only get onto the southbound lane but protestors argue that a northbound carriageway would remove the need for a cross-town route.
Yesterday Darlington Environmental Watch spokeswoman Maggie Bosanquet said she was delighted by the news from the DoT.
She said: ‘Certainly the need for the route would be drastically lessened if the interchange was northbound.
The cross town route won't solve problems, it will create more, by bringing extra traffic into the middle of Darlington.’
Mrs Bosanquet said traffic from Teesside would be able to use the underused dual carriageway A66 bypass to the new junction.
She added the planned cross town route would only be single carriageway and would rapidly become overcrowded with vehicles.
DEW intends to oppose the cross town route even though planning approval has already been granted for part of it.
‘There are people who feel strongly enough to lie down in front of bulldozers,’ she said.
But John Braithwaite, assistant director of highways and bridges design at Durham County Council, said the possible northbound junction would not remove the need for the new route.
‘I have never considered that these would be alternatives, they serve different purposes,’ he said.
‘There are lots of little reasons that will add up to the need for the cross town route.
‘It will open up new land for development along its length and remove traffic from Haughton village, it's a multi-purpose route.
‘But the northbound junction would be a more significant long-distance connection.
Drivers coming from Teesside Airport and heading north would have to go a significant distance to use it.’
Mr Braithwaite said work on the first stage of the new road was on schedule to start at the end of this year or early in 1993.
He added DoT engineers had asked the county council for a list of suggestions for projects to consider during their investigation of possible improvements along the length of the A1(M).
If the A66(M) junction were redesigned it would cost several million pounds and take several years to complete, he said.
Darlington election candidate Michael Fallon confirmed the DoT was to examine the junction.
ADULT education focuses on environmental responsibility and wildlife habitats in two courses running in Darlington later this month.
Tutor Viv Shelley will look at whether manufacturing industries are living up to the green images they promote, the adequacy of monitoring processes and ask what responsibility lies with the public.
The course is set to run for six Wednesdays from April 29 with sessions from 10–11.30am.
The wildlife habitat course, led by Trina Barrett, will form an introduction to management of grassland and woodland and one indoor meeting will be followed by four evening field visits at sites including Thrislington Plantation and Hamsterley Forest.
The first meeting will be held on Wednesday, April 29, from 7.15–9.15pm and enrolment for both courses is now open.
More details are available from Bennet House, Horsemarket, Darlington, tel .
RELATIVES are flying in from Japan to celebrate the golden wedding of a Newton Aycliffe couple known to hundreds of club members in the area.
Jack and Ann Gilmore, from Avon Court, Newton Aycliffe, worked in clubs and pubs from Wheatley Hill to Workington from 1959 until their retirement.
Through the Sixties Jack and Ann worked at the Nestfield Unionist Club, in Albert Hill, Darlington, supervising the new club when it was first opened.
From there Jack, a Royal Navy veteran, became steward at the Newton Aycliffe British Legion club for four years.
By this time the couple had six children, two of whom now live as far away as Japan and Cyprus.
Tomorrow a big party is being held for friends, children, grandchildren and great grandchildren.
Jack and Ann are expecting about 60 guests.
Yesterday the couple enjoyed a quiet day together.
RESIDENTS objecting to a bedsit complex in Darlington were too scared to express their views publicly, it was claimed yesterday.
The terraced house in Station Road, Darlington, is already in multiple occupancy and retrospective planning permission had been applied for.
Yesterday's planning applications sub-committee was told residents in the property create an unacceptable level of disturbance for others in the street, and rejected the request.
Labour ward councillor Margaret Thomas said people in the house had threatened opponents of the planning application who would not now come forward for fear of repercussions.
She said she had a dossier of complaints relating to the bedsit and requests to the owner to keep his tenants in order had been fruitless.
Coun Thomas said police had been called to the house numerous times.
WORKING experience of the French language and way of life will be on offer to pupils from a Darlington school.
They leave town on Sunday for a ten-day exchange to Amiens, Darlington's twin town in France.
The group of 16 boys and eight girls is from Carmel RC Comprehensive.
They will be the guests of local families staying in and around the town of Amiens.
Lessons at the local college and visits to other parts of the country as well as a day out in Paris, are on the agenda.
The children, all aged 14, will be accompanied by two members of staff and face a 12hour journey to reach Amiens.
A return visit is planned for May when Darlington families will be hosts to Amiens children.
FIRST-HAND experience of the French language and way of life is in store for schoolchildren on an exchange visit to Amiens, Darlington's twin town across the Channel.
The party of 16 boys and eight girls from Carmel RC Comprehensive School in the town's west end will be the guests of local families.
Lessons at the local college, a day out in Paris, and visits to other parts of the country are just some of the items on the agenda.
The children, all aged 14, leave on Sunday with two members of staff.
They face a 12-hour journey before reaching their destination.
A return visit is planned for May when Darlington families will play host to children from Amiens.
THE number of patients waiting for hospital treatment has been cut considerably according to health officials.
In the last 12 months the number waiting for more than two years across the Yorkshire region dropped from more than 3,000 to just 16.
And those 16 are all booked in for treatment during April, most this week.
The final figures for those waiting between one and two years won't be available until later this month, but Yorkshire Health predicts a cut from 8,322 to about 2,000.
The total number of people waiting for treatment is also down, by more than 1,500 to 70,714.
Over the last year an extra 29,000 inpatients and 8,500 day case patients were treated up 6pc on the previous year's total of 588,000.
A row has broken out among Darlington councillors over plans to build a private hospital in Lingfield Way on the Yarm Road Industrial Estate.
Coun Frank Robson (Lab), who represents Lingfield Ward, said: ‘It's inappropriate.
A hospital isn't an industrial use.’
Bur Tory councillor Peter Jones welcomed the proposals.
‘I think a private hospital in Darlington would relieve the Memorial Hospital of its private patient commitments.’
RESIDENTS have voiced growing concern over ambulance coverage in Teesdale after an ambulance took more than half an hour to respond to an emergency call.
A man who collapsed with chest pains in Barnard Castle was treated by a local doctor before the ambulance arrived after travelling about 15 miles from Darlington.
When it arrived, it was not needed.
Coun Phil Hughes, chairman of the town's Citizens Advice Bureau, has written to the general manager of Durham county ambulance service, Ken Threlfall, about the delay after the incident outside his office.
Mr Threlfall, who is still awaiting the letter, said he would investigate, while an ambulance service spokesman said the ambulance had taken 24 minutes to respond.
Coun Hughes urged Mr Threlfall to consider a rapid response unit to deal with emergencies.
Coun Hughes said the emergency services were called to Barnard Castle shortly before 2pm, while the nearby health centre was contacted at about the same time.
When further requests were made at 2.10pm and 2.15pm callers were told the ambulance was on its way, he said.
In his letter Coun Hughes said he had read that 95pc of all emergency calls in rural areas of the county were responded to within 19 minutes.
He added: ‘While I appreciate that in some 5pc of cases the response time is outside this target, 36 minutes is unacceptable in Barnard Castle.’
He suggested the ambulance service adopt a rapid response paramedic on a motorcycle, equipped and trained to save life using specialised equipment and techniques.
Mr Threlfall said: ‘The standards we regularly achieve in County Durham exceed the national requirement of 19 minutes it is regularly 18 and a half minutes.’
He said it was inevitable that in 5pc of instances the response times may be longer.
He added: ‘We have to employ resources in the most effective way we can to cover the whole of the demand as it occurs.’
PLANS to build a private hospital on an industrial estate at Darlington have been criticised.
A foreign medical company, which is not being named, is negotiating with Darlington Council through a local construction company about the proposal for the hospital in Lingfield Way, on the Yarm Road Industrial Estate.
A letter to the council from Bowhill Construction, of Middleton St George, claims the hospital would employ at least 80 people and could be open by September 1993.
The developer hopes it would link with the existing Magnetic Imaging Centre, which already operates a sophisticated body scanner.
So far no formal planning application has been submitted.
But yesterday Coun Frank Robson (Lab), who represents Lingfield Ward, said: ‘I think we should weigh up the advantages and disadvantages of having a hospital on an industrial estate.
My first reaction is the two are not compatible.
‘It's inappropriate.
A hospital isn't an industrial use.’
Bur Tory councillor Peter Jones, who supported a plan by Bioplan to build a clinic in the grounds of Darlington Memorial Hospital, welcomed the proposals.
He said: ‘I think a private hospital in Darlington would relieve the Memorial Hospital of its private patient commitments.
‘I think the green field site is excellent.
It opens on to open countryside and is easy to get to.
There would be no car parking problems.’
But Eleanor Young, chairman of Darlington Community Health Council, said: ‘We would only want to know if the hospital was going to have any effect on NHS provision.
Otherwise we would not be concerned with it.’
Representatives of Bowhill Construction were not available for comment yesterday.
PARENTS and teachers have been left ‘punch-drunk’ by Tory efforts to reform the education system, Darlington's Labour candidate Alan Milburn said yesterday.
But his Tory opponent Michael Fallon hit back claiming Labour's tax plans threatened teachers' pay.
Mr Milburn was joined by the party's front-bench education spokesman Baroness Tessa Blackstone and Danish MEP Freddie Black claiming cuts in training investment and Britain's education record compared with the rest of Europe.
He said children were being let down by Conservative ‘pennypinching’ and adult training was being savaged by a cut in funding.
Mr Milburn said £600m would be allocated to schools and £300m for skills and training.
‘More than 2,500 Darlington children will benefit there are classes in 20 schools with 30 or more children,’ he said.
But Mr Fallon said the biggest threat to teachers came from Labour's tax plans.
‘More than half of Darlington's teachers would pay higher national insurance,’ he said.
Education spending rose by 16pc last year and 7pc this year, he claimed.
‘That's way ahead of inflation.’
And he said adult education had never been cut.
‘Adult education is Durham County Council's responsibility and will remain Durham's responsibility,’ he said.
DARLINGTON is to spearhead a new scheme designed to keep homeless families out of bed and breakfast temporary accommodation.
Staff from the borough council's housing department have held meetings with a national building society which is anxious to use its empty properties to house homeless families.
Coun Bill Dixon (Lab), chairman of the housing committee, said last night he hopes Darlington can be one of the first towns in Britain to use this system.
A spokesman for the society, which has asked not to be named during the run-up to the election, said: ‘We are still not certain how many houses we will have to offer Darlington council.’
Coun Dixon is optimistic there will be at least ten homes available soon.
Most will be empty because they have been repossessed from mortgage defaulters.
The council will move high priority homeless families into the homes and the housing benefit they receive will go to the building society to pay the mortgage.
PEOPLE in Teesdale are worried about ambulance cover after a vehicle took half an hour to respond to an emergency call.
A man who collapsed with chest pains in Barnard Castle was treated by a local doctor before the ambulance arrived from Darlington 15 miles away.
When it arrived, it was not needed.
A complaint has gone to Ken Threlfall, general manager of the Durham county ambulance service, who promised to investigate.
Last week a Durham City vehicle took 25 minutes to answer an emergency call in Bishop Auckland, and recently a woman in Upper Teesdale had to wait over an hour for an ambulance.
THE British National Party last night held a meeting in Darlington's Dolphin Centre.
Anti-fascist demonstrators had said they would demonstrate outside the centre but there were no protestors.
There were 17 people in the meeting room to hear a speech from the party's Darlington candidate Dr Donald Clarke.
BNP regional organiser Kevin Scott said the BNP had suffered from unfair treatment from the media and the cowardly attitude of the three other candidates.
He said Labour, Conservative and Lib Dems have refused to share a debate with Dr Clarke but he warned the BNP would not be prevented from going to election meetings in the town.
Dr Clarke aimed his remarks at the key issues of the election campaign: health, education and the economy.
He blamed the Conservative Government for making a mess of the economy but warned a Labour Government would do no better.
He said the NHS needed to stay public if it was to remain ‘the envy of the world’.
On education he applauded the Conservatives for taking school budgets out of control of local education authorities.
He ended his speech with what he called: ‘the vexed issue of immigration’.
He said there are parts of Britain including Leicester, Bradford and East London where ‘you cannot feel at home’ and warned of a ‘tidal wave of North Africans poised to flood into the UK.’
NEW figures which show only one Northerner is still waiting for hospital treatment after two years were yesterday greeted with caution.
The waiting list figures, released three weeks early by the Department of Health, show that the number of people waiting over two years for treatment in the Northern Region has dropped from 1,474 at the end of March, 1991.
A spokeswoman for the regional health authority said that 206 people on the two-year list were treated during March.
Figures for people waiting between one and two years for treatment had also dropped by around 400 to 4,355 in the 12 months to the end of February.
However, Eleanor Young vice-chairman of the National Association of Community Health Councils and chairman of Darlington CHC, expressed concern that recent efforts to bring down the lists would not be sustained over the next few months and years.
Mrs Young said: ‘It is really too early to comment on whether this is going to be the permanent way of things.
‘Even the recent drop begs the question if they can do all this in a month or two, why couldn't they have done it before.’
She welcomed the work done and the fact that so many people who had been waiting for so long had been treated, but was concerned that health workers who had been working flat out to reduce the lists would not be able to maintain their work rate.
She added: ‘Even if you have to wait a year, it's a long time if you're worried about it.’
The Department of Health figures show that nationally, two-year lists have been slashed from 51,224 patients at the end of March, 1991 to just 1,640 patients at the end of last month.
Health secretary William Waldegrave described the reduction as ‘an astounding success for the NHS’
It was unacceptable, he said, that patients should have to wait for more than two years for their promised treatments.
Five years ago, the number waiting more than two years for treatment stood at 90,000.
Of 186 district health authorities across the country, 153 no longer have two year waiting lists.
Julia Schofield, director of the London-based NHS Support Federation, claimed some regions were keeping ‘pending waiting lists’ so that many people do not appear on the official lists.
She claimed that the Northern Region could be one of them.
But last night the NRHA spokeswoman emphatically denied her authority had any secret list, adding there was just one person in the North who was waiting more than two years for treatment.
A CHURCH basement in Darlington is being converted into a youth club with a bar atmosphere in a bid to keep teenagers off the streets.
The club, which should be open by the summer, will only serve soft drinks, but will be furnished with bar fittings, a pool table and a juke box.
‘We're dragging these clubs into the twentieth century,’ said Morag Coates, of Grange Road Action For Youth.
Mrs Coates came up with the idea when she realised that young people were finding their way into adult bars or congregating in the streets.
‘I've been looking into something like this for about two years and come up against brick walls constantly,’ she said.
Things changed last summer when she spoke to Dr John Elliston, Minister of Grange Road Baptist Church, who suggested using the church basement.
Last October an appeal was launched for £15,000.
So far only £2,000 has been raised, but individuals have been doing jobs for nothing.
A lot of support has come from local firms and from individuals like electricians and plumbers, said Mrs Coates.
At the moment they are looking for joiners.
‘We've also had people on community service orders who've been marvellous.
Without them we wouldn't be anywhere,’ says Mrs Coates.
Anyone who can help with the work can contact Mrs Coates on Darlington .
DARLINGTON health officials have drawn up a smart new logo as part of their plans to revamp the service's image.
The new letterhead also marks a change of name from Darlington Health Authority to Darlington Health Services Unit.
Staff have been told to use stocks of old stationery as scrap paper.
No further supplies of the out-of-date letterheads will be issued.
A spokeswoman for the Health Services Unit explained: ‘We wanted to give the service a corporate image which could be easily understood by the public.
‘The new logo incorporates all that was good about the old one in a smart new design.’
A DARLINGTON man cannot fulfil his life-long ambition to be a chauffeur because he is too young.
Richard Gladstone, 23, has telephoned and written to dozens of companies for a chauffeur's job.
But he has been refused because firms think he is too young.
‘People do not take me seriously and it is very frustrating,’ said Richard, of in Zetland Street.
‘I am constantly ringing firms up to see if anything is going.
But they say you have to be over 35 to comply with the insurance requirements.
‘It's a life-long ambition of mine to be a chauffeur and I just want to be given a chance.’
Richard, who is unemployed, has been driving since he was 17 and said he had a clean licence.
‘I always stick to the limits and am not a boy racer,’ he said.
He was a taxi driver in Newton Aycliffe for two years but gave it up as it was ‘soul-destroying’.
‘I love driving but I was doing this 14 or 15 hours a day to make ends meet.
I would just love to get a job and then go on to do my advanced driving test.’
‘Reject doctrine of envy and bitterness’ MR Kinnock states that no one earning less than £20,000 per year will pay more in income tax under a socialist Government.
So how is it that I, a pensioner earning half that sum, will pay more tax should he win the election than I did last year?
If the Socialists win the election I, and I suspect a lot of pensioners with an occupational pension no matter how small, will lose out financially.
I admit that it will not be a lot more but it will be more, whereas should the Tories win I will pay less.
The last time they were in office Labour said the same thing, those earning less than a certain amount would not pay tax, however, in reality everybody paid out more and remember Harold Wilson's pound in your pocket speech?
Labour denigrate Britain and its achievements and particularly the Health Service.
I have no complaints about the health Service.
I had a hernia operation last year in Darlington Memorial Hospital and cannot speak too highly of the staff and my treatment.
I could not have received better treatment anywhere in the world.
My vote will go the party that faces up to present day problems not one that wallows in class hatred and preaches the doctrine of envy and bitterness.
Mr. A.W.
Card,.
We have a new North-East.
This region was once dominated by coal, steel, ship-building and rail engineering.
Today more people work in electronics, pharmaceuticals, car components and new technology businesses of all kinds.
Throughout the 1980s the North-East has become a magnet for new investment.
American, Japanese and Korean companies have flocked here creating thousands of new jobs.
Fujitsu chose to site their £400m semiconductor plant near the A1(M) bringing in 1,500 jobs.
All these companies have longterm confidence in our region.
They have faith in our work force and in the skills we offer.
The North-East gives them room to expand and offers their employees a higher quality of life.
With the new jobs has come wider ownership.
Once a land of dour council housing, thousands now own their own houses.
One in six own shares; most now have private pensions.
Enterprise, ownership and choice are the ingredients of Tory success.
Socialism is the smokestack creed, condemning its people to council houses and poor public services.
The North-East is much more prosperous than ten years ago.
The unemployment rate is close to the national average, and the recession has hit far harder in the south.
Our region is poised for further growth once the election is out of the way.
We are committed to the new North.
We shall go on backing business in the region and encouraging companies to relocate here.
We shall go on upgrading the region's rail and road links to ensure faster, more efficient access to the European markets.
We shall go on expanding higher and further education to ensure more of our young people go on to college as naturally as they once went down the pit or onto the shop floor.
We shall go on improving education and training to guarantee that all our children have the basic knowledge and skills they need in a modern economy.
We shall go on improving our public services, cutting through the authorities and bureaucracies to give our colleges, hospitals, school and doctors' surgeries their own funding.
We shall reduce the weight and cost of local government in the region, allowing towns like Darlington, Hartlepool and York the right to run their own affairs again.
Above all, we shall continue to reduce tax, especially for the low paid and allow working families to keep more of their earnings.
We shall do this while continuing to increase spending on the essential public services on which we all depend.
Labour threatens the new North.
They would drive away foreign investment.
The TUC calls companies like Nissan alien.
They would give more power to local bureaucracies.
They would extend council monopolies in housing and in schooling.
Everybody in the region would have to pay a new tax towards a regional assembly based on Tyneside and dominated by Labour politicians.
In short, we would be back into the world of Andy Capp owing, dependent, controlled and poor.
The Conservative vision offers the North more enterprise, new jobs in the new technologies, wider ownership of homes, shares and pensions and greater freedom.
Stick with us.
NORMA HILDON is secretary of the Darlington branch of the Guide Dogs for the Blind Association.
Our branch of the association has around nine members who work together to raise money for the full training of guide dogs estimated to cost £1,000.
In the past we have held a number of fund-raising events in the area.
These have included coffee mornings, flag days, stalls and fairs.
Two of our members also go along to schools to do talks about the association.
Often, they take one of the guide dogs or puppies along to show the pupils.
On April 29, International Guide Dog Day, we are planning to set up a stall to promote the work of our organisation.
Hopefully, we are going to set up our stand at Morrison's supermarket in the town.
The training of a guide dog begins after they have been ‘puppy trained’ for a year.
Some of the members of the Darlington branch help to look after potential guide dogs when they are puppies.
The volunteers have to be prepared to look after the puppy for a year, although they do get an allowance for feeding the dogs.
When the dogs are young they don't have any real fear of anything.
We take them out at about six months to get them used to travelling on buses and trains, as well as teaching them to stop at kerbs, listening for traffic and avoiding any obstacles.
The dogs must also be trained not to be easily distracted by the environment they find themselves in.
Occasionally, the dogs attract the attention of children, and even adults, who want to stroke them.
The attention is not so much of a problem when the dogs are puppies as the idea is to train the dog to not be afraid of people, but when this happens to a fully trained guide dog accompanying a blind person it can cause problems.
At the moment, the association has kennels at Leamington Spa that breed guide dogs for the whole of the country.
Around 85pc of the dogs bred are cross Labrador-retrievers.
However, we also use German shepherds, collies and Labradors and retrievers separately.
The association used to take dogs from the general public, although this acceptance has now ceased.
Some of the dogs came from aggressive breeds, not suitable as guide dogs.
We try to match the dog with the owner.
For example, if the owner lives in the countryside, then the guide dog will be trained in the countryside.
I have always loved dogs and I became involved with the association when I met a lady who was also involved in puppy training.
From then on, I knew it was something I wanted to do.
I have trained about five or six puppies now.
Each puppy stays with a volunteer for a year before finishing its training with qualified experts.
This takes between six and nine months.
It can be very sad having to part with the dog after a year, especially when you have become so attached.
We're desperately in need of some more members to join branch.
Anyone interested can write to 14 Mulheim Close, Darlington, or telephone .
TODAY, 21 years of caring are celebrated by staff and visitors at a Darlington day care centre.
Beck House, in Faverdale, has become a second home to many people in the area with learning difficulties.
Centre manager Malcolm Powton said he hoped for 500 visitors for the party day, including Durham County Council's director of social services, Peter Kemp.
Beck House plays an important part in the social services system for the county, providing training programmes and an advice service.
Hundreds have benefited from its training schemes.