

New job cuts fear as Leyland axes 1,600
By Graeme Stewart Industry Correspondent
MORE than 1,600 workers at the crisis-hit truck maker Leyland DAF, including 67 at the Albion axle production plant in Glasgow, lost their jobs yesterday.
Those remaining after the receivers began the ‘painful’ task of cutting jobs in an attempt to avoid the total closure of the company feared more losses in the near future.
However, the workers were split on whether to take industrial action over the crisis, with production employees at Leyland in Lancashire rejecting a strike by 4-1 but shopfloor workers in Glasgow backing the move by more than 2-1.
The result of a ballot by Birmingham workers will be known on Monday, when national and local union leaders will meet to plan their next move.
The company's 5,750 British workers had been braced for cuts all week but they still came as a devastating blow.
Managers were as badly hit as shop floor workers and the full breakdown of redundancies was:
67 out of 550 at the Albion works in Glasgow;
768 at the truck plant in Leyland;
589 at the van plant in Birmingham;
136 at the parts warehouse in Chorley, Lancashire;
75 at the sales and marketing centre in Thame, Oxfordshire.
Murdoch McKillop, the joint  administrative receiver said he very much regretted having to make some 30 per cent of Leyland Daf's UK employees redundant.
‘This has been a very painful decision.
These redundancies are necessary if we are to maintain the business and carry on trading as a viable operation,’ he said.
John Allen, chief negotiator for the Amalgamated Engineering and Electrical Union, said: ‘It is disgraceful that these workers, many of whom have been with the company all their working life, are just thrown on the scrap heap, while the Government sits on its hands and does nothing.’
Tommy Gorman, acting convener at the Albion plant in Glasgow, added: ‘I saw a staff manager leaving with a plastic bag and half-an-hour's notice after 40-odd years of service.
That type of behaviour is absolutely outrageous.’
Some of the workforce from Albion demonstrated outside Alhambra House, the Scottish Office premises in Glasgow, as the Scottish industry minister, Allan Stewart, met the plant shop stewards and Labour MPs Donald Dewar and George Galloway.
Both Labour MPs protested strongly to Mr Stewart that immediate  Government action was essential if a vital part of the remaining industrial base in Glasgow is to be saved.
However, while Mr Stewart said he would be working strenuously to help ease the plight of the Albion workers, he could offer little hope of any Government money to support the stricken plant.
Editorial, Page 10
Cold print: one of the workers at Leyland's Albion plant reads his redundancy notice outside the factory yesterday
Hunt in Spain for mother of ‘home alone’ girl
POLICE were last night trying to trace an actress whose 11-year-old daughter was found alone in a flat after she apparently flew to Spain on holiday.
Officers from the child protection team and social services were called in after the girl turned to an elderly neighbour for help, Scotland Yard said.
Inquiries were being carried out in Spain in the hunt for her mother, who had walk-on parts in two episodes of the TV series The Bill.
The girl involved in the case — which echoes the hit film Home Alone — goes to stage school and had a non-speaking part in The Bill.
She was found on her own in a £75,000 two-bedroomed mansion flat in the Stamford Brook area of west London.
Hammersmith and Fulham council was alerted in the the night on 1 February after a caretaker at the block of flats called in the authorities when neighbours became concerned.
‘As a result of that the child was taken to a place of safety and is now being accommodated by the council,’ a council spokesman said.
The case follows a similar set of events in America where Chicago couple David and Sharon Schoo were arrested after leaving their two daughters at home over Christmas while they went to Acapulco.
The couple appeared in court in Illinois on Thursday and pleaded not guilty to more than 60 charges including cruelty and neglect and possessing marijuana.
In Home Alone, a child played by Macaulay Culkin is left at home on his own and has to fend off burglars.
A neighbour at the flats said the youngster was ‘a lovely little girl’.
‘I heard on Wednesday from a neighbour that she had been left alone by her mother who had gone to Spain.
I think it is dreadful.’
Another said: ‘How could any mother leave a child to fend for itself?
It's a disgrace.’
The caretaker who alerted Childline and police said the girl once told him ‘she didn't care where she lived as long as it wasn't with her mother’.
He said the youngster, whose mother was about 32, was ‘only alone for about a day.
She wasn't really at risk’.
The owner of the London stage school which she attends said she turned up to school every day with the right lunch money and with her uniform clean.
‘I believe her mother left the country at the end of January so I am shell-shocked, basically, to find she was on her own.
‘She is a good little actress although she has opted for the dancing course here.
She has been doing a voice-over for a commercial for a magazine today, which will keep her mind off her problems.’
The girl's mother could face a criminal charge of wilfully neglecting the child under the Children and Young Persons Act 1933, which carries a maximum penalty of ten years' imprisonment.
Civil proceedings could follow under section 31 of the Children Act, involving a possible care or supervision order.
— PA
Everest challenge for Alison and the children
ALISON Hargreaves and her children put in some low-altitude training in Scotland yesterday as they prepared for the high life of the Himalayas.
Tom (left) will be six and Kate (right) four by the time next year when Alison, as part of the British Mount Everest Medical Expedition, attempts to become the first British woman to ascend Everest.
They will stay in the base camp.
The children, their father Jim and other members of the first UK medical expedition to Everest, were on Aonach Mor, near Fort William, yesterday where they set up an imitation base camp for the benefit of the press and potential sponsors.
Ms Hargreaves, 32, from Derbyshire, will be at the sharp end of the project.
As well as being the first UK woman to climb the mountain she intends to be the first to make the ascent without oxygen.
‘I've been climbing ever since I was a child, and I suppose Everest has always been a dream for me,’ she said.
‘To do the climb without oxygen, to prove it can be done, is a real challenge.’
Murdered girl's mother still held
THE mother of a murdered seven-year-old was yesterday still helping with  inquiries into the child's death, more than 24 hours after she was arrested, said police.
Gilliane Queripel, 33, was arrested on Thursday by officers investigating the murder of Stacey Queripel.
The child was found lying alongside a footpath near her home in Bracknell, Berks, on 24 January.
She had been strangled and died later in hospital, Thames Valley police said.
— PA
Tribute paid to dead stuntman
THE HOLLYWOOD star Harrison Ford and the SAS were among those who paid tribute to stuntman Tim ‘Tip’ Tipping at his funeral yesterday.
He died last week when his parachute failed to open while filming for the BBC series 999 near Alnwick, Northumberland.
More than 500 mourners packed the St Peter and St Paul's Church in Wadhurst, East Sussex, where Mr Tipping, a former Royal Marine and part-time SAS soldier, was buried.
Mr Tipping, 34, worked on the Indiana Jones series in which Ford starred.
— PA
Man dies on work training trek
AN INQUIRY is under way after a man collapsed and died yesterday while trekking through mountains as part of a management training course.
The 46-year-old married man collapsed in freezing fog while walking at 600ft in the Brecon Beacons in Powys, mid Wales.
Police said last night that he was thought to have suffered a heart attack.
With visibility down to 15 yards, rescue teams struggled to reach the man, but a doctor pronounced him dead.
— PA
Prime Minister and caterer get apologies
THE Prime Minister and the caterer, Clare Latimer, were yesterday given a public apology and undisclosed damages in the first round of their libel claims over allegations of an affair between them.
The High Court settlement came in actions brought against the New Statesman's printers, BPCC Magazines (Colchester), the distributors Comags and the newsagents John Menzies.
Mr Justice Otton was told they regretted helping to give currency to the allegation that John Major and Miss Latimer had been conducting an adulterous relationship.
They ‘unreservedly’ accepted that such an allegation was ‘wholly untrue’.
Miss Latimer, who was in court, said afterwards: ‘I am pleased with the outcome so far, but I will carry on pursuing this.
The other actions are continuing and I hope they get tidied up very quickly.’
Mr Major's counsel, Mr Andrew Caldecott, said BPCC printed 30,000 copies of the offending issue of the New Statesman, which appeared on January 29, before being notified it was considered libellous.
They took such action as they could to prevent further distribution.
Comags distributed about 25 per cent of the print run of the New Statesman to wholesalers before being contacted by Mr Major's legal advisers.
They took prompt action to prevent further distribution.
John Menzies had sold some 700 copies of the New Statesman and 50 copies of the satirical magazine Scallywag, which also contained the allegation, before they were contacted.
They too took prompt action.
The printers, distributors and newsagents accepted there was ‘no truth whatever in this grave charge’, said Mr Caldecott.
They had agreed to pay Mr Major sums which were ‘proportionate to their responsibility in the matter’ while ‘properly reflecting the injury and distress’caused to him and his wife Norma.
They also agreed to pay his legal costs.
‘In these circumstances the Prime Minister is happy to accept the apologies offered and to take no further action against them,’ said Mr Caldecott.
Similar settlement terms were announced by Miss Latimer's counsel, Mr Thomas Shields.
The New Statesman itself and Scallywag have indicated they will contest the libel actions still pending against them.
Proceedings against the newsagents W H Smith are also outstanding.
The New Statesman insisted in a statement that the article was not defamatory and said yesterday's settlement would not affect its determination to fight the libel actions brought by Mr Major and Ms Latimer.
‘As far as the New Statesman is concerned this question will be determined at the end of the day by a judge and jury who will have heard all the evidence, and not by any other means,’ it said.
It added: ‘Our position has always been that there is no truth in the rumours concerning Mr Major's private life: our article made this clear and is not therefore defamatory of him or of Ms Latimer.
‘As far as the New Statesman is concerned this question will be determined at the end of the day by a judge and jury who will have heard all the evidence and not by any other means.’
Clare Latimer: ‘pleased with the outcome so far’
Baghdad prisoner's wife renews call for release
THE wife of Baghdad prisoner Paul Ride returned to Britain yesterday and renewed calls on the Government to press for his release.
Julie Ride, of Walthamstow, London, said as she landed at Heathrow airport after a five-day visit to the Iraqi capital: ‘The Government has got to get its act together now and get Paul and Michael out.’
Her 33-year-old caterer husband is being held in a Baghdad jail along with fellow Briton Michael Wainwright, 42, of Sowerby Bridge, West Yorkshire.
Both are serving long sentences after being found guilty of illegally entering the country.
Mrs Ride who travelled with their 23-month-old son William, was also accompanied by Mr Wainwright's sister Heather Horne, his mother Iris Wainwright and Mike Whitlam of the British Red Cross.
Mrs Ride said both men were very well and had no complaints about their treatment in prison.
‘We are obviously a step closer now.
We have been out there and seen the situation for ourselves.
And we know what the Iraqi government would like, which is the release of their money frozen here since the Gulf war.
‘It's really down to the British Government to sort it out now and for us to keep the pressure up on them.
But we are hopeful,’ she said.
She added that she would be asking for a meeting on Monday with a minister from the Foreign Office.
Radioactive leak confirmed at Sellafield
WORK on the dismantling of a nuclear reprocessing plant at Sellafield caused a leak of radioactivity yesterday.
British Nuclear Fuels Ltd said the radioactivity reached the air through a chimney stack which was still in use.
But spokesman Bob Phillips said it was not an incident which required reporting to the Government.
He dismissed protests from Friends of the Earth as ‘scaremongering’.
However, Dr Patrick Green, Friends of the Earth radiation campaigner, said: ‘BNF has a scandalous track record of playing down incidents at first, and only admitting their seriousness later.’
Three months ago BNF confirmed that a leak of radioactive plutonium solution had been reclassified as ‘a serious incident’.
— PA
Tribunal victory for Sunday working objector
A SHOPWORKER who claimed she was sacked for refusing to work on Sundays won a claim for unfair dismissal at a Hull industrial tribunal yesterday.
But the tribunal chairman, David Latham, ruled that Ruth Taylor, 50, of Scarborough, North Yorkshire, had not lost her job over the issue of Sunday working.
The decision to sack her followed disagreements with the shop manageress but the procedure involving dismissal had been virtually non-existent.
Mrs Taylor's complaint of unfair dismissal was upheld and she was awarded £324 compensation.
Mrs Taylor, a devout Baptist, made her claim against a clothing store, Franlow, where she worked until last July.
She told the tribunal that she had been pressured and bullied into working after commercial pressures forced Franlow to start trading on Sundays from May 1992.
Mrs Taylor said Sunday was an important day for her and her family and that she also wanted to go to church.
When she was asked to work on Sunday 5 July, she refused and was sacked two days later.
Franlow maintains Mrs Taylor was dismissed after a long-running dispute with the manageress.
The tribunal chairman ruled that the dismissal was because of‘a personality clash’ between the two women and Mrs Taylor's alleged misconduct.
But he said the procedure involved in dismissing Mrs Taylor had been ‘virtually non-existent’.
Mr Latham said it was an instant decision by the managing director without thought, investigation or discussions with Mrs Taylor before she was dismissed.
‘This was not the action of a responsible employer,’ said Mr Latham.
But he added that the complaint by Mrs Taylor that she was sacked because she refused to work on Sundays was not accepted by the tribunal.
No instruction was ever given to Mrs Taylor that she must work on Sundays.
Her beliefs and principles were accepted by the company and never challenged but Mrs Taylor had failed to recognise this.
The hearing was seen as a test case to establish an important legal principle and Mrs Taylor's claim was backed by the Keep Sunday Special campaign.
After the decision, Mrs Taylor said she still believed the case was about Sunday trading.
‘After I told them I would not work on Sundays I got hassle,’ she said.
— PA
Commenting on the compensation award, Mrs Taylor said: ‘I was not doing this for the money.
I wanted to do it to help other people in this position.
Okay, there is no decision here but I think it is just beginning.’
— PA
Unions attack ‘derisory’ public sector pay rise
THE Government's 1.5 per cent limit on public sector pay was denounced as ‘derisory, insulting and abysmal’.
Although it was announced last November that the awards would be down to 1.5 per cent, that did not stop politicians and union leaders from condemning the Government's action.
Health union negotiators said they would refuse to accept the award for Britain's 600,000 nurses, midwives and health visitors.
The Prime Minister had said in a Commons written reply: ‘The Government will pay increases of 1.5 per cent to doctors and dentists, nursing staff, midwives and health visitors, professions allied to medicine and the armed forces with effect from 1 April.’
Qualified classroom teachers would get a 0.55 per cent increase on 1 April, plus a one-off payment of £90 in May.
Mr Major added: ‘This, together with the implementation of restructuring designed to develop the relationship between pay and performance in schools, will give teachers, like most other review body groups, an increase in pay of 1.5 per cent, while containing the total cost within the settlement limit.’
There was fury among teachers as well as nurses and other hospital workers, but the message from the military was that there was little point in grumbling.
Doug McAvoy, general secretary of Britain's biggest teacher union, the NUT, branded the award a ‘disgraceful insult’.
He said: ‘Pay has not been at the top of the teachers’ agenda but this derisory increase will push it high up their list of grievances.’
Scottish teachers, who have lodged a claim for a ‘substantial’ rise and who are not covered by yesterday's announcement, called the English award ‘farcical’.
Jim Martin, general secretary of the Educational Institute of Scotland, the biggest Scottish teacher union, said: ‘Scottish teachers will continue to pursue our salaries claim which is to maintain and enhance the living standards of all Scottish teachers.’
The health union negotiators said the award was ‘totally unacceptable’ Judith Carter, the unions' lead negotiator and national officer for Cohse, described the award as a ‘derisory insult to Britain's half a million nurses’.
The ‘short-sighted’ award would simply lead to a deterioration in morale, cause difficulties implementing the Government's patient's charter and lead to more staff leaving the health service, she said.
‘Nurses everywhere are working under intense and growing pressure and today's announcement will be a heavy blow since it says clearly that the Government does not value their efforts and is not prepared to treat them with fairness or justice.’
For a newly-qualified nurse, the increase equals £3.12, giving an annual salary of £13,449.
Ward sisters would get an additional £4.31 a week, giving them a new annual salary of £15,184.
The shadow employment secretary Frank Dobson said: ‘It is unfair to expect vital people like nurses and teachers to accept a pay settlement less than the rate of inflation, a lot less then settlements outside, and less than what the Government are likely to give the judges.’
‘It was not the teachers and nurses who caused the run on the pound in September or who are selling the pound short in the City today.
It is a lot of Tory speculators, but the nurses are being asked to pay the price.’
— PA 
‘Nurses everywhere are working under intense and growing pressure, and the announcement will be a heavy blow’
BR failed to heed advice, disaster inquiry told
IF BRITISH Rail had heeded advice, the Newton rail disaster would never have happened, a fatal accident inquiry in Glasgow was told yesterday.
Lessons that should have been learned from two similar collisions at Bellgrove in Glasgow and Hyde near Manchester, were not taken on board in time.
There were several similarities between the three crashes, the inquiry heard.
All three involved passenger trains passing a start signal at a station platform before a single-track section of line.
After Bellgrove, in 1989, Sheriff Archibald McKay in his deliberations criticised the single lead junction layout which placed a signal so close to the single-track section of line outside the station.
But against his considered opinion, and two years later, commissioning of a similar single lead junction at Newton went ahead.
Shortly after the £5 million junction was opened, two trains collided head-on killing four people and injuring 22.
Questioned by the procurator-fiscal, Andrew Normand, British Rail's director of operations at the time, Terence Worrall, admitted that had the sheriff's deliberations been fully taken into account, additional safety procedures would have been introduced which would have prevented the Newton disaster.
Under subsequent cross examination from Allan Gore, barrister, for driver Reg McEwan who died in the Newton collision, he conceded that with hindsight the new layout at Newton, designed to allow higher speeds for trains on the Glasgow to London InterCity line, had been achieved ‘at a price’.
‘And that price was safety?’ asked Mr Gore.
‘Yes,’ Mr Worrall agreed.
New risk determination procedures introduced after the three crashes revealed Newton to be the most dangerous junction in the country.
It was found to have almost three times the risk factor at which BR should have become concerned.
Since the Newton disaster in July 1991, BR had introduced a series of measures to make rail travel safer, the inquiry was told.
The junction at Newton is to revert to double track, airline style black boxes are being installed in trains to pinpoint the cause of accidents, and a new electronic safeguard system which will literally stop trains in their tracks if a driver makes a mistake is being tested.
The inquiry, before Sheriff Brian Lockhart, continues.
Bank error blocks pay for 10,000
FIVE city centre banks are to open specially today after almost 10,000 health workers failed to get paid yesterday because of a bank error, writes Sarah Chalmers.
The weekly-paid Greater Glasgow Health Board employees first discovered the bank's mistake when they tried to withdraw money from cash machines.
A health board spokesman said the wages' computer tape was handed over to the Clydesdale Bank on Wednesday, as normal, which would have allowed processing of the £1,360,000 wage bill in time for withdrawal yesterday.
A spokesman for the Clydesdale confirmed that the bank had made an error somewhere and had not processed the tape.
He added: ‘No-one will suffer financially because of us.
If there are bank charges we will deal with them.’
To help out, the Clydesdale is opening Glasgow city centre branches at St Vincent Street, Buchanan Street, Bath Street, Weaver Street and Shettleston Road this morning, between 9:30 and 12:30.
Health board workers can withdraw up to £100 each on production of their pay slip, their bank card and identification.
Deserved rest for airlifted Antarctic explorers
THE explorers Sir Ranulph Fiennes and Dr Michael Stroud were tucking into a hearty breakfast of eggs yesterday after being airlifted to safety from the icy wastes of the Antarctic.
Expedition organisers confirmed the two men had arrived safely at the Patriot Hills base on the Chilean side of the Antarctic after being picked up by a rescue plane.
They were enjoying the first fresh food they had had in weeks before settling down for a long, well-earned rest.
‘They are at Patriot Hills now.
They're cooking eggs and then they will have a long sleep,’ a spokesman said.
The men, who covered 1,350 miles unaided and set two world records, were said to be ‘more dead than alive’ when they radioed their base camp to request an airlift.
The spokesman said: ‘Both men are absolutely exhausted.
They are obviously very, very thin.
But I know that their spirits will be high knowing what they have done.’
Both men's families were delighted to hear they had arrived safely and their ordeal of waiting was now over.
Dr Stroud's wife Thea said: ‘I think they've done extremely well.
It would have been irresponsible to go on with them having lost so much weight.’
After a brief stop-over at Patriot Hills they will be flown on to Punta Arenas in Chile where the expedition radio base was located.
There they will undergo medical tests as part of Dr Stroud's research into the impact of such harsh conditions on the body.
Sir Ranulph's wife, Lady Virginia Fiennes, speaking from her remote Exmoor farm, said: ‘All I know is that they asked to be picked up and the pick-up has come in and got them.
I'm pleased obviously.
I'm very happy that they've been picked up and that they will now be on their way to Chile.
‘They have got medical problems.
Michael Stroud has been treating himself and Ran with medical supplies on the aircraft.
But it might take them days to get back if the weather's bad when they arrive at Patriot Hills.’
An expedition spokesman said the pair could remain at Patriot Hills for a week depending on weather conditions.
To build up their weight and strength again, they will be eating little and often, with a diet rich in protein and carbohydrate.
The base, a tent camp which is operated by Adventure Network International, is in the process of being run down ready to close down for the Antarctic winter.
It is being run by a skeleton staff with minimum facilities, though it will be luxury compared to what Sir Ranulph, 49, and Dr Stroud, 37 have become used to.
The two men were picked up on the Ross ice shelf, about 350 miles from the coastal camp at Scott base which was their original target.
During the journey they raised thousands of pounds in sponsorship for the Multiple Sclerosis Society.
— PA
Casualty staff back late-night curfew on pubs
Severin Carrell finds those at the sharp end in total support of drinking-time cuts
PROPOSALS to restrict late-night drinking in Edinburgh which have split the ruling Labour group have won the full support of emergency staff at the capital's central casualty hospital.
Drunken patients and drink-related accidents  dominate the emergency wards of Edinburgh Royal Infirmary between 2am and 4am.
‘In this department, you're assumed to be drunk until proven otherwise,’ said Keith Little, head of Accident and Emergency.
A plan to restrict late-night pub opening generally to 1.30am across a three-mile-square area of central Edinburgh, where a number of the area's 500 pubs and clubs can open until 3am or 4am, has provoked a deep division in the district council's Labour group.
By a one-vote majority, the group voted this week to advise members on the city's licensing board to abandon the idea.
Councillor Bob Cairns, Edinburgh's planning convenor, quit his post as Labour group vice-chairman in protest.
He now intends to campaign for the plan.
The proposed expansion of the zoning scheme, which has been on trial in three city-centre wards since 1990, has already won the clear support of the police, residents' groups and the hospitals, which have become increasingly concerned about late-night disturbances and violence.
The plan will be dealt with at an Edinburgh licensing board meeting later this month.
Members are traditionally allowed a free vote and cannot be instructed by their party to follow a line.
Margaret McGregor, the board's Labour convenor, is to support the proposal.
Since Edinburgh's licensing laws were liberalised in the 1970s, Lothian and Borders police statistics indicate that late-night violence has escalated.
From 1980, serious assaults in bars jumped by nearly 50 per cent to 775 in 1989.
Reported crimes of violence are up to 250 every Saturday night.
‘There's no doubt at all that the workload of the A&E department at night is almost totally generated by alcohol.
That is true of all things from falls to road traffic accidents to assaults and assaults with weapons,’ said Dr Little.
Such work used to peak before midnight, he said.
‘It now happens at 3 or 4 o'clock in the morning.
That is clearly difficult and anti-social for us.
I have no doubt, if you limit the hours in which people can drink, the level of violence would decrease.’
To ignore this would ‘demonstrate a lack of regard for the people who suffer as a result’, he said
This workload increased the strain and pressure on nursing staff, on the hospital's budgets and resources, and on other patients who cannot get into hospital because beds are full because of abuse of alcohol, Dr Little said
Derick Wilson, the Labour councillor who lobbied fellow members to reject the licencing restrictions, claims that they would badly damage Edinburgh's tourism image.
He added that pubs and clubs should be allowed to stagger their closing times.
Opponents of the curfew claim that forcing every bar to close at one time or, as proposed, requiring nightclubs to close their doors at 1.30 while allowing drinking until 3am or 4am, would lead to a flood of pub-goers hitting the streets at once, exacerbating the problem.
Roger Carter, chief executive of Edinburgh Marketing, the capital's tourism board, agreed that Edinburgh's liberal drinking and entertainment laws played a crucial part in the city's promotion.
But he denied that closing times after 1.30am were of great value to tourism.
‘I'm not sure exactly how much relevance that has to visitors,’ he said.
There were no tourism survey results available to support claims that very late hours were needed, he added.
The main issue in this debate was striking a balance between public needs and residents' needs.
GRAHAM McGIRK
On the chin: Richard McCallum treats a late-night casualty at Edinburgh Royal Infirmary
Police ask drinkers for help over stabbing
By Allan McLean
PEOPLE enjoying an evening out in Edinburgh pubs, clubs and restaurants were asked by police last night if they had any information about two men involved in the fatal stabbing early last Saturday of a student, Paul Sheldon.
More than 60 members of the murder inquiry team toured licensed premises to speak to customers and ask licensees to display posters inviting anyone who could help to come forward.
Photographs were distributed of young men wearing clothing similar to that worn by the two attackers involved in the incident which led to the death of Mr Sheldon, 20.
Police hoped this would jog the memories of people who may have seen the two.
Det Supt Eric John, one of the men leading the murder hunt, said last night: ‘It's a senseless crime, an unnecessary killing…
Somebody must have seen these people last week…
Somebody may have some snippet they don't appreciate is a lead for us.
They should come forward and let us piece together the jigsaw.’
Mr Sheldon, of Cherry Tree Park, Balerno, near Edinburgh, was stabbed to death in Whitehouse Loan.
He had chased two men, one of whom had stabbed his friend Tom Cole, 20, who was not seriously hurt.
The attackers had shouted abuse at Mr Sheldon, his brother Peter, 18, and Mr Cole, who were walking between friends' houses in the Bruntsfield area of Edinburgh just before 2am.
Mr John and Det Chief Insp George Brown, his colleague at the head of the murder investigation, said there had been a tremendous response from the public.
More information was sought, and they were particularly keen to hear from the companion of the killer, who may not have realised until too late that his friend was carrying a knife.
‘If he doesn't want to call us, let him call a councillor,’ Mr Brown said.
Devin Scobie, a district councillor, has offered to act as an intermediary.
‘We'll resolve it.
We've got 60-odd officers going out tonight.
We'll get to the bottom of it.
He's [the killer's companion]only waiting for a knock on the door,’ Mr Brown said.
He said someone who was in the area last Friday night or in the early hours of Saturday must have seen the two attackers.
Their height difference would be particularly noticeable.
The taller man was wearing a dark, leather jacket.
The killer had a light, hooded top.
Mr Brown added that earlier descriptions said the murderer had short, dark hair.
But he may have been wearing a dark ski cap of the Deerhunter style.
‘This is going to take time.
We are now going through real detective work,’ Mr Brown said at a press conference before briefing the officers involved in last night's operation.
He opened the briefing by telling the assembled squad: ‘In this case there was nothing left at the scene…
There's somebody out there who must be sitting and waiting until you are going to knock at the door.
It's going to have to be the police and the public working together to solve this murder.’
‘Somebody must have seen these people last week…
Somebody may have some snippet they don't appreciate is a lead for us.’
BR failed to heed advice, Newton inquiry told
IF BRITISH Rail had heeded advice, the Newton rail crash would never have happened, a fatal accident inquiry in Glasgow was told yesterday.
Lessons that should have been learned from two similar collisions at Bellgrove in Glasgow and Hyde near Manchester, were not taken on board in time.
There were several similarities between the three crashes, the inquiry heard.
All three involved passenger trains passing a start signal at a station platform before a single-track section of line.
After Bellgrove, in 1989, Sheriff Archibald McKay in his deliberations criticised the single lead junction layout which placed a signal so close to the single-track section of line outside the station.
But against his considered opinion, and two years later, commissioning of a similar single lead junction at Newton went ahead.
Shortly after the £5 million junction was opened, two trains collided head-on killing four people and injuring 22.
Questioned by the procurator-fiscal, Andrew Normand, British Rail's director of operations at the time, Terence Worrall, admitted that had the sheriff's deliberations been fully taken into account, additional safety procedures would have been introduced which would have prevented the Newton accident.
Under cross examination from Allan Gore, barrister, for driver Reg McEwan who died in the Newton collision, he conceded that with hindsight the new layout at Newton, designed to allow higher speeds for trains on the Glasgow to London InterCity line, had been achieved ‘at a price’.
‘And that price was safety?’ asked Mr Gore.
‘Yes,’ Mr Worrall agreed.
New risk determination procedures introduced after the three crashes revealed Newton to be the most dangerous junction in the country.
It was found to have almost three times the risk factor at which BR should have become concerned.
Since the Newton accident in July 1991, BR had introduced a series of measures to make rail travel safer, the inquiry was told.
The junction at Newton is to revert to double track, airline style black boxes are being installed in trains to pinpoint the cause of accidents, and a new electronic safeguard system which will literally stop trains in their tracks if a driver makes a mistake is being tested.
The inquiry, before Sheriff Brian Lockhart, continues.
Police quiz drinkers on murder of student
By Allan McLean
POLICE last night questioned people in Edinburgh pubs, clubs and restaurants over the fatal stabbing last Saturday of a student, Paul Sheldon.
More than 60 members of the murder inquiry team toured licensed premises to speak to customers and ask licensees to display posters inviting anyone who could help to come forward.
Photographs were distributed of young men wearing clothing similar to that worn by the two attackers involved in the death of Mr Sheldon, 20.
Police hoped this would jog the memories of people who saw the two.
Det Sgt Gavin Barry, who led one of the groups of uniformed and plain clothes officers, said afterwards: ‘We've got quite a few leads we will follow up.
It's been a successful exercise.’
Earlier, Det Supt Eric John, one of the men leading the murder hunt, said: ‘It's a senseless crime, an unnecessary killing…
Somebody must have seen these people last week…
Somebody may have some snippet they don't appreciate is a lead for us.
They should come forward and let us piece together the jigsaw.’
Mr Sheldon, of Cherry Tree Park, Balerno, near Edinburgh, was stabbed to death in Whitehouse Loan.
He had chased two men, one of whom had stabbed his friend Tom Cole, 20, who was not seriously hurt.
The attackers had shouted abuse at Mr Sheldon, his brother Peter, 18, and Mr Cole, who were walking between friends' houses in the Bruntsfield area of Edinburgh just before 2am.
Mr John and Det Chief Insp George Brown, who is also heading the investigation, said there had been a tremendous response from the public.
More information was sought.
They were particularly keen to hear from the companion of the killer, who may not have realised until too late that his friend was carrying a knife.
‘If he doesn't want to call us, let him call a councillor,’ Mr Brown said.
Devin Scobie, a district councillor, has offered to act as an intermediary.
‘We'll resolve it.
We've got 60-odd officers going out tonight.
We'll get to the bottom of it.
He's [the killer's companion]only waiting for a knock on the door,’ Mr Brown added.
He said someone who was in the area last Friday night or early on Saturday must have seen the two attackers.
Their height difference would be particularly noticeable.
The taller man was wearing a dark, leather jacket.
The killer had a light, hooded top.
He added that earlier descriptions said the murderer had short, dark hair.
But he may have been wearing a dark ski cap of the Deerhunter style.
‘This is going to take time.
We are now going through real detective work,’ Mr Brown said before briefing the officers involved in last night's operation.
He opened the briefing by telling the police squad: ‘In this case there was nothing left at the scene…
There's somebody out there who must be sitting and waiting until you are going to knock at the door.
It's going to have to be the police and the public working together to solve this murder.’
CAMPBELTOWN
Woman dies in car accident
A WOMAN died and three others were injured when the car they were travelling in was involved in an accident on the access road to RAF Machrahanish, Campbeltown, yesterday.
The dead woman, a passenger in the car, was named as Sharon Brown, 21, of Ralston Road, Campbeltown.
Three other women passengers received minor injuries and were released after treatment at Campbeltown Hospital.
Police said a man, 22, was to be the subject of a report to the procurator-fiscal.
ANNAN
Factory site could be top rally centre
PLANS to turn the site of a former explosives factory at Annan, Dumfriesshire, into Scotland's top rallying centre were put forward yesterday by the 300-strong Wigton Motor Club which is based a few miles over the Border in Cumbria.
The 300-acre site has all the features needed — roads and hills — and is hidden from sight, said a club official, adding that the centre would attract tourists.
The proposal has been welcomed by some local councillors.
Heritage group joins debate on reform
By Gary Duncan
A PREFERENCE for a relatively small number of large councils has been expressed by the conservation agency Scottish Natural Heritage in its response to the Government's consultation exercise on the future of local government north of the Border.
SNH says it doubts whether smaller local authorities could maintain effective strategic planning which it sees as crucial to the continued conservation and enhancement of Scotland's natural heritage.
Magnus Magnusson, the SNH chairman, said local government had been and must continue to be an important partner of the agency.
‘We need a strong system of local government capable of both planning at the wider geographical level and of acting sensitively and  accountably at the most local level,’ he said.
None of the four structures given in the Government's proposals are desirable, SNH says, arguing that they do nothing to tackle the problems caused by historic boundaries such as the fact that one local boundary runs down the middle of Loch Lomond.
‘Most of the options actually exacerbate the difficulty of securing co-ordinated management of the Cairngorms by increasing the number of local authorities involved,’ the response states.
Scottish Natural Heritage warns that a fragmentation of local government might mean it would need extra resources.
Man admits setting fire to blocks of flats
A MAN who lived a ‘dreamlike existence’ set fire to two multi-storey blocks of flats in Edinburgh, endangering the lives of hundreds of residents.
The two fires, within a 100 yards of each other, could have had ‘catastrophic’ consequences if they had not been discovered on the ground floors of Dunsyre House, Calder Crescent, and Medwin House, Calder Park, a court heard.
Yesterday, Campbell Hynd, 21, of Walker's Wynd, Edinburgh, was jailed for 30 months at the High Court in Edinburgh after admitting two charges of wilful fire-raising.
Hynd pled guilty to wilfully starting the fires in ground-floor store rooms on 11 September, 1991.
The court heard how between 100 and 200 people lived in each of the 12-storey flats.
After midnight on 11 September, William Moodie was reading in bed in Dunsyre House when he saw smoke coming through the floorboards.
He ran downstairs and saw the storeroom was on fire.
He roused Alexander White, 69, who was asleep in a first-floor flat filled with heavy smoke.
Other residents were evacuated from the building.
Ann Paton QC, prosecuting, said the lives of the residents were endangered and the consequences of the fire could have been catastrophic.
Soon afterwards, the caretaker in Medwin House was wakened by an elderly woman who said her first-floor flat was full of thick smoke.
The fire brigade which was at the first blaze about 100 yards away extinguished the second fire in a short time.
Passing sentence, Lord Sutherland said he took into account Hynd's domestic background.
This would be reflected in a more lenient sentence of 30 months.
Earlier, Douglas Small, defence counsel, told the court that Hynd was an unemployed frame-maker and had suffered a ‘catalogue of personal distress’.
He remembered little about the fires because he was under the influence of drink and did not realise what he was doing.
Community projects get pools cash
A £162,000 pools payout was handed over to four community projects in the Highlands yesterday by Ross, Cromarty and Skye MP, Charles Kennedy, on behalf of the Foundation for Sport and the Arts, which is funded through Littlewoods, Vernons and Zetters.
The biggest award was for £150,000 to Ullaspool, a company set up to raise funds to build a new swimming pool at Ullapool.
Construction is due to begin in May.
The region's community education department received £10,000 towards last summer's international music and dance festival.
Plockton Amateur Dramatic Society got £1,633 for new stage lighting and a £500 grant was made to the Avoch Heritage Association for an exhibition on schooldays from the mid-19th century to 1961.
MP wants Scots ban on carrying knives
By Sarah Chalmers
REGULATIONS covering the carrying of knives in Scotland must be brought into line with those in England, the shadow Scottish spokesman on home affairs said yesterday.
John McFall, MP, made the call after meeting Chief Supt Michael Currie, divisional commander for Paisley and the surrounding area.
With the Paisley MPs Irene Adams and Gordon McMaster, Mr McFall was lending his support to Operation Blade, an initiative by Strathclyde Police to clamp down on knife crime.
Mr McFall said: ‘The Criminal Justice Act 1988 in England and Wales differs from Scotland in a number of ways.
It says it's an offence for anyone to be carrying an offensive weapon.
The person has to prove they had a legitimate reason for having the knife in a public place.’
Under Scottish law, carrying a knife is not an offence unless the prosecution can prove there was intent to injure someone with it.
Mr McFall said he and his colleagues would be pressing Lord Fraser, the Scottish Office minister for home affairs, to change the law.
He added that if swift action was taken, new legislation could be in place by the end of the parliamentary session.
Since Operation Blade's month-long knife amnesty began 11 days ago, more than 1,500 sharp weapons have been surrendered at 70 stations throughout the region.
After a slow initial response in the Paisley area, yesterday's total stood at 146 knives.
Mr Currie said it was like being ‘back in medieval times’, as he surveyed a table laden with kitchen knives, swords and home-made weapons including a rolling pin with spikes on the end.
He warned: ‘After the knife amnesty, we will search people for knives.
We will make the streets unsafe for the knife-carrier.’
Last autumn police stopped and searched people for offensive weapons as part of an initiative called Operation Dove, designed to crack down on drugs and violence in the Paisley area.
The campaign came in response to a spate of fatal stabbings and involved extra police officers being drafted in to patrol late-night trouble spots.
In 1992, there were eight knife murders in and around Paisley compared to only one in 1991.
Aid convoy loses £1m of supplies as vandals burn depot
By Alan Forbes
‘THEY don't know it, but they have killed children,’ said Phil Green as he surveyed the charred and sodden remains of medicine, food, clothing and toys which should have been bound this month for Bosnia and Romania.
The 100 tonnes of relief supplies, valued at around £1 million, had been collected from all over Scotland and stored in a warehouse in the east end of Glasgow for dispatch to hospitals and children's and old folk's homes.
On Thursday night, vandals smashed through a heavily padlocked, steel-panelled door and set fire to the stock.
Firefighters who arrived to tackle the blaze in Nuneaton Street, Dalmarnock, had to summon police protection when youths  harassed them and stole a radio from a tender.
The youths made a malicious call with the radio, interrupting firefighting.
Yesterday, Phil Green, director of People In Need, a charity which helps people in Romania and Bosnia, viewed the destruction.
The buckled roof of the modern, brick-built warehouse threw light on to ruined bundles of clothing.
Soft toys and medicine, much of it earmarked for specific children, was soiled by smoke, fire and water.
Food, desperately needed now that produce from last year's harvest is running out, had become garbage.
Mr Green said: ‘We had lots of food but that's all blitzed.
The clothes would have given people life.
‘There were saline drips for dehydrated children and a large quantity of Benylin (a decongestant) which is a lifesaver for children in winter.
‘I really feel sick, angry and frustrated.
I'd like to take the people who did this to Romania for a month and show them how vital these supplies were.’
The warehouse was erected by the Glasgow East Area Renewal project to help tackle chronic unemployment.
Across the road, the Boden furniture factory, which employs 30 people, may move out because of weekly robberies.
Boden's has had £20,000-worth of computers and machinery stolen in ram raids and rooftop break-ins since the start of the year alone, according to a director, Alex King.
He said: ‘What has happened to the charity is terrible, volunteers were in late each night sorting goods.
We also have had serious problems, despite razor wire and big padlocks, and if it continues we may have to move to a new town, which will do no good for this community.’
Mr Green hopes the fire will provoke further pledges of aid to People In Need at 1113 Maryhill Road, Glasgow.
Tel:041-946 7182.
STEPHEN MANSFIELD Hopes gone up in smoke: Phil Green of People In Need examines the charred and sodden mess that was once a £1million aid cargo for Romania and Bosnia
Lang to outline economic hopes in speech
By Joanne Robertson Scottish Political Correspondent
SCOTLAND HAS failed to fill the entrepreneurial gap which has opened up over the last decade since the decline of the nationalised and heavy industries, the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, will acknowledge next week.
In spite of the claims of the success of the Thatcher years, Mr Lang will emphasise the need for Scotland to fill that critical gap which has emerged over the last 13 years.
In a keynote speech on the economy, the Scottish Secretary will set out his desire to see Scotland develop into a headquarters rather than a branch economy.
However, he will stress that economic success can only be achieved through a commitment to free market principles and Scottish businesses' pursuit of efficiency, diversity, enterprise, international markets and quality.
Although his speech to Edinburgh University students will spell out the need for the creation of a level market place which is supported not supplanted, he will also make clear that he believes the Government does have a role in ensuring Scotland prospers and in attracting industry.
He will argue that Scots put a higher proportion of their wealth into forming small businesses but are restricted from getting their fledgling operations off the ground through a lack of capital.
During his speech, the Scottish secretary will underline the Government's commitment to spreading ownership through deregulation, and supporting joint private and public sector ventures in order to produce more home base companies.
He will attempt to counter the Oppositions' attacks on the rise in unemployment by arguing that Scotland has a higher proportion of people in work than any other European country except Denmark and Luxembourg.
Mr Lang will criticise Labour for concentrating on attacking the Government over unemployment without recognising that wealth has to be created in order to increase the number of jobs on offer.
His speech is the latest in a series which will run up to the Scottish party conference in May at which a booklet containing all his speeches will be on sale to the party faithful.
Man gets two years for knife attack
AN UNEMPLOYED man was jailed for two years yesterday for a knife attack which left his victim's life hanging in the balance.
Sentencing Robert Cameron, Sheriff James Farrell warned that any knife-related crime would lead to a custodial sentence.
Edinburgh Sheriff Court heard earlier that Alan Gay suffered a punctured lung and lost three litres of blood as a result of the assault in Niddrie Marischal Place, Edinburgh, on 26 April.
Mr Gay will be scarred for life.
Cameron, 36, a father-of-three, of Bingham Broadway, Edinburgh, was initially accused of attempted murder, but the charge was reduced to one of assault to severe injury and to the danger of life.
He was convicted of the lesser charge by a jury, with the addition that the assault had taken place under provocation.
During the trial, the jury heard how the assault had led on from an earlier flight between the two men over a woman.
Cameron was, at that time, living with his co-accused, Linda Melvin — Mr Gay's ex-girlfriend.
Mr Gay had turned up at her home in Niddrie Marischal Place after a drinking binge, armed with a baton and determined to continue the fight, it was claimed.
Cameron maintained he acted in self-defence.
Mr Gay pulled a knife from his waistband, but was so drunk he dropped it and Cameron picked it up and fought back as he was beaten with a baton.
He stabbed Mr Gay five times with the knife.
Cameron was also found guilty of assaulting his victim with a pick-axe handle.
Jailing Cameron, Sheriff Farrell said: ‘Knife related crime is a matter of great concern at the moment and indeed, it is very much my policy, except in exceptional cases, that even being in possession of a knife will bring about a custodial sentence.’
Cameron would have faced a High Court sentence had it not been for his good record, the sheriff added.
DUMFRIES
Arrest over attack on woman driver
A MAN has been arrested and charged after an incident on the A74 Carlisle-Glasgow road when a woman driver — Yvonne Jackson, 38, of Comiston Drive, Edinburgh — was taken to Dumfries Infirmary after being found unconscious near her car.
Police said a report had been prepared for the procurator-fiscal and a man is expected to appear at Dumfries Sheriff Court on Monday.
Judge rebukes Lady Kennedy for court antics
A JUDGE at the Old Bailey in London yesterday reprimanded the former wife of the Earl of Cassillis for ‘unacceptable’ behaviour in court after she pulled faces, made noises and shook her head as a witness gave evidence.
Judge Geoffrey Grigson rebuked Lady Dawn Kennedy, 32, after David Waters, prosecuting her on three charges of making bogus rape allegations, pointed out her conduct.
The American-born former wife of the Scottish peer denies three counts of doing acts tending or intended to pervert the course of justice.
Her antics came as James Cowan, 36, one of the men she claimed raped her in an east London flat, gave evidence.
Mr Waters told the judge her behaviour was ‘unacceptable’.
He agreed and ordered Lady Kennedy's counsel, Stephen Kamilish, to talk to her and ensure it did not continue.
Mr Cowan told the court the allegation by Lady Kennedy, of Jodrell Road, Bow, east London, was ‘complete rubbish.’
Cross-examined by Mr Kamilish, he denied that he and the other men gang-raped Lady Kennedy while a pornographic video called Sex Slaves 22 was played.
He said she had made advances to him which he rejected.
She had stood naked in front of him in the bedroom, tried to kiss him on another occasion and put her arms round him.
Mr Cowan said Lady Kennedy's promiscuous behaviour was ‘not unusual for her’ and she had once been sacked from a job for ‘obscene behaviour’.
Lady Kennedy was divorced from the multi-millionaire Lord Charles in 1989.
They have two daughters who still live in the 50-bedroom Cassillis Castle, near Ayr.
The court has heard that she was arrested after police found out that one of the men she named appeared to be in Scotland at the time of the alleged incident.
The trial was adjourned until Monday.
— PA
Prince to address Crofters Union
THE Prince of Wales is to get back among the crofters in the Outer Hebrides next month.
Yesterday Buckingham Palace confirmed that the Prince had accepted a long-standing invitation to address the annual conference of the Scottish Crofters Union which has almost 2,000 members in the Western Isles.
Prince Charles has agreed to open the congress at Stornoway Town Hall and to deliver a speech to an expected audience of 500 crofters from throughout the Highlands and Islands.
The Prince is likely to meet Donald ‘Splash’ MacKillop again when he flies into Stornoway on Lewis on 26 March.
But it is not clear yet whether after the formalities are over, the Prince will be rolling up his sleeves and getting his hands dirty as he did on two previous visits to Mr  MacKillop's 92 acres of arable croft on Berneray.
Buckingham Palace is saying only that there could be other engagements which have not yet been fixed up.
A spokesman said: ‘This visit is part of the Prince's interest in rural communities in the Highlands and Islands.’
Prince Charles first stayed with Mr MacKillop on a secret trip in 1987 when he helped to plant potatoes, cut peat and dip sheep.
He returned for five days in November 1991 when Selena Scott made a TV film A Prince Among Islands, which was shown all over the world.
Yesterday Splash said: ‘I was going to the conference in Stornoway anyhow, so no doubt I might bump into him.
I'm a union member and I always try to attend their annual gathering.’
IRA and Loyalists claim two victims
THE IRA murdered a man it said was one of its former members yesterday and claimed he was a police informer.
He was Ulster's second victim of violence in 24 hours.
Earlier, Loyalist gunmen shot dead a Catholic bricklayer, Tommy Molloy, 32, in front of his wife and children at their home near Loughgall, Co Armagh.
Mr Molloy had a distant relative in Sinn Fein, the IRA's political wing, but family and friends insisted he had no time for the politics of violence.
He was the latest Catholic victim of gunmen involved in an indiscriminately sectarian campaign.
They fired through the windows of his bungalow home as he watched television.
His wife, Gabrielle, and their four children including girls aged seven, ten and 11 were in the living room at the time.
The youngest child, a boy of 14 months, was slightly hurt, but did not require hospital treatment.
A forestry worker discovered the alleged informer's body dumped by the road in isolated country just inside the northern side of the Irish border six miles from Castledery, Co Tyrone.
He had been hooded, his hands tied behind his back, and then shot in the head.
The Provisionals' victim was from the Ballymurphy area of west Belfast.
The RUC refused to comment on their claim that he was an informer.
— PA 
Union sets guideline on lecturer-student liaisons
By Douglas Fraser, Education Correspondent
UNIVERSITY lecturers are being told by their union to inform colleagues if they get over-involved with their students.
The Association of University Teachers is marking St Valentine's weekend by cooling its members' enthusiasm for intimate one-to-one tutorials.
Draft guidelines for the Lothario of the lecture theatre say appropriate colleagues or bosses should be told and there should be separation from any professional responsibilities towards the student involved.
‘We want to help students and members before and during what sometimes can be difficult situations,’ said David Triesman, general secretary of the AUT.
‘We are not in the business of imposing rules and regulations.
This is a complex and sensitive issue which is naturally of interest and concern to students, parents and all our members.’
The guidelines, which are to be discussed by the union's local associations, note the responsibility of staff to protect the interests of students, and that sexual or romantic relationships between staff and students may involve serious difficulties rooted in unequal power.
There is also a warning over teaching a family member or friend of a sexual partner.
These are also to be reported to colleagues under the provisional code of conduct, and any relationship which is not agreed to should be open to a sexual  harassment complaint.
According to the AUT, the effect of such relationships goes beyond the people involved.
‘Fellow students and colleagues and the learning and working environment will be affected, especially when conflict of interest and unfairness are involved.’
Student counsellors say tutor-student liaisons are primarily between female students and male tutors, and the key problem arises if the academic is involved with assessment of his partner's work.
But male students are not exempt.
They dispute the stereotype of the ageing lecher, popularised in Malcolm Bradbury's The History Man.
The problem can more easily arise for young academics, who are close in age to their students and do not know when they are crossing an invisible line.
Young students, recently away from home, are seen as the most susceptible to the attractions of someone in power with an impressive mind, but can often be disappointed by the person who comes with it.
Mhairi McMillan, a counsellor at St Andrews University, said: ‘There may be a sense of glamour attached to a tutor or a lecturer for somebody who's maybe just come up to university or working their way through.
It's understandable that they can admire academics, but that's not quite the same as loving them for the person they are.’
Lin McLean, a Strathclyde University student counsellor and AUT activist, said she had not had anyone come to her with problems over a tutor-student relationships in eight years, and that the guidelines were only a guide to help union members in a delicate area of their work.
Braer unit to brief ministers
A SPECIAL unit of the Scottish Office has been set up to co-ordinate Government action following the Braer oilspill in Shetland.
The unit, which has four members, will keep Government ministers briefed on progress in the islands as well as supporting the ecological steering group, announced by the Secretary of State, Ian Lang, in January.
Staff from the unit are expected to make frequent visits to Shetland and will liaise with officials in Whitehall and in Brussels.
The unit will gradually take over from other Scottish Office staff, who have been involved with monitoring, sampling, policy and financial work relating to the tanker grounding.
The staff were to meet EC officials yesterday to finalise arrangements for European funding for environmental studies in the isles.
Meanwhile, the wreck of the Braer has been designated a ‘dangerous wreck’ by the Department of Transport.
The water up to 500 metres around the ship has now been made a no-go area, for fear any oil still in the wreck could be a danger to life and property.
A full survey of the Braer will be needed before it is known for certain no oil remains, but a survey cannot be carried out until the weather is suitable, which could take up to three months.
THE Duke of Edinburgh visited Edinburgh University's veterinary medicine field station in Roslin and the school of Scottish studies yesterday.
The Duke, who is chancellor of the university, was given a tour of the veterinary centre's laboratories before seeing some of animals used for research purposes, including a Shetland pony and a swamp buffalo.
Later he spent an hour at the Scottish studies department, which he opened nearly 40 years ago, where he saw a display of Scottish artefacts and heard a rendition of Gaelic songs.
Naval rating dismissed for drug abuse
A YOUNG naval rating was dismissed for widespread drug abuse at his court martial at HMS Scotia, Pitreavie, Dunfermline yesterday.
Neil Ormerod, 19, from Bromsgrove, was also sentenced to nine months' detention.
He admitted ten charges of possessing and supplying cannabis and speed over a period of a year.
Another rating, Mark Wonderling, 21, from Worcester, admitted possessing cannabis, speed, LSD and ecstasy.
The prosecuting officer, Lt Cmdr Nick Hawkins, said the two accused had been charged after an extensive investigation into drug abuse by a number of ratings at the naval training ship of HMS Collingwood at Fareham last May.
‘The two accused admitted widespread drug abuse but it is accepted there was no element of corruption or financial gain,’ he added.
The defending officer, Lt Neil Brown, said: ‘Most of their drug abuse took place while they were at home on leave.’
Funding fight by Newbattle College fails
THE five-year battle by Newbattle Abbey College for core funding finally ended in failure yesterday, as education authorities joined the Scottish Office in refusing a grant, writes Douglas Fraser.
The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities' education committee opted not to continue the support it gave when the Government withdrew funding for Scotland's only adult residential college in 1988.
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, the education minister, had been considering an appeal for support but turned down the college in December.
‘It would be inappropriate to divert scarce funds in order to support the kind of specialised provision which the college would offer,’ he wrote.
The Midlothian centre is, however, continuing to provide a reduced range of course options and will next month consider how to ensure its future in residential and non-residential courses, seminars and conferences.
Jobs crisis warning over Scots spending
By Joanne Robertson, Scottish Political Correspondent
THE GOVERNMENT'S controversial review of public spending risks creating a jobs crisis in Scotland.
The warning came yesterday as Labour dismissed the announcement by the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, of a £500 million rise in Scottish Office expenditure.
The Shadow Scottish affairs spokesman, Henry McLeish, pointed out that over 500,000 Scots work for local and central government which meant one in four Scottish jobs could be threatened by a severe public expenditure clampdown.
He urged the Government to recognise the danger of fuelling unemployment and undermining the economy in Scotland by allowing massive job cuts to take place in the public sector.
Mr McLeish said: ‘At a time of deepening recession, it's absolute folly to be considering cutting back on key public expenditure.
The big issue for Scotland is the real fear that we will be subject to savage cuts in two or three years time.’
The review, detailed by the chief secretary to the Treasury, Michael Portillo, last week, is designed to chop billions of pounds off public spending, particularly from the social security, education and health budgets.
The review is not expected to be completed for three or four years but initial findings could be implemented by this autumn's statement on spending.
Mr McLeish, who will spell out the dangers for Scotland next week, dismissed as a ‘massive con trick’ Mr Lang's announcement of record levels of Government spending in Scotland to £13.4 billion.
The Scottish figures which were announced in outline last December were mapped out in detail in the report Serving Scotland's Needs, published yesterday.
The MP for Fife Central claimed that after subtracting additional Government funds to cover new Scottish Office responsibilities — such as Care in the Community which will come into operation in April and the allocation of teaching and research grants to Scottish universities and higher education institutions — the actual increase was only £130 million in real terms.
He also underlined the increasing pressures on local government budgets which will be responsible, despite claims of a massive shortfall in funding, for the implementation of community care.
The leader of the Scottish National Party, Alex Salmond also challenged the Scottish Office's spending claims, commenting: ‘Mr Lang claimed this is a windfall but the increase is based mainly on internal government transfers of responsibility and will evaporate as soon as this is taken into account.
‘There is no real benefit to Scotland in these figures and we will never be able to fund our health and education services properly until we have an independent government.’
Mr Lang claimed that Scottish spending per head ‘was a substantially higher average figure than for equivalent services in England’.
The main spending areas within the £13.4 billion budget for 1993-94 include £3.7 billion for health; education will rise to £1.2 billion given the extra responsibility of funding all higher and further education in Scotland while £141 million will be made available for agriculture as a result of reforms to the Common Agricultural Policy.
‘At a time of deepening recession, it's absolute folly to be considering cutting back on key public expenditure.’
Germans pledge security inquiry after hijack
SECURITY lapses at Frankfurt airport that let an armed hijacker on to a Lufthansa airliner will be tracked down, the German government pledged yesterday.
The hijacker, identified by United States officials as a 20-year-old Ethiopian, Nebiu Zewolde Demeke, took over the Airbus 310 on Thursday during a flight from Frankfurt to Cairo.
He surrendered at New York's John F Kennedy airport where his gun turned out to be a starter's pistol that fired blanks.
Demeke was arraigned at a New York court last night but German prosecutors said they may ask for him to be extradited.
Germany's interior minister, Rudolf Seiters, said during a press conference at Frankfurt airport: ‘We take this incident extremely seriously.
We will do everything we can to clear up the open questions.’
The episode has embarrassed German authorities particularly in regard to supposedly stringent security imposed after a Pan Am jumbo jet was blown up over Lockerbie in 1988 by a bomb allegedly placed aboard at Frankfurt.
The hijacker has told US officials he put the pistol under his hat and placed the hat on a table as he passed through a metal detector.
He then picked up the hat.
Airport police confirmed Demeke had gone through security checks, dismissing reports that he had avoided them by transferring from an Oslo flight.
Police said had been in Germany since last September and was being considered for asylum.
Gerhard Goebel, the aircraft's captain, who returned to a hero's welcome yesterday, declined to criticise security.
‘I have been flying out of Frankfurt for nearly 22 years, and I have no reason to believe security…is below standards.’
He told the conference no airport was totally secure.
Giving graphic details of the 11-hour stand-off, Capt Goebel said the hijacker had held the gun to his head or that of his co-pilot for most of the flight.
They had been able to build a rapport with him, however.
On landing at John F Kennedy Airport, Capt Goebel said: ‘I told him, ‘Welcome to New York’ and he laughed.’
He told a packed Frankfurt news conference that during the flight ‘I gave him my pilot sunglasses.
I said I would give them to him only if he later gave me his weapon.
And after we landed, he gave it to me.’
He said that when the hijacker  commandeered the plane over Austria, he had at first ordered the crew to fly directly to New York, but had been persuaded of the need to refuel.
‘I showed him on the map where we would sink into the Atlantic if we didn't,’ Capt Goebel said.
He said he had helped the hijacker to pick Hanover Airport because its runway was far away from the control tower.
‘My incentive was to get the young man to…trust me.’
Hanover officials said the plane was allowed to leave because they took seriously the hijacker's threat to shoot passengers.
Capt Goebel appeared annoyed when asked if the gun was real.
‘If someone puts a weapon to your head, would you ask if it is real or not.’
— AP and Reuter 
Returning hero: applause and bouquets for pilot Gerhard Goebel
South Africa majority rule may wait to next century
From Fred Bridgland, Johannesburg
SOUTH AFRICA'S National Party government and the African National Congress agreed yesterday on a course that could delay majority black government until the end of the century.
In a significant move forward towards the establishment of a non-racial democracy, they agreed at the end of three days of talks in Cape Town to take a common stand on two important issues when multi-party constitutional talks resume: power sharing in a future democratic system and regional government.
The power-sharing agreement calls for the establishment of a national unity after the election of a Constituent Assembly which would remain in power for five or six years.
If endorsed by the cabinet and the ANC's national executive committee, and in due course by a multi-party conference, it would effectively postpone majority rule until the year 2000.
The deal means the ANC has abandoned its demand that majority rule elections be held immediately after the elected constituent assembly has agreed a new constitution.
For its part, the government has shelved its demands for entrenched veto rights for minorities and for indefinite power-sharing with whites.
The breakthrough was inspired by belated realisation on the part of Pretoria and the ANC that unless they made rapid progress what is left of the South African economy would be wrecked.
The ANC secretary-general, Cyril Ramaphosa, said the government had made a major concession on the issue of devolution of power to regional governments.
Until this week the government negotiating team, led by the minister of constitutional development, Roelf Meyer, had been insisting that the powers, duties and functions of regional governments should be fixed as constitutional principles which would bind a future elected constituent assembly.
The ANC argued that the decision should be left to the constituent assembly itself, which is expected to be elected by the middle of next year by universal franchise.
The government concession, if approved in full cabinet, is a major one.
Its demand for cast iron guarantees for a federal-style constitution, as a safeguard against domination by a strong central government, has been a central plank in its negotiating stance.
The ANC favours the much watered down form of regional government.
A resumption of multi-party constitutional talks is now well within reach.
Both sides agreed that a multi-party planning conference should be held later this month to prepare for the full constitutional negotiating session.
Multi-party talks at Codesa (the Convention for a Democratic South Africa) broke down eight months ago when the ANC walked out after the massacre of more than 40 of its sympathisers in Boipatong township by followers of the Zulu-dominated Inkatha Freedom Party.
In another gesture of goodwill to the ANC, the government announced that two controversial South African Defence Force Units would be formally disbanded next month.
The units are 32 Battalion, made up of dissident Angolans and 31 Battalion, composed of Bushmen from Namibia and Angola.
Both Gurkha-style battalions played significant roles in South Africa's war in the 70s and 80s against Cuban forces in Angola.
When they were deployed later in the townships, the ANC accused 32 Battalion in particular of acting as a destabilising ‘third force’ and demanded its disbandment.
Rebels take key Angolan city
ANGOLA'S government appeared on the verge of military collapse yesterday as the Unita rebel movement was reported to have captured the country's second most important city.
A senior foreign ministry official in Portugal, the former colonial ruler, said the ministry believed the city of Huambo had fallen ‘although there may still be one or two pockets of resistance’.
Unita, however, has not yet claimed outright victory in Huambo, where its leader, Jonas Savimbi, has established his headquarters, and the Angolan government said yesterday it was still fighting desperately to save the city.
One diplomatic source in Lisbon, however, said: ‘The Portuguese are of the opinion that the government is on the verge of military collapse.
They expect that within days if not hours Luena, Cuito, Bie and Menongue will also fall.’
Other sources said Menongue, capital of the southern province of Cuando Cubango, was particularly vulnerable and Unita was piling heavy pressure on besieged Cuito in the central highlands and Luena in the east.
A 16-year civil war between Unita (National Union for the Total Independence of Angola) and the ruling MPLA (Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola) flared again last September, shattering a Portuguese-mediated peace accord implemented in 1991, after Unita rejected its defeat by the MPLA in elections.
Lisbon diplomats said Portugal had asked the United States to try a new initiative to bring the two sides together.
The US supported Unita during the civil war and along with Russia, which supported the MPLA, and Portugal, the US acts as an official observer of the 1991 peace agreement's implementation.
However, the diplomats said that neither Unita, enjoying success on the battlefield, or the Angolan government, which wants to win back the lost ground, appeared ready for serious peace negotiations.
One senior Portuguese diplomat accused South Africa and Zaire of providing large-scale military support for Unita, despite official denials from Pretoria and Kinshasa.
 Zaire's elite presidential guard, under the direct control of President Mobutu Sese Seko, helped Unita to capture the oil town of Soyo last month, the source claimed.
— Reuter 
Jonas Savimbi: rebel forces have government on the run
‘Dead’ soldier returns home after 52 years
A FRENCH prisoner in Nazi Germany who stayed behind the Iron Curtain after the Second World War for the love of a Ukrainian woman returned home yesterday for the first time in 52 years.
Paul Catrain, now 74, will spend a week in his home village of Bois-les-Pargny in northeast France, where a public welcoming ceremony will be held tomorrow.
For many years his family thought he was dead, and his name was only recently removed from the village war memorial.
He has lived on a collective farm in Ukraine since 1945 but was flown back to France by a French television station.
‘He still understands French but can hardly speak it any longer,’ said his sister-in-law, Edwige Zunarec.
Mr Catrain was 21 when German troops captured him in June 1940.
He spent five years in a prison camp next to a camp where Ukrainian women were held, and he and one of the captives, Maria, fell in love over the barbed wire.
They married in 1945, but she died in 1986 and he has since married again.
— Reuter
Catrain first wrote to the French embassy in Moscow in 1980 asking it to tell his brothers and sisters that he was alive.
But French officials were initially suspicious and the Soviet KGB security police forced him to turn down a French passport.
New blast from killer volcano
A VOLCANO that erupted in the Philippines last week, killing more than 60 people, exploded again yesterday in blasts of superheated steam, smoke and ash.
A series of explosions shook the crater of Mt Mayon, about 200 miles south of Manila, spewing mushroom clouds of ash and sand high into the sky and scientists warned of even greater eruptions to come.
Hot sand, ash and rock tumbled three miles down deep gullies towards villages and farms on the lower slopes.
Farmers who had refused to leave their homes and livestock ran for their lives.
Nobody was reported injured, but volcanologists said the eruption was only moderate.
‘We think the big one has not happened yet,’ said Leonila Bautista.
‘What happened this morning is a start.’
More than 50,000 people living in a six-mile danger area have been evacuated but, even with lava heading for them, some have refused to leave.
‘It is good for Mayon to release some of its hot air,’ said one 93-year-old who will leave only when ‘Mayon gets too violent’.
— Reuter
Union chief to lead Italian Socialists
A VETERAN trade union leader, Giorgio Benvenuto, 55, was elected leader of Italy's Socialist Party yesterday to replace the disgraced former prime minister Bettino Craxi.
Mr Craxi, who had been unchallenged party leader for 16 years, four of them as prime minister, resigned on Thursday as judges moved to prosecute him in connection with a corruption scandal.
Mr Benvenuto was favoured by the party's old guard and may face criticism from ardent reformers.
— Reuter
RUSSIA
Opposition group ban overturned
RUSSIA'S Constitutional Court yesterday formally overturned a ban on a right-wing opposition grouping imposed by President Boris Yeltsin last year.
Judges ruled that the ban on the National Salvation Front was unconstitutional but the decision has little effect as Mr Yeltsin last month cancelled the ban, imposed in December, in a decree.
He said the front's organising committee had ceased to exist and therefore there was no need to ban the group.
— Reuter
UNITED STATES
Clinton attacks drug companies
DRUG prices were criticised as ‘shocking’ yesterday by the US president, Bill Clinton, as he launched a $300 million programme to get US children immunised.
The new funds are to keep clinics open longer and keep better track of  inoculations .
A day after his wife, Hillary, spoke out against profiteering by vaccine makers, Mr Clinton said the industry's profits were rising four times faster than those of an average major company.
— AP
RUSSIA
Anti-theft scheme not holding water
STATE canteens in Chuvashia, central Russia, have found a novel way of stopping guests stealing the spoons.
They drill holes in them.
Diners have to plug the holes with bread before they can drink their soup, Itar-Tass news agency reported.
Unfortunately the spoons are still disappearing — apparently they are now sought after as souvenirs.
— Reuter
Relief convoys to challenge Serb blockade
THE United Nations relief agency UNHCR said yesterday that it would send aid convoys to challenge a Serb blockade of thousands of starving Muslims trapped in eastern Bosnia.
The agency's special envoy, Jose Maria Mendiluce, told a news conference that convoys protected by UN peace keeping troops would be sent to the area next week, whether Serbs besieging Muslims towns and villages agreed or not.
‘We will go and spend as many days and nights on the road as are necessary in order to reach them,’ he said, adding that the UNHCR might cut off its aid to Serbs in eastern Bosnia if the convoys were stopped at Serb road blocks.
Agency officials in Geneva and Belgrade are concerned by the worsening plight of refugees from all three sides in Bosnia's ten-month civil war but are particularly worried about the Muslims in the east.
A spokeswoman in Geneva said more than 100,000 Muslims were in ‘absolutely total misery’ in eastern Bosnia.
Today Mr Mendiluce will go to the Bosnian capital, Sarajevo, to urge President Alija Izetbegovic to reverse a decision to refuse further aid to the city out of sympathy with the Muslims in the east.
About 380,000 people trapped in the besieged city rely entirely on UNHCR aid.
The international mediator Lord Owen said yesterday that talks between the Croatian government and Serbs would begin at the United Nations next week in an effort to renew a peace agreement blown apart in recent fighting.
He said that Serbs in the Croatian enclave of Krajina who had earlier boycotted such negotiations had now agreed to the new talks.
Two Bosnian women have filed a civil suit against the leader of the Bosnian-Serbs, Radovan Karadzic, alleging that he has legal responsibility for mass rapes and other brutalities inflicted by his forces in Bosnia-Herzegovina.
The suit was filed in New York by human rights groups on the women's behalf.
— Reuter and AP
POLAND
Government wins vote on budget
IN A crucial vote yesterday Poland's coalition government won parliament's approval for its 1993 budget.
The 230-207 vote in the Sejm (lower house) ended a week of uncertainty in which the prime minister, Hanna Suchocka, had threatened that her government would resign if the budget failed.
The Sejm accepted the most contentious point, a deficit of about £3.4 billion, clearing the way for a new credit deal with the International Monetary Fund.
— Reuter
Former president to die
THE former Malian president, Moussa Traore, and three senior army officers were sentenced to death yesterday after a court found them guilty of mass murder in 1991.
After a ten-week trial, the high court said Traore had ordered his forces to fire on demonstrators in the capital, Bamako, and provincial cities, killing 106 people.
The carnage led army officers to overthrow Traore in March 1991.
His military government had ruled Mali for 23 years.
Traore, 56, was found guilty by a majority of the seven judges of deliberately causing death and injury to  demonstrators , some of whom were blinded or lost limbs.
The three main co-accused — Traore's defence minister, Gen Mamadou Coulibali, his interior minister, Gen Sekou Ly, and former army chief, Col Ousmane Coulibali — were also sentenced to death.
The 29 other defendants, prominent members of Traore's one-party system, were found not guilty and acquitted.
Only eight were released, however, because the other 21 face a second trial for ‘economic crimes’.
— Reuter
Frankfurt hijacker had gun hidden in his hat
SECURITY lapses at Frankfurt airport that let a hijacker walk on to a jet with a gun hidden under his hat will be tracked down, the German government pledged yesterday.
A 20-year-old Ethiopian, Nebiu Zewolde Demeke, hijacked a Lufthansa Airbus 310 on Thursday on a flight to Cairo.
He surrendered at New York's John F Kennedy airport where his gun was found to be a starter's pistol.
Demeke was ordered to be held without bail after being arraigned at a New York court last night.
German prosecutors earlier said they may ask for his extradition.
The charges alleged Demeke hid the gun under his Indiana Jones-style fedora hat while he was searched with a metal detector.
‘The defendant was then asked to remove his hat, which he did, concealing the pistol.’
The court heard Demeke had made two demands: that the plane fly to New York and that he receive political asylum in the United States.
Officials said Demeke had been on his way to Cairo with a ticket supplied by the Germany under a plan to encourage asylum seekers to return home.
Promising a full investigation into the security breach, Germany's interior minister, Rudolf Seiters, told a Frankfurt airport press conference: ‘We take this extremely seriously.
We will do everything we can to clear up the open questions.’
The episode has embarrassed German authorities particularly in regard to supposedly stringent security imposed after a Pan Am jumbo jet was blown up over Lockerbie in 1988 by a bomb allegedly placed aboard at Frankfurt.
Also at the press conference, Gerhard Goebel, the jet's captain who returned to a hero's welcome yesterday, declined to criticise security.
‘I have been flying out of Frankfurt for nearly 22 years, and I have no reason to believe security…is below standards.’
He said no airport was totally secure.
Giving graphic details of the 11-hour stand-off, Capt Goebel said Demeke had held the gun to his head or that of his co-pilot for most of the flight, but they had been able to build a rapport with him.
He said he had struck a deal on the gun.
‘I said I would give him my pilot sunglasses if he gave me his weapon.
After we landed, he gave it to me.’
Capt Goebel said that when Demeke  commandeered the plane over Austria, he had at first ordered the crew to fly directly to New York, but had been persuaded to refuel.
‘I showed him on the map where we would sink into the Atlantic if we didn't.’
The pilot said he had advised Demeke to pick Hanover airport because its runway was far from the control tower.
‘My incentive was to get the man to…trust me.’
Hanover officials said the plane was allowed to leave because they took seriously Demeke's threat to shoot ‘one flight attendant every five minutes’.
Capt Goebel looked annoyed when asked about the gun.
‘If someone puts a weapon to your head, would you ask if it is real or not?’
What happened to Scottish debate?
I thought that the question of Scotland's future as part of the UK, or as an independent nation, was an important subject, worthy of wide-ranging debate to be followed ultimately by a democratic decision.
However, I understand that, the other day, an English acrobat's son came up to Scotland for a few hours and said that the whole thing was non-negotiable.
I waited for a day or so, expecting some sort of national protest.
But no, the country carried on as usual with its football, its treks to the supermarket and its favourite TV programmes, as if nothing had happened.
Perhaps, after all, there is no Scottish question?
John Major is a likeable man, who could rarely be accused of arrogance, but, from a  position of about ten parliamentary seats in Scotland, his remarks were, if not arrogant, at least cheeky.
However when cheek meets apathy, nothing apparently happens.
In the same way, when the Labour Party, with 49 Scottish seats, opposes things like unemployment, industrial closures and declining social services, again nothing happens.
Unless the Labour leadership recognises publicly that some form of Scottish parliament must come first on its political agenda and unless it can bring itself to co-operate enthusiastically with the SNP and Liberal parties to achieve this, nothing will continue to happen.
The one probable exception to this state of affairs is the campaign against water privatisation, which seems likely to succeed because public opinion has rallied across the whole political spectrum.
The moral to be drawn from this is, let us apply the same committed and co-ordinated approach to deliver a Scottish parliament, which could tackle a whole range of problems, rather than simply showing piecemeal enthusiasm over a few issues like water and the poll tax.
Integrated transport system answer to bridge delays
The news that the Secretary of State for Scotland has asked for a feasibility study to investigate the need for a second Forth road bridge is unwelcome and merely confirms that the Scottish Office lacks a viable, long-term strategy for transport.
The interests of the people of Fife and Lothian, and elsewhere for that matter, are surely best served by the development of a modern, integrated transport system which optimises the use of both road and rail.
Such a system would sustain the area's transport requirements well into the 21st century.
In contrast, the Scottish Office's strategy, which primarily concentrates on road-building, is a short-term ‘fixit’ response to a growing problem and an environmental disaster in the making.
By encouraging transport users to choose road rather than rail, the Scottish Office is capitulating to the powerful car and construction lobbies, and adding to already unbearable development pressures.
If road traffic doubles within the next 20-25 years as forecast, then the number of annual road vehicle crossings of the Forth could conceivably reach 40 million by the early part of the next century.
This compares to over 17 million in 1992.
If these predictions prove to be correct, then the Scottish Office's current proposals are hopelessly inadequate because traffic congestion will be even worse than it is today.
While I expect that there are people in Fife and Lothian who are in favour of a new bridge, I have yet to meet them.
In contrast it is not difficult to find someone in favour of improving public transport and they agree that the £400 million-plus available to the Scottish Office could be better spent.
Eventually, the Government must make it easier to live without the car.
It has no choice and it should start now.
Facing down the fatwa
IT IS hard, looking back on Salman Rushdie's four years of unwalled imprisonment, to see many places where credit may be easily accorded.
Some would say that blame should begin, even end, with Rushdie himself: that this ‘impertinent, whining guest,’ as Lord Tebbit unforgivably called him, wrote a calculatedly provocative book, brought the predictable wrath of Islam down upon himself and has since presented the taxpayer with a multi-million pound bill for keeping due retribution at bay.
Even if that caricature were true, which in almost every respect it is not, it would not alter the fundamental issues at the core of the Rushdie affair.
The first and biggest is that no nation which expects to take its place in the world order should be in the business of commissioning international vengeance and terrorism.
The fatwa was and remains an affront to civilised values, for which Iran should be held accountable for as long as the command stands unrescinded.
As Rushdie himself argues, in his interview today with The Scotsman, Iran has infringed British sovereignty, that much-revered totem, by passing a death sentence on a resident British citizen.
A second, but equally fundamental, principle is that people's lives should not be in forfeit because of the ideas they choose to express.
Rushdie may not project an image immediately attractive to everyone, but that principle stands as an absolute or not at all.
It is unqualified by personal circumstance or character.
It might be thought that such tenets were unambiguous enough in a democracy to be assured the most rigorous defence.
Yet the harsh fact remains that Rushdie has won much greater commitment from politicians elsewhere than from those in the country of which he has been a citizen for a quarter of a century.
In Scandinavia, in North America, in Germany, his case aroused a cross-party resolve to take whatever steps are necessary to bring Iran back within the limits of tolerable behaviour.
Norway has suspended an oil deal, Canada a credit line.
In Britain the only consensus has appeared to be to regard him as an embarrassment.
Neither Government nor Opposition emerges with great honour from the Rushdie affair.
While some Labour politicians have been supportive, others have displayed a small-minded determination to avoid saying anything that might offend Muslim voters, as if that was the highest issue at stake.
The Government refused at first even to meet him, citing the need not to inflame those holding the Beirut hostages, and did precious little more for a long time after the hostages were freed.
Only now are ministers rousing themselves to speak of his plight with anything approaching urgency.
True, the Government has continued to afford him protection, an expensive commitment for which he helps pay.
But, with Iran anxious to normalise its trading relations with the rest of the world, the time to apply more decisive pressure is now.
The issues Rushdie involuntarily personifies are great indeed, and for as long as they continue to be treated as an inconvenience, democracy itself is diminished.
NHS costs
I am concerned about the National Health Service and the high costs to treat individual cases and I agree with the Rev Ralph CP Smith (Points of View, 4 February) that the NHS will have to get its priorities right.
Thousands of babies are born with some form of birth defect and most have immediately to go into incubators with doctors and nurses having to work round the clock to give them intensive care.
By the age of seven, nearly half of the babies will have died and many others will require constant care throughout their lives.
Other people who have contributed money all their lives to the NHS since it began have to wait 51 weeks for a hip replacement.
The population in the world has risen substantially since 1970 and there is an increase of 90 million each year.
So let us promote better health for the population that we have at present instead of experimenting with high-cost technology.
Maybe in the future, like the Chinese, we will only be allowed one child.
Corrupt old order deposed in Italy's ‘clean hands’ revolution
Italy is forging a bright new future free from the pervasive taint of corruption in business and politics, writes Joseph Farrell
VIRTUALLY unnoticed by the outside world, Italy is in a state of revolution, albeit peaceful revolution.
The most frequent sounds heard in the corridors of power at the moment are the click of handcuffs being attached to the wrists of once prominent figures from the old parties, and the hallelujahs of the young turks as they record victory after victory at the polls.
The latest casualty is Bettino Craxi, who this week resigned as leader of the Socialist party, the PSI.
Everything in Italian politics is subject to change as the old order is swept away and a variety of designs for the future are proposed.
Umberto Bossi's Lombard League advocates a federal republic, Leoluca Orlando's Network promises war on all forms of corruption, Mario Segni's more diffusive movement offers electoral reform.
The common aim is to found a Second Republic and to reduce or eliminate the power of the political cliques who have held sway since the fall of fascism.
The need for this enterprise has been made clear by the magistrates in their year-long anti-graft campaign Clean Hands.
The number of politicians and industrialists investigated, arrested, interrogated and discredited is beyond calculation.
Some Italian papers publish lists of those rounded up the previous day together with little maps marking the cities where the companies implicated have their factories.
This is the crisis of a regime and not of some deviant individuals.
Collusion between industry and politics had plainly become endemic to the system so that calculations of the size of bribe, and in what percentages to which parties, were regulated by established rules and not left to the whim of individual negotiators.
It was not necessary to demand ‘little envelopes’.
Everything could be done by a nod and a wink.
The first move towards breaking the system was made on 17 February 1992, when the magistrate Antonio Di Pietro arrested the socialist administrator Mario Chiesa for receiving bribes.
The sum involved, around £3,500, was small change compared with what was to follow, but after a month in prison Chiesa began to talk.
His revelations amazed the investigators who had believed they were dealing with a limited case.
Francesco Borrelli, chief magistrate in Milan, was appalled by the acceptance of corruption on all sides of the political spectrum.
‘What I did not realise at the outset was that this overlap of business and politics was not something episodic or occasional, but something which permeated the whole system from bottom to top, the very top.
It represented a kind of circulation or tax system running parallel to the ordinary system of redistribution of wealth in favour of society.’
The political parties were behaving like mafia families.
Chiesa is now serving a six year sentence but his evidence set in motion an inquiry which covers the whole of Italy.
The parties had their own money collectors and the industrialists, willingly or stoically, paid up knowing there was no option.
Some of Italy's largest companies are under investigation, and yesterday a group of shareholders announced the formation of an action group to see if any of the money disbursed in illegal payments could be recovered.
The investigations cover not a single scandal but the unrelated activities of hundreds of firms and politicians.
The former leader of the Social Democratic Party was recently sentenced to two years eight months imprisonment for corruption; the former Socialist Foreign Minister, Gianni De Michelis has had his parliamentary immunity lifted so he can be tried for misuse of office.
Motorways, electricity generators, municipal dumps were all subject to kickbacks.
Some of the money went into the pockets of individuals but most went into the coffers of the local or central parties or helped finance the mysterious research institutes which seemed  indispensable to Roman politics.
From there they went to increase the power of the individuals who controlled them.
Some Christian Democrat politicians are reportedly involved in a racket in which cash set aside by parliament for earthquake victims in Irpinia was misappropriated.
In local government in Rome, Edmondo Angele, the councillor with responsibility for Heritage, was arrested for alleged extortion while negotiating a contract to improve the navigability of the Tiber; a building firm called Gruppo Acqua grew from nothing in 1973 to become a multi-national which recently won a contract in Moscow to fight pollution.
The Pisante brothers who own it are now helping with inquiries, as the phrase goes.
The list is endless.
Power was exercised not by parliament but by the parties themselves, which had complete freedom to put their own men in positions of influence.
These favours were obviously repaid.
Members of all political parties, including the ex-Communists, are implicated in the scandal.
But none are more deeply affected than the PSI, which Craxi had headed since 1976.
The party fared badly at the election in April last year, and Craxi's name has appeared regularly in the inquiries.
Italian MPs enjoy an immunity from prosecution which can only be lifted by their peers, and magistrates have now lodged four separate requests for permission to proceed against Craxi.
The allegations state that he received money from the contract for the restoration of Milan's Underground and for repairs to the dam in Valtellina which burst in 1987 with much loss of life.
Craxi clung to power until last Thursday, seemingly prepared to pull the PSI down with him.
Until this week, his heir apparent was Claudio Martelli, minister for justice in the present government.
On Wednesday, Martelli resigned when news of new developments concerning a bank account in Switzerland in his and Craxi's names began to circulate.
This account was first identified as long ago as 1981 when a ledger was found during a raid on the house of masonic boss Licio Gelli.
It included details of payments made by Roberto Calvi, manager of the Banco Ambrosiano who was later found hanged under Blackfriars Bridge in London.
Allegedly the money was a back-hander to the PSI for helping to arrange loans.
At the time, the story was not investigated thoroughly and Craxi and Martelli were able to brush it aside.
Times have changed.
The tragedy of Italy in the past was that corrupt activities were ‘known’ but the nation felt powerless before the insolence of politicians.
The magistrate Di Pietro has become a national hero, the old parties have been weakened and new forces are waiting to take over.
In spite of the talk of the End of History, Italy is even now forging a whole new future for itself.
Big rise in Scots violent crime
By Gary Duncan
VIOLENT crime in Scotland has escalated sharply, with a rapid growth in the most serious offences producing figures likely to lead to fresh demands for urgent action by the police and the Government.
Provisional statistics obtained by The Scotsman from six of Scotland's eight main police forces reveal worrying jumps in the numbers of murders, attempted murders, serious assaults, and robberies being committed across the country.
The worst increase is in murder cases, which, for the six forces surveyed, have leapt from 72 in 1991 to 122 in 1992 — a rise of 69 per cent.
Attempted murders have also risen sharply, by 30 per cent, from 390 in 1991 to 503 last year, and cases of serious assault have increased by 8.5 per cent from 5,827 to 6,320.
For robberies, the six force areas have suffered a rise of 9.1 per cent from 5,920 cases to 6,458.
While Strathclyde records the highest numbers of the most serious offences, the survey highlights that it is not alone in suffering steep rises in violent crime.
In the Grampian and Northern areas there have been big increases in both murder and attempted murder.
After hearing details of the figures last night, Scotland's home affairs minister, Lord Fraser, said any criminal statistics indicating a rising trend were of great concern.
He said the figures would need to be studied.
Responding to Labour criticism of the Government's failure to implement a manifesto pledge on legislation to crack down on the sale and carrying of knives, Lord Fraser said ministers would like to act on this at an early opportunity.
However, he added that there were some difficulties with framing a law to curb the sale of weapons which would be both enforceable and effective.
Labour's Scottish home affairs spokesman, John McFall, attacked the Government's record on tackling crime as indicating a ‘state of torpor’.
Calling for a full public debate, Mr McFall said the Scottish Office should establish a Royal Commission on Criminal Justice similar to that already at work south of the Border.
Full report, Page 5
Climber dies on Beinn Achaladair
A CLIMBER was killed and another injured on Beinn Achaladair, Bridge of Orchy, yesterday, writes Eric McKenzie.
It is believed the two men slipped on ice while descending.
They were eventually taken off the mountain by rescue teams from Oban and Dumbarton.
The injured man was taken to the West Highland Hospital at Oban.
Earlier two climbers, reported overdue on Ben Nevis, were found safe after losing their way and having to spend the night on a ledge at 4,000 ft.
Both students, they had been well equipped and managed to make their own way off the mountain.
Researcher led to safety in Rwanda
By Denny Macgee
A SCOTTISH researcher has been led to safety after being trapped in a remote wildlife reserve by gun battles raging between rival forces in the African republic of Rwanda.
Alistair McNeilage, whose parents live in Kilmacolm, Renfrewshire, was part of a research team working on a project to save endangered species at the 10,000ft high Karisoke Research Centre, made famous in the film Gorillas in the Mist.
Mr McNeilage, 26, and four other members of the Dian Fossey Gorilla Fund team were trapped last week when Rwandan Government forces clashed with  guerrillas of the country's Patriotic Front after the massacre of 300 Tutsi tribesmen.
Mr McNeilage and another British research student, Jocelyn Milner, from Buckinghamshire, who arrived there earlier this month, should have pulled out of the centre in the tropical rainforest last week.
But their route to the capital, Kigali, ran through the Volcanoes National Park, which had become a battle-ground.
The first rescue mission by French troops last week had to be abandoned when they were caught in cross-fire.
It was feared that the team, which included two Americans and a German, could run out of food and suffer hardship if a rescue attempt was not successful.
A renewed attempt by ‘neutral’ forces was mounted and the five-strong team was brought to safety.
Last night, Mr McNeilage's father, Alan, said: ‘There has been a lot of fighting in the area, and one of the officials of the fund which finances the operation phoned on Wednesday and told my wife about the problems.
At that stage, they were obviously quite concerned about the situation.’
When they did not hear any further news, Mr McNeilage and his wife, Caryl, became increasingly worried about Alistair's safety.
However, he telephoned from Kigali on Saturday to say that they had been taken out through the area in which the fighting had taken place without mishap.
‘We spoke to him on Saturday, and he told us that he and the rest of the team were safe and well,’ Mr McNeilage said.
Mr McNeilage added that Alistair is due to leave Rwanda at the end of February.
‘His studies there are over, and he already had his flights booked to fly back to Britain.’
We're not sure yet exactly when he will be back in Scotland.
‘It may be that despite what has happened, he will simply stay on in Kigali until the time he was due to fly out.
At least we know he is safe.’
Last night, Alistair McNeilage was unavailable at his hotel in Kigali.
A spokesman at the hotel said he and the other members of the team had checked in at the weekend and appeared to be none the worse for their ordeal.
Alistair McNeilage: he phoned parents on Saturday
Major sparks new Maastricht row
By Ewen MacAskill Political Editor
THE GOVERNMENT's handling of the Maastricht bill came under fierce attack yesterday when it emerged that the Prime Minister has taken legal advice on whether he could by-pass Parliament.
John Major has been told by constitutional lawyers that he could ignore Parliament and use the royal prerogative to sign the treaty bill if he faced the prospect of defeat.
In fact, it is highly unlikely that the Government would use such a drastic step and ministers have told Mr Major that politically it would have terrible consequences.
Nevertheless, Labour and Tory Euro-MPs were incensed by the suggestion and Labour front-benchers said they will block the bill when it returns to the Commons next Monday until they receive clarification from the Government of its intentions.
Attempts will be made to raise the issue in the Commons today.
Labour's constitutional review committee was set to recommend, even before the latest row, that the royal prerogative should be ended.
The mere fact that the idea of by-passing Parliament has been floated is an indication that the Government, in spite of putting on a brave face, is worried about losing to a combination of Opposition MPs and Tory Euro-rebels.
The legal advice is part of a smokescreen being put up to hide its intentions and its concern.
The Government has also backpedalled furiously from a threat made last week by the Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, to scupper the bill if the vote on the social chapter was lost.
Downing Street publicly refused yesterday to contemplate defeat.
A spokesman said the Government was confident of winning the vote and would not be drawn on ‘hypothetical’ discussion about defeat.
The date of the vote has not been announced and is not expected for at least another six weeks.
The vote is on a Labour amendment that would reinstate the social chapter to the Maastricht treaty, setting out minimum employment standards.
Although Tory Euro-rebels support the Government in opposing the social chapter, they are prepared to vote for it in the hope of wrecking the whole treaty.
It is not clear if the Government's tactics over the last few days are typical of the muddle that has beset it in recent months or if it is deliberately designed to throw its opponents into confusion.
The Home Secretary, Kenneth Clarke, yesterday disputed the interpretation put on Mr Hurd's words last Wednesday but refused to say what the Government would do if it lost.
He said: ‘I actually, in my usual optimistic spirit, do not believe it will be lost, in the end, because we're facing such a strange collection of critics and would-be voters who contradict each other.’
The shadow foreign secretary, Dr Jack Cunningham, said: ‘If the House of Commons has no say over the Maastricht Treaty then the bill itself is a complete charade and a waste of time.
This matter must be clarified before any further consideration of the bill can be contemplated in the Commons and we shall be demanding such clarification from the Prime Minister and the Foreign Secretary.’
Tory Euro-rebels served notice they would ‘fight without restraint’ and create a constitutional crisis if the Government tried to by-pass Parliament to ratify the treaty.
William Cash, one of the leading rebels and MP for Stafford, said: ‘Any authoritarian attempts to bludgeon through Maastricht and by-pass Parliament, when 70 per cent want a referendum, by the obsolete and legalistic use of prerogatives will be fought without restraint by Euro-rebels and will cause a constitutional crisis.’
Another shadow foreign spokesman, George Robertson, said: ‘If the Government overrules the House of Commons vote on the Maastricht social chapter by invoking the royal prerogative on ratifying treaties, it will be an historic betrayal of Parliament.’
Boy last seen on shop video found dead
THE hunt for a missing two-year-old turned into a murder inquiry last night after his body was found on a Merseyside railway embankment.
Confirming that the dead boy was James Bulger, who disappeared while out shopping with his mother on Friday, a police spokesman said a post-mortem examination had established the cause of death, but would give no details other than to say: ‘We are now treating it as murder.’
James's body was found off Cherry Lane, Walton, about three miles from the Strand Shopping Centre in Bootle, where he went missing.
He was filmed by video security cameras leaving the shops with two youths.
Last night, a police spokesman said: ‘We are still looking for the two boys, aged about 10-14 years…
We are very anxious to trace them and we would like them to come forward.’
A woman saw the two boys holding James by the hands about an hour after they had left the shops.
She asked them about the child and they said they had just found him.
Police said James's body was discovered at 3:15pm yesterday by four boys on the Edge Hill to Bootle freight line section of the Liverpool-Kirby railway, yards from Walton Lane police station
James's mother Denise, 25, and father Ralph, 26, were last night being comforted by family and friends.
The scene where James was found was being searched by forensic scientists while other police worked on the shop video footage. — PA 
James Bulger: disappeared during shopping trip
Fury greets South Africa power share agreement
From Fred Bridgland, Johannesburg
THE South African government and the opposition African National Congress yesterday sought to defend against ferocious attack the agreement they have reached to share governmental power until the end of the century.
Clarence Makwetu, president of the radical Pan Africanist Congress (PAC), warned last night that every means, including armed struggle, would be used to oppose the ‘devil's pact’ between the government and the ANC.
Speaking in Cape Town, Mr Makwetu said the proposed five-year transition to democracy would prolong the political life of the ruling National Party.
‘The whole system is covered in the blood of our people,’ he said.
‘These are the people that the ANC now wants to share power with.
We in the PAC have not been fighting for the crumbs from the master's table.’
Mr Makwetu's angry denunciation of the deal was part of a swelling chorus of bellicose criticism from both left and right and from dissenters within the ANC.
‘This is a recipe for civil war,’ said Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, president of the Zulu-oriented Inkatha Freedom Party.
‘The government and the ANC are dangerously toying with all our lives and the lives of our children and grandchildren.’
He was particularly angry that the government had abandoned its demand that ‘federalism’ would be one of the cast iron principles that a constituent assembly, to be elected next year, would be compelled to implement.
Instead, the government on Friday accepted the ANC argument that the powers of devolved regional governments should be decided by the elected constituent assembly.
The government begins two days of negotiations today with Inkatha in an attempt to persuade the touchy Zulu leader that the ANC-government pact is not designed to exclude other smaller parties.
It will explain that the proposal is that any party which gains a minimum proportion of the votes to a constituent assembly will be entitled to representation in a government of national unity that will rule until 1999-2000.
A multi-party conference, which the government and the ANC want convened next month, will determine whether 5 per cent of the vote or 10 per cent is necessary for representation.
Five per cent would give Chief Buthelezi a good chance of playing a role in the national government.
Ten per cent would threaten him, as Inkatha's militancy is not matched by mass support throughout the country.
Mr Gwala will lead the assault on the ANC leadership when the movement's National Executive Committee meets tomorrow (Tues) in Johannesburg to ratify the deal with the government.
Mr Gwala is certain to enjoy widespread support, but on balance the NEC moderates are expected to win the day.
Diplomatic sources say the ANC and the government plan to call a national referendum on the power-sharing deal if the smaller political groups decline to attend the multi-party conference to refine and ratify the plan drawn up by the two major political players.
Chief Buthelezi's biggest enemy, Harry Gwala, leader of the ANC in Natal and KwaZulu, reviled the pact, saying: ‘The people have not struggled and suffered for years to share power with their oppressors.’
Robert von Tonder, leader of the white separatist Boer-estaat Party, warned: ‘Since De Klerk won't allow us an election to get him out democratically, we will have to get him out by other means.
We are the civil service and the white working class…
We control the railways, the power stations, the police and the army.’
‘This is a recipe for civil war’ Chief Buthelezi
House fire kills mother and child
A MOTHER and her two-year-old son died in a house fire in west Belfast early yesterday.
Firemen found the mother and son upstairs after flames swept through the house at Beechmount Pass just off the Falls Road.
They were trapped after the blaze broke out in a downstairs living room.
Her husband and two other sons and a daughter, as well as a friend who was staying with them, managed to escape.
Police said one of the boys suffered a broken leg and his father was in hospital with serious burns.
Three firemen were injured.
— PA
Jobless figures to top three million
By Ewen MacAskill Political Editor
MINISTERS are bracing themselves for the release of unemployment figures on Thursday which are expected to go over the three million mark.
The Trades Union Congress has organised a lobby of Parliament for that day and the Labour leader, John Smith, is almost certain to press the Prime Minister on it in the Commons.
The Government has had a special Cabinet committee looking at ways of reducing unemployment but its recommended package is not due to be announced for a couple of weeks.
Workfare was on the  committee's agenda but the committee has now been wound up and it is thought workfare has been pushed back as an idea requiring long-term consideration rather than implementation in the near future.
The committee, chaired by the Leader in the Lords, Lord Wakeham, has decided on a package that includes relaxation of rules that prevent benefit claimants from taking further education courses which occupy more than 21 hours a week.
In addition, there are plans to increase the number of places available in Job Clubs and Job Plan Workshops from April.
There is growing concern within the Government about the level of unemployment in the south-east of England and what is seen as discrimination in favour of Scotland and other areas through regional aid.
The Chancellor, Norman Lamont, is expected to put job creation high on his list of priorities when he announces the Budget on 16 March.
But the shadow Chancellor, Gordon Brown, announcing a series of what he termed job rallies in Tory-held marginal seats over the coming weeks, said almost 100,000 job training places had been cut since John Major became Prime Minister.
Sun in front page apology to the Queen
THE Sun newspaper today made a front page apology to the Queen for ‘unintentionally’ causing personal offence by publishing the text of her Christmas message early.
The climbdown in the form of a letter comes after a writ on behalf of the Queen was served on the paper last Thursday.
It also offers to donate £200,000 to the Save the Children Fund which has the Princess Royal as its patron.
Chris Davis, the paper's assistant editor, said last night: ‘It is Mr Rupert Murdoch who feels we should make this handsome and gracious gesture.
It has been discussed at the very highest level.’
But he said that both sets of lawyers were unaware of the paper's offer and he did not know if it would halt the looming legal action which alleges  infringement of copyright in relation to the 1992 Christmas message.
The contents of the annual speech have a strict embargo.
— PA
Scots Labour autonomy calls getting louder
By Joanne Robertson, Scottish Political Correspondent
MOVES to win greater autonomy for the Scottish Labour Party at next month's Inverness conference will be intensified by both the nationalists and the left-wingers within the party, it emerged yesterday.
The debate aimed at winning more control over policy, staff and top appointments has been fuelled by the row over the party's policy on water privatisation and the question-mark over the shadow Scottish secretary, Tom Clarke.
Discussions over the need for increased powers for the Scottish party were initiated by its nationalist wing but have been seized on by the left as a means of ensuring that Labour's different electoral aims north and south of the Border do not lead to alienation of the party's traditional supporters in Scotland.
Bob McLean, convener of the home rule pressure group, Scottish Labour Action, stressed that proposals for the election of a Scottish party leader by the Scottish party conference were not targeted at Mr Clarke.
However he said: ‘This debate has highlighted the need for greater autonomy for the Labour Party in Scotland and the need to have policies which reflect the political consensus in Scotland.
‘Labour's own Scottish Watergate has also emphasised the need for a leader who has the authority of being elected by the party in Scotland.’
Concern among the party's grass roots and the parliamentary party was demonstrated by the tenor of the debate at Saturday's executive which led to a further clarification of the Scottish party's position.
The statement released after the meeting in Dundee underlined Labour's pledge to create a Scottish parliament and committed Scottish Labour MPs to returning any privatised water services to public ownership — a significant shift from its previous promise of ‘public control.’
It stated: ‘If the Government goes ahead with privatisation, a Labour controlled Scottish parliament will legislate to ensure that water and sewerage services are returned to public ownership under the control of directly elected and accountable local authorities.’
The confusion over the party's policy direction in the wake of last week's speech by the Labour leader, John Smith, is now expected to result in a statement from the Scottish executive during the conference debate on water which is much stronger than any of the resolutions submitted.
Party activists also point out that Labour's attempt to move its agenda away from the constitutional issue and on to‘bread and butter’ issues such as jobs and water, has in effect led to a policy commitment which gives even greater weight to the role of a future Scottish parliament.
Attempts by the party leadership to stall the demands for greater autonomy until its review of organisation and structure is completed next year will be keenly fought on the floor of the conference hall.
One possible temporary solution could be acceptance of a reduction in membership fees for Scotland in contrast to the rest of the United Kingdom, to satisfy demands for Scotland's distinct nature to be recognised.
Doubt hangs over future of girl found alone at home
COUNCILLORS are likely to consider whether the 11-year old girl at the centre of a Home Alone storm should be returned to her mother when she returns from her Spanish holiday, it emerged yesterday.
Police are still trying to trace the out-of-work actress, Yasmin Gibson, 34, on Spain's Costa Del Sol but say there is no indication as to when she will return home.
How Gemma Gibson came to be left alone in a flat in Hammersmith, London seems likely to remain unclear until she comes back.
Social services stepped in to take Gemma into care after a neighbour looking after her went into hospital.
The older woman living with her, thought to be in her  eighties , could not cope.
But it is not clear whether Ms Gibson made arrangements with neighbours, who had cared for Gemma before.
During a telephone call to a neighbour this weekend, Ms Gibson apparently indicated she intended to continue her holiday.
Yesterday councillors on Hammersmith and Fulham council's social services committee said they needed to know full details of the case, but that the law required a child's interests were put first.
Emile Al-Uzaizi, deputy leader of the council's Tory opposition group and a social services committee member, said this was the first case of its kind he had known in his eight years on the council.
It seemed ‘really quite incredible’ that the mother could call her neighbour and still not return home, he said.
‘It is a very distressing case, We don't know what the full facts are, and I would not want to comment in detail.
The Children's Act emphasises we have to do what is best for the child, and that has tended to mean more children are taken into care or placed in foster care,’ he added.
Ms Gibson lives with her daughter in a two-bedroom flat in a mansion block.
The building's caretaker, Jim Chapman, said he called police because he was concerned for Gemma's welfare.
But it emerged that it was unlikely the child was on her own for more than a day, as neighbours volunteered to look after her.
A High Court judge on Friday made Gemma a ward of court and ruled that she could not be approached by the media.
— PA 
Gemma Gibson: mother intends to continue holiday
Mother of murdered girl freed
THE mother of the murdered seven-year-old schoolgirl, Stacey Queripel, was last night released by police without charge after 87 hours of questioning.
Gilliane Queripel, 33, was arrested on Thursday and taken to the police station at Bracknell, Berkshire by detectives investigating the killing.
Police were twice granted an extension to the time allowed for questioning.
The third period expired at 7pm, when Mrs Queripel was freed.
Stacey was found strangled alongside a footpath in the South Hill Arts Centre, Bracknell, on 24 January.
At first it was thought her death was an accident and she had been choked when her necklace snagged on branches, but a second post-mortem examination five days later revealed she had been murdered.
When Stacey was found, Mrs Queripel told police she had disappeared from the family's flat in Birch Hill, Bracknell, after being sent to bed early.
— PA
Rushdie condemns fatwa as terrorist threat
THE AUTHOR, Salman Rushdie, yesterday condemned the death edict against him as a ‘terrorist threat’ after Iran renewed its call for the sentence to be carried out four years after it was imposed.
Mr Rushdie said the fatwa, issued after allegations that he had blasphemed against Islam in his novel, The Satanic Verses, symbolised the worst of religious fanaticism.
In a emotional 20-minute speech during a surprise appearance at a service at King's College Chapel in Cambridge he spoke of the importance of freedom in the face of the edict.
‘The fatwa has become a symbol of what is worst [about religion].
It far exceeds its author's jurisdiction, since it contravenes fundamental principles of Islamic law.
It is in fact a straightforward terrorist threat,’ he said.
Mr Rushdie, who went into ‘deep hiding’ after his appearance, was said to be depressed and disappointed by the hard-line Iranian renewal of the edict.
The 45-year-old author has spent his years under the death threat in hiding.
He has been protected by a team of Special Branch officers, moving him from location to location.
Iran's spiritual leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, said the fatwa announced by his predecessor Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini must be carried out whatever the consequences.
‘Imam Khomeini has thrown an arrow at this impudent apostate.
The arrow is moving towards its target and will sooner or later hit it,’ Ayatollah Khamenei said.
‘The verdict must undoubtedly be carried out.
It is incumbent upon every Muslim who has access to this mercenary author to drive this harmful being out of the way of Muslims and punish him,’ he added in a report from the Iranian news agency IRNA.
The fatwa was ‘irreversible and no-one is able to make a deal over it,’ he told a meeting of Islamic clergy and students.
A Muslim foundation that offered more than $3 million for Mr Rushdie's head added that the time was ripe for the death sentence to be carried out.
But the Iranian foreign minister, Ali Akbar Velayati, appealed to western countries to keep the Rushdie issue separate from bilateral relations with Iran.
‘Some western governments have linked or connected the destiny of bilateral relations between Iran and themselves to the destiny of this person,’ he told a Tehran news conference.
‘They should separate the issues,’ he added.
In Cambridge, Mr Rushdie said it was an honour to be asked to speak at the college, where he was a student in the 1960s.
The freedoms threatened by the fatwa went far beyond his own freedom and the principles involved were greater than his own life or death.
In the West writers and publishers were nervous of publishing any material about Islam except the most anodyne, and in the East and across the Muslim world progressive voices were under attack, he said.
‘The language of the Inquisition is abroad again,’ he added.
‘Values and morals are independent of religious faith.
God and evil come before religion.
That is where our freedom lies and it is that freedom which the fatwa threatens, and which it cannot be allowed to destroy.’
As he left the chapel a crowd of more than 100 onlookers burst into spontaneous applause.
Britain confirmed its backing for Mr Rushdie's rights in the face of the renewed death threat.
A Foreign Office spokesman stressed Britain would continue to support all constructive efforts to resolve the issue of the ‘incitement to murder’ Mr Rushdie, including action in international forums.
— PA
‘We remain greatly concerned by the failure of the Iranian authorities to repudiate this incitement to murder and to repudiate the bounty,’ the spokesman said.
Britain angered Iran when Mr Rushdie met the Foreign Office minister, Douglas Hogg, on 4 February, his first public meeting with a British Government minister in four years.
In September 1990 the Government partly restored diplomatic relations with Iran, severed over the book, but the fatwa remained an obstacle to upgrading ties to ambassadorial level.
Father charged with son's death
A MAN will appear in court today charged with the murder of his baby son, police said.
Five-month-old Wesley Symes-McSwan died on Thursday at a hospital in Salisbury, Wiltshire.
A post-mortem examination showed he had suffered internal injuries, said a spokesman.
Lee McSwan, 22, of Bos-combe Down, Wiltshire, was is custody and would appear today before magistrates at Salisbury, the spokesman added.
— PA
Three venues bid to host 1996 Mod
THREE places are bidding to host the National Mod in 1996.
Blairgowrie, Largs and Aberdeen have all applied to An Comunn Gaidhealach to stage the event.
The deadline for applications falls today.
The organisation will decide who wins the right to stage the 1996 event at its annual general meeting in June.
This year the Mod is to be held in Airdrie before moving to Dunoon in 1994 and Golspie the following year.
Father under fire over forest search
A SCOTS father who took his two sons for a forest walk and sparked a huge rescue operation came under fire yesterday.
Two RAF rescue teams, ten police officers and 40 civilians combed the 9,000-acre fogbound forest in North Yorkshire all night for William McKenzie, 48, of West Calder, West Lothian, and his sons David, 15, and Ross, 13, who turned up safe this morning unaware of what was going on.
In the 17 hours they were missing after losing their way, they trudged the forest to keep up their body heat until they eventually reached a path with white arrows which led them to the edge of the forest.
They had been staying at a log cabin holiday home at Cropton, near Pickering, and yesterday, Ray Allanson, manager of the Forestry Commission's Keldy Forest cabins, said: ‘They left without any maps unaware of the dangers of walking in the forest at night.
Black holes and craters appear out of nowhere and it can be hell at night and very dangerous.’
— PA
‘Police and many volunteers had been up all night looking for them.
But when he and his family got back to their cabin they seemed upset because we had gone to so much trouble.’
Banks and Mellor in TV row
THE former Cabinet minister, David Mellor, was accused of ‘talking bollocks’ by a Labour MP during a television row yesterday.
At one point, during a fiery discussion on the Maastricht Treaty, Mr Mellor suggested that Tony Banks, Labour member for Newham North-West, should take a tranquilliser to calm him down.
The exchanges came during London Weekend Television's political Crosstalk programme.
The guests were discussing the treaty's social chapter, low pay and a national minimum wage.
Mr Banks said: ‘How come the other 11 in the European Community want it and we do not?’
Mr Mellor, who resigned as National Heritage Secretary, offered to answer.
Then, thousands of viewers heard Mr Banks say: ‘No, because you are talking bollocks, David.’
A few minutes later, Mr Mellor said: ‘Are you going to take a tranquilliser while I answer that?’
Mr Banks responded: ‘Well, stop getting me worked up then…‘
Peter Allen, political editor of London News Network, intervened: ‘Keep the language as clean as you can, gents.’
Then Mr Banks turned to Mr Mellor and said: ‘At least you get a speech and not cheap abuse from me.’
Mr Mellor retorted: ‘Well, I shan't remind you what you said earlier in the programme.’
Mr Banks: ‘You are still talking it, David…‘
Cannabis ‘could be used to treat brain disorders'
A SCOTTISH scientist is at the forefront of research which could lead to cannabis being used to treat certain brain-related disorders, including Alzheimer's disease.
Dr Roger Pertwee claims it is only a matter of time before marijuana moves from being regarded as a drug of abuse to a substance which can be used positively.
Dr Pertwee, of Aberdeen University's Department of Bio-Medical Sciences, has been studying cannabis since the late 1960s and is now secretary of the International Cannabis Research Society.
He and colleagues in Israel have discovered a naturally-  occurring compound within the body which mimics the effects of cannabis on the brain.
The genetic material, he says, produces what are known as ‘cannabis receptors’ which affect certain parts of the brain in exactly the same way as illegally-smoked cannabis.
The effect is most marked in those parts of the brain which deal with memory loss, muscle movement and body temperature, all of which are affected by cannabis.
Scientists in the United States ‘cloned’ the genetic compound last year in what was the most exciting breakthrough since cannabis research began.
Dr Pertwee says the receptors are found in the brain areas where it is known that cannabis acts to produce many of its effects.
‘They are not found in equal amounts throughout the brain and there is a good correlation between where they are found and the effects which we know cannabis has.’
‘The cannabis field has moved away from the drug abuse side of things.
It has expanded in a very exciting way.
‘We are actually now dealing with a substance which affects us all, not just the few people who take cannabis for recreational purposes.’
‘We are now dealing with a situation where all of us are exposed to a cannabis-like substance.
Under what circumstances it is released we need to discover; maybe it is only released under special circumstances, maybe it is released all the time.’
Dr Pertwee said it could be that the genetic substance is helping the human memory to function properly and having a controlling or modulatory role on the brain.
‘Moving on from there it could be that we find out more about how certain diseases occur and we could maybe find new ways of treating diseases.’
He said that, when looking at potential positive uses, there are clues in the effects which cannabis has on certain body functions.
‘It has an effect on perception, it has an effect on mood and on the ability to move the muscles, memory, to name just a few.
So possibly it might be used to deal with disorders of those effects.
‘Memory and cognition are affected in old age, particularly in Alzheimer's disease.
It could be that one could use cannabis-related compounds to deal with disorders of those  phenomena , like memory and so on.’
Dr Pertwee says there is no longer a stigma attached to cannabis research in the scientific world, although pharmaceutical companies have been less willing to be seen to be working with cannabis-like substances.
‘It would be great if we could come up with a way of treating some disorders, we could actually make use of cannabis in some way therapeutically, that would be tremendous.’
‘We are dealing with a substance which affects us all, not just the few who take cannabis for recreational purposes.’
Teachers demand action on dangers of computer games
Thousands of children are becoming hooked on computer games, according to a survey.
Their addiction could have frightening consequences.
Bryan Christie, reports
ADDICTION to computer games is creating aggressive and anti-social tendencies among children, it is claimed today as teachers demand a campaign to alert parents to the potential dangers.
The phenomenal success of computer games in recent years has seen them become the most popular pastime of hundreds of thousands of children.
But the craze has come under attack from two separate sides.
In a television documentary to be screened tonight, details will be given of a study at one British school which found that 60 per cent of boys and 30 per cent of girls showed signs of being addicted to the games — many of which feature violent activities.
More than half of those worst affected had aggressive and anti-social tendencies.
In a separate development, the Professional Association of Teachers in England claimed the games were affecting the social and educational development of children.
It wants the Government to mount a publicity campaign to highlight the problem and also called for an an independent body to be set up, funded by profits from the electronic games industry, to monitor the content of computer games.
‘We should like to see parents control the amount of time their children spend on computer games, especially if it becomes clear that it is becoming more than a normal hobby,’ said the PAT deputy general secretary, Jackie Miller.
The school survey to be reported in World In Action was based on a US test for studying amusement arcade addiction.
After finding that large numbers were addicted, researchers then gave a psychological test to two groups of children — some of those with the heaviest addiction and others who did not play computer games.
It found that 55 per cent of the addicted players gave mainly aggressive responses and displayed anti-social tendencies compared with only 18 per cent of the non-players.
Cary Cooper, professor of psychology at Manchester University's Institute of Science and Technology, who analysed the results, said: ‘Kids who watch video games a lot actually use that behaviour or transpose that behaviour in other social situations — maybe not grossly but they certainly show much more aggressive behaviour than the kids who don't watch video games.
‘Until more research is done I don't think the video games companies have any justification in saying it has no impact on kids.’
Teachers are finding that many children are spending substantial amounts of time playing the games to the detriment of their school work.
‘Our members are reporting that children's social and educational development is already being affected by playing games to excess, and we are concerned that, long-term, there will be medical effects on them as well,’ said Ms Miller.
‘Computer games are like lots of other children's hobbies — great in small doses.’
Two of the principal games manufacturers respond to the criticisms on the World in Action programme.
Bill White, head of communications for Nintendo, says: ‘While some of our games do have violent themes, or more violent themes…we believe they all fall within the range of quality games accepted by the majority of the people in the population.’
Tom Kalinske, president of Sega US, adds: ‘All we are really doing is interpreting what one sees in the world today and making some form of game play out of it.
I hope we develop those that are so interesting you don't want to put it down.’
Action call after ship hits island
KEN AMER
SALVAGE specialists last night called off attempts to refloat a ship aground on an uninhabited island in the Pentland Firth — as pressure mounted for far tougher controls on vessels using the channel.
Coastguards said they were still unclear how the Danish registered coastal vessel Bettina Danica had managed to run aground on Stroma.
The general cargo ship was empty except for its own fuel oil when it hit the island, lying between Orkney and the Scottish mainland, in the early hours of Saturday.
But worried Orcadians said it was further proof — following the Braer oil tanker disaster on neighbouring Shetland — of the pressing need to review shipping arrangements.
After two tugs failed to refloat the ship, the crew was lifted off 14 hours later by a Sea King helicopter from RAF Lossiemouth.
The ship's captain remained on board for another four hours to transfer 25 tonnes of diesel oil from vulnerable fuel tanks to a more secure area of the vessel.
But the Coastguard spokesman said that about five tonnes of diesel had escaped into the sea.
Last night, as a tug prepared to remain on standby overnight, with a fresh refloating attempt planned for this morning, an environmental row erupted.
The accident provided councillors on Orkney with fresh ammunition as they prepare to put their case for stricter controls on shipping in the area to Lord Donaldson, who is expected to visit Orkney next week as part of his inquiry following the Braer disaster.
The councillors will point to a recent survey by their harbours department which showed that about 5,000 ships a year are using the Pentland Firth.
The survey disclosed that in a three-week period, 309 vessels had passed through the firth and that 94 had refused to identify themselves.
‘We have no idea what those ships were carrying,’ said Councillor Jim Sinclair, chairman of Orkney Islands Councils harbours and ferries committee.
This latest accident is a graphic illustration of the disaster that's waiting to happen out there.’
Stuck fast: the Bettina Danica on Stroma.
An attempt to refloat her will be made today.
Victory fells a male bastion
SCOTTISH women have now broken into another supposedly impenetrable male bastion — international rugby, writes Sarah Wilson.
Though the club-room comedians no doubt felt robbed of their favourite source of humour — sexism — the 1,000-strong crowd who turned out to watch yesterday's friendly match against Ireland at Raeburn Place, Edinburgh, seemed satisfied with the standard of play.
Preferring to pound the rugby pitch rather than passively wait for Valentine's cards dropping through the letter box, the efforts of the 15 women on the Scotland side were rewarded with a 10-0 win.
It was a tense match with not much to choose between the two sides until Scotland scored the first try near the end of the first half.
Ireland nearly equalised in the second, but were held back and Sandra Colamartino scored her second try for Scotland in the final minutes.
The attitude was every bit as brutal as the men's variety, but less damage was inflicted as there were no significant injuries.
Though according to Sue Brodie, who plays full back for Scotland, the women have suffered everything from dislocated shoulders to broken ankles in league matches.
‘It happens, but it's not a major concern.
It's just the risk you take if you want to play a physical game.
‘It's a contact sport and we have the same commitment level as the men, so there is the same danger.’
Steve Skeldon, who coaches the female Edinburgh Academicals, said: ‘Women tend to play rugby the way it should be played.
They tend to throw the ball rather than kicking it 60 yards up the park.’
While it is still a fledging sport north of the Border, women's rugby is growing fast with teams starting up from Livingston to Lerwick.
The Scottish squad are hoping to raise the £27,000 needed to compete in the second Women's Rugby World Cup in the Netherlands in April, 1994.
Vickers dismisses job fears over lost tank order
A DECISION today by the United Arab Emirates to buy French tanks instead of Vickers Defence Systems' Challenger 2, raised fears among MPs of job losses and closure of a plant, although the company dismissed the threat.
Dr David Clark, shadow defence secretary and MP for South Shields, said the loss of the $3.5 billion order was ‘very, very bad news indeed’.
Vickers' Challenger 2 was competing for the contract with the United States Abrams M1A2 and France's Leclerc.
At the Abu Dhabi first International Defence Exhibition yesterday, a UAE spokesman announced his country would be buying 436 Leclercs.
A spokesman for Vickers, which employs 1,800 staff equally split between plants in Leeds and Newcastle, said the company had always believed the order would go to the French.
‘The UAE has traditionally looked to France to supply their defence needs.’
He added: ‘The Emirates have provided funding for the French to develop a special version of their Leclerc tank equipped with an MTU engine, similar to that used in the Leopard 2.
Their decision is therefore not unexpected.
‘It is not a blow at all— you don't win every order you bid for.
A blow is when something you are expecting to get doesn't come.
‘We are always looking for new business.
We have been in business a long time and not being selected by one particular country is not going to have a significant effect on us at all.’
With a recent £150 million order from Oman, the company already had about seven years' work worth around £700 million on their books, which meant neither factory was under threat.
Dr Clark said, however: ‘This must put a question mark over the future of one of the Vickers’ plants, either in Newcastle or Leeds.’
Dr Clark said Leeds was regarded as the more modern of the plants.
Menzies Campbell, the Liberal Democrat defence spokesman, said: ‘This decision is a big blow to Vickers and British manufacturing.
I am afraid that some jobs will now be at risk as a result of this.’
Arrest after A74 attack on woman
A MAN is expected to appear in court at Dumfries today accused of attacking a woman on the A74 Glasgow to Carlisle road on Tuesday.
Yvonne Jackson, 38, of Comiston Drive, Edinburgh, was found lying unconscious on a slip road near Eaglesfield, seven miles north of Gretna in Dumfriesshire.
Passing drivers helped her and she spent 24 hours in Dumfries Infirmary.
Ms Jackson, a sales representative, alleged she had been assaulted by a man after a motoring incident on the A74 southbound carriageway.
A Dumfries and Galloway Police spokesman has now announced that a man has been taken into custody.
The spokesman added: ‘A report on the matter has been prepared by police for the procurator-fiscal at Dumfries.
The man is expected to appear at Dumfries Sheriff Court on Monday.’
ABERDEEN
Man found dead on housing estate
DETECTIVES are appealing for help in piecing together the last movements of a man found dead in a street yesterday morning.
The 44-year old was found at 8am lying in Birkhall Parade, in Aberdeen's Mastrick housing estate.
Grampian Police say he has been identified as a Northfield resident but his name is being withheld.
They said it appeared the death was not suspicious but they would like to hear from anyone in the area between 7am and 8am yesterday.
AIRDRIE
Detention centre escapees caught
TWO ESCAPEES from a detention centre were recaptured within hours yesterday when they were spotted in the countryside near the institution from a Strathclyde Police helicopter.
Gary Brodie, 19, from Bannockburn, near Stirling, and a 15-year-old youth, both remand detainees, escaped from Longriggend centre, near Airdrie, Lanarkshire.
Both will appear at Airdrie Sheriff Court today in connection with the incident.
Operation Blade ‘more than a knife amnesty’
By Graeme Stewart
POLICE chiefs in Strathclyde yesterday defended their knives amnesty against criticism from other Scottish forces.
Other forces have dismissed the operation, part of a crackdown entitled Operation Blade, as a public relations exercise that was failing to tackle spiralling knife crime and said they had no plans to introduce similar schemes.
Almost 2,000 knives and other blades have been handed in during the first fortnight of the month-long amnesty.
Operation Blade was introduced to combat the rising incidence of crime involving blades.
Last year Strathclyde experienced a 50 per cent rise in murders, with knives used in 47 of the 92 cases.
The Strathclyde Police spokesman, Supt Angus Kennedy, said he was disappointed at the comments attributed to spokesmen for other Scottish forces.
‘There is more to Operation Blade than simply an amnesty.
It is a multi-strand approach to tackling the use of knives in crime.
‘Phases yet to come include seminars with retail outlets on self-regulation, education packages for use in schools, discussions with licensing boards and operators of places of entertainment.
All are aimed at raising the awareness of the  responsibilities that everyone shares.
‘Following the surrender period there will be a three-month-long spell to detect those carrying knives and put them before the courts,’ he said.
The long-term strategy to combat knife crimes through schemes like Operation Blade is to achieve a change in the law.
Strathclyde Police is pushing for reforms to bring Scottish law in line with English law and make knife-carrying an offence.
Meanwhile, crime involving knives continues in Strathclyde.
On Saturday two masked youths, one armed with a hammer and the other with a butcher's knife, went into the sub post office at Lamlash Crescent, Glasgow, threatened the staff and stole a three-figure sum of cash.
Later on Saturday two men wearing balaclavas, one armed with a hatchet, entered The Chip Shop at Highcraig Road, Johnstone, threatened the 27-year-old owner and his 42-year-old female assistant.
They tried to force open the till but failed, then ran off empty handed.
Today Operation Blade takes to the buses with ten Strathclyde buses advertising the campaign message, ‘Save a life — bin the knife’.
Highland's council tax maximum set at £792
By Tom Morton
HIGHLAND householders are likely to face regional council tax bills ranging from £264 to £792 if councillors approve recommendations from their finance director, James Bremner.
Almost 90,000 Highland properties have been valued and placed in eight price bandings.
Houses worth up to £27,000 (band A) face a council tax of £264, with a water and sewerage charge of £54.
Homes worth more than £212,000 will be charged a tax of £792, plus £162 for water and sewerage.
District council tax rates, which have yet to be set, must be added to these figures.
The council has valued 64 per cent of properties at less than £45,000; only 8 per cent fall in bands F, G and H, with values over £80,000.
The regional non-domestic rate has been fixed at 41.9p in the pound by the Scottish Office — the same as the sum levied in the current financial year.
The non-domestic sewerage rate is recommended at 5p in the pound — a reduction of 0.4p — and the non-domestic water rate to remain at 7.5p.
The various recommended taxes and rates contribute towards a total revenue budget for 1993-94 of £241 million, 1.2 per cent more than 1991-92.
The regional council's finance and policy and resources committees will meet to discuss the recommendations on Wednesday.
The full council will confirm the charges set on 4 March.
Householders will have their first indication of how much they will have to pay by late April.
Police working to identify body found in plantation
AN INVESTIGATION has begun to attempt to discover the identity of a badly-decomposed body found in a forest ditch near Dundee.
Police are treating the death as ‘suspicious’ but are in the early stages of their investigation.
The discovery was made by a farmer's son, Euan Baird, 16, who was out walking in a private forestry plantation near the family farm at Scotston, Auchterhouse, a few miles north of Dundee.
Although the body was clothed, it was virtually a skeleton and police are awaiting the results of a forensic examination to tell its sex and age.
Last night police roped off the area of the find and were searching the undergrowth.
Ian Baird, Euan's father, said his son had found the body at about 3:30pm on Saturday afternoon.
He added: ‘Euan was not very sure what he was looking at to begin with.
There was some clothing on the body but it was really just a skeleton, the hip bones were sticking out.
He was a bit stunned and rushed home to raise the alarm.
‘The forest plantation is quite young and the ditch was ploughed in 1987, so the body has obviously come to be there after that.’
A police spokesman said, ‘We are treating this as a suspicious death.
We are at the very early stages of our inquiries.’
Euan Baird: rushed home stunned to raise the alarm
MPs seek inquiry as third Gartnavel man dies
By Eric McKenzie
TWO MPs are seeking a full investigation into the staffing levels and quality of supervision at a psychiatric hospital in Glasgow after the death of three patients in the last year.
The recent death of a patient in a road accident near Gartnavel Royal Hospital shortly after he was admitted, has prompted John McFall, MP for Dumbarton, to write to Greater Glasgow Health Board to demand a full inquiry.
The patient, Joseph Gilmartin, 51, who was suffering from a serious nervous problem, was admitted to the hospital on 29 January.
Just over two hours later he was killed in nearby Great Western Road.
Mr McFall said yesterday he was writing to the health board demanding a thorough inquiry.
‘When somebody is taken in, in a distressed state, there should be supervision to ensure they stay in the hospital,’ Mr McFall said.
‘What with health budgets being pruned and cut back I'm asking the health board if staff shortages perhaps were a contributory factor here.’
The MP for Clydebank and Milngavie, Tony Worthington has already written to the health board after hearing of the death of Mr Gilmartin following the death of one of his constituents, Joseph Doherty, of Clydebank, in April.
Mr Doherty, also a patient at Gartnavel Royal, died after a fall from the Erskine Bridge.
Mr Doherty's death and that of another patient, Raymond Pender, of Alexandria, whose body was recovered from Loch Lomond in September, are the subject of a fatal accident inquiry at Dumbarton Sheriff Court next month.
Last night, Mr Worthington, who pressed for the FAI, said he had asked the health board for records of how many cases at the hospital had ended in death in recent years.
A spokesman for the health board said last night that with an FAI pending, it would be inappropriate to comment.
‘Clearly we will be looking with interest at the sheriff's determination from the FAI.
We have carried out an internal hospital inquiry into the incidents, but that is a confidential inquiry at this stage.’
Council chiefs set to block giant quarry scheme
PLANNING chiefs are set to block a controversial scheme to extract more than four million tonnes of rock from a green belt site at Elderslie in Renfrewshire.
Scottish Aggregates will seek approval for the giant quarry when their application comes before Renfrew District Council's planning and development committee in Paisley.
The company wants to blast 200,000 tonnes annually on a site at Windyhill Farm, between Elderslie and Johnstone.
Planning officials insisted on an environmental assessment being carried out when the scheme was first mooted more than two years ago.
When councillors finally meet tomorrow to consider the proposal their officers will urge them to deny permission.
A 13-page report lists a catalogue of concerns from a number of agencies and reveals that 1,772 individuals have submitted objections.
Some 400 local people attended a protest meeting at the weekend and will hold a demonstration to coincide with the planning talks.
Outlining his opposition to the project, the depute planning director, Grant Russell, recommends refusal on a number of grounds.
Local residents fear that shock waves from any blasting operation could disturb old mineshaft workings in the area, which has a history of subsidence problems.
Other concerns include the threat of pollution, noise disturbance, danger from heavy lorries and the loss of environmental amenities.
The company has warned that the jobs of 18 quarrymen, currently employed at another site almost exhausted on the outskirts of nearby Kilbarchan, can only be safeguarded if the Elderslie scheme wins approval.
The Paisley MP, Gordon McMaster, who lives in Johnstone, and is chairman of an action group established to oppose the plan, said yesterday: ‘The massive weight of evidence is stacked against this proposal.
‘If this is thrown out and the company then goes for a public inquiry, we will fight them all the way.’
An Elderslie councillor, Bobby Stevenson, added: ‘The plan is ill-considered for dozens of reasons.
There is no way that Scottish Aggregates is going to get away with it.’
DUNOON
Leisure project welcomed
A £400,000 PROJECT to provide leisure facilities near Dunoon marks the beginning of the Cowal area's regeneration as a tourism resort, the chief executive of Argyll and Islands Enterprise, David McIntyre, said yesterday.
Mr McIntyre said the development at Hafton House was the turnaround in fortunes the community had been waiting for since the Holy Loch US Navy base was closed last March.
AIE is investing a grant and loan package of £187,500 in the project, which will see the completion next month of a leisure complex including a swimming pool, sauna, solarium and gym.
DUNBLANE
Man sought after suspicious fire
CENTRAL Scotland police are searching for a man seen leaving a building which was deliberately set alight on Stirling Road, Dunblane, late last Friday evening.
Police said forensic experts had now confirmed the fire was not an accident.
They described the man seen leaving the rear of the building as male, white, between 5ft 8in and 6ft tall, and wearing a hooded jacket.
Police are also anxious to trace anyone who may have been nearby between 9pm and 10:30pm.
A Crimestoppers cash reward could be given for any information.
CASTLE HUNTLY
Young offenders on the run
POLICE are searching for two youths who escaped from Castle Huntly young offenders institution in Perthshire last night.
The Scottish Office named the youths as Malcolm Chalmers, 18, from Macduff, and Brian Anderson, 19, from Kilmarnock.
Neither is considered dangerous.
Greenock fishing boats in front line over dock closure
CLYDE fishermen are preparing to use their boats today to prevent Renfrewshire Enterprise closing off the entrance to Greenock's East India Dock.
The agency has applied to the Scottish Office for permission to erect a barrier across the mouth of the dock which is used by local fishermen to unload their catches and berth their boats.
Recently the fishermen warned agency bosses that they were prepared to fight any moves which would restrict their 300-year-old rights to free access to the port.
Plans by Renfrewshire Enterprise to turn the dockland area into a £60 million waterfront hotel and leisure complex have met with stiff opposition.
A Greenock skipper, Brian Penny, said last night: ‘After trying to sneak their plans through, Renfrewshire Enterprise are now trying to defuse the situation.
They sent down one of their consultants who was full of vague promises.
‘It is time the bosses met with us to thrash out this mess once and for all.’
According to Renfrewshire Enterprise, the East India Dock is to remain a working harbour.
But it says the area is unsafe and has erected warning signs.
A spokesman said that the organisation had met fishermen's leaders and was exploring ‘possibilities’ of repairing the harbour and improving the facilities.
Officials of the Greenock Waterfront Heritage Association claim that the land around the dock has parliamentary protection.
The secretary of the association, Kenny Ferguson, said: ‘We have official documents dating back to 1772 which prove that the Clyde Port Authority had no right to sell the land to Scottish Enterprise.
It belongs to the people of Greenock.’
The land was bought by Scottish Enterprise two years ago for £285,000.
Three-way play on words
GAELIC, Doric and English will come together theatrically for the first time later this month, when tri-lingual theatre makes its debut at Broadford, Skye.
The £100,000 project — which has a Scottish Arts Council grant of £20,000 and funding from the Gaelic Television Committee and the National Gaelic Arts Project — is the brainchild of Alisdair MacDonald of the Aberdeen-based Invisible Bouncers Theatre Company and the Gaelic actor and writer Domhnall Ruadh, now infamous nationwide as the anti-hero of Gaelic' first soap opera, Machair.
Craobh nan Ubhal (The Apple Tree) is the first play to be written and performed in Gaelic, Doric and English.
It deals with the pressures on traditional life in east and west coast rural communities from the need to earn a living from the oil industry.
A 17-strong touring party, including the ceilidh band the Old Blind Dogs, will take the production to the Tramway in Glasgow after visiting Benbecula, Bowmore and Tiree.
Birmingham team planning buy-out for Leyland-DAF
MANAGERS of a part of crisis-hit truck and van maker Leyland-DAF are planning a buy-out to save up to 1,400 jobs, it was confirmed yesterday.
A management team at the Washwood Heath van plant in Birmingham said it was developing ‘a sensible business plan’ to take over the factory.
The move followed the loss of 589 jobs at the plant on Friday as a third of the workforce across the financially-stricken company was made redundant by administrative receivers.
The Albion axle production plant in Glasgow is to lose 67 jobs.
The managing director at Birmingham, Allan Amey, said: ‘We now have a team to put together a management buy-out.
‘We have expressed our interest to the receivers and we believe we have got a sensible business plan that can be developed,’ he said.
‘We believe there is real demand for our product in the UK.
We have some way to go, but we are actively working on the plan.’
The workforce was behind the project and he had a loyal customer base and the support of the suppliers.
It is understood the financial backing for the plan has yet to be finalised.
Meanwhile, Lancashire County Council announced it was to send representatives to the Netherlands in a bid to rescue the Leyland truck plant and the Chorley parts warehouse, where together more than 900 jobs were lost on Friday.
A spokesman for the receivers, from the accountancy firm, Arthur Andersen, said he could not comment on the possibility of a buy-out at Birmingham.
A senior union official welcomed the prospect of a buy-out.
Tony Woodley, national motor group secretary of the Transport and General Workers' Union said: ‘I hope that even at this late stage, the Department of Trade and city institutions will co-operate with any management buy-out.
‘In the interim, I appeal to all the van plant suppliers to continue supplying the factory in order to give it a fighting chance of survival.’
Union leaders last week accused some local firms of being ‘virtually on strike’ by refusing to supply Leland-DAF factories because of the uncertainty of their future.
The result of a ballot of workers at Birmingham on taking strike action over the crisis will be announced tomorrow.
Workers at Leyland in Lancashire voted four-to-one on Friday against taking action but employees at the smaller axle production plant in Glasgow backed a strike by two-to-one.
Mr Woodley said the ballot had already achieved its objection of bringing pressure on the receivers and the Government to sanction immediate payments of at least the minimum state redundancy payoff to the 1,600 workers who have already lost their jobs.
The council leader, Louise Ellman, said it was feared that for every job lost directly, at least another two were in jeopardy in feeder factories or large businesses.
‘We can already identify over 450 jobs lost in large businesses as suppliers are hit,’ she said.
Mrs Ellman will be part of a delegation from Lancashire Enterprises, the council's economic development agency, which will meet DAF's board chairman, Cor Baan, in Eindhoven.
— PA
Murdoch McKillop, joint receiver from accountants Arthur Andersen, said the 1,600 job losses at the five UK plants had to made ‘to maintain the business and carry on trading as a viable operation’.
Mental handicap man set free from prison
By Eric McKenzie
A MENTALLY handicapped man who spent almost a month in Barlinnie Prison because there was nowhere else for him to go is to be transferred to the Royal National Hospital in Larbert today.
The plight of Ian X, a 23-year-old Ayrshire man who has a mental age of six, surfaced when he appeared in court after getting into trouble for the first time with the police, and was sent to Barlinnie in the absence of any hospital or social work establishment willing to take him into care.
Now Ayrshire and Arran Health Board has said it has found a place for Ian in Larbert.
Brian Wilson, MP for Cunninghame North, who has campaigned for Ian's release from Barlinnie, said last night: ‘It is a reasonably satisfactory outcome to a terrible case.
I've spoken to the man's mother and she is very relieved.’
Mr Wilson added that he was still pursuing the wider issues of the case until it became apparent whether the case of Ian X was unique.
Landlords vie for vote of Tweeddale tenants
By William Chisholm
SCOTTISH Homes tenants in Tweeddale face a five-week election campaign as two landlords bid for control of their houses.
At stake are the 145 Scottish Homes properties in Peebles, Walkerburn, and Innerleithen.
Radical changes in the disposal procedure, however, should prevent a repeat of the acrimony and trading of insults which surrounded the sale of 1,300 public sector homes in the rest of the Borders last year.
Eildon Housing Association, which manages the houses for Scottish Homes will face opposition from Waverley Housing, the successful bidders in Roxburgh and Ettrick and Lauderdale.
Both organisations will be allowed to canvass tenants and stage public meetings in an attempt to swing the ballot vote in their favour.
A 100 per cent survey of the 145 households will be carried out by Market Research Scotland in March to see which landlord is preferred.
The outcome is expected to influence Scottish Homes in deciding whether Waverley or Eildon should go forward for a four-week postal ballot in June.
The approaches to tenants with information packs, personal visits and open days are in sharp contrast to the previous sale of Scottish Homes stock in the Borders.
Eildon Housing complained bitterly because it was not allowed to contact the 1,300 tenants or even talk to the media about its bid.
Eildon's director, Peter Lee, launched his company's campaign by stating: ‘I am delighted that tenants are being allowed under Scottish Homes revised procedures to gain access directly to representatives of both Eildon and Waverley.’
According to Mr Lee, a code of conduct has been agreed during the Tweeddale campaign which precludes each of the bidders from passing comment on the opposition's package.
In the final week, however, Waverley and Eildon are expected to appear on the same platform at public meetings.
Mr Lee also disclosed ‘good news’ for Eildon's 600 Borders tenants by announcing a maximum 3.6 per cent rent rise averaging only 95p a week.
Average rents from April 1993 would be £26.30 for houses which are centrally heated, double glazed and highly insulated.
He said: ‘Regrettably Scottish Homes tenants in Tweeddale will have their rents raised by Scottish Homes in April by a full 9 per cent.
But if Eildon becomes the new landlord then these tenants will eventually be paying rents on the same basis as other Eildon tenants.’
Waverley's opening statement came from vice-chair Michele Munro, who said the trust board felt it was time to offer the benefits former Scottish Homes tenants in the Borders had enjoyed with Waverley for the last four years to Tweeddale tenants.
The company confirmed it would be visiting every Scottish Homes tenancy in Tweeddale, and would provide a freephone help line and a mobile office during the campaign.
Warning on control of schools
By Douglas Fraser Education Correspondent
CLEAR democratic control of the Scottish education service after local government re-organisation has been urged by a leading education lobby.
The Forum on Scottish Education has said the needs of schooling should not be used to further the Government's wider interests in the council reform debate.
It criticised those calling for a large number of small councils and the possibility of creating joint boards to run the education service.
‘Small local authorities would lack clout in dealing with central Government on educational matters,’ said the Rev John Taylor, convener of the forum.
‘We need education authorities which are strong enough to take strategic decisions on provision of education in their areas.
He added: ‘The forum is convinced that joint boards and similar arrangements have a democratic deficit and are not perceived by the public as being the same as responsive local authorities.
‘It is concerned at the possible link between the Government's evident desire to impose its own educational policies and the weakening of democratic local government.’
The response to the Government's consultation is the third time in a week that the forum has voiced strong criticism of Scottish Office policy.
With the unanimous backing of its nine teacher and lecturer organisations, seven parent groups, students, local authorities and the two main Churches, it also opposed the publication of school performance indicators and the handing of school budgets from councils to head teachers.
Mr Taylor, who is also convener of the Church of Scotland's education board, said the forum had highlighted the practical difficulties of the reforms being proposed, as well as voicing concern at the thrust of policy.
‘A lot of people are fed up with a whole range of changes which appear to have no philosophical direction to them,’ he said.
‘This Government, since Mr Major became Prime Minister, has shown a disposition to alter policies.
We believe there may be elasticity in a Government with a very narrow majority nationally and a very vulnerable position in Scotland.’
The consultation on the plans to devolve 80 per cent of school budgets to head teachers closes today as it faces growing opposition from education authorities.
On Friday the education committee of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities backed a strongly critical report on the plans.
Elizabeth Maginnis, the convener, said the timetable for change — starting at the start of next school year and to cover all schools by April 1996 — was unrealistic at the same time as local government was being reformed.
‘It will cause quite unprecedented chaos and upheaval to the education system,’ she claimed.
Mrs Maginnis criticised the Government for being ‘deliberately naive or mischievous in its claim that devolved management of schools can be achieved at no cost.’
The convener went on to warn against funding schools on the basis of their pupil numbers.
‘It must be self-evident that this will have a very detrimental effect on small rural or city schools,’ she said.
COSLA has also warned the Government over the recent policy announcement on teaching foreign languages in all primary schools.
Mrs Maginnis voiced concern that the Government would repeat the mistakes of previous primary language projects in the 1960s, and that the programme would not be adequately resourced.
She is to request a meeting with the education minister, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, to discuss the issue.
Earl Spencer's friend told to expect jail for £1.8m swindle
THE flamboyant diamond dealer, Darius Guppy, best friend of the Princess of Wales's brother, Earl Spencer, is facing a long prison term after being found guilty of swindling insurers out of £1.8 million.
He and a business partner, Benedict Marsh, also found guilty, will not be sentenced until the end of a forthcoming VAT evasion trial involving alleged gold smuggling in which they are defendants.
The judge, Andrew Brooks, told the two they would be remanded in custody till then.
He added: ‘I want you to know you are both going to prison for a very long time.’
The six men and six women of the jury at Snaresbrook Crown Court, east London, took 12 hours 44 minutes spread over three days to find the two men guilty.
Guppy, 28, a jet-setting socialite, and Marsh, also 28, his Oxford University contemporary, had denied three charges — conspiracy to defraud, conspiracy to steal and conspiracy to commit false accounting.
The trial, estimated to have cost nearly £1 million, heard how the men, both from London, had begun planning the insurance fraud in 1989.
On 2 March, 1990, in a room in a luxurious New York hotel, they staged the carefully planned armed raid of £1.8 million worth of rubies, emeralds and sapphires, fooling New York's police.
After returning to Britain, they made a secret Concorde trip back to America to collect the supposedly stolen gems.
They then used bogus invoices to fool Lloyd's into covering their alleged losses, before carrying out the second stage of a ‘double sting’ stealing £1.2 million of the £1.8 million insurance pay-out from their company, London-based Inca Gemstones.
They made their first mistake when they tried to sell some ‘stolen’ emeralds to a Hatton Garden dealer.
Later, a pair of heart-shaped sapphire earrings, also supposed to have been taken, were auctioned through Sotheby's in Geneva.
Guppy and Marsh insisted they had been framed.
— PA
Bobby Moore tells of cancer fight
THE CAPTAIN of England's 1966 World Cup winners, Bobby Moore, last night disclosed he had cancer and spoke of his fight to beat the disease.
In a statement in response to increasing media interest in his health, he said he had decided to let it be known he was undergoing treatment.
He said an operation was carried out on his colon in April 1991 and therapy was continuing after cancer elements were identified in his liver.
Mr Moore, 51, a former West Ham player, said: ‘Fortunately I have been able to continue leading my normal life and hope to continue doing so.
I have a battle to win and would ask only that I am given the chance to do so without intrusion in my private life.
I appreciate everyone's concern and above all the loving care and support of my family.’
Awarded an OBE the year after captaining England's World Cup winning side, he won 108 international caps and since he gave up playing has been involved in football management and various business ventures.
He is a partner in a sports marketing company, Mitchell-Moore Associates, and returned recently from the United States where he was working on 1994 World Cup projects.
It is understood doctors have not given him any timescale for the progress of the cancer.
A friend said: ‘He is battling the disease on a day-to-day basis.’
Mr Moore said he intended to continue as a regular football match commentator for London's Capital Radio.
‘It is one my great pleasures to attend the games and analyse the matches,’ he said.
Dr Peter Wrigley at the London Clinic, a private clinic in central London, was continuing his therapy under the overall direction of Professor John Smythe of the Western General Hospital in Edinburgh.
Mr Moore married an air hostess, Stephanie Parlane-Moore at Chelsea Register Office in December 1991.
He has two grown-up children, Dean and Roberta, by his first marriage to a former model, Tina, which broke up in a blaze of publicity after he left her for Stephanie.
Mrs Moore said last night the family was very proud of her husband.
‘Bobby has proved himself to be something of a medical miracle already by his resilience to the treatment.’
‘He has been jogging, swimming and playing golf as well as working normally.
We are all very proud of him.’
Mr Moore added: ‘Bulletins about my progress will be issued in due course but neither my wife nor myself will be making any further statements of any kind with regard to my medical condition.
And Mrs Moore said: ‘We felt it important to keep the matter private while we came to terms with the situation.’
Senseless killing highlights rise in serious crime
Gary Duncan reports on a Scotsman survey which shows an upward trend in street crime statistics
THE senseless murder of a 20-year-old student, Paul Sheldon, in Edinburgh nine days ago, threw the spotlight on the startling rise in Scottish street crime.
The Sheldon murder, along with the Operation Blade knife amnesty in Strathclyde, has again made knife-related crime a high profile issue.
But, as The Scotsman's survey of six of the eight Scottish police forces reveals, the increase in serious crime is not confined to stabbings.
Glasgow's problems are merely a symptom of a wider malaise which has produced a 69 per cent rise in murders across most of the country and a 30 per cent increase in attempted murders.
While Strathclyde continues to have by far the highest number of killings of any force, the 67.3 per cent increase it has suffered is less than in some other force areas.
It would be statistically misleading to headline the 500 per cent rise in the murder rate in Central Region, but the chief constable there can hardly be pleased to find the number of such incidents his force has dealt with rise from one to six.
The Grampian, Northern and Dumfries and Galloway forces have also suffered large percentage increases in murder from a low base.
In Grampian, there were seven murders last year compared with two in 1991, in Dumfries and Galloway two rather than one and in Northern, where there was not a single murder in 1991, last year brought five.
Only Lothian and Borders has seen its murder rate fall — from 13 to 10.
Several forces have also seen very sharp rises in attempted murders.
In Grampian, for example, 1992 brought 44 such cases compared with 18 the year before; in Northern there were 21 compared with nine.
The pattern is not uniform, though, with Dumfries and Galloway reporting a 50 per cent fall.
A patchy picture also emerges from the serious assault statistics, with an 8.5 per cent rise across the six forces surveyed driven primarily by the surge in Strathclyde.
Overall, these statistics, which will be officially published by the forces over the next few months, cannot but fuel public concern and lead to demands for more police resources.
Leslie Sharp, Strathclyde's chief constable, last year won an extra £4.7 million to put another 155 officers on patrol.
But Mr Sharp predicted at the time that there would be continued violence before that brought results and is on record as believing an extra 700 officers were needed.
More than just extra officers and money, however, tackling Scotland's new crime wave may require more imaginative solutions.
In 1992 just half the authorised shift strength of patrol constables in Strathclyde was available.
The others were tied up with sickness, special duties, leave and — a key problem — court attendance.
It is widely accepted that vast amounts of police time are wasted by calling constables unnecessarily as court witnesses but the problem has so far proved intractable.
And beyond such institutional difficulties, technology may also offer some solutions, with trials of cameras on the streets already producing dramatic results in curbing crime in some west coast towns.
If Scotland's streets are to be made safe, more such innovations may be needed.
The unspeakable difficulties of mastering Russian
It takes more than promenading on the streets to learn one of the world's most difficult languages, James Meek finds
‘RUSSIAN has more words in it than any other language,’ the teacher told me confidently.
I was torn between a desire to contest an absurd statement and a desire to believe her, given how tough the language seemed to be.
Around the same time I met another paper's Moscow correspondent, recently arrived from China, whose Mandarin is fluent.
‘Russian is more difficult than Chinese,’ he claimed.
I did not believe him — but I wanted to.
Russians tend to be smug about the complexity of their native tongue.
Foreigners who stutter their way through an inquiry about the way to the railway station are congratulated as if they had just recited Pushkin's Eugene Onegin, and are asked: ‘How did you learn Russian?’
It does not seem so bad when you first approach the language, and you have grasped the not very difficult (for Scots especially) alphabet, although a few less words beginning ‘vagly’ would be welcome.
The first things you find out are an immense relief: Russian has no words for ‘a’ and ‘the’, and no present tense of the verb ‘to be’.
In short, a lot of sentences are phrased like English newspaper headlines: Mum home.
Doctor busy.
Man eats pie.
Then it gets horrible.
Every noun and adjective has 12 possible endings.
There are three genders.
Every time you learn one verb you have to learn another verb as well, which means the same thing, only in a different time-frame.
Every multi-syllable word has one syllable heavily stressed, but there is no easily discernible pattern for which one it should be.
Worst of all are the Russian verbs of motion.
Whole books are devoted to this subject.
Blessed be whoever invented the words ‘come’ and ‘go’.
Such words do not exist in Russian.
To get anywhere you have to master a bagful of verbs —‘to go somewhere, on foot, in one direction’; ‘to fly, generally speaking’; ‘to arrive, by means of transport, but only in the past or future’; and so on.
I never went far with languages before.
The French teacher at school had a neurotic obsession with neat handwriting and discipline.
I toiled through Latin for a course requirement because meteorology had too much maths in it, and felt the conjugations sluicing out of my brain the instant the exam was over.
Italian studies did not outlast the separation from an Italian girlfriend.
Previous attempts to learn Russian foundered on laziness.
Arriving in Kiev, where Russian rather than Ukrainian is still the first language for most people, I thought things would be different.
I do not suppose I am the first naive monolinguist who thought he could pick up the language on the street, somehow acquiring it passively just by basking in the babble of the market, like getting a tan.
It took a few months to destroy this illusion.
It may work for some individuals of genius; it works for young children; it would definitely work if you were thrown into a situation where you had to communicate or die.
But for most of us, even living in a country where the language you are learning is spoken, you need a teacher, you need self-discipline, and you need to work.
There is no alternative to sitting down and slogging through long lists of vocabulary.
That is not to say the process is not quicker when you are living in the country concerned.
When you tackle a foreign language at school it tends to be treated like a series of codes you have to crack.
Learning among native speakers, you start to see it more like an enormously complex song: even if you don't know all the melody and lyrics, the rhythm comes through.
Being able to dispense with the services of an interpreter is a big incentive to fluency.
It is not just the cost.
The best interpreter in the world will be able to translate your words perfectly, but not your moods.
There is no way to be persuasive through someone else.
You sit there in the head man's office, you wave your hands about, your voice goes up and down, you raise your eyebrows and round it off with a quizzical smile and a subtle twist of the head.
The head man just sits there drumming his fingers, a bit embarrassed, until you have finished, whereupon the interpreter rattles off the main points, throwing in a few gestures of his or her own just to confuse things.
Learning a language is a series of peaks and troughs.
The troughs are realising you have forgotten something you learned right at the beginning, finding out you have been saying ‘taste’ instead of‘try’for six months, falling asleep over vocabulary, believing you are ready to understand speeches without help and discovering you are not, being corrected by another non-native speaker who has been at it the same time as you, and taking an hour to tell a Lada joke.
(‘Why do Ladas have…uh…back windows…hot, hot back windows, windows at the back with, uh, hot things…what do you call hot things, you know, like in rooms in winter…‘heated rear windscreens’ is there such a phrase in Russian?
No?…uh…ok, look, here's a car, right…)
The peaks are arranging things on the phone without help; having your first conversation with a taxi driver; getting the point of a newspaper story without looking in the dictionary; realising how bad the dubbing on an English language film is; catching the mood of a Chekov story; best of all, making friends with people who do not speak English.
For me it is still a long haul towards fluency (and the closer you get, the more tempting just to stop with what you have) but that sense of a door opening when you reach the conversational level makes the effort of getting another language worthwhile.
Refugees survive nightmare voyage
MORE than 500 Chinese who wanted to be smuggled into the United States have been moved on to an American base in the Marshall Islands after a six-week voyage from Hong Kong, the US Coast Guard said yesterday.
A US armed forces spokesman, Lt-Col Greg Smith, said many of the 527 migrants were ill and were being examined by doctors after disembarking over the weekend.
Officials said the passengers were in poor health because of unsanitary conditions aboard the 310ft freighter East Wood during their weeks at sea.
Many were suffering from eye infections, diarrhoea, dehydration and heat exhaustion.
‘Our immediate concern is their basic human need.
We are providing medical treatment, food and water,’ Lt-Col Smith said.
The State Department in Washington still must decide what to do with the migrants, apparently picked up by the Panamanian-registered East Wood from an island off China to be smuggled to Hawaii.
US authorities have promised only to ship the would-be immigrants from the Marshall Islands, but it was not known where they would be taken.
Precisely what happened on board the ship after it left Hong Kong in late December remains unclear.
Radio appeals on 27 January spoke of the ship being overrun by pirates, but coast guards who boarded the East Wood last week said that they had discovered signs of a mutiny.
The crew is being kept separate from the migrants at Kwajalein base, a missile test range leased from the Marshall Islands government.
— Reuter
Israel sees hope for peace talks after UN switch
THE ISRAELI government said yesterday that it hoped Middle East peace talks could resume after a UN statement welcoming its attempt to resolve the dispute over its mass deportation of Palestinian militants.
But Palestinian negotiators insisted that all of the 415 alleged Islamic militants exiled to Lebanon in December must be allowed back before they would return to the negotiating table.
The UN Security Council said late on Friday that an Israeli decision on 1 February that 101 of the deportees could return immediately and the remainder before the end of the year had been a step in the right direction.
But it reaffirmed a council resolution of 18 December demanding the immediate repatriation of all the Palestinians expelled the previous day and stressed the need for it to be implemented.
A key provision of the new statement urged Israel to ‘follow through expeditiously with the above points, allowing therefore the return of all the deportees as soon as possible.’
The Israeli prime minister, Yitzhak Rabin, said the new statement paved the way for resuming the peace talks and he hoped all parties would now make every effort to resume negotiations.
But one of the leading Palestinian negotiators, Hanan Ashrawi, said the UN statement failed to address the central issue of the illegality of the deportations.
She said the Palestinian position remained unchanged.
The deportees' spokesman, Abdul Aziz al-Rantisi, said the UN statement was an attempt to bypass Security Council resolution 799, which called for the immediate return of all the deportees.
The US secretary of state, Warren Christopher, is due to begin a Middle East tour later this week in an effort to get the peace talks started again.
Yesterday Arab leaders were engaged in a flurry of diplomatic activity to coordinate their positions in advance of Mr Christopher's visit.
The Jordanian foreign minister, Kamel Abu Jaber, speaking after talks with Syrian leaders in Damascus, called for the return of all the deported Palestinians, but in Cairo, the Lebanese prime minister, Rafik al-Hariri, did not rule out resuming the peace negotiations before the issue of the deportees was resolved.
Yesterday clashes that had flared overnight in southern Lebanon died out.
Lebanese police said several artillery rounds fired from Israel's self-styled security zone in the south of the country had crashed before dawn on suspected guerrilla strongholds overlooking the deportees' camp.
An Israeli military spokesman denied that any artillery had been fired yesterday after clashes on Saturday night with guerrillas of Hezbollah, the Shia Muslim militia backed by Iran.
In the Israeli-occupied West Bank yesterday Palestinian gunmen shot and wounded an Israeli man and woman near the Jewish settlement of Kiryat Arba.
Israeli security sources said the two Israeli civilians were driving towards Kiryat Arba near the Palestinian city of Hebron when they were shot at from a car.
The man was wounded seriously and the woman lightly.
Earlier, troops had shot dead an 18-year-old youth after he had thrown stones at a patrol near Nablus and refused the soldiers' orders to halt, military officials said.
Israelis have killed at least 1,016 Palestinians since the outbreak of the uprising, or intifada, in December 1987.
Arabs killed 111 Israelis in the same period.
— Reuter and AP
Serbs block UN relief convoy in Bosnia
BOSNIAN Serbs yesterday turned back a convoy carrying food and medicine to a Muslim town in eastern Bosnia which has been cut off from the outside world for ten months.
The Serb action was a fresh setback for relief agencies faced with mounting hostility from Bosnian leaders and citizens who say they have not done enough to help feed up to 200,000 people trapped by Serbs in Muslim-held pockets of eastern Bosnia.
Ten trucks carrying food and medicine to Cerska, said to be a haven for up to 40,000 Slavic Muslims, left Belgrade yesterday and got to Serb-held Zvornik on Bosnia's border with Serbia.
But Bosnian Serbs refused to let the convoy pass, saying they had had insufficient advance notice, said Judith Kumin of the United Nations' High Commissioner for Refugees in Belgrade.
The convoy would stay overnight in Loznica, in Serbia, and make a fresh attempt to reach Cerska today she said.
In Sarajevo, UN officials said they hoped to begin medical evacuations from the besieged city soon.
Distribution centres were still quiet as Sarajevo's 380,000 residents entered the third day of what city authorities have described as a hunger strike in solidarity with the hungry and diseased trapped in eastern Bosnia.
The city council, backed by the government, announced on Friday that it would stop distributing the food aid that has kept Sarajevans alive during a ten-month siege until convoys reached eastern Bosnia.
The UNHCR's envoy, Jose-Maria Mendiluce, fiercely attacked the council's decision yesterday, saying it was an insult because the people who would suffer had not been consulted.
He stressed that UNHCR workers were facing snipers, mortar fire and up to 25 roadblocks a  kilometre trying to get aid through in disputed areas.
‘It is difficult to ask my colleagues to risk their lives if nobody cares about the lives of the people,’ Mr Mendiluce told reporters in Sarajevo.
‘I don't have any way to check how many inhabitants agree with this decision.
The government tells us it was a decision of the people.
2,500 tons of food is at risk from shelling…if nothing is done, we will stop deliveries in two more days because we don't have any place to put it.’
On Saturday Bosnian radio said 166 people had starved recently in Cerska, but Bosnian reports of mass starvation have been disputed by UN officials in the past.
Serb fighters recently allowed some 6,000 Muslims to flee the Cerska area for the nearby Muslim-held town of Tuzla, where relief agencies said many of the refugees had arrived in terrible condition, suffering from hepatitis, head lice and frostbite.
Tuzla, 50 miles north of the Bosnian capital, declared on Saturday that it would join Sarajevo's fast for those in eastern Bosnia.
The Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan Karadzic, denied that Serbs had blocked convoys except when Muslims had misused them to smuggle in ‘terrorist groups,’ the Bosnian Serb news agency SRNA said.
For the second day, heavy fighting prevented any aid flights reaching Sarajevo from Zagreb, the Croatian capital.
Karin Landgren, a Swede taking over UNHCR operations in Bosnia, said there were 2,300 tons of food and medical supplies in warehouses in Sarajevo and at the airport.
‘The warehouses are 65 per cent full,’ she said.
UN officials have said stockpiled food may spoil, and Ms Landgren added that a shell which had damaged a warehouse on Saturday had also ‘alerted us to the danger of letting stuff pile up.’
She reported initial agreement on medical evacuations from the city, where some badly wounded people have lain for months without being able to get proper treatment or artificial limbs.
‘A doctor is coming in next week to review who needs to go, and get it started,’ Ms Landgren said.
Danielle Maillefer of the World Health Organisation reported that 100 cylinders of oxygen, needed during operations, had reached the city.
Nine or ten cylinders will go to the Serbs, the rest to city hospitals where experts will instruct doctors in methods to make the oxygen last longer.
Despite continuing fighting, UN teams managed to repair one power line and one water pipe to the city, where utility supplies have been sporadic at best for months.
— AP
Ex-communist tipped to win in Lithuania
RIVALS in Lithuania's first direct presidential election cast their ballots yesterday amid signs of high turnout by the voters.
The former communist, Algirdas Brazauskas, who wants to mend fences with Russia to ease an economic crisis, is tipped to defeat Stasys Lozoraitis, an emigre who became Lithuania's ambassador to Washington.
— Reuter
THAILAND
Nobel winners in plea to Burma
ARCHBISHOP Desmond Tutu arrived in Bangkok yesterday to start efforts by Nobel Peace Prize winners to win freedom for a fellow laureate, the Burmese opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi.
The seven laureates hope to focus world attention on the plight of Ms Suu Kyi, who has been under house arrest in Burma since 1989, and 1,500 other political prisoners of the junta.
They are visiting Thailand because they were denied visas by Rangoon.
— AP
MADAGASCAR
Opposition leader defeats president
THE opposition leader, Albert Zafy, took an unbeatable lead yesterday in Madagascar's presidential election, ending 17 years of virtual dictatorship by Didier Ratsiraka.
Late results showed that Mr Zafy had almost 70 per cent of the vote.
The poll, adjudged free and fair by foreign observers, was a resounding vote of no-confidence in Mr Ratsiraka. — Reuter
ALGERIA
Fundamentalists attack schoolbus
MUSLIM fundamentalists yesterday fired on a schoolbus carrying children of members of the Algerian security forces, seriously wounding the driver.
In a weekend of violence, the defence minister, Khaled Nezzar, narrowly escaped from a car bomb attack.
Four policemen were fatally shot on Saturday, less than 24 hours after authorities announced the execution of four fundamentalists.
— Reuter
GERMANY
Motorway fee for foreigners backed
A CONTROVERSIAL motorway fee that Bonn may introduce next year should be slapped only on foreigners, the opposition Social Democrat leader, Bjoern Engholm, said yesterday.
The fee would help reform Bonn's loss-making national railways ahead of privatisation, but Mr Engholm said a higher petrol tax would be preferable.
— Reuter
SOUTH AFRICA
American actor beaten in street
JOHN SAVAGE, an American actor whose roles include a white man living in a rough black  neighbourhood in Spike Lee's Do the Right Thing, was attacked in Soweto last week.
Savage said he was rescued by members of the militant Pan Africanist Congress and army soldiers after he was attacked when he stopped to help children caught up in unrest between striking taxi drivers and police.
— AP
RUSSIA
Nine freeze to death in cold
NINE people froze to death in the central Russian region of Chuvashia over the weekend as strong winds accompanied a sharp fall in temperature, Itar-Tass news agency said yesterday.
It said the victims succumbed in gardening allotments, rural areas or simply on the street.
— Reuter
Ceasefire brings peace to Kabul
A PAKISTANI peace broker won a ceasefire yesterday, apparently halting artillery battles between the Afghan government and guerrillas that have caused thousands of civilian casualties.
President Burhanuddin Rabbani said he was ready for talks with any party and described the nearly four-week bombardment around the capital of Kabul as necessary to defend residents.
The government and the radical Hezb-i-Islami agreed to hold their fire from late on Saturday to facilitate negotiation of a permanent truce, retired Pakistani Lt-Gen Hamid Gul said.
He was unable to say how long the ceasefire would last.
‘I have made a specific request that both sides should extend the ceasefire to include tomorrow [today],’ he said.
A government official said the army would halt its clean-up operation against unauthorised armed men in Kabul today to mark the fourth anniversary of the withdrawal of Soviet troops.
‘We hope the others will also stop rocketing the city,’ a presidential spokesman said.
The Hezb-i-Islami chief, Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, is fighting to oust Mr Rabbani, accusing him of rigging his election last December.
Kabul saw its quietest day since battles between the army and the Hezb-i-Islami erupted 27 days ago.
Hundreds of people have been killed and more than 5,000 injured in the fighting.
‘We are definitely in favour of a permanent ceasefire,’ Mr Rabbani said.
He declined to say if that included Hezb-i-Islami, which has declared his election invalid and refused to take part in the government unless Mr Rabbani steps down.
— Reuter
Clerides heads for Cyprus win
THE right-wing challenger Glafcos Clerides appeared to be heading for a narrow victory last night in a Cyprus presidential election which could be crucial for the future of the divided island.
With more than 80 per cent of the vote counted, Mr Clerides had 50.5 per cent to President George Vassiliou's 49.5 per cent.
Clerides supporters poured into the streets to celebrate, but electoral officials argued over whether to order a recount in the capital, Nicosia, as demanded by the Vassiliou camp.
The first round of voting last week had been seen as a referendum on a UN-backed ‘set of ideas’ to end the division of the island with the creation of a federal state comprising Greek and Turkish Cypriot zones.
Mr Vassiliou, 61, seeking a second five-year term, helped to draw up the formula as a basis for negotiation which would bring down the dividing ‘green line’.
Mr Clerides, 73, who was making his third bid for the presidency, was far more reserved about the proposals.
He calls them a blueprint for disaster in their current form and wants them amended.
The only candidate who totally rejected the proposals, the right-wing businessman Paschal Paschalides, was defeated in the first round, which Mr Vassiliou won with 44.15 per cent of the vote.
Mr Clerides took 36.74 per cent in the first round and Mr Paschalides 18.54 per cent.
Only the leading two candidates are entitled to go through to the second round.
The ‘set of ideas’ incorporated under UN Security Council Resolution 789 envisages the reunification of Cyprus in a federation between the Greek and Turkish zones.
The proposals would reduce Turkish Cypriot territory from 38 per cent of the island to around 28 per cent.
There would be freedom of movement between the zones and limited settlement rights.
The toughest issue is the Greek Cypriot demand that 200,000 refugees be permitted to return north.
Ankara and the Turkish Cypriot leader Rauf Denktash reject the proposals and other Security Council resolutions demanding the withdrawal of the estimated 35,000 Turkish troops and 50,000 mainland settlers from the north.
The final week of the election campaign saw long debates over the proposals into a traditional left-right confrontation.
The Clerides camp said a Vassiliou victory would open the way for a communist takeover, while supporters of Mr Vassiliou accused Mr Clerides of ties to the extreme right that led the 1974 coup seeking union with Greece.
The coup was crushed when Turkish troops invaded from the mainland and occupied northern Cyprus to protect the 150,000 Muslim Turkish Cypriots.
In 1983, the Turkish Cypriots declared their own republic, which has since been recognised only by Turkey.
— AP and Reuter
Communists revive Russian party
HUNDREDS of Communists gathered at a resort near Moscow at the weekend and elected a hard-line nationalist to lead their revived party.
They also adopted a political declaration that called for a socialist and ‘planned-market’ economy instead of President Boris Yeltsin's free-market reforms.
The two-day meeting, called the Second Emergency Restoration-Unification Congress, formally restored the Russian Communist Party that lost much of its prestige, power and resources after the August 1991 coup attempt against Mikhail Gorbachev.
One of the leading figures among the plotters, the former leader of the Soviet parliament Anatoly Lukyanov, was elected yesterday to the new party's 89-member central executive committee, which also includes many Communist members of the Russian parliament.
As the congress closed the committee elected Gennady Zyuganov, hard-line leader of the once-banned National Salvation Front, as its chairman.
Greek Cypriot voters turn right
THE right-wing challenger Glafcos Clerides won the Cyprus presidential election by a whisker yesterday, signalling a tougher line towards a UN plan to reunite the island.
Mr Clerides, 73, standard bearer for the Greek-Cypriot conservative establishment, scored an unexpected victory over the incumbent president, George Vassiliou, in a second round runoff.
Final results gave him 50.3 per cent of the vote to the communist-backed Mr Vassiliou's 49.7 per cent— a majority of about 2,000 votes.
Mr Vassiliou, a 61-year-old self-made millionaire, telephoned his opponent to congratulate him and then went on television to concede defeat and appeal for national unity.
He said he hoped Mr Clerides would continue UN sponsored efforts to unite the island as a bi-zonal bi-communal federation of Greek and Turkish Cypriots.
But Mr Clerides opposes key clauses in the plan, which was put forward by the UN secretary general, Boutros Boutros Ghali, and endorsed by the Security Council.
He maintains that it violates basic human rights and blocks Cyprus' drive for membership of the European Community.
He also says that transitional arrangements for federation could undermine the international recognition of the Greek Cypriot south.
The UN proposals — rejected by Ankara and by the Turkish Cypriot community — would reduce Turkish territory from 38 per cent of the island to around 28 per cent.
There would be freedom of movement between the zones and limited settlement rights.
The toughest issue is the Greek Cypriot demand that 200,000 refugees be permitted to return north.
Mr Clerides takes over at a time when the international community is showing impatience with lack of progress towards a Cyprus settlement.
Denmark has withdrawn its UN peace keeping forces, Canada is doing the same in June, and Britain and Austria have slimmed down their contingents.
Many Greek Cypriots are fearful that a reduction of UN policing of the 110 mile ‘green line’ separating the Greek south from the Turkish northern third of the island could lead to renewed fighting.
Talks between the two communities were due to begin next month but Mr Clerides has said he intends to seek a postponement.
— Reuter
Kabul calm as ceasefire takes effect
A PAKISTANI peace broker won a ceasefire yesterday, apparently halting artillery battles in Kabul between the Afghan government and guerrillas that have caused thousands of civilian casualties.
President Burhanuddin Rabbani said he was ready for talks with any party.
The government and the radical Hezb-i-Islami agreed to hold their fire from late on Saturday to facilitate negotiation of a permanent truce, retired Pakistani Lt-Gen Hamid Gul said.
— Reuter
THAILAND
Nobel winners in plea to Burma
ARCHBISHOP Desmond Tutu arrived in Bangkok yesterday to start efforts by Nobel Peace Prize winners to win freedom for a fellow laureate, the Burmese opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi.
The seven laureates hope to focus world attention on the plight of Ms Suu Kyi, who has been under house arrest in Burma since 1989, and 1,500 other political prisoners of the junta.
They are visiting Thailand because they were denied visas by Rangoon.
— AP
UNITED STATES
Six massacred in New York
Six people were found shot to death in an apartment in the crime-ridden South Bronx district of New York yesterday in a modern St Valentine's Day massacre, police said.
The six, Hispanics from 15 to 40 years old, were found face down with bullet wounds in their heads.
Police said they did not know if the killings were drug-related. — Reuter
ALGERIA
Fundamentalists attack schoolbus
MUSLIM fundamentalists yesterday fired on a schoolbus carrying children of members of the Algerian security forces, seriously wounding the driver.
In a weekend of violence, the defence minister, Khaled Nezzar, narrowly escaped from a car bomb attack.
Four policemen were fatally shot on Saturday, less than 24 hours after authorities announced the execution of four fundamentalists.
— Reuter
STANLEY HUNTER
When death came close
Colette Douglas-Home talks to Daniel Marks about how his life changed when, at the age of 17, he discovered he was suffering from cancer
DURING my first year of A levels I noticed a swelling in one of my testes.
I did nothing about it because at 17 it wasn't really the sort of thing you went to the doctor about.
I was embarrassed.
It didn't hurt and so I left it.
Then one day at school I got a sharp pain in my stomach.
I couldn't move.
On the way home I remember being violently ill in the car because of the pain.
Our GP took me straight to Queen Mary's, Roehampton.
The swollen testis was two and a half times the size of the normal one and very hard.
But when you are a teenager your body is going through so many changes, you think there is nothing wrong with that.
If it doesn't hurt you ignore it.
The pain in my stomach was because the swelling had caused a nerve to be trapped.
It had nothing to do with the tumour.
In hospital they told me they were going to do a routine examination and that it was going to be a twist in the scrotum or it was going to be a tumour; and it might be benign or it might be malignant.
I was still in pain and still in shock and not really knowing what was going on.
I guess I must have been frightened but it all happened so quickly.
I remember waking up and reaching down automatically and realising that they had shaved me which was my biggest shock.
And then everything was in bandages so I couldn't tell and I asked immediately and somebody said: ‘They have taken it out.’
The testicle had been dead so they had taken it out and sent it off for tests.
I think I was too young to worry about being emasculated.
Those thoughts only came into my head later.
I had been in hospital for about two days when they told me my tumour was malignant.
It was in the evening.
My mother and father were there and the doctor came up and said I would have to go into the Royal Marsden in Sutton to have a scan to find out whether the cancer had spread.
I was told that it could spread through the intestines to the stomach and lungs and then you had pretty much had it.
If it had spread then obviously chemotherapy had to come.
That was the worst night of everything.
When my parents went and I was left alone I cried for most of the night.
I had cancer, I thought that therefore I was going to die.
Death comes very close to you.
You really start to think about what it would be like to die.
There was a nurse who sat with me and held my hand through that night.
Suddenly I realised that there were all sorts of things that I wanted to do that I hadn't done.
It all came out.
The nurse who was talking me through was wonderful, very very comforting, and by the time the next morning came around I was fine.
Literally I cried that night and then I didn't cry again.
In a funny way I knew I was going to need treatment.
I was going to have treatment and then it would be all right.
I knew I would be all right.
It was very strange.
So that was the initial phrase if you like.
I can only tell you how it was for me.
I suspect it was worse in a way for my family.
Then I had to go into the Royal Marsden.
As it happened my brother knew the leading professor in testicular cancer there, Dr Janet Husband.
She took us through to the scan.
You have to drink this large jug of orange juice with a chemical in it that makes the tumour show up if it is there.
It tasted of lots of tartrazine and something sort of metallic on top.
I had to lie on this bed with an enormous arch over me and be passed very slowly underneath it.
You're the only one in the room and you can see the doctors through a glass.
It was so slow.
I was impatient.
I wanted to know.
When it was over Janet came into the room and said: ‘We found a small tumour but you are very lucky because it's at the preliminary stage.
This is the most treatable and most curable stage.’
The initial spreading was in the intestines and was about 3cm wide which apparently is the smallest tumour you can have.
We sat with my parents and discussed chemotherapy.
They were calm.
I mean I have no idea how they felt.
I was shocked when I first went into the Marsden and saw all these people with no hair, very white, being wheeled around in wheel chairs with cannulas and drips and looking very sickly.
And then of course as soon as I started the chemotherapy I became one of them and I started not to notice.
I had chemotherapy over the course of three months.
You go in for three days and you have a big dose of drugs.
Then you have three weeks when you go in once a week for a top-up; then another three days in, until you have done four sets of each.
You are only resident in the hospital during the three day stints.
There was a week before I went.
I had my hair cut very very short and I just all of a sudden realised that it was all a bit serious; that something else was about to happen.
Then my mother and I went out to make ourselves feel better and spent lots of money.
I got an amazing pair of slippers and fantastic pyjamas and a brilliant dressing gown, and she bought herself something.
We spent a fortune.
At the end of the day I felt terrible but she was not feeling guilty at all.
She just said: ‘Well we had fun didn't we.’
I went in through the Marsden's revolving doors for my first treatment thinking: ‘This is the beginning.’
Very sinking stomach.
I've got my bag.
I am being set up in the ward and it occurs to me that I am feeling fine.
I mean, I am not in any agony.
Why should I believe these people that one small grey lump which they showed me on a screen is a threat to my life?
I have no proof that lump is going to harm me so much.
I went into the Marsden with a sinking feeling.
I wanted to know everything.
Everything had to be explained.
I was too old for the children's ward so I was in with men.
The next youngest was 28 and he also had testicular cancer.
Everyone else was much older, 50, 60, 70 years old.
They were all looking far worse off than me.
I thought: ‘I am going to get better; they may not.’
There were terrible noises in the night; people being ill, in real pain in the next bed, and I remember somebody being there at night and not being there in the morning.
But it was very very natural and just part of what was going on.
It really didn't feel like it was such big stuff, it was just happening to me and I believed I was going to be all right.
I think I wanted to convince myself that I was going to be all right because if I didn't and if I stopped to think about what was really going on, I would have been a mess.
And there were very funny parts.
There was this wonderful little old lady called the tissue collector.
She was grey haired, quite dumpy with a white coat on and she came to collect sperm if you wanted it stored.
She came up in front of my parents and said: ‘Would you like to take this home, put a sample in it and we'll do a sperm count for you?’
She hands over this little jar and she says: ‘It has to be brought back warm.
You can hold the jar under your armpit or between your legs.’
And I was like: ‘Em, okay.
That's fine.’
All of a sudden things that you had never discussed with your parents come into the forefront of things.
We went home and my mother said: ‘Now you haven't done your sample yet.
Would you mind going and doing it.’
I had this image of my mother, complete star that she is, going into the hospital with the pot under her arm.
As it turned out my sperm count was too low for them to store any, because of my operation and the treatment.
So that was when I first started to be told about the possibility that I might not be able to have any children.
Most people who have testicular cancer and who are treated for it and cured go on to lead perfectly active normal lives as far as having children is concerned.
I haven't had a test since then to see if I can, and I don't want to have a test.
I want children very much, but what is the point of me worrying about it now?
I don't need to think about it now.
I am certainly not impotent which would have been a worry.
At least, I haven't had any complaints.
For the chemo I was in bed and they attached me to the drip.
They give you a cocktail of all the drugs.
One of them is the drug that kills cancer cells.
Then you have a drug to take away the pain of the drug that is killing the cancer cells which unfortunately makes you sick and then they give you something to try to reduce that sickness, so you have one battling the other, battling the other.
I remember very little from those times.
You are kind of dozing but you are not asleep because you can't get to sleep because there is a needle sticking in your arm and you have got a drip going on and they come and change the bag and you are constantly feeling sick.
You develop a reflex action of reaching for the bowl.
It is not demoralising because everyone around you is going through the same thing.
But you have no energy.
You need to be helped upstairs, helped into bed.
You can't lift anything.
It drains you completely and it's not the cancer; it is the drugs.
You just have to convince yourself: ‘They are doing me good, so I am not going to complain about it.’
Your concentration is nil.
I was bored but I couldn't read, couldn't write, couldn't concentrate.
All I could do was watch television.
Neighbours once is bad enough; twice a day is revolting.
By the second treatment I knew the routine.
There are the same faces, the same nurses.
It became like a social visit.
It became my life.
Back at home again I came down to breakfast one morning scratching my head and my hair started to fall out.
I was a mixture of desperately upset and very excited, because this was the first physical sign, apart from throwing up, about what was going on.
Soon it was just clumps and permanently itchy so I asked them to shave it off.
I wore a wonderful panama outside, but I didn't wear anything in hospital.
Most people around you have no hair either so you are sort of out of place if you do.
My 18th birthday was that summer and I remember having a birthday tea on a beautiful sunny day, opening my presents.
I don't know what everyone else was thinking.
I just remember having a great time and then feeling tired and going off and having a sleep.
We didn't talk about futures at all.
My future was going into hospital next week.
I knew that at the end of the four sets of treatment I would have the final scan.
And I knew that I was going to be all right.
I guess everyone said it is 95 per cent curable; the treatment is good; you are making a good recovery.
Initially on that first night after the operation there was that very finite feeling: ‘Oh my God I have cancer that means death.’
But once the treatment started I felt was being cured.
Still when it was time for the scan I was very nervous.
Again the slow scan, but again we had the results very quickly.
Janet came into the room and told me that there wasn't a single sign of cancer left in my body.
Nothing.
I remember running out of the room, running to my parents and lots of hugs and emotion and it was great.
Part of me was hugging them because this is what you should do and part of me was thinking: ‘It's over.
Thank God.’
And I remember running into the ward where I had been treated, finding one of the nurses who had looked after me and giving her a big hug and her crying.
You know, tacky film ending kind of thing.
That wasn't really it.
I went back to school slowly to begin with.
I found it very tiring.
I got questions about wearing a hat and at first I didn't want to explain.
Then, as a prefect, I had to take my turn at presenting morning assembly.
I did it on having testicular cancer.
I had slides of the tumour, cross scans of what it looked like and where it was.
I took my hat off and people could see my hair was just growing back.
Men aren't taught about testicular cancer, yet it can affect any man between the ages of 15 and 45.
If I hadn't been diagnosed quite early, I wouldn't be here.
I caught up, did my A levels when everybody else did them.
I got into Edinburgh and before I came up I took a year off and worked and travelled.
Then I started university.
I am in my third year now studying history of art.
I don't live in the past but I can't forget the cancer.
It changed me.
It got rid of the crap if I can put it that way, sorted out my priorities.
If I set out to do something now, I will do it and I won't worry if I am making the right impression — if I fit in.
I am ambitious.
I have always been fascinated by fashion and fashion journalism.
I would like to be the first male editor of Vogue.
On a deeper level I am no longer frightened of death.
I came near to it and was cured.
It's not frightening any more.
It has just become a reality.
One day it will happen.
I was lucky.
That is how I think of myself.
I'm the lucky one.
For the second year running Daniel Marks is organising a Student Fashion Show in the Assembly Rooms, George Street, Edinburgh, on Monday 22 February at 7.30pm in aid of the Marie Curie Memorial Foundation, Fairmile Home, Edinburgh, and the Daniel Marks Testicular Cancer Research Fellowship at the Royal Marsden.
Tickets £18 or £8 from Annabelle Oakley, 1 Broughton Place, Edinburgh EH1 3RL Tel: 031 557 1718.
Taking time to shed an old skin
POSTCARD FROM OVERSEAS: CATHERINE ELSWORTH IN ROMANIA
‘I can only see things getting worse.
Romanians have lost their sense of humour and their attitudes are characterised by aimlessness.
Who can they blame now?’
THE shaky Romanian jet smells of old food, sweat and feet and rattles as it flies.
Heavily made-up stewardesses serve up fatty meals and stale rolls.
After a juddering landing the cranky plane eases up the runway towards a chalky line reading ‘stop’.
Remarkably we do.
From the plane window the scene has the usual bleakness of an airport panorama.
Bucharest's Otopeni terminal is a distant fortress of grey and black, its approach obstructed by piles of rubble and tiny, dwindling buses winding across the runway.
Sub-zero temperatures bleach the place of colour.
The air is bitter.
It is like moving through a black and white film.
But reaching the terminal calls for a rapid revaluation of these hasty eastern European generalisations.
The arrivals section is being done up.
There is hi-tech glass and lighting, cute little passport kiosks and a tapered rubber ramp to baggage reclaim.
Okay, so it still takes the best part of an hour to move the next ten paces past passport control.
You have to suffer the officials' hostility and their slow, interrogative assessment of your visa's validity, but the contrast between old and new is acute and strikingly pertinent to the state of Romania today.
Celebrations for the third anniversary of the 1989 revolution are continuing.
Sparked off in the city of Timisoara by Lazlo Tokes, a Hungarian priest, the uprising spread to Bucharest and triggered the overthrow of the Ceausescu regime ending 40 years of communist rule.
But the National Salvation Front, which took over under Ion Iliescu, consisted largely of former communists and embraced vigilante tactics in its consolidation of power.
The secret service, the Securitate, remained in all but name.
Many Romanians became disillusioned, seeing the changes as cosmetic and hollow.
But to the surprise of western political spectators, last autumn's elections returned Iliescu to power in preference to the policies of Emil Constantinescu and the Democratic Convention, an anti-government coalition promising civil liberties and a free market economy.
Outsiders criticised while the electorate opted for Iliescu's slow and seemingly reluctant blueprint for reform.
But not all Romanians are happy with the government.
In Piata Universitatii, in central Bucharest, under the looming tower of the Intercontinental Hotel and the glaring neon of a Castrol sign, a crowd has gathered to mark the anniversary and hear political speakers.
They cheer and jeer, clutch candles in the freezing night air and wave Romanian flags with the symbolic hole in the centre where once the emblem of the Communist era was stitched.
Videos of the revolution are screened on to a side wall of the Architecture School and the sounds of the 1989 crowds blasted out into the icy night.
But later, only a small cluster of people remain, grouped around the Martyr's Cross where their candles burn to a carpet of wax.
‘Five days is too long a time for the anniversary,’ says Patricia, 23, a student from Timisoara.
‘People have too many other things to be worrying about than remembering a revolution that did not achieve very much.’
Such scepticism is common.
Many students in Bucharest now refer to it as simply the ‘events’ of 1989.
Yet visual reminders of the revolution are everywhere.
In Piata Revolutei bullet holes like acne scars riddle the ruined buildings, a grim testimony to the hundreds that died.
Now newspapers are calling for the truth to be revealed about the numbers killed.
The legacy of Ceausescu lives on in his House of the Republic, a 7,000-room defunct monstrosity that hogs the skyline on its pert, artificial crest.
An unfinished palace, an orgy of architectural whims and cliches, its construction razed 9,500 homes.
Meanwhile Bucharest buzzes with activity.
The shops are packed and the streets crowded with vendors selling oranges and bananas.
There is no denying that many things have improved since the revolution.
Petrol queues are shorter and goods unobtainable six months ago are becoming common.
Butter is in the supermarkets of Timisoara for the first time since March last year.
There is an expectant market, eager for the new products and western brands.
You see it in the neon strips that colour the city, the flashing lights on every corner.
There is a thirst for conspicuous consumption and a consumerism as yet only briefly sampled.
‘The people here want to spend their money on the more expensive imported brands,’ say Eugen, 24, who works for the Soros Foundation in Timisoara.
‘They are seduced by the packaging, not the goods.’
The American giants have moved in.
Everywhere you look a sign screams Marlboro, Camel or Pepsi.
Even the public transport is emblazoned — you wait for the ‘Marlboro Tram’.
The black markets proffer Levis, pirated rave music and electric kettles.
Gypsies sell packets of small, familiar pills by the handful, calling out ‘anti-baby’ to the throngs of bustling shoppers.
The press has mushroomed, stalls are packed with newspapers and Romania has become a mecca for journalists from the West eager not only to report but instruct the new media, still largely partisan and biased, in western techniques and styles.
In Timisoara, Sorinne, a young Romanian journalist, is trying to start up a student newspaper.
But while increased freedom and greater choice are positive movements, they are being countered by mounting inflation and unemployment.
Close to a million are now out of work, 8 per cent of the workforce.
In 1989 the figure was zero.
With the Securitate still intact, people remain cautious.
The government retains control of television and radio.
And there is pessimism too, as expressed by Sanyi, 31, an electrician.
‘Nothing has changed since the revolution and I can only see things getting worse and worse.
Romanians have lost their sense of humour and their attitudes are characterised by aimlessness.
Who can they blame now?’
For some the answer to this is the ethnic minorities that constitute a significant part of Romania's population.
Dangers lurk in the wings for the government in the shape of extreme nationalism and the anti-Hungarian policies of those such as the Mayor of Cluj, Gheorghe Funar.
Royalists look to their exiled King Michael in Switzerland.
A planned visit by the king to Timisoara on Christmas Eve was cancelled at the last minute because of restrictions imposed by the government.
The monarch's potential as a political rival is an issue of which Iliescu is only too aware.
However, he will have increased his unpopularity among those eagerly awaiting the return of the king, those who were forced to put their ‘welcome home Michael’ T-shirts away once again.
Sanyi considers the populace politically immature, ignorant and apathetic: ‘The people won't vote in someone better than Iliescu but we need a clean break with the past.
It's very frustrating for those who do want change.’
But the argument against further reform is that stability above all is what the country needs.
It is encouraging business investments from abroad and private enterprise is beginning to take off.
Perhaps Romania is, like its Otopeni airport, undergoing slow rejuvenation from the outside in and shedding its old skin.
But it will take far longer for the core to turn.
So far, change has occurred without the chaotic excesses, random U-turns and destructive instability that have characterised communism's demise in some other former Eastern Bloc states.
Such difficult transition demands time and balance and Romania has a long way to go before it is comfortable with its new identity.
Wandering star in the Maastricht bandwagon
PARLIAMENT has been reminding me this past week of some scenes from the musical Paint Your Wagon.
In particular, I'm thinking about the fine filming which accompanies the song There's A Coach Comin' In, as the carriage packed full of prostitutes speeds towards town.
Everyone knows there is, ahem, gratification galore to be had upon its arrival.
Scandalmongers will be disappointed to know that it is not the prostitutes which I have in mind here, rather the fact that this little thing called Amendment 27 to the Maastricht bill is also receiving such a chorus of anticipation.
My surprise does not arise from the possibility of a Government defeat over the social chapter but from the fact that it is only now that such a story has found its way onto the front pages.
In truth, this one has been something more akin to a slow train coming.
Labour first signalled their legislative desire to try and amend the bill in this way prior to last year's summit recess.
Support for a ratified Maastricht Treaty, which included the social dimension, had equally been stated in the Liberal Democrats' general election manifesto.
So our two sets of opposition votes were always predictable.
The various Nationalists had also expressed their sympathy for such a move.
The arithmetic alone shows that this Government is only prone to defeat when there is an issue over which all the non-government parties intend to vote the same way (ie including the Official and Democratic Unionists, plus the self-styled popular Unionist, Sir James Kilfedder) and where that total is topped up by a dozen or so Tory malcontents.
It is a measure of the seriousness with which the European issue divides the Conservative Party that the Prime Minister came within three votes of defeat over Maastricht — despite having Lib Dem support — in the paving vote last November.
But it was a misreading to suppose that the vote then marked the high water mark on the issue.
During the progress of the bill so far (not much and currently stalled) it has been instructive to note the number of occasions on which the Government has not tried to force the pace beyond 10pm.
That has been a reflection of the numerical constraints under which it has been operating.
However, as no votes have been recorded at these junctures the arithmetic straitjacket has remained largely hidden.
The social chapter was always going to be the item over which the opposition forces would coalesce.
In recognising that fact, as well as the reality that this package cannot be amended or the entire community ratification process goes back into the melting pot, it was the pressure point likely to offer the greatest temptation to the Tory anti-Maastricht brigade.
So it has proved.
Lady Eden once remarked that she felt as if the Suez Canal was flowing through her drawing room.
Mrs Major could be forgiven for seeing Maastricht mud deposited across the carpets.
The Prime Minister has, like Eden before him, become both bogged down and boxed in by one big issue at the expense of the general election mandate secured only the previous year.
Will, however, the parallel end there?
It is often said of the Prime Minister that he retains all the instincts and skills which were politically honed during his time in the Whips' Office.
This regular assessment, given recent events, now looks increasingly to be in need of some fundamental reappraisal.
What was always going to be an extremely tricky situation has now been made even more unfavourable for the Government — by the Government.
The gift of Lord Tebbit's manic utterances last Wednesday (perhaps always a risk when one chooses to dine upstairs in the press gallery) was thrown away by the decision to set Douglas Hurd up to advise (a) that the passage of Amendment 27 would wreck the treaty and (b) that for HMG ‘there is no question of our ratifying a treaty other than the one we negotiated’.
Tebbit embarrassed the Tory Euro sceptics; Hurd emboldened them.
That opportunity squandered was followed swiftly by the briefings for yesterday's press to the effect that Delphic Douglas was in fact leaving open the door for an executive ratification of the original, unamended treaty irrespective of whatever parliament may decide.
Archy Kirkwood, one of our mild-mannered  brethren , was moved to describe this gambit on radio yesterday as ‘monstrous’.
That reaction will be typical of the vast majority and confirms that this Government is not good at making friends or influencing people.
Over the weekend, Tory loyalists like Michael Ancram and Tim Renton have acknowledged publicly that if the choice becomes Maastricht plus the social chapter or no Maastricht then the sensible, majority position will be Maastricht Plus.
The first step in a sequence of events would be the passing of Amendment 27 to demonstrate a parliamentary majority for the social dimension.
As it stands at present(for technical reasons) this leaves a hole in the legislation and has the effect of wrecking the bill.
So step two becomes, probably, reversing that vote and inserting instead a further amendment to the bill allowing for the social issue to be  addressed , in line with the earlier decision of the House, after the treaty is ratified.
There is nothing here — not least the welcome that the rest of our EC partners would express over Britain signing up — that creates insuperable difficulties.
If the political will exists, then the way can be found.
All this will have to be conducted against a timescale mindful of the second Danish referendum on 18 May and a likely post-treaty intergovernmental conference in the summer.
Paint Your Wagon let loose on an unsuspecting cinema-going public the singing capabilities of Lee Marvin and Clint Eastwood.
The former chewed his way through Wandering Star, the latter grappled manfully with I Talk To The Trees.
The Prime Minister's star does seem rather lost over Maastricht, does it not?
And he should remember that the last person who talked to trees while pursuing a determined foreign policy was George III.
Prince moved by American welcome
AMERICAN university students gave the Prince of Wales a rousing welcome at the weekend as he continued his first overseas trip since the December announcement of the collapse of his marriage.
The prince, on a three-day visit to the United States, broke from his prepared speech at the College of William and Mary in Williamsburg, Virginia, in an ebullient show of joy at the thumping applause that greeted him.
‘I'm very touched, if I might say so,’ the prince said, as he was cheered by a 10,000-strong audience.
‘All I can say is that it's wonderful to come to Virginia and receive such an incredibly warm and encouraging welcome.
Thank you very much indeed.’
College officials said they could not recall any previous speaker receiving such an enthusiastic welcome.
It was the first US test of the prince's popularity since his split from the Princess of Wales.
In his speech, the prince returned to a favourite theme — the value of simpler times and the spiritual vacuum created by consumerism — in urging a return to traditional values.
‘I claim no special insight,’ he said.
But he added: ‘Why is it that while the means for achieving happiness have never been greater, the incidence of stress and depression also seems to be greater than ever before?’
The technological rush of today, he said, could rob people of humanity.
‘We certainly become more knowing, but we do not seem to become any more civilised,’ he said in a celebration for the 300th anniversary of the college, one of the most prestigious in the US.
For the prince, the setting could hardly have been more appropriate.
Williamsburg, a town of rambling old buildings named after Prince Charles's 17th-century ancestor, William III, was the colonial capital of Virginia, once Britain's most prosperous outpost in America.
The Prince of Wales last spoke at the college in 1981, the year of his wedding.
‘In those days I was young and relatively inexperienced.
In these days I am middle-aged and relatively inexperienced,’ he joked.
‘I now find that I am an exact contemporary of the current vice-president of the USA and just two years younger than the president.’
He urged the audience to cast away ‘a cynical disbelief in the relevance of the past to the present, and in the value of what is traditional and timeless.
‘It is said that the past is another country.
If so, we have become xenophobic,’ he said.
Prince Charles flew from Washington to Houston yesterday.
From there he was leaving for a four-day official tour of Mexico.
The US trip was largely private, capped by dinner on Saturday with President Bill Clinton, his wife Hillary Rodham Clinton, Vice-President Al Gore and his wife Tipper.
Prince Charles with Vice-President Al Gore and his wife Tipper.
They were joined later by President Clinton and his wife
Royal opening for Fife hospital project
SCOTLAND's newest hospital is to have a Royal opening.
Fife health board has confirmed that the Princess Royal will perform the ceremony at the £52.8 million second phase of the West Fife District General Hospital in Dunfermline on 28 June.
Due to be finished at the end of this month, the project will add an extra 326 acute beds to the 240 long-stay and acute beds in the hospital's first phase which was completed several years ago.
The board chairwoman, Ann Ferguson, said: ‘The opening of the new hospital will be the biggest event in the recent history of the board and we are delighted that the Princess Royal has agreed to conduct the ceremonial opening.
‘This most modern building will be superbly equipped and will be a great asset to the whole of Fife.
It is extremely important that the princess, who takes great interest in Scotland, will be here to grace the occasion.’
Housed in the extension will be most surgical and medical specialities, eight operating theatres, and some of the latest hi-tech diagnostic equipment as well as out-patient clinics.
The project, which began in July 1990, has been constructed by a design and build process promoted by Mrs Ferguson, a civil engineer, as the best method of providing a hospital to the required standards in the shortest possible time and within budget.
New professor for St Andrews
THE University of St Andrews has appointed Professor Graham Smith to a professorial chair in the department of art history.
Prof Smith is currently Professor of the History of Art at the University of Michigan and will join St Andrews in January 1994.
Prof Smith graduated in medieval and modern history from St Andrews in 1964.
A former assistant professor at the University of British Columbia, he joined the University of Michigan as assistant professor in 1972, becoming professor in 1983.
He has a particular interest in Italian Mannerist art and also photography, especially the early history in Scotland.
Clinton package gift-wrapped for maximum appeal
President Clinton's plan for the US economy has been created after careful market research, says MICHAEL PYE, to be a morale-booster
IT'S A little late for all those lovely, shiny Christmas packages — all promise and ribbon and hope.
But we're expecting one on Wednesday: the Clinton plan for the American economy.
It contains a sensible stimulus, a great deal more federal spending, an energy tax, a guarantee of higher income tax for people and companies and only a promise of future spending cuts.
It is exactly like a Christmas present: it makes people feel good on the day.
Think psychology rather than economics when you see the details, for Bill Clinton's success in changing the American mood is the best economic move he could make.
Better yet, he's not pretending all is well.
The new White House uses the austerely realistic forecasts of the Congressional Budget Office: 2.8 per cent growth this year, 3 per cent growth next year.
This allows no glib assumptions that growth will solve everything, the deficit included.
Indeed, the Clintonians divide acrimoniously on the matter of the deficit.
There are those who would like to keep campaign promises, like not putting new tax burdens on the middle-class, but they know they cannot.
There are those who dream of becoming American heroes by vanquishing the deficit, but know that most of their plans involve, at least in the short term, more federal spending.
The president, in the middle as usual, has been poring over budget items in the millions, the tiny cogs of the federal machine.
But he knows he cannot possibly find $2 of spending cuts for every $1 in increased taxes, as once was promised.
While it is still tough to distinguish trial balloons, downright disinformation and honest leaks, this much is clear: the burden is going to the taxpayer.
For it costs money to immunise needy children, investigate AIDS and treat TB, train more minimum wage workers to break out of poverty and help the displaced, including those let go from a shrinking military.
All this is in the $16 billion increase in federal spending this year, and it does not leave much for the obvious benefits of public works and grants to local governments to mend their bridges and roads.
Then there is the still unworkable sum which overhangs all this budgeting: how much health care reform will cost.
The White House is carefully holding some tax increases — on drink and tobacco, for example— until the sum is done, and this year's medical price freeze will most likely go to the same account.
Meantime, Clinton is obliged to release to the states billions in Medicare funds which the last regime held back on technical grounds.
In a decade, Clinton's reforms may salvage the economy' short-term, they do nothing for the deficit.
And while Clinton wants to shave $8 billion from the Pentagon's spending, he has earmarked the money for his industrial policy — on civilian R&D.
The effect on the deficit is zero.
But he needs cuts to announce on Wednesday — an end to some bizarre farm subsidies to anyone running cattle on federal land, or cuts in the super-collider programme, but not the space station.
Even these cuts may not be what they seem.
Indeed, read everything carefully, because this package is something new: a policy created by market research.
For the past month the Clintonians have been working with opinion polls and focus groups, all the paraphernalia of selling soap, to devise exactly the policy the public will accept.
This is more, much more, than the Washington tradition of listening to lobbyists, although the White House has done that, too.
After the red-hot protests of the retired classes, Clinton will not touch the expensive cost of living adjustments to their social security pensions, although he will make taxable 85 per cent of the benefits paid to the rich instead of the present 50 per cent.
No, the White House has been listening hard to how people think things look, and devising plans to fit.
Focus groups said they would pay more taxes if the cost of the Federal machine was cut, and so Clinton announces with great fanfares a 25 per cent cut in White House staff.
Its economic impact is minimal, its publicity value huge.
Likewise, the promise to cut administrative costs by 14 per cent over four years will play well in Peoria, as long as nobody notices that the federal staff is being reduced by only 4.7 per cent(and those who go need pensions and benefits from the Treasury, still.)
Then there's the question of who pays taxes.
There will be a surcharge on incomes over $1 million.
Companies in future will be able to write off against taxes only the first $1 million of what they pay any director or executive.
The highest rate of personal income tax (if you earn more than $200,000) goes up from 31 per cent to 36 per cent— raising maybe $10 billion for the Treasury, a mere down payment on the first Clinton domestic schemes.
This is all because middle-class people, the polls say, want to see the rich suffer first.
And corporate income tax also has to rise to the same 36 per cent, from 34 per cent , because the slightest gap would cause the genuinely rich to incorporate overnight.
Having proved he can hurt everyone, Clinton then has to do the Democrat thing, and attempt to fine-tune the economy.
He can't do very much short-term about the federal deficit, although he's sharp enough to see that borrowing short-term cuts interest costs.
What he can do is instill a sense of purpose and energy that's been missing for years.
This is where talk and plans may come apart.
Clinton has to promise he will create jobs, even though he is firing thousands of civil servants and military personnel.
So he will talk up his investment tax credits and a break on capital gains tax for shares held in some small companies for at least five years.
But investment tax credits, combined with tax hikes, help only capital intensive companies, and do nothing much for profitable, labour intensive ones — the ones that need help most (people are a luxury when their future benefits can push GM into declaring the largest corporate loss in history.)
There is very little evidence that investment tax credits actually inspire any new investment.
Worse, the complications in defining the ‘right’ kind of new investment, and the ‘right’kind of small company will be a make-work scheme for lawyers and accountants.
In the end, what matters most about the Clinton package is whether it convinces most people that a bit of pain is worthwhile, that there's a future to aspire to.
Put it this way: it could be the new, reformulated Coca-Cola that almost destroyed a franchise, or the crystal clear Pepsi that created one.
Either way, it's all marketing.
RICK WILKING/Reuter Upbeat: Changing the US mood is the best economic move Bill Clinton could make
OPEC talks on oil production cuts hit stumbling block
By Frank Frazer
KUWAIT was in the thick of battle last night as leading oil producers tried to hammer out a deal which would prevent prices collapsing when winter demand drops.
Sources close to the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries said that weekend talks in Vienna achieved consensus that cuts in output were needed to avert a serious fall in revenue for the 12 member states.
But delegates ran into difficulties in informal haggling over how to share the cuts.
The main stumbling block was a demand by Kuwait to be given freedom to continue building up production to cover a $50 billion bill for the Gulf war and subsequent reconstruction costs.
During initial exchanges, delegates agreed that at least 1 million barrels per day (bpd) needed to be lopped from the cartel's total production of more than 25 million bpd to avoid an oil glut during the second quarter of the year, when demand generally slumps with the onset of warmer weather in the northern hemisphere.
But Kuwait, which is reported to have built up its output recently to 2 million bpd, was resisting pressure to make it share in the cuts.
Ali al-Baghli, who heads the Kuwait delegation, admitted during a break in the discussions that the issues were ‘complicated’.
The head-on clash with Kuwait, which has been allowed to produce oil without restriction since the end of the Gulf war, was seen by many OPEC observers as a rehearsal for the more difficult problems arising when the United Nations' embargo on Iraq is lifted.
Iraq, which is thought to have capacity to produce at least twice as much oil as Kuwait, did not send its oil minister to the OPEC talks — an indication that the authorities in Baghdad do not expect an early resumption of export trading.
The focus switched to the stance taken by Kuwait after Iran and Saudi Arabia, the two largest OPEC exporters, appeared to have put aside differences to work together in trying to reach a settlement.
Alirio Parra, OPEC's president who toured member states in an effort to get support for production cuts ahead of the Vienna meeting, declined to comment last night on the progress at the talks.
But a source close to one of the delegations summed up the frustration when he remarked: ‘We are like a drunkard who knows his house but he does not know how to get there.
We all agree that cuts are needed but we do not know how to get them.’
The Middle East Economic Survey, a trade publication which maintains close contact with OPEC delegates, said in a special edition at the weekend that the cartel might have to cut its output ceiling by 678,000 bpd more than already planned if it wanted to raise oil prices from levels around $18 a barrel.
It calculated that present output of 25.26 million bpd would have to be reduced to 23.58 million bpd.
Smith's white flag is danger signal for Tories
THE REVIEWS were all favourable.
The Leader was wise.
He was shrewd.
With this new posture, victory was probable.
All John Smith had done was put up the white flag.
The Labour Party was to slough off its socialist skin and trade under more engaging terms such as‘putting people first’.
Stepping back from the hurly-burly of political combat, I suppose all the tussles of the last 15 years have been about weaning our politicians off the romance of a benevolent, let alone competent, state.
It is splendid news that Mr Smith is able to renounce socialism and even better that Gordon Brown and Tony Blair and even wee Nigel Griffiths are going to pursue the ugly connections between Tory plutocrats and regulations that block the free market.
At this sort of pace we will start to lose the landmarks that give us our bearings.
The Labour Party is in favour of loosening the tax and legal inhibitions that stop people renting spare rooms.
Peter Rachman is exorcised along with Clause Four.
The political party so long lubricated and cajoled by the Transport and General workers is expressing interest in private toll roads and pricing the use of public roads.
The Labour Party, or its thinking wing, is polishing its credentials so remarkably that Mr Smith's team will look quite different when they get to meet us all again in the polling booth.
The Fabian Review, a good way to eavesdrop on thoughtful Lefties' ruminations, leads with ‘What's Wrong With Being Middle Class?’ by Mo Mowlam, MP.
This from the party where everyone competed to be holier than thou, with no shoes in their childhood and rickets in their relatives.
True the odd Wykehamist could always be a socialist, but now, it seems, you can even have bought your council house and be a member of the party.
As part of the victorious sweep of competitive tendering in health authorities and local government, even the People's Party has subcontracted its thinking.
The Institute for Public Policy Research is the brains of the Left.
Their pamphlets are remarkable.
If I was a Tory tactician I would be alarmed by the fertility of the IPPR's work.
This is a Left that has seen that competition and pricing are virtues.
The political art is to devise the frame of rules and regulations markets play in.
James Cornford, formerly Professor of Politics at Edinburgh University, orchestrates a sympathetic body of writers.
They can see how the Health Service has been captured by its employees.
They argue for ways to enhance health care that the Government can barely touch.
They concede that municipal monopoly of schooling has let down generations but they come back with ideas that seem to me to be sensible and subtle but also politically popular.
A quick-witted Tory Education Minister must plagiarise the IPPR's proposal for a UK Baccalaureat.
Anna Coots and Patricia Hewitt, two of the most creative pamphleteers, ought to be assured peerages and a few quangoes if Mr Smith gets to Downing Street.
Cool rethinking on family policies can barely fail to be a political winner.
The IPPR could have us all in popular revolt against the faceless financial institutions with the subversive idea that pension funds should be owned and run by their members.
The Labour Party is out-manoeuvring the free marketeers.
Why are employees treated as vassals by the pension funds?
All those smug fellows in Charlotte Square have far more reason to be alarmed by this cogent, lucid Leftism than the silly Red Romance of a world run between the DHSS and Lothian Regional Council.
I have long thought the Scottish Tories' best hope was the potential popularity of schools opting out of council control.
All those dreary councillors and their officious bureaucrats deserve to be humbled.
Yet if the IPPR has its way, the Labour Party will be adopting parent-friendly, talent-rewarding policies well before Lord James Douglas-Hamilton has got the first secondary school to say goodbye to our authoritarian system.
The Left will never be able to renounce its primness.
There is an earnestness about them that no Tory can understand.
They do want to make us all better people.
Their policy rehearsals are the political equivalent of jogging.
As heirs of the Roundheads, it is silly to look for much laughter on the Left.
Contrast the fertility of Mr Smith's intellectuals with the odd status of Conservative ones.
The Tory party is often an amiable shambles, but the Maastricht process is turning it into a neurotic press gang.
Nobody, apart from Sir Edward Heath, has any time for the drizzle of petty regulations of the EC nor for the scandal of the Common Agricultural Policy, but all the energies of the Conservative whips are being employed to enforce Euro-allegiance.
The Labour Party is beguiled by Europe.
Apart from licensed old codgers like Mr Foot, Mr Benn and Mr Shore, the Left are entranced by the Commission and its works.
it is a very natural marriage.
The Commission allows the markets to do their prosaic task of delivering the goods.
The political fun is to be had spending it.
The new non-socialist party looks more agreeable than it has done for 20 years.
We badly need some by-elections to test-drive the new Labour Party.
Queen accepts apology from Sun
THE Queen last night accepted an apology from the Sun, for publishing her Christmas message two days early, and an offer from the newspaper to pay £200,000 to charity.
A statement from Buckingham Palace said the Queen was content to drop legal proceedings following a front-page offer in the newspaper.
‘In the light of the apology to the Queen in today's issue of the Sun and the offer of the newspaper to pay £200,000 to charity, Her Majesty is content to regard the matter as settled since the making of the payment by the newspaper must be seen as recognising the basis of the claim,’ the statement said.
A Buckingham Palace spokesman said the money would be divided between the Save the Children Fund, as intended by the Sun, and the Leonard Cheshire Foundation, subject of part of the broadcast.
‘The Sun also agreed to pay costs in the action,’ the spokesman said, declining to reveal how large the costs were.
The Sun's open letter came after a writ on behalf of the Queen was served on the paper last Thursday, alleging infringement of copyright.
The newspaper insisted it would fight any legal proceedings, which it maintained lacked ‘a sense of due proportion’.
The Palace statement said the Queen's action had been brought ‘to make clear that there had been a breach of Her Majesty's rights in the matter’.
It added: ‘When copies of the Queen's Christmas Broadcast to the Commonwealth are made available in advance for the convenience of the media in this country and abroad, such a system depends upon all the media accepting the obligation not to publish it prematurely.
‘As the Sun now recognises, the publication did cause personal offence to the Queen but it also caused offence amongst those who prefer to hear or see Her Majesty's Christmas Message for the first time on Christmas Day.’
The Sun's publisher Rupert Murdoch was reported to have ordered an apology in what was described by assistant editor Chris Davis as a ‘handsome and gracious’ gesture after discussions ‘at the very highest level’.
Earlier Mr Davis stressed the offer was not a climbdown.
Speaking on the BBC radio he said: ‘We realise that the Queen has enough problems on her plate at the moment.
There is no point in any further embarrassment for her.
‘The Queen has now made a gesture towards public opinion and has recognised in the modern world that the monarch does have to pay income tax.
We thought it was the time when we could make a gesture in return.’
He denied the apology was on the orders of Rupert Murdoch, saying it was a ‘common consensus’ emerging from a meeting involving Mr Murdoch, editor Kelvin MacKenzie, and senior News International executives.
‘We are the biggest-selling paper in the country.
We can afford to make gestures towards people, whether they are the Queen or the cleaning lady.
It doesn't make any difference to us,’ said Mr Davis.
Two commandos found dead on Arctic training mission
By Gary Duncan
THE DEATH of two Royal Marines from 45 Commando, based in Arbroath, while on a Arctic training exercise in Norway, was under investigation by the Ministry of Defence last night.
The men, who were among about 2,000 members of 3 Commando Brigade taking part in the exercise in wintry conditions, died after being found unconscious in a tent.
They were named as Marine Philip Yates, 22, of Norfolk, and Marine William Reed, 19, of Tyne and Wear.
A third man found with them was later revived in hospital.
Last night, very little was known about what the three men had been doing.
However, a spokesman for the Ministry of Defence said exposure was not the cause of death, adding that while there was snow on the ground it was not terribly cold.
‘The deaths are obviously very tragic and there will be a full and thorough investigation into the circumstances,’ he said.
Sources close to the ministry said later that early indications suggested the deaths may have been caused by a fault with a stove in the tent.
The incident follows the death less than two weeks ago of a marine warrant officer taking part in the same exercise.
Andrew Forret, 35, who was also based in Arbroath, was found dead in a stationary over-snow vehicle.
It is thought he may have suffered from carbon monoxide poisoning caused by a faulty exhaust system.
Questioned about the nature of the Norway exercise, the MoD spokesman said the men had been learning to live and fight in Arctic conditions.
‘The skills they were learning would range from skiing through to simple survival,’ he said.
‘They learn how to survive without tents as well as how to put up the issued tents.
This would include digging holes in the snow to shelter in.
They have to know how to stay alive with very little equipment.’
Clinton unveils economic blueprint
PRESIDENT Bill Clinton last night prepared the country for a painful package of tax increases and spending cuts, saying he was trying to ‘change a direction of 12 years and take a new course’ for the economy that would quickly provide half a million new jobs.
The plan envisages tax increases worth about $500 billion and spending reductions on many popular programmes over four years to cut the deficit.
Big corporations and wealthy Americans face significant rises in their income tax rates.
The White House spokeswoman, Dee Dee Myers, told reporters the new plan ‘turns trickle-down economics around 180 degrees.’
The so-called ‘trickle-down economics’ is the Reagan-era notion that economic prosperity can best be assured through tax cuts for the rich.
On health care, Ms Myers denied widely circulated reports that additional costs would mean upper-income elderly people would be asked to pay more for Medicare coverage.
— AP 
Full report, Page 7
Warning to parents in hunt for boy's killer
By Audrey Gillan
DETECTIVES on Merseyside warned parents yesterday to keep a tight hold of their children, saying their safety could not be guaranteed while the murderer of two-year-old James Bulger was still at large.
The child died of horrific multiple injuries before being left on a railway line where he was struck by a train, police said yesterday.
He had wandered away from his mother Denise, 25, on Friday while she was queuing in a busy butcher's in the Strand shopping centre, Bootle.
Police are still searching for two boys who were pictured on closed-circuit security screens taking James from the Strand.
His body was found on Sunday less than three miles away.
Last night the investigating team said they had made a breakthrough when a missing hood from James's anorak was discovered by officers searching the area.
It was lodged high in a tree beneath the railway embankment in Walton, where his body was discovered by four other boys.
The hood has been sent for forensic examination and it is hoped it will yield important clues.
Det Supt Albert Kirkby appealed for the two boys seen escorting James from the shopping centre to come forward, saying they may be completely innocent.
At a press conference he warned parents: ‘Poor James only went missing from his mother for a matter of seconds and he had gone, disappeared.
Until this person is caught, parents must keep hold of their children.’
Parents on Merseyside were keeping a firm grip and a watchful eye on their children yesterday.
Old baby reins and buggies were brought into use and children in the Strand were being pushed around in trolleys.
One woman, Helen Edwards, said she was horrified to discover that James was the same age as her son Mark.
‘My husband told me not to bring Mark to the Strand and if he's out of the house he's to stay in the buggy,’ she said.
‘They are just so vulnerable.
Children this age take to anybody.’
James's family were said to be absolutely devastated.
His grandmother telephoned the local radio station after hearing callers express their distress over the murder.
‘I don't know how they could be so cruel,’ she said.
‘This is like a dream.
I feel as if I am watching something happen to someone else.’
Last night the four boys who discovered James lying on the railway embankment said that at first they thought they had found a dead cat.
James Riley, 14, said: ‘Then one of us said ‘No, it's a baby’ and as we got nearer we could see it was a little boy.
It was horrible.
It was just terrible.’
The response from the public had been tremendous, police said, after posters were displayed across town.
Many people had called offering to help to search the area and some suggested that their sons could be used in a reconstruction of James's disappearance from the Strand.
Shocked community, Page 3
James Bulger: died of horrific multiple injuries
A boy lays a bunch of flowers near the railway embankment in Walton, Merseyside, where James Bulger's body was found two days after his abduction
Hurd apologises in Maastricht row
Inaccurate legal advice means Labour move cannot wreck treaty
By Ewen MacAskill Political Editor
THE Government was forced to make an embarrassing about-turn over the Maastricht bill yesterday to head off a damaging defeat at the hands of an alliance of Tory Euro-rebels and opposition parties.
The Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, apologised to the Commons for inaccurate legal advice given by the Government four weeks ago about the status of a Labour amendment.
At that time, the Government said the amendment, reinstating the social chapter on minimum conditions for workers, would have the effect of wrecking the treaty.
That was music to the ears of Tory Euro-rebels who planned to back the Labour amendment.
However, Mr Hurd's pronouncement yesterday removes that incentive, leaving the Labour move almost certain to fail.
Mr Hurd said the amendment would have no effect and that the Government would ratify the treaty anyway.
Opposition MPs and Tory Euro-rebels accused Mr Hurd of putting political expediency before principle and by-passing the will of Parliament, a view echoed by the Labour leader, John Smith.
The shadow foreign secretary, Jack Cunningham, said what had happened was the work of ‘a scurrilous Government without principle, which will use any expedient to sustain its view regardless of the opinions of the Commons’.
Lord Tebbit said ingenious minds were still at work on the treaty.
‘We might find ways of tripping it up and destroying it,’ he said.
After a weekend of uproar over reports that the Government intended to by-pass Parliament if defeated on the Maastricht bill and ratify the treaty anyway, Mr Hurd met the Prime Minister, John Major, the Leader in the Lords, John Wakeham, and the Chief Whip, Richard Ryder, at Downing Street yesterday morning.
Mr Hurd denied in the Commons that the Government was planning to ride roughshod over the will of the Parliament.
The ruse, while getting the Government off the hook in the short-term, may yet backfire on ministers, and both Labour and the Tory Euro-rebels were last night separately planning the next stage of their respective campaigns.
In his Commons statement, Mr Hurd was forced to apologise for legal advice given to the House on January 20 and 27 January by the Foreign Office minister, Tristan Garel-Jones, on the Labour amendment, which he said would mean the treaty could not be ratified.
Mr Hurd said the position had now changed and that even if the amendment was carried, it ‘would be no impediment to ratification’.
The initial legal advice had come from Foreign Office lawyers.
Mr Hurd said that because the issue was so important, he had asked the Attorney General and the Lord Advocate for their advice and on Thursday they had given contrary advice.
Mr Hurd said ‘this constitutes a different situation from that implied’ by Mr Garel-Jones.
‘I regret that the legal advice then given to the House was not correct.’
He denied the Government would ignore Parliament by ratifying the treaty using the royal prerogative.
‘The UK will not ratify the treaty unless the bill is approved by Parliament.’
For the Liberal Democrats, Sir Russell Johnston said: ‘The simple point is that where there is a political will, there is a legal way.’
Margaret Ewing, the Scottish National Party's parliamentary leader, said: ‘The Government is hiding behind a cloak of technicality to prevent MPs voting on the principle of the social chapter.’
A better piece of news for the Government yesterday came from Brussels, where there were indications that German and Spanish EC finance ministers were gradually swinging round to the Government's view that the social chapter would lose jobs rather than protect them.
Eleven of the 12 EC countries voted for inclusion of the social chapter in the Maastricht treaty, with only Britain opting out.
Attending talks in Brussels, the Paymaster General, Sir John Cope, welcomed a change of heart from Germany and Spain.
Germany's deputy economics minister, Johan Eekoff, said there were too many social regulations within the EC.
He said that the most important thing was to provide jobs for people.
The Spanish finance minister, Carlos Solchaga, said: ‘You cannot pile up social provisions and forget the real economy.’
Boy, 13, sent to secure unit
A BOY of 13 thought to be responsible for a car crimewave sobbed loudly last night as magistrates ruled he should be placed in a secure unit for three months — 300 miles from his home.
Shortage of such accommodation means the youngster from Sunderland, Tyne and Wear, who cannot be named for legal reasons, will have to be housed at a special centre in Romford, Essex.
Granting a Sunderland council application for him to be sent to the unit, the magistrates at the Family Court hearing in the city said: ‘It is unfortunate…the nearest placement is at the opposite end of the country.’
However, they felt it would be in his best interests to send him there, because of the number of times he has run away from council care.
Earlier Bill Scanlon, a solicitor representing the boy's guardian, said accommodation at the secure unit is £500 per day.
The court heard the public will also have to pay the expenses incurred by his divorced mother and father travelling to visit him.
Opposing the application, Anna Blower, for the boy, said he would be very upset if placed so far from home in a strange environment.
The boy, subject of national publicity since being described last week by the local police chief ‘a very  persistent offender who is a thorn in the sides of me and my officers’, was led into court handcuffed to a policeman.
Magistrates rejected an application for the press to be excluded from the hearing.
After the secure unit order was made, there was a brief youth court hearing concerning an unspecified number of offences alleged against the boy.
The hearing was adjourned until 13 May.
Two killed by chip pan fire
TWO MEN died yesterday when they were overcome by fumes after a chip pan blaze.
The bodies of Paul Burns, 34, and Darren Dalton, 32, were found by fireman called to a flat in Chesters Avenue, Longbenton, Newcastle-upon-Tyne. — PA
£10m order for new Ford model
FORD'S Mondeo car was given a huge boost yesterday when the car rental company Hertz placed a £10 million order.
The first of the Mondeos will be delivered on 25 March, the day the car goes on sale in the United Kingdom.
Hertz's order includes 1.6, 1.8 and 2.0 litre four and five-door models, plus five-door estates.
Among the first renters will be management from Hertz's corporate accounts and British Airways passengers.
— PA
US lawyer is acquitted in Guinness fraud case
AN AMERICAN lawyer, Thomas Ward, was cleared yesterday at the Old Bailey in London of stealing £5.2 million from Guinness after the brewery giant's successful takeover bid for Distillers.
During the five-week trial, the prosecution had alleged that Ward — then a Guinness director — and the firm's former chief executive, Ernest Saunders, planned to divide the money between them.
Ward, 53, had maintained throughout that the money had been a legitimate success fee for his vital role in the bitterly-fought takeover bid.
‘It fully reflected a contribution made by Mr Ward in this hugely important business transaction,’ said his counsel, Andrew Trollope, QC.
Ward had not lied or misled anyone about the nature of the payment or tried to conceal the money he had received.
Before leaving the dock, Ward turned to the jury and said: ‘Thank God — thank you all.’
He hugged Mr Trollope and shook hands with officers from the Serious Fraud Office who undertook the investigation against him.
Then standing beside the dock, he rang his wife in the US on a mobile phone.
‘She is very thankful, the way I am.
If you believe in God it's not hard,’ he told reporters.
He thanked his friends and lawyers in this country and America who had stood by him throughout.
Saying he planned to continue to practise law, he said he was ‘very proud’ of his track record in helping companies and their shareholders.
In this, the final trial of the Guinness affair, Victor Temple, prosecuting, alleged that Ward — with Saunders's knowledge — submitted a false invoice for the money in the name of Marketing and Acquisition Consultants, a Jersey company effectively controlled by Ward.
During the trial, the judge ordered not guilty verdicts to be entered on two of three counts the lawyer had faced, of false accounting and of procuring the execution of a valuable security.
That left the theft charge on which Ward was cleared yesterday.
He had denied all the allegations.
Before sending the jury out yesterday, Mr Justice Turner told them that to convict they must be sure an ordinary person would have regarded the means by which Ward obtained the cash as dishonest.
Mr Trollope said the case against Ward was a travesty.
‘It is a gross slur on a highly-respected and honest man who provided vital services towards a very vital business transaction,’ he said.
There had been no plan between Ward and Saunders to steal the money or any other sum from Guinness.
‘Nor was there any plan for Saunders to have any share in it at all,’ he added.
The Guinness bid transformed the company into an international giant and Ward had played a vital role in bringing this about.
Ward's payment was agreed with Saunders ‘a man who had huge authority in that company because he had picked it up by the scruff of the neck and transformed it.’
Two more horses are attacked
POLICE are investigating two further serious attacks on horses — one near Redditch, Worcestershire, and the other at Telford, Shropshire.
West Mercia police are checking for possible links between the Telford incident and another close by a few weeks ago when a horse was slashed.
In the latest incidents, Flambard, a three-quarter Arab chestnut, was found with a serious stab wound at Truemans Heath riding stables, Wythall, near Redditch.
In the Shropshire incident, another chestnut owned by a schoolgirl was found with its legs tightly bound with tape at the Rough Park riding stables, Telford.
— PA
Campaign to curb road tax cheats
A NATIONAL crackdown on road tax dodgers started yesterday with London offenders getting warning notices on the windscreens of their cars.
The water-proofed red notices warn drivers they have been reported and to get taxed at once or face a possible £1,000 fine.
— PA
Run by the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA) in conjunction with the police, the campaign aims to rake back some of the estimated £115 million a year lost from evasion of vehicle excise duty.
Roy kicked into touch in comic tragedy
THE football world was gutted yesterday when its greatest hero announced he was being forced to hang up his boots after almost 40 years at the top.
Once, his exploits were followed every week by 200,000 adoring young fans.
But the advent of the computer game generation and the recession has consigned Roy of the Rovers to football's wastepaper basket.
The weekly comic named after Roy Race, the legendary player manager of Melchester Rovers FC, is to close next month.
Thirty-nine years after Roy became a schoolboy football star on the front page of the then new comic, Tiger, he is finally bowing out of big time.
‘He is about to suffer a tragic accident which will signal the end of his incredible, action-packed career as Britain's greatest goal-scoring hero,’ said the Roy of the Rovers editor, Dave Hunt.
‘You can definitely say he's sick as a parrot — and so am I.’
Roy of the Rovers was started as a weekly comic in 1976, when the character was at the height of his fame in the Tiger comic.
Without him, Tiger itself went into decline and closed in the early 1980s.
Circulation of Roy of the Rovers peaked at around 200,000 but was now down to barely 30,000, said Mr Hunt.
He added: ‘We have to balance the books, it's as simple as that.
The fact is that there are so many things which interest children now, and comics don't have the place they once did.
‘We are all shocked at the news.
We are taking stock of the situation, but we are sure that Roy's time will come again.’
He would not reveal the nature of the fate to befall the hero of generations of schoolboys in the final issue on 20 March.
‘All I can say is that it will end with a question mark over the future.
‘But we are working on the idea of a monthly publication, probably starting in May, to act as a kind of bulletin to keep supporters in touch with what is happening,’ he said.
‘He still has a lot of loyal fans.
But all eyes are on his son Rocky.
He is 16 — around the age Roy was when he became a star — and he plays for the Melchester youth team.
‘His career could be about to take off as Roy's once did.
There are no definite plans but we are looking at the options for the future.’
Roy's age is the one vital fact missing from the long list in the Rovers press release.
But last year, when the team announced a sponsorship deal with TSB, he was widely reported to be 42.
— almost as old as the grandfathers of many of his fans.
TSB's public affairs manager Laura O'Connell had a straight answer for the choice of a fictional team to wear the TSB logo on their shirts.
‘Roy is unlikely to spring any surprises,’ she said.
‘He won't get caught drink driving or be found rampaging through hotel bedrooms.’
Fox-hunting group starts campaign
A GROUP in favour of fox-hunting began a nationwide campaign yesterday to counter the ‘welter of false propaganda and lies’ about the pastime.
The Campaign for Hunting's effort involves a 14-minute video presented by the author and broadcaster Ludovic Kennedy, designed to demonstrate that hunting with hounds is not cruel.
— PA
Jury is told how death struck children's ward
AN UNPRECEDENTED string of deaths and life-threatening collapses began on a hospital children's ward after a nurse had been told she lacked experience caring for sick youngsters, a court was told yesterday.
Doctors at Grantham and Kesteven hospital in Lincolnshire had been astonished when four children died and nine suffered inexplicable collapses in just two months in early 1991, said John Goldring, QC, prosecuting.
Attempts to find a medical explanation had failed and police had been called in, he told Nottingham Crown Court, where a former nurse, Beverley Allitt, faced 26 charges, including four of murder.
‘Nothing like it had happened before, nothing like it has happened since,’ he said.
‘It was clear, incredible as it may seem, that there was a criminal at large on Ward 4.’
He added: ‘A chilling fact emerged…there was no suspicious collapse when the defendant was not on duty.’
Allitt, 24, of First Avenue, Grantham, denies four charges of murdering children, 11 of attempted murder and 11 alternative charges of causing grievous bodily harm with intent.
All but four relate to children and babies who were patients on Ward 4, the children's ward, where she worked as a nurse.
Mr Goldring said Allitt had been a trainee nurse at the hospital nearing the end of her contract in early 1991 and had failed two job interviews, one at Grantham and another at Boston.
‘She was told she needed more experience nursing very sick children.’
On the day her contract had been due to run out, 15 February, she had been offered a job as an enrolled nurse at Grantham.
The contract had been until the end of September when she could reapply for the job she had been turned down for, ‘provided she had had sufficient experience nursing very sick children’, he said.
Days later, Liam Taylor, a seven-week old baby in her care, had died of a mysterious heart attack.
That had been the first of many occasions when a baby in her care collapsed suddenly and surprisingly, said Mr Goldring.
‘We cannot say in each case exactly what the defendant did.
No one was watching her.
Nurses are not expected to assault their patients,’ he added.
‘In some cases she plainly injected insulin.
In some, you may conclude, she injected or introduced through the baby's drip-feed another drug or mixture of drugs, for many were readily available to her.’
Mr Goldring claimed she had injected one baby with potassium.
In other incidents she might simply have placed her hand over the child's mouth or nose, or interfered with its oxygen supply with ‘dramatic consequence’.
Mr Goldring added: ‘What is really significant in this case is not what happened to each child individually, it is that there were so many collapses.’
He said Allitt had been on duty on 24 occasions when children suffered collapses on the ward.
Among other ward staff, only one had been present as many as ten times.
Mr Goldring said it might have crossed jurors' minds ‘Why should a nurse do these things?’
‘The short answer is we do not know.
This is not a case where the police came upon the crime and looked to see who had a motive,’ he said.
‘This is a case where painstaking analysis of all the evidence points to the defendant.’
Allitt sat pale with her hands in her lap throughout the opening day of a hearing expected to last three months, but showed no emotion.
She looked tiny, sitting between two female staff from Rampton maximum security hospital in the middle of the large dock.
Since her arrest she has reportedly suffered from anorexia nervosa.
Her weight has dropped from 13 to seven stone and she was transferred to Rampton last August for medical treatment.
Allitt is charged with murdering Claire Peck, aged 15 months, of Nottinghamshire; Liam Taylor, eight weeks, from near Grantham; Timothy Hardwick, 11, from Beeston, Nottinghamshire, and Becky Phillips, nine weeks, from Grantham.
Eighteen charges of attempted murder or alternatively causing grievous bodily harm relate to Becky Phillips's twin sister, Katie and to other children aged between five weeks and six years.
Four charges of attempted murder or causing grievous bodily harm relate to offences allegedly committed on 4 August last year, while Allitt was on police bail.
They involve a 79-year-old resident at a nursing home in Leicestershire and a 15-year-old Cambridgeshire boy.
The case continues.
‘Nothing like it had happened before, nothing like it has happened since.
It was clear, incredible as it may seem, that there was a criminal at large on Ward 4…
A chilling fact emerged, there was no suspicious collapse when the defendant was not on duty.’
Beverley Allitt: Denies four child murders
Soldier dies in Belfast shooting
AN OFF-DUTY soldier was shot dead last night in the heart of Loyalist West Belfast.
He was in his 30s and was a member of the Royal Irish Regiment.
The shooting took place in the Highfield Estate off the Shankill Road and local people said he was hit several times in the head by gunmen who sped from the scene in a car.
He died instantly and was left lying in the middle of the street — the 13th victim of terrorism this year.
Last night's shooting occurred a few hours after the previous victim, a former Irish Republican Army man shot dead by the Provos for allegedly turning police informer, was buried in Belfast.
A priest warned mourners the orgy of death currently sweeping Northern Ireland was leading people into an abyss of darkness and emptiness. — PA
Hepatitis alert for 147 patients
A HEALTH authority was last night trying to trace 147 former patients after it was discovered that a surgeon at a hospital where they had operations was a hepatitis B carrier.
Hospital chiefs in north Wales searched records and asked local doctors to contact the patients.
The surgeon was said to have been present during their operations at Wrexham Maelor Hospital.
Blood tests are being offered and a special help line will be manned from today.
A Clwyd health authority spokesman said about 30 GP practices were being asked to contact people who had received surgery at the hospital over the past ten months.
The action followed the discovery that a former patient at the hospital had contracted hepatitis B. The patient was now recovering.
Although tests had not been completed it seemed probable that the infection was contracted during surgery and a junior member of the surgical team had been identified as a carrier who began work at the hospital in last May.
— PA
Life for 15-year-old rapist
A YOUTH of 15 who broke into a young mother's house in the middle of the night and subjected her to a two-hour rape ordeal while her children slept was yesterday given a life sentence.
Stewart Smith pled guilty at Warwick Crown Court to raping the 23-year-old mother of two last November.
Ordering Smith to be detained for life, Mr Justice Rougier said: ‘This offence contained almost every aggravating feature it is possible to think of.
You terrified this young woman, you raped her, you threatened her life and those of her children and you took money.
‘A doctor's report says you are unable to control your sexual impulses, you are dangerous and unpredictable and there is no guarantee you will not perform a similar act again.
I have to think of the person who may be your next victim.’
Michael Burrows, prosecuting, said Smith, of Cashmore Road, Bedworth, broke into the woman's home in the middle of the night and grabbed her as she lay in bed.
He ordered her downstairs, threatened to kill her year-old baby if she did not obey and then demanded money, which she gave him.
Smith forced her into her living room, ordered her to unplug the telephone, and told her he was going to have sex with her.
When she refused he threatened to kill her and pushed a knife against her.
When one of her children began crying, he went upstairs with her and fondled her as she comforted the baby.
He then ordered her back to the living room where he tried to rape her twice without success.
Mr Burrows said Smith then made his victim lie on the floor and raped her before ordering her to have intercourse again by sitting astride him, threatening to stab her if she refused.
After 20 minutes Smith, who had put the telephone outside, used his victim's keys to lock her in and made his escape almost two hours after the ordeal began.
The woman used a spare key to open the back door, retrieved the telephone and called the police who arrested Smith the next day.
Mr Burrows added that Smith, who had a previous conviction for indecent assault, claimed he was high on drink and ecstasy at the time, but denied having a knife.
Ten days ago there was an outcry after a 15-year-old boy was freed by Judge John Prosser at Newport Crown Court after being found guilty of raping a schoolgirl.
The boy was ordered to pay his victim £500.
Judge refuses cases, Page 5
Boy sent 300 miles to secure unit
A BOY of 13 thought to be responsible for a car crimewave sobbed last night as magistrates ruled he should be placed in a secure unit for three months — 300 miles from his home.
Shortage of such accommodation means the youngster from Sunderland, Tyne and Wear, who cannot be named for legal reasons, will have to be housed at a special centre in Romford, Essex.
Granting a Sunderland council application for him to be sent to the unit, the magistrates at the Family Court hearing in the city said: ‘It is unfortunate…the nearest placement is at the opposite end of the country.’
However, they felt it would be in his best interests to send him there, because of the number of times he has run away from council care.
After the secure unit order was made, there was a youth court hearing concerning a number of offences alleged against the boy.
The hearing was adjourned until 13 May.
Jazz star George Melly in hospital
THE JAZZ singer and television celebrity George Melly is in hospital, it was disclosed last night.
A spokesman for Colchester District hospital in Essex said: ‘His condition is satisfactory.
He is being kept in for observation.’
Mr Melly, 66, returned to the world of jazz in 1974 as a singer with John Chilton's Feetwarmers band, having fronted Mick Mulligan's band in the 1950s.
£1m awarded to paralysed soldier
A YOUNG Coldstream Guardsman confined to a wheelchair by catastrophic injuries when an army vehicle driven by a comrade overturned in Cyprus, was awarded £1 million agreed damages against the Ministry of Defence at the High Court in London yesterday.
The award to David Robinson, now 25 and paralysed from the neck down, came after Deputy Judge Patrick Bennett, QC, had expressed amazement at the initial failure of negotiations to reach a settlement in his damages claim.
Mr Robinson's counsel, Kieran May, had told the judge that the MoD admitted liability for the purposes of the action, but was disputing how much should be awarded.
The ministry, he said, was arguing over how many carers Mr Robinson required, the sort of car he should have and the extent of his potential loss of earnings.
It also contended that he should have £80,000 to buy a house, in which his carers could live upstairs, rather than £150,000 for a bungalow more suited to life in a wheelchair.
The judge told Hugh Carlisle, QC, for the MoD: ‘I will need a lot of persuading that a  bungalow is not the ideal position for somebody as severely injured as this young man.’
Clearly impatient, the judge said: ‘It amazes me.
You have a case here which must be worth a lot of money, yet there is argument over whether somebody needs an electric toothbrush, how many toilet tissues he is going to use, etc.’
The MoD agreed to pay £1 million.
The judge left the bench and stepped down to the floor of the court to congratulate Mr Robinson and wish him well for the future.
Mr Robinson, who lives in a special unit, Wakerley Lodge, at Leicester General Hospital, was injured on November 29, 1988 when a Ferret scout car crashed.
The accident brought to an end a promising army career which began in December 1986 when he was 17.
He was described as an enthusiastic, determined and well-turned-out soldier with leadership qualities which could have taken him to the top warrant officer rank.
He suffered the severest form of tetraplegia short of being condemned to life on a ventilator. — PA
Funding cuts may mean a leaner Festival
By Allan McLean
PARTS of the planned programme for the Edinburgh International Festival may have to be dropped if Edinburgh District Council accepts a recommendation to cut the annual grant by 2 per cent, a Festival representative said yesterday.
The council's working party on grants to cultural organisations took no decision on payments expected to total more than £2 million in 1993-94.
It will meet again on 3 March to make recommendations which the recreation committee will consider on 15 March.
The biggest beneficiary will be the Festival, even if the proposal to cut its grant from last year's £723,320 to £708,853 is accepted.
The event's organisers would like the council to award it £1 million this year.
Joanna Baker, marketing director of the Festival, welcomed a decision yesterday by the Scottish Arts Council to increase its grant in 1993-94 by 5 per cent to £684,500.
The SAC's grant to the Festival Fringe is to rise less than 2 per cent to £24,000.
Ms Baker forecast cuts in plans for the Festival if the district council did not provide more funds, but said she could not indicate at this stage which productions would go.
‘If we fail to secure the funding for this year's Festival, we will have to lose elements of the programme,’ she said.
The devaluation of the pound sterling meant that productions which came from overseas — inevitably of great significance for such an international event — would cost about 25 per cent more.
The companies had to be paid in their own currencies, at a much less favourable exchange rate than last year.
Steve Cardownie, Labour recreation convener of the council, said officials had recommended a 2 per cent across-the-board cut for all the cultural grants.
This would allow room within a total budget increase of 2 per cent for new applications to be considered.
‘It may well be that political groups on the council will have to decide whether or not a special case is to be made for the Festival,’ he added.
Other organisations who also wanted money complained that the Festival was taking so much, Councillor Cardownie argued.
‘This is a corollary of the ceiling on the council tax imposed by the Government.
We are in the position of taking the blame for what is a Government decision,’ he went on.
‘No matter what the Tories may do, the Labour group are fully supportive of the Festival.
We are 100 per cent in favour of it.’
Scots fax inventor honoured
By Gillian Harris
THE SON of a Caithness crofter will take his rightful place among great Scottish inventors today when an exhibition to celebrate the 150th anniversary of the fax machine opens in London.
Alexander Bain (1810-77) filed a patent in 1843 for his fax, which relied on pulses of electric currents transmitted over telegraph lines to send images.
It laboured under the title Certain Improvements in Producing and Regulating Electric Currents, and Improvements in Electric Time-Pieces, and in Electric Printing and Signal Telegraphs.
It was not an immediate success.
Interest in what has become an indispensable means of communicating in the 1990s was not sparked until early this century when a modernised version of Bain's brainchild was used to send newspaper photographs.
Bain was far ahead of his time.
His fax was created 30 years before fellow-Scotsman Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone.
However, at the Secret Life of the Fax Machine exhibition which opens at the Science Museum in London today, Bain's patent specification will be on display along with a drawing of how it would have worked by the cartoonist Tim Hunkin, who uncovered the 1843 patent.
Although Bain is little known outside a small circle of science historians, his inventions were myriad.
He came up with the electric clock, a form of fire alarm, a railway signal and a loudspeaker.
Among the materials he used to construct his prototypes at his father's croft in Watten were heather and animal bone.
‘He probably invented a large number of things,’ said Mr Hunkin.
‘But he seemed to end up getting into patent battles over them.’
Bain's most costly legal conflict was with the powerful American company Morse over an alleged infringement of copyright.
He poured hundreds of pounds into his fight but lost.
Having secured the patent for the fax machine, Bain never actually made one.
‘He lost interest and went on to invent other things,’ Mr Hunkin explained.
As police track a small boy's killers, locals face up to a lurking danger
A shocked community where every child is kept on the tightest rein
Audrey Gillan finds the tension high among mothers in the Bootle shopping precinct where James Bulger disappeared on Friday
THE CHILD had outgrown the buggy but he was strapped in tightly nevertheless.
His mother's knuckles were white as she protectively gripped the plastic handles.
Like every other parent in Bootle's Strand shopping centre yesterday, she was taking the words of Merseyside Police's Det Supt Albert Kirkby very seriously.
After the abduction and murder of two-year-old James Bulger, he warned parents yesterday: ‘For goodness’ sake, keep a tight hold of your children.’
And they did.
So tight that children were securely fastened to their parents, some with leather baby reins that had become too small, others were in prams, trolleys or just held by the firm grip of an adult hand.
One child, however, still managed to slip away.
A woman stood screaming her daughter's name in the downstairs section of the two tier mall.
‘Danielle,’ she cried.
A quick anxious look behind her and she found what she was looking for.
The moment of panic that had strained her face was gone.
‘C'mon luv,’ she shouted.
‘Danielle, oi!’
Each of the shoppers was conscious of the atmosphere.
They sat on the benches saying how terrible it all was.
‘This is the worst thing to happen to Bootle,’ one woman said.
‘It's affected us more than Hillsborough.’
On windows and doors posters flapped.
‘MURDER, if you have any information please call’ they pled.
Yesterday, a ‘cop shop’ was set up in the Strand.
A disused shop has been turned into an area where shoppers can give any evidence that they might think useful.
They stand outside the shop studying the stills from the security video where the small boy can be seen walking with two other young boys.
Standing beside the mall's potted trees are police officers, they are also by the chrome pillars, the mirrored escalators, the swing doors and near the wooden benches.
In uniform and in plain clothes, roughly 50 were on different shifts asking each shopper for more information.
A child of Seventies architecture, the Strand was given a Nineties makeover and its tiled floors are now amenable to small feet.
It is large, indoors and a popular shopping venue.
It is not too difficult for a child to run away.
Outside the butcher's shop where James first disappeared sits a bright orange sign.
In black pen it reads: ‘We are taking donations inside.
This is our way of saying sorry and deepest sympathy to the parents of little James from the people of Bootle.
Every little helps.’
Inside, the staff of AR Tyms are stunned.
The manager, Paul Bennett, explained that they all felt so low when it was discovered that the baby had been murdered.
Staff had spent most of Friday afternoon and evening looking for the child and the owner, Alan Tym, had gone back again late that night to double check that James had not crawled behind a counter or into a cupboard and fallen asleep.
‘Little people are good people and we just want to show that we care,’ said Mr Bennett.
Last Friday afternoon, the queue at Tyms was out of the door.
It is one of the most popular butchers in the area and it is easy for a small child to slip out unnoticed.
‘You cannot keep your eye on children every minute of the day, although people might make sure they do it now,’ said the butcher.
‘If the woman has to take money out of her purse then she has to use two hands and children can easily stray.’
Helen Edwards, a mother of four, explained how easy it can be.
Her son, Mark, is the same age as James and yesterday his small body was strapped in his buggy.
‘My mother lives right next to the Strand and we are here a lot.
I usually let him out of the pram but last week I lost him for five minutes in Tesco,’ she said.
‘We have been looking at the pictures of James and we are really upset because there is such a likeness.’
Mrs Edwards has been warned by her husband that their son must stay in his buggy whenever he is outside the house.
‘I have been trying to get him out of the pram to get him ready for nursery but not now.
They are so vulnerable at that age they will go away with anybody.’
Another mother said she knew the pain that Denise Bulger was going through.
Louise Davies, 23, from Bootle, lost her son Peter in 1990 in a car accident.
Yesterday, her other son, Gary, 3, was at home because she has decided never to bring him to the Strand again.
‘She's probably feeling bitter and angry and wants to kill the people who did it.
But she mustn't blame herself.
I did at first when I lost my son but I had to tell myself it was an accident,’ she said.
A 20-year-old friend, Sheena Heffing, had put her son in the seat of a shopping trolley and refused to let him out no matter how much he squirmed.
‘It makes me sick.
I was in a shop and some fella said: ‘She should have had her eye on him’ but it can just happen in seconds.’
Everywhere in the Strand, in Bootle and on Merseyside the people said they felt that same sickness.
They did not want to hear another missing child public-address call again.
‘She's probably feeling bitter and angry…
She mustn't blame herself.
I did when I lost my son but I had to tell myself it was an accident’ Louise Davies
‘It makes me sick.
I was in a shop and some fella said ‘she should have had her eye on him’ but it can just happen in seconds' Sheena Heffing
Vital question: One of the 50 policemen on duty in the Strand shopping centre questions a shopper in the hope of eliciting an essential piece of forgotten information
Shrouded in mystery: Fog surrounds a police tent covering the spot where James Bulger was found on Sunday
Wanted notice: The police appeal about the murder goes up outside Moss Lane police station in Liverpool
Dead body identified as man missing two years
By James Rougvie
A BADLY decomposed body found in the Sidlaw Hills near Dundee at the weekend is that of Nealle Wilson, a mentally handicapped man who went missing two years ago, police revealed yesterday.
Now detectives are trying to unravel the mystery of how he came to be found face down in a ditch in a plantation on Scotston Farm, Auchterhouse, nearly eight miles from his home on the Ardler estate in Dundee.
Mr Wilson, 25, was last seen by his family as they prepared to celebrate Hogmanay at a relative's at the nearby Charleston estate, but there appear to have been sightings a day or so later in the city centre.
Police are treating his death as suspicious, but it may take until the end of the week before forensic examination is complete.
Yesterday, his family said they were convinced Mr Wilson, who was an epileptic and slightly mentally handicapped, was murdered.
His step-father, George Thomson, said at the family home in Turnberry Avenue: ‘It is unnatural to think Nealle would have gone off on his own to the hills.
It is a remote and inaccessible area and he would never have gone off in the dark.
He was afraid of the dark.’
After his disappearance, he said, friends and family had searched the streets but after a week passed, they had feared the worst.
‘As soon as I saw newspaper reports that a body had been found, I had a gut feeling that it was Nealle.’
Mr Wilson had been celebrating in an aunt's house just after tea when he disappeared, and the family had assumed he had gone home.’
He was asked if he had money that night, and Nealle said he had his bus pass.
Police have found his ring, but the bus pass isn't there.’
Mr Thomson said Mr Wilson could not have got a bus to the area where he was found, which more than a mile from a road, and he could not have walked the distance on his own.
His father, David Wilson, said: ‘We want to know how he died.
We do not believe he just wandered up there and lay down to die.
We will be demanding that an inquiry into his death is held.’
DUMFRIES
Man charged with A74 assault
A MAN appeared in private at Dumfries Sheriff Court yesterday charged with assaulting a woman motorist on the A74 Glasgow-Carlisle road.
Brian Sullivan, 44, of The Village, East Kilbride, was accused of assaulting Yvonne Jackson, 38, of Comiston Drive, Edinburgh, at a slip road leading to Eaglesfield, Dumfriesshire, last Tuesday.
Sullivan, who appeared from custody, made no plea and the case was continued for further inquiries.
ABERDEEN
Police name man found dead
POLICE yesterday named the man whose body was found lying in a street in Aberdeen's Mastrick housing estate at the weekend as Richard Green, 44, a window cleaner from the Deansloch area of the city.
A police spokesman said: ‘There is nothing at this time to suggest any suspicious circumstances.’
Glasgow bus drivers join in anti-knife campaign
By Sarah Chalmers
A GLASGOW bus driver said yesterday that he might have been blinded during an attack by a drunken passenger who had broken into his cabin and assaulted him as he drove through the city centre one Saturday evening.
Sandy Seymour was among drivers, managers and police officers helping to publicise the latest aspect of Operation Blade, the campaign by Strathclyde Police to clamp down on knife crime.
For the next four months, ten Strathclyde Buses will advertise the campaign message: Save a Life — Bin the Knife.
Mr Seymour recalled the astonishment he had felt when a passenger opened the door of his driving cabin and started to hit him around the head.
‘He went to put his hand inside his jacket, then another passenger jumped out of his seat and threw him through the doors.
‘He could have taken my eye out if he'd had a knife.
There's more violence on the buses than there used to be.
I've seen fights upstairs and blood.
I had to empty my bus on Friday night in East Kilbride because there was trouble before we had even left the station.’
Stringent safety measures now operate on buses to help drivers who, like Mr Seymour, find themselves at the sharp end of Strathclyde's rising tide of serious crime.
All cabins contain radios and alarm horns.
Plastic screens separate the drivers from the passengers.
Those screens are specially designed so that only the driver can open them, in an attempt to prevent incidents like the one Mr Seymour experienced.
The divisional manager of Strathclyde Buses, Bert McGinley, said there had been several knife assaults which have resulted in hand cuts, and threats on drivers.
Police hope the bus advertising campaign will help heighten public awareness of Operation Blade.
Chief Insp John McLean, deputy sub division officer at Saracen police office, said: ‘Nobody will have the excuse after 1 March that they did not know the campaign was under way.’
At the start of the third week of a month-long knife amnesty more than 2,000 blades have been surrendered at 70 stations throughout the region.
When that period ends on 1 March, police will introduce stringent search procedures.
The halfway point in the no-questions-asked surrender follows another weekend of violence in Strathclyde.
A 34-year-old man whose identity has not been released was stabbed and badly injured after leaving the Cadder Vaults pub in Glasgow at 8pm on Sunday night.
Later that night, Jean Robertson, manageress of Brannigan's pub near Easterhouse, and two male friends were threatened with knives when two men broke into the pub at around 11:45pm and took almost £600.
BR cut corners to save money when upgrading fatal junction
BRITISH RAIL literally cut corners to save time and money at Newton junction, a fatal accident inquiry in Glasgow heard yesterday.
When the track and the signals at the ageing junction were due for renewal, British Rail had chosen the cheapest option to enable InterCity trains to travel faster at the expense of local services, the inquiry into the 1991 disaster which killed four people and injured 22, was told.
Engineers, whose prime objective had been to maximise net revenue, originally had put forward four proposals for the upgrading of the junction, all of which would have made the head-on collision of two trains on a single-track section of line outside the station impossible.
BR's project manager, Kenneth McKay, acknowledged that financial considerations had been taken into account.
Under cross-examination from Alan Gore, a barrister representing one of the dead drivers, he said that as a result one of the options had been amended.
That meant that a proposal, which would have prevented the collision, for four new platforms at Newton had been scrapped.
By cutting corners on the main line to enable trains to travel at 90mph instead of 75mph, a single-lead junction, similar to the one at Bellgrove, had been installed.
The controversial £5 million layout had been put on hold after the Bellgrove accident, in which two people died.
According to BR's director of operational standards, Terence Worrell, it should have been re-evaluated before being brought into use.
In his second day of evidence before Sheriff Brian Lockhart, he said that that would have been good management.
Further questioned by the procurator-fiscal, Andrew Normand, he conceded that no such review had taken place, and that no additional safety checks had been called for before the junction was opened, that although a total embargo had been introduced on single-lead junctions immediately after Bellgrove.
British Rail had been made aware of the danger of drivers going through red lights, a possible cause of the Newton disaster, as far back as 1951, the inquiry was told.
It was only recently that safety specialists had concentrated their attentions on limiting the consequences, said Mr Worrell.
Since Newton, BR had introduced risk ratings to prevent a recurrence, the hearing was told.
The inquiry continues.
Striking Yarrow workers and management in talks
By Graeme Stewart, Industry Correspondent
DISCUSSIONS between management and representatives of the 1,300 striking manual workers at Yarrow took place yesterday for the first time since the dispute began 12 days ago.
While little came out of the meeting between management and the shop stewards' committee, it was an encouraging sign in a strike which appeared to have reached stalemate.
A company spokesman said: ‘Discussions took place this afternoon with the shop stewards’ committee to make our situation clear.
No new offer was made but each side listened very attentively to the other.
No further meetings have been scheduled.’
Earlier in the day the spokesman had forecast that talks of some form could take place this week after the first week of the strike produced nothing in the way of dialogue.
‘After three months of negotiations we had exhausted all avenues.
We simply had nothing else to say.
This is usual for the first week after a strike but it would not surprise me if things began to happen later in the week.
That is the usual pattern,’ the spokesman said.
John Carty, Clyde secretary of the Confederation of Shipbuilding and Engineering Unions, said Yarrow management would have to improve the deal if they wanted to get the workers round a table and an early end to the strike.
The management offer involves a lump sum payment of £300 and a pay rise of about £8 a week from next July.
The package would abolish the half-hour Friday teabreak, limit other teabreaks, cut payments for sea trials and change overtime payments.
The workers feel the package is derisory, particularly as they have accepted minimum wage rises over the past few years and Yarrow has at least three years' work on its books.
Democracy cairn wins its first committee approval
By Allan McLean
A PLAN to build a two metre-high ‘Democracy Cairn’ on Calton Hill was accepted by Edinburgh District Council's recreation committee yesterday.
If permission were given after an application to the planning committee, the monument would be erected east of the Nelson monument above the former Royal High School building, which would have housed a Scottish parliament if the Conservatives had lost the general election last April.
Conservative councillors who objected to the proposal by the Democracy for Scotland campaign were defeated by eight votes to three.
In a letter to the council, Stuart McHardy of the campaign wrote that stones from all over Scotland and other parts of the world would be formed into a cairn on 10 April to mark the first anniversary of the Vigil for a Scottish Parliament on Regent Road.
Four ‘destiny marches’ from Iona, Arbroath, Whithorn and Berwick would arrive at the vigil on that date.
Mr McHardy added: ‘Given that we are a non-party political grouping and have received support from members of all Scotland's political parties, we hope that this proposal will not be seen as contentious by anyone.’
Steve Cardownie, the Labour convener of the committee, said it was up to members to take a view before the application was considered by the planning committee.
Donald Gorrie, of the Liberal Democrats, supported the idea.
Brian Meek, for the Conservatives, said: ‘I don't know exactly that this organisation has any right to speak for democracy in Scotland, nor do I believe that it's an all-party organisation…
It's up to the planning committee to decide and not up to us.’
Officials advised yesterday's meeting that the council's recreation department, which is responsible for the public areas of the hill, had not identified any practical or physical problems.
Cargo ship starts to lose diesel oil
DIESEL OIL from the Danish cargo vessel ship aground in the Pentland Firth was sighted yesterday near the Caithness coast.
Marine pollution specialists stressed that the diesel was likely to disperse — but an attempt will be made today to pump ashore 40 tonnes of fuel which is still on board.
The 15,000-ton Bettina Danca, which grounded on the island of Stroma on Sunday was still held fast yesterday.
Attempts by salvage crews to refloat the vessel have failed.
Captain Bob Sclater, the Orkney island's harbours director, said attempts to refloat the ship would stop until she had been examined by a team of salvage specialists.
The team, from the United Towing Co, were due to be taken by boat today to Stroma.
Their first job will be to try to pump the diesel still aboard into portable tanks.
Around five tonnes has spilt into the sea.
Last night, Capt Sclater said: ‘A sheen of oil has been spotted near Gills Bay.
It is about 60 metres by 20 metres wide but we anticipate that it will disperse, given the weather conditions.’
Referring to the Braer disaster in Shetland, Capt Sclater said: ‘This could well have been a tanker and it goes to show how vulnerable Orkney is.’
The Bettina Danca with six of a crew was en route from Greenock to Norway when she ran aground.
AYR
£2.6m care in the community project
LONG-STAY hospital patients in Ayr are to be given the opportunity of moving into small staffed community homes thanks to £2.6 million of bridging finance from the National Health Service.
A total of 76 care in the community places are to be created following the award to Ayrshire and Arran Health Board, in partnership with Strathclyde Regional Council.
Residents at Ailsa Hospital, Ayr, will be resettled into schemes where comprehensive care is provided on a 24-hour basis by the Richmond Fellowship — a mental health voluntary organisation.
GLASGOW
Police fear for hospital patient
POLICE are becoming increasingly concerned for the safety of a man who has been missing from Gartloch Hospital in Glasgow for six days.
He has gone missing on previous occasions but he has always returned within a short time.
Joseph Barry, 28,(above) is described as about 5ft 8ins, heavily built, with auburn hair and a ruddy complexion.
He wears glasses.
When last seen he was wearing blue jeans, a cream sweatshirt, blue padded jacket and black shoes.
US degree for Lockerbie official
THE OFFICIAL who led the local authority response to the Lockerbie disaster, Neil McIntosh, now chief executive of Strathclyde regional council, is to be honoured by an American university.
He will be given the honorary degree of Doctor of Humane Letters by Syracuse University, New York, which lost 35 students in the terrorist bombing.
He was chief executive of Dumfries and Galloway regional council when the New York-bound Pan Am jumbo was blasted from the sky, killing 270 people.
Mr McIntosh was largely responsible for marshalling and co-ordinating the various local authority departments involved in the huge recovery operation after the disaster.
He later produced a detailed report from which evolved a blueprint for emergency planning which was sent to all local authorities throughout Britain.
The executive, who was made a CBE for his work in connection with Lockerbie, said he would be pleased to accept the honorary degree as a recognition of the selfless contribution made by all those involved.
‘It is also confirmation of the very close relationships which have been forged between the university, Dumfries and Galloway region and in particular Lockerbie and its academy,’ he added.
The Lockerbie Disaster Fund set up a scholarship under which two Lockerbie students go to Syracuse University each year for a study course.
£6m plan to attract golfing tourists
By Denny Macgee
THE NEW owners of Dougalston Golf Course on the outskirts of Glasgow yesterday announced a £6 million investment programme to upgrade the course and its facilities to a level which will prove attractive to the lucrative Japanese and American tourist market.
Co-ordinated Land and Estates, which bought the Milngavie course from Stakis for an undisclosed sum last year, believe Dougalston, only minutes from Glasgow city centre and within easy reach of Glasgow Airport, is ideally placed to cash in on the golfing tourists.
The investment plan involves the construction of nine additional holes, the upgrading of fairways and greens and a clubhouse incorporating indoor swimming pool, gym, sauna and steam rooms.
Tennis courts and a driving range will be included in the programme.
Tom King, managing director of CLE, said the development to bring Dougalston to what would be the premier golf and country club complex in Glasgow was designed to put the course into the huge corporate and tourist market, alongside Scotland's big name courses such as Turnberry, Gleneagles and St Andrews.
GLASGOW
Body identified as missing man's
POLICE said yesterday that a body taken from the River Clyde at the weekend was that of John McGregor, 49, who had been missing from his home in Millerfield Place, Glasgow, since December last year.
A police spokesman said that a report would be sent to the procurator-fiscal.
There did not appear to be any suspicious circumstances.
GLASGOW
Iron bar victim recovering
A MAN who was attacked by a gang of thugs wielding iron bars and baseball bats in Glasgow city centre at the weekend yesterday left Stobhill Hospital after undergoing an operation to a serious facial wound.
Owen Connell, 20, from Bishopbriggs, was walking with his brother and a friend in Clyde Street near Customhouse Quay gardens when he was seriously assaulted by four or five youths.
Police are appealing for any witnesses to the attack.
Talks fail to solve Timex row
By James Rougvie
THE TIMEX dispute in Dundee remained deadlocked last night after a day of talks between union officials and management.
A management spokesman said that the union had refused to accept a peace package as a whole, while the union negotiators claimed a lock-out of workers was in progress.
At a meeting on Sunday, the 300 strikers indicated they were prepared to agree to management plans to resolve a dispute over lay-offs, but would return to work under protest at part of the package which included a wage freeze for 1993 and a cut in fringe benefits.
The strikers did turn up for work yesterday morning but found the gates locked.
After talks with local and national officers of the Amalgamated Engineering and Electrical Union, a brief Timex Electronics statement said that the company was considering its position.
The AEEU Scottish organiser, Harry McLevy, said he thought both sides had been inching towards some sort of agreement.
The union had repeated that workers were prepared to return to work using an agreed formula to resolve a grievance over lay-offs but that a return to work would involve workers pursuing individual contractual rights.
Mr McLevy said that the company had moved its position over the lay-offs and had agreed to the Advisory Conciliation and Arbitration Service's being called in if negotiations could not be satisfactorily concluded.
New witnesses sought in murder hunt
THE HUNT for the killer of an Edinburgh student, Paul Sheldon, yesterday led police towards three more potential witnesses, writes Sarah Wilson
Detectives said they were anxious to trace a man who was near the junction of Whitehouse Loan and Thirlestane Road around the time of the attack at 2am on 6 February.
He was described as being about 30 and wearing a diamond patterned jumper.
Police would also like to hear from two men who boarded a taxi at around 12:30am that Saturday morning at the junction of Whitehouse Loan and Strathearn Place and travelled to the Grassmarket, leaving the taxi near Victoria Street.
They were described as being in their early 20s and smartly dressed.
Travelling people show 50pc increase
By Sarah Wilson
THE NUMBER of travelling people in Scotland has increased by 50 per cent over the past 24 years, a survey revealed yesterday.
Since 1969, when the last study of the travelling population was carried out, the number of people who follow this lifestyle has risen from 2,000 to 3,000.
The increase in the number of travelling families was even sharper, rising from 450 in 1969 to nearly 800 in 1992.
The figures show that travelling families are smaller than they used to be, but that travellers still have more children than the settled community.
The travelling communities also tend to be younger with 50 per cent of them under 20 and only four per cent over 65.
About half of the travelling families were found to be living on official local authority sites with only 28 per cent living on derelict land.
The remaining 21 per cent lived on privately-owned sites.
Strathclyde was home to the largest number, followed closely by Lothian and Tayside.
Hardly any families were found in the Borders or Dumfries and Galloway.
Hugh Gentleman, who conducted the research, said in his report that it was difficult to gauge precise numbers of New Age travellers — as opposed to traditional travellers — in Scotland, but he estimated there were about 60 households.
The report, Counting Travellers in Scotland, was commissioned by the Scottish Office.
PAISLEY
Hunt for visiting time thieves
POLICE in Paisley are hunting for thieves who broke into a house while a father was with his two children visiting their seriously ill mother in hospital.
The break-in happened at Glenapp Avenue between 6:30pm and 8:30pm on Sunday as Robert Paton, 39, was at the Royal Alexandra Hospital with his children Christopher, ten, and Jennifer, nine, visiting his wife Ellen, 39.
Earlier this month she received a serious head injury in a road accident in which a driver failed to stop.
Police name hill-walking fall victim
POLICE yesterday named the climber who was killed in an accident on Beinn Achaladair, Bridge of Orchy, on Sunday as Ian Rose-Smith, 32, of Glenlivet Place, Kilmarnock, writes Denny Macgee.
Mr Rose-Smith was one of a party of three men, all from Ayrshire, making their way down the mountain when he slipped on ice.
They were taken off the mountain by rescue teams from Oban and Dumbarton.
David Stevenson, 52, of Sorn, by Mauchline, was injured.
Last night he was said to be comfortable in the West Highland Hospital, Oban.
The third climber, Stephen Darling, 43, of Main Street, Dunlop, was unhurt.
Another climber suffered head injuries when he lost his footing and fell about 150ft down Ben Oss near Tyndrum, Perthshire.
James Cocker, 53, of Milton Road West, Edinburgh, was said to be in stable condition at Stirling Royal Infirmary last night after being recovered by the Killin mountain rescue team.
Leith move on cards as college seeks university status
By Douglas Fraser Education Correspondent
COULD it be Edinburgh's fourth university, or Leith's first?
Queen Margaret College yesterday announced plans for a major expansion on to a new campus, costing up to £10 million and aimed at carrying the former domestic science school to the size required for university status.
A management consultant's study has found that office and warehouse space around the port and former burgh of Leith offers the best potential for growth, while giving a further boost to the area's development plans.
The other option is to take over the property in central Edinburgh's Grassmarket which was vacated last year by Heriot-Watt University, as it completed its move to the Riccarton campus on the western outskirts of the capital.
Consultation is under way on which departments of Queen Margaret would move out of the current site on Corstorphine Hill.
But the principal, Donald Leach, said that new facilities would have to be in use by autumn of next year, as the college continues its rapid growth.
The current year has seen a 25 per cent growth in student numbers, which will increase the total from the equivalent of 2,500 full-time students to more than 4,000 by 1995.
That is the threshold for university status, which is the declared aim of the Queen Margaret.
However, the timetable may be hampered as the Government intends a dramatic slow-down nationally in the growth of student recruiting over at least the next three years.
The plan may also encounter obstacles from the Scottish Higher Education Funding Council, which will put pressure on institutions to use their space for more of each day, week and year before cash is released for expanding space.
Mr Leach said: ‘Queen Margaret has immediate needs for more space for both its expanding student numbers and its growing research portfolio.
Even on the most restrictive interpretation of the Government's cutbacks in planned student growth, QM will be under serious accommodation pressure as early as September 1993, specially for space for the library, information technology and student residences.’
The consultancy firm Pieda, headed by Donald Mackay, recommended against further expansion at the Queen Margaret site, partly because of the pressure of traffic, which already causes friction with residents in the Clermiston area.
The Mountbatten Building in the Grassmarket, which is for sale, was seen as offering a 50 per cent increase in purpose-built teaching space, plus the benefits of a city-centre location.
The report argued that the gradual development of a Leith campus would offer the benefits of student accommodation nearby and more scope for continued expansion towards the next century.
Queen Margaret also sees that it could identify with and serve the Leith community, raising educational and training levels for local people, and particularly for part-time and full-time students.
Among the other major developments in Leith is the Scottish Office building under construction.
Mr Leach commented: ‘Leith has a lot going for it.
Of all the areas in Edinburgh, it's the one with the greatest character that doesn't have anything like this already.’
Queen Margaret specialises in training for caring and health employment.
The principal said expansion in student numbers would be around its core areas, with a focus on food science and in drama.
Applications for places have doubled this year to 5,500, since QM joined the UK polytechnic and college entry scheme.
Donald Leach: Students and researchers need space
Smoking as addictive as heroin, says specialist
TOBACCO can be as addictive as heroin for some people, a leading cancer specialist stated yesterday.
Sir Richard Doll, who first discovered the link between smoking and lung cancer, said he could understand that even doctors who smoked found it difficult to quit in spite of the dangers to health.
‘In some cases smoking is as addictive as heroin and it is difficult for people to give up when they have been inhaling deeply for a number of years,’ he told a news conference at the Royal Society in London.
Sir Richard condemned cigarette advertising and said the only piece of anti-smoking law the tobacco companies had ever supported, was the one banning sales to children.
‘Why was that?
Because they know that to do so makes smoking look like a grown-up thing to do…at the moment people are being encouraged to smoke and I regard that as an immoral activity.’
Sir Richard said sportsmen had a tremendous impact on youngsters when it came to tobacco advertising and they had to set an example.
‘We need the inverse of the Marlboro man to prevent children smoking.’
He said the hazards of long-term smoking were far greater than was realised when the link with lung cancer was first made 40 years ago.
A follow-up of the study made in 1951 by Sir Richard and his colleague Austin Bradford, has found smokers are three times as likely as non-smokers to die in middle age.
‘These new results are much more extreme than had been suggested by the 20-year follow-up, where premature death was only twice as common in smokers as in non-smokers.
‘Our findings mean that those who start to smoke in their teenage years will be at particularly high risk of death from tobacco in later life.’
There is some good news.
The study has shown that those who quit the habit also avoided most of the risk of death from tobacco.
In his study Sir Richard asked all 34,000 doctors in Britain what they smoked and then began to monitor the causes of death of those doctors.
Four decades on, more than half have died and the fates of the smokers and non-smokers can be compared.
Good record on roads
BRITAIN has the lowest rates of car driver and passenger deaths in Europe, according to statistics published yesterday.
If all road deaths, including pedestrians, are assessed, only three countries have a better record than the UK, according to a Department of Transport report on road deaths in 1990.
The report compares all road accident fatalities in the 12 EC member states, nine other European countries, and in the United States and Japan.
It found that in Britain, the number of car users killed was 7.1 per billion vehicle kilometres — the lowest figure in Europe and less than half the EC average, 16.
Taking all road accident deaths into account, only the Netherlands, Norway and Sweden had a better record than the UK's figure of 94 deaths per million head of population.
Kenneth Carlisle, roads minister, said the figures were very encouraging.
— PA 
Smith denies party split over public ownership
By Joanne Robertson Scottish Political Correspondent
JOHN SMITH denied yesterday that the Labour leadership and the Scottish party were split over public ownership, in particular the future of the water service north of the Border.
After the shadow cabinet met in London to draw up a campaign strategy, the Labour leader dismissed reports of a split and said that any perception of divisions in the party was without foundation.
‘We are totally opposed to the privatisation of water in Scotland,’ Mr Smith said.
‘I am not myself convinced that the Government will be so foolish as to go so far as to privatise water.
‘There's probably a very good chance they will reverse their opinion.
I think we have to wait and see what it is they announce.’
The uncertainty over the Scottish party's position arose after Mr Smith set out his vision for Labour's future at the start of last week.
He tried to distance the party from the question of public ownership but then the shadow Scottish secretary, Tom Clarke, acknowledged the possibility of private Scottish companies operating under a Labour government.
The party debate on the issue resulted in a statement from the Scottish executive at the weekend underlining the party's commitment to a Scottish parliament which would return the water and sewerage service to public ownership.
The Scottish National Party's vice-president, Andrew Welsh, challenged Mr Smith last night to spell out whether he intended to exempt Scotland from his ‘neo-Tory policies’, which were designed to win votes in the south of England by taking his Scottish voters for granted.
At an SNP public meeting on water privatisation in Leith, Mr Welsh said: ‘The campaign to save Scotland's water has been endangered by the Labour Party's blundering last week.’
The Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, indicated that the Government saw no reason to change Scots law to allow water supplies to be disconnected.
He told students at Edinburgh University that no changes were planned but allowed himself a get-out clause by stressing that he would not be tied to any position until the Government's conclusions on the industry had been agreed.
Mr Lang stated: ‘I'm not going to start answering specific questions about specific aspects of how one of the individual solutions we may chose will apply until we have reached a conclusion about the right way forward then we can address this issue and debate it fully, but as things stand at present I see no reason to have to change that law.’
Mackay argues case for media ombudsman
A MEDIA ombudsman to handle minor defamation claims could be a useful alternative to costly court action for members of the public, the Lord Chancellor, Lord Mackay of Clashfern, told MPs yesterday.
The system could be set up by the industry itself ‘on as voluntary a basis as possible’, he told the national heritage select committee's inquiry into privacy and media intrusion.
Lord Mackay appeared to rule out an extension of legal aid to cover defamation cases.
The Lord Chancellor has proposed controversial legal aid reforms, reducing eligibility in view of booming costs: £1.1 billion in 1992-93 and set to rise.
He told the committee: ‘It is not a very good time for extending the scope of legal aid.
No state can attain the ideal in every respect.
There have to be limitations on what the state can afford to assist.’
Lord Mackay referred to work already under way to simplify and speed defamation case procedures and said: ‘I would be very keen to encourage anyone who wished to develop systems which do not require to take people to law.’
The media could create an ombudsman system the recommendations of which might not be formally binding ‘but would have pretty strong effect’, he said.
‘For it to be successful, I would have thought some form of power at least to recommend smallish settlements would be a useful aspect…but I wouldn't envisage the ombudsman as someone dealing with huge claims.’
If an offending media  organisation were to be obliged to publish the ombudsman's findings, Lord Mackay said, there would be a fair degree of pressure for it to pay up, although not formally bound to do so.
‘That might be a fairly good, reasonable, voluntary way forward.
On the whole, one can deal with it on as voluntary a basis as possible and make it persuasive.’
But he added that a system which simply gave complainants a chance to investigate the defence case before going to court ‘would not be satisfactory or acceptable’.
— PA 
Lord Mackay of Clashfern gives evidence to the national heritage select committee's inquiry into media intrusion
Sellafield radiation leak was serious but within safety limits, MPs told
A RADIATION leak from the Sellafield nuclear plant was serious but well within safety limits, David Maclean, an environment minister, said yesterday.
He told the Commons that an investigation was under way into last week's excessive discharge and promised to publish the results.
The inquiry involved the Inspectorate of Pollution, the Nuclear Installations Inspectorate and the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
Mr Maclean was answering an emergency question from the area's MP, John Cunningham (Lab, Copeland), who had visited Sellafield on Thursday and Friday but complained he had not been told of the leak.
The minister said that only a small amount of radioactive material had escaped.
‘I emphasise that this incident occurred in redundant plant and is not associated with the normal or planned operations on the Sellafield site.’
Mr Maclean insisted that it was nonsense to suggest there had been any contamination of the food chain or to make comparisons to the Chernobyl nuclear disaster.
Earlier he said: ‘On the basis of pessimistic estimates, the increase in dose to the public close to the plant is approximately 10 microsieverts; the annual average dose in the UK is 2,500 microsieverts.’
He said that 1,000 mega becquerels (MBq) of  radioactive material had been released, but emissions were now down to 20MBq over 24 hours.
That compared with an authorised limit of 4,300MBq a year.
A Department of Environment spokesman said that 1 gram of radioactive dust had been released.
Dr Cunningham protested that there had been a ‘totally unacceptable series of events’ at the Cumbrian plant.
He told Mr Maclean: ‘It is unacceptable that one quarter of the annual authorisation of particular radio nucleids should be discharged in just a 24-hour period.
‘Isn't it also unacceptable that it took the management of British Nuclear Fuels longer than one might expect to make this incident public, especially bearing in mind that Dr Lewis Moonie [a Labour front-bencher]and I actually visited this site on Thursday and Friday of last week and were not informed that these excessive discharges had taken place?’
Mr Maclean said the fact that MPs visiting Sellafield were not informed of the leak ‘would seem to me a rather extraordinary discourtesy’.
He added that he was concerned about the time it took for the incident to be reported to the Inspectorate of Pollution and the Nuclear Installations Inspectorate.
They were not told until 4pm on Friday, yet it was believed the leak started on Wednesday.
The minister told a questioner later: ‘To somehow suggest that this incident of 1,000MBq released into the atmosphere is somehow responsible for massive contamination of the food chain…it clearly is nonsense to suggest that or to compare it in any way with Chernobyl.’
A former Conservative agriculture minister, Michael Jopling (Westmorland and Lonsdale), said: ‘Cannot we take some comfort from the fact that our safety rules and our arrangements are such that such a minute dose leads to widespread concern and a Commons statement?’
Mr Maclean replied: ‘The fact that we do have a full investigation of what has been a small emission does show how rigorous the inspectorate systems are in this country.’
The Liberal Democrat environment spokesman, Simon Hughes, said: ‘The discharge recorded is about 300 mega becquerels higher than the authorisation limit being currently discussed by HMIP with BNFL.’
Mr Maclean dismissed that as highly speculative and said it had no connection with the draft authorisation under consideration by HMIP.
Dale Campbell-Savours (Workington) rebuked fellow Labour MPs who compared the incident with the major leak at the site in 1957, when it was known as Windscale.
‘It is quite wrong for any member of this House to compare what happened in 1957 to what happened last week.’
— PA
Tory treasurer named
By Our Scottish Political Correspondent
PETER RUNCIMAN, who recently retired as chairman of the Shanks & McEwan Group, was appointed treasurer of the Scottish Conservative Party yesterday.
Mr  Runciman , who succeeds David Mitchell, will take up his role on 1 April.
Lord Sanderson, the chairman of the Scottish Conservative & Unionist Association, expressed delight at the appointment and paid tribute to Mr Mitchell's work over the past three years, particularly in the run-up to the election.
Mr Runciman holds a number of directorships, including Scottish Eastern Investment Trust and British Steel.
He is a former president of Glasgow Chamber of Commerce and is a member of the Scottish Economic Council.
Get-in-touch appeal to Gemma's mother
A SOCIAL services chief issued an appeal yesterday for the bit-part actress Yasmin Gibson to contact them about the future of her Home Alone daughter, being cared for in a children's home.
The appeal followed a meeting to discuss the case of 11-year-old Gemma left alone in a flat in Hammersmith, west London.
Her mother is reported to be working as a dancer in the Fuengirola area of the Costa del Sol.
Hammersmith and Fulham's social services director, Denise Platt, said: ‘I appeal to Ms Gibson to contact me or Hammersmith police.’
A council spokeswoman said: ‘There is an ongoing investigation which cannot be resolved until the mother returns and can be interviewed by both social services and the police.’
The council confirmed that child protection procedures were invoked on 1 February, the day after Ms Gibson, 34, left her £75,000 flat in Stamford Court, Hammersmith, west London.
Gemma has been a ward of court since 12 February.
Any decisions about her future will be taken by the High Court, the council said.
A statement insisted that confidentiality would be maintained throughout the investigation.
Both the council and the police were aware of the intense interest in the case.
Scotland Yard has asked Spanish police to trace the mother, but with hundreds of hotels and vacant holiday apartments to check, they have discovered nothing so far.
An injunction is in force banning any approach to the child or friends and staff at the home.
However, Gemma continues to attend the Ravenscourt Theatre School in Hammersmith, where she has ambitions to be a dancer.
It is still not clear whether Ms Gibson believed she had made arrangements for Gemma to be looked after while she was away.
She told  neighbours by telephone over the weekend that she intended to stay in Spain until the end of this month.
Her daughter, Gemma, had been left money for her school dinners and an elderly neighbour took her in for several days before social workers took her into care last week.
It is costing the council between £200 and £500 a week to look after Gemma.
Councillors on the social services committee said yesterday they needed to know full details of the case, but that the law required a child's best interests be put first.
Emile Al-Uzaizi, the deputy leader of the council's Tory opposition group and a social services committee member, said that this was the first case of its kind he had known in his eight years on the council.
It seemed really quite incredible that the mother could call her neighbour and still not return home, he said.
‘It is a very distressing case.
We don't know what the full facts are, and I would not want to comment in detail,’ he added.
‘But it really is not acceptable for parents to leave children unattended at that age, and questions need to be asked how it was allowed to happen.’
— PA
A DISTRESSED father appealed for help yesterday in finding the ‘animals’ who had gunned down his daughter and her husband.
Michael Johnson said he believed his daughter, Nicola Fuller, 27, had been shot because she was a ‘totally innocent’ witness of the murder of her husband Harry, 45.
The couple were shot last Wednesday at their cottage at Wadhurst, East Sussex.
Mr Fuller had been shot once in the body and she several times in the head.
‘Our beloved daughter was brutally murdered together with her husband, Harry.
Whoever killed Harry, Nicola was an innocent witness,’ said Mr Johnson, a businessman, who attended a press conference with his wife Barbara (pictured above).
Mr Fuller, who had been married three times, dealt in second-hand cars and dabbled in property and building.
Police believe that a motive for the shooting may be found in his business dealings.
Mr Johnson said that both families had been devastated by the killings and he appealed to the public: ‘If you have any information, however small, please help us.
Please come forward, call the police.
We must find these animals.
His daughter married six months ago and Mr Johnson said she had  been extremely happy.
‘Nicola was happier than I had seen her for months,’ he said.
‘We are totally devastated.
Life is just empty.’
He described his daughter as a shy, inoffensive and sensitive girl and a private person.
She was introduced to Harry last summer by her younger sister, Michelle, and married him after a whirlwind romance.
Detectives, who are considering staging a reconstruction of the events today, renewed their appeal for those in the area at the time to contact them.
Det Chief Insp Alan Snelling said they were particularly keen to hear from people in a car park at the rear of the cottage, which could have been used by the murderers.
It would have been busy with pupils going to a nearby school and parents dropping them off.
Gemma's mother to continue holiday
From Tim Brown, Madrid
THE woman who left her 11-year-old daughter alone in a London flat while she went on holiday to Spain denied last night that she had been heartless or wicked.
Speaking in the bar of a five-star hotel in Marbella, Yasmin Gibson, a bit-part actress, said that even though her daughter Gemma was now in the care of the local authority, she planned to stay on the Costa del Sol until the end of her holiday in two weeks.
Gemma had been left alone at home in Hammersmith, west London.
Ms Gibson said: ‘From what I hear, Gemma is happy where she is.
I am not a wicked mother.
I have had au pairs and nannies — everything for that child.
She is neither under-privileged nor neglected.’
Ms Gibson said she had left Gemma in the care of a friend she named as Neha.
‘All Gemma had to do was walk up a few stairs to Neha's.
It is not as if I abandoned her.’
She claimed that she had invited both her daughter and Neha to go to Marbella with her but Neha was not ready to leave at the same time.
‘So I said I'd see them in a few days.
I don't know what went wrong.’
Ms Gibson claimed she tried to telephone when she arrived in Marbella at the beginning of the month but could not get through because her friend's number was engaged all night.
When she called later she was told that the police and social services had called.
‘It was unbelievable, a total misunderstanding.
I wanted Gemma to be here but she wouldn't come.’
Hammersmith and Fulham's social services director, Denise Platt, said: ‘I appeal to Ms Gibson to contact me or Hammersmith police.’
A council spokeswoman said: ‘There is an ongoing investigation which cannot be resolved until the mother returns and can be interviewed by both social services and the police.’
The council confirmed that child protection procedures were invoked on 1 February, the day after Ms Gibson, 34, left her flat.
Gemma has been a ward of court since 12 February.
Any decisions about her future will be taken by the High Court, the council said.
A statement insisted that confidentiality would be maintained throughout the investigation.
Scotland Yard has asked Spanish police to trace Ms Gibson, but they have not yet done so.
Gemma continues to attend the Ravenscourt Theatre School in Hammersmith.
It is costing the council between £200 and £500 a week to look after her.
Councillors on the social services committee said they needed to know full details of the case, but that the law required a child's best interests be put first.
Emile Al-Uzaizi, the deputy leader of the council's Conservative opposition group and a social services committee member, said it seemed quite incredible that the mother could call her neighbour and still not return home.
‘It is a very distressing case.
We don't know what the full facts are and I would not want to comment in detail.
But it really is not acceptable for parents to leave children unattended at that age…‘
Train halted in chain reaction
A MAN brought a French TGV high speed train to a halt when his hand got stuck down a lavatory.
The hapless passenger travelling on Sunday from Paris to the southern town of Toulouse dropped his wallet down the toilet, bent to scoop it out and trapped his hand in the bowl.
He sounded the alarm and the train stopped at St-Pierre-des-Corps, near Tours.
Firemen with metal cutters extricated him — and the lavatory bowl — from the train.
French television showed him lying on the station platform with the toilet wrapped around his arm.
Fellow passengers had to wait for another train to continue their journey because the original train's safety mechanism had jammed.
— Reuter
Environmentalist's killers break out
THE convicted killers of the environmental activist Chico Mendes escaped from a prison in the western Amazon yesterday, Brazilian police said.
The two men, Darli Alves da Silva and his son Darci, broke out of the Acre state penitentiary in Rio Branco with seven other inmates, the local public safety director, Americo Carneiro Par, said.
He said the inmates had cut through window bars, adding: ‘There wasn't anybody hurt or any shooting or anything like that.
At this point we don't know if they are armed.’
Mr Carneiro said police had erected roadblocks and alerted authorities on the nearby Bolivian border.
The Da Silvas were convicted in December 1990 of killing Mr Mendes, an internationally recognised environmentalist and leader of Amazon rubber tappers.
The killing, which occurred in 1988, was met with worldwide outrage and focused attention on environmental destruction of the Amazon.
Darli Alves da Silva, a rancher in his early 50s, and his son were sentenced to 19 years in prison for ambushing Mr Mendes at his home in a remote village near Rio Branco.
During the 1980s Acre state was the scene of violent disputes between ranchers seeking to clear the land and people whose livelihoods depended on the Amazon rain forest, such as the rubber tappers led by Mr Mendes.
Supporters of the environmentalist have said the Da Silvas were small players in a larger  conspiracy .
The international concern spurred the government to end subsidies that had encouraged ranching and led to the burning of virgin rain forest.
— Reuter
Meciar ally elected as Slovak president
THE Slovak parliament yesterday elected economist Michal Kovac, a close ally of Prime Minister Vladimir Meciar, as newly-independent Slovakia's first president.
The vote was 106 for and 20 against.
Mr Kovac, 62, was the only candidate.
He is deputy chairman of the dominant Movement for a Democratic Slovakia (HZDS), the party whose vigorous campaign for Slovak independence hastened Czechoslovakia's partition into separate Czech and Slovak states on 1 January.
Yesterday's ballot was widely seen as a test of strength for Mr Meciar, whose hand-picked candidate last month outpolled his opposition rival but failed to garner the required three fifths majority in the 150-seat house in two rounds of voting last month.
Mr Kovac, who worked as a banker until Czechoslovakia's 1989 ‘velvet revolution’ against communism, yesterday polled 16 more votes than needed.
The ballot came after determined efforts to lobby support for him.
While the Slovak presidency is a largely ceremonial post, the ballot was important for Mr Meciar and his HZDS after public disputes which prompted speculation that the party might break apart.
In a speech before the ballot, Mr Kovac — whose career includes a stint as an economic adviser to Cuban leader Fidel Castro in the 1960s — said he was in favour of‘socially-oriented’ market policies.
‘I agree with the principles of a market economy which are socially oriented,’ he told parliament.
‘We need moral principles with belief in God and ourselves.’
Mr Kovac did not elaborate but his statement was in line with Mr Meciar's oft-declared intention to slow down the pace of economic reform introduced by free market apostle Vaclav Klaus after the collapse of communism.
Mr Klaus, then Czechoslovak finance minister, is now Czech prime minister.
Yesterday's ballot was called after parliament last month failed to elect a president, with some deputies in the HZDS voting against party candidate Roman Kovac, who is Slovak vice premier and no relation of Michal Kovac.
That result spotlighted discontent with Mr Meciar, often accused of being authoritarian, inside the HZDS and prompted a fierce public row between the prime minister and his foreign minister, Ivan Knazko, a party stalwart of long standing.
Mr Knazko refused a Meciar request to resign for breaking party discipline by encouraging deputies to vote against Roman Kovac.
At least five of the 74 HZDS members in parliament followed Mr Knazko's advice.
— Reuter
European ministers seek ways to stem migrant flow
MINISTERS from 35 European countries started a two-day conference in Hungary yesterday to agree joint measures on stemming the flow of illegal migrants through Eastern Europe to the West.
The Hungarian interior minister, Peter Boross, in opening remarks, said a common strategy was needed to cope with the growing tide of illegal migrants, including a policy to improve life in their home countries.
Proposals include unifying border controls and penalties on smugglers of immigrants, and a European Migration Charter, said the Austrian interior minister, Franz Loeschnak.
Many hundreds of thousands of people from poorer regions of Europe and beyond have headed for the West to seek a better life now East-West borders are easier to cross.
The influx of refugees and illegal migrants has sparked anti-foreigner violence in several countries, notably Germany.
The Budapest meeting, also attended by six international organisations and observed by Canada and Argentina, is intended to follow up the work of a similar gathering in Berlin in 1991.
‘We hope that birth will be given to a document which will allow the coordinated action of European countries against the undesirable effects of increasing illegal migration which worry us all,’ Mr Boross said.
The number of illegal border crossings and attempted crossings in Hungary had risen by 400 per cent compared with 1988, he said.
Hungary had turned back more than one million people from its borders since October 1991, when it restricted the conditions of entry into the country.
People turned away lacked proper travel documents or adequate means for living.
Illegal migrants who hide from authorities often became victims of crime or criminals, he said.
‘The real solution lies in cooperation to eliminate the causes of illegal migration, in easing the situation of countries from where migrants flow through economic assistance, training and other means,’ Mr Boross said.
A working group established at the Berlin conference has elaborated a series of proposals for the Budapest conference to adopt, said Mr Loeschnak.
German Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian Democrats, in an important policy shift, were meanwhile considering loosening citizenship laws to integrate several million Turks and other foreigners into German society.
Two CDU politicians, in comments seen as trial balloons for a longer debate, argued at the weekend that Bonn's laws should allow dual citizenship to extend full rights to foreigners living in Germany for decades.
Opposition Social Democrats and Mr Kohl's liberal coalition partners, reacting to the neo-Nazi murder of three Turks last November, have renewed longer-standing calls to naturalise some of the six million foreigners working in Germany.
A grass-roots initiative supported by dozens of prominent writers, actors and politicians is trying to collect one million signatures urging more liberal citizenship laws.
‘We have to give those who have lived here a long time the right to become German citizens,’ Johannes Gerster, deputy leader of the CDU parliamentary group, said at the weekend.
‘We should also allow dual citizenship in cases where a foreigner who wanted to become a German citizen would suffer disadvantages if he gave up his old citizenship.’
In contrast to other European countries, which generally grant citizenship to those born on their territory, Bonn's 80-year-old law recognises ethnic Germans abroad as German citizens but all but excludes long-standing immigrant workers and their children born and educated exclusively in Germany.
‘The citizenship law we have now harks back to another era,’ one CDU official said.
‘We have to change the law.’
Without spelling out exact details, he said: ‘We have to find a human and reasonable solution and I'm sure we will.’
President Richard von Weizsaecker, also from the CDU, launched the latest discussion last Christmas by calling for a looser law that could include dual citizenship.
CDU conservatives and the party's right-wing Bavarian ally, the Christian Social Union (CSU), have strongly opposed any changes that would lead towards a ‘multicultural society’.
But last year's wave of violence against immigrants, which claimed 17 lives and provoked a series of mass candle-light anti-racism marches, has increased pressure to do something to ease tensions between Germans and foreigners.
Gerster, who spoke on German radio and in a newspaper interview, said the new law should drop residency requirements for prospective citizens from over 10 years to eight or less.
Officials should be more flexible with other citizenship requirements, which include a good knowledge of German.
An article in the weekly Die Zeit urging a more liberal citizenship law said only about 1,000 of the 1.8 million Turks in Germany are naturalised each year under complicated rules.
But the Turkish community, the largest of all foreign groups, now registered about 30,000 births annually in Germany.
‘Immigrants and their families have remained until today simply tolerated second-class citizens,’ it said.
‘They have to pay tax but the motto ‘no taxation without representation’ has no meaning for them.’
European meeting seeks ways to stem migrant flow
By Emil Varadi
Budapest, Feb 15, Reuter — Ministers from 35 European countries started a two-day conference in Hungary on Monday to agree joint measures on stemming the flow of illegal migrants through Eastern Europe to the West.
Hungarian Interior Minister Peter Boross, in opening remarks, said a common strategy was needed to cope with the growing tide of illegal migrants, including a policy to improve life in their home countries.
Proposals include unifying border controls and penalties on smugglers of immigrants, and a European Migration Charter, said Austrian Interior Minister Franz Loeschnak.
Many hundreds of thousands of people from poorer regions of Europe and beyond have headed for the West to seek a better life now East-West borders are easier to cross.
The influx of refugees and illegal migrants has sparked anti-foreigner violence in several countries, notably Germany.
The Budapest meeting, also attended by six international organisations and observed by Canada and Argentina, is intended to follow up the work of a similar gathering in Berlin in 1991.
‘We hope that birth will be given to a document which will allow the coordinated action of European countries against the undesirable effects of increasing illegal migration which worry us all,’ Boross said before the meeting went into closed session.
There will be a news conference on Tuesday.
The number of illegal border crossings and attempted crossings in Hungary had risen by 400 per cent compared with 1988, he said.
Hungary had turned back more than one million people from its borders since October 1991, when it restricted the conditions of entry into the country.
People turned away lacked proper travel documents or adequate means for living.
Illegal migrants who hide from authorities often became victims of crime or criminals, he said.
‘The real solution lies in cooperation to eliminate the causes of illegal migration, in easing the situation of countries from where migrants flow through economic assistance, training and other means,’ Boross said.
A working group established at the Berlin conference has elaborated a series of proposals for the Budapest conference to adopt, said Loeschnak.
These include a unified system of penalties for smuggling people, the creation special units to deal with illegal migration, the exchange of information and unified border controls.
Austria is expected to propose at the conference the setting up of a European Migration Charter, a document which will have to be elaborated on later.
Macedonia mulls name change
MACEDONIA'S parliament was locked in a bitter debate yesterday over demands that the republic accept a temporary name to allow its admission to the United Nations.
Britain, Spain and France proposed the temporary name as a compromise to overcome objections by Greece, which has blocked widespread recognition of the Balkan republic.
The European Community states represented on the UN Security Council have asked that Macedonia be admitted under the name ‘Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia’ until the dispute with Greece is settled.
Athens argues that the predominantly-Slav state wants to use the name to press territorial claims against Greece's own Macedonia province, which includes the port of Salonika.
Greece dropped its hardline position over the weekend and said it would now accept the word Macedonia in the republic's name — but only if this was the result of binding arbitration.
So far the Macedonian president, Kiro Gligorov, has rejected the offer of an arbitrated settlement, saying his country has the right to choose any name it likes.
The feud is steeped in bitter Balkan history.
Opposition members in parliament said the proposal of a temporary name was a diplomatic failure and demanded the resignation of Mr Gligorov and the foreign minister, Denko Maleski.
The main opposition party VMRO-DPMNE, the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organisation, said a temporary name would be humiliating and would in time become permanent.
It would also serve to encourage the aspirations of Yugoslavia, which let the republic go its own way in late 1991.
Macedonia was the only republic to secede peacefully from the Yugoslav state set up in 1918.
Slovenia, Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina have all fought for their independence.
The parliamentary debate enters its fifth day tomorrow but Mr Gligorov has said no decision will be taken at the end of the session because no formal proposal has been received from the United Nations.
— Reuter
Protests after fatal stabbing at bus stop
A PALESTINIAN stabbed to death a Jewish man and wounded a woman at a Jerusalem bus stop yesterday before fleeing to a nearby Arab area, Israeli police said.
In a later incident, Arabs threw stones at an Israeli car in north Jerusalem, fracturing the skull of a Jewish girl on her first birthday.
The hospital to which she was taken said she was out of immediate danger.
Angry Jews demonstrated after the attacks, shouting that the government had failed to protect them.
— Reuter
UNITED STATES
Tyson demands new trial
LAWYERS for Mike Tyson demanded a new trial for the former heavyweight champion yesterday, arguing that the jury which convicted him of rape was not allowed to consider whether his accuser had confused him as to whether she was a willing sex partner.
Tyson's legal team predicted that the Indiana Court of Appeals would give serious consideration to the boxer's request for a new hearing.
Prosecutors defended the 1992 trial, which left Tyson behind bars serving a prison term of up to six years.
The appeals panel is not expected to rule for several months.
— Reuter
SOUTH AFRICA
New heart for Valentine's day
A SOUTH African man received the ultimate in Valentine's Day gifts — a new heart.
The 45-year-old man from Pinetown, near Durban, was given the heart on Sunday at Cape Town's Groote Schuur hospital, where the world's first heart transplant was carried out 25 years ago.
The hospital, which did not release his name, said he was progressing well.
— Reuter
FRANCE
Bardot urges ban on city's rodeo
BRIGITTE Bardot, the film actress and animal rights activist, has asked the mayor of Toulouse to ban a planned rodeo.
‘Rodeo is to the United States what bullfight is to Europe: a ludicrous and cruel exploitation of animals which honours neither those who watch nor those who take part in such buffoonery,’ she wrote to the mayor, Domninique Baudis. — Reuter
Hope for Bosnia aid convoy as Milosevic agrees to mediate
SERBIA agreed yesterday to try to persuade rebel Serbs in neighbouring Bosnia to let a UN relief convoy through their lines to get supplies to starving Muslims, a UN spokesman said.
UN peace mediator Cyrus Vance telephoned Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic and he agreed to use his influence to try to clear the way for the UN convoy, stopped at the Serb border.
Peter Kessler, spokesman for the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), said it was hoped the ten-truck convoy which set out from Belgrade on Sunday could now proceed to the village of Cerska, where some 25,000 Muslims are trapped.
Mr Milosevic, blamed by the West for the fighting which swept the northern Balkans following the breakup of Yugoslavia, helped Mr Vance get the Bosnian Serbs to accept a peace plan during talks in Geneva in January.
The trucks were meanwhile waiting in freezing weather and a UNHCR spokeswoman said the Serbs insisted they had orders from General Ratko Mladic, military chief of the rebel Serbs, to stop the trucks passing.
As the drivers kept their engines running because of the cold, UNHCR official Larry Hollingworth said: ‘Unfortunately we have not been allowed to bring the convoy over the bridge.
‘So far I have met with politeness here, but so far they have not honoured the agreements that I have.
I came here with full agreements in order to get this convoy to Cerska and so far I've been blocked at every turn.’
The spokeswoman said UNHCR special envoy Jose Maria Mendiluce was trying to talk to Radovan Karadzic, leader of the Bosnian Serbs, in an effort to get the trucks through.
The UNHCR says the Muslim-led Bosnian government and leaders of the Serbs had already agreed a ceasefire to let the convoy pass.
The people of Cerska are among tens of thousands of Muslims encircled by Serbs in eastern Bosnia since civil war broke out in the former Yugoslav republic last March.
The Bosnian government has protested at the UNHCR's failure to reach the Muslims in the east by refusing to accept UN aid for the besieged capital, Sarajevo.
But if the convoy gets through the UNHCR plans to send another to the area in a week, with more to follow.
While the UN negotiators bargained, fierce fighting raged in Sarajevo, 60 miles to the south-west of the stalled convoy.
Artillery shells slammed down on Sarajevo, sometimes at the rate of one a minute, as rebel Serb tanks and infantry attacked Bosnian defenders in the strategic western suburbs of Stup and Azici.
They are the last Bosnian-held suburbs west of the main highway linking Sarajevo with its airport.
If they fall, the Serbs would have complete control of the vital road.
Serbs were using anti-aircraft machineguns with explosive bullets to shoot at buildings in Bosnian-held Grbavica, a district just south of central Sarajevo.
Muslim-controlled Sarajevo radio reported that Serbs also launched attacks on Brcko and Gradacac, towns in a communications corridor the rebels are trying to establish across northern Bosnia.
The Belgrade-based news agency Tanjug quoted Serb forces as saying Muslims had been using heavy artillery to bombard Serb positions in the Bratunac region of eastern Bosnia.
It added that Serb sources said their opponents were making a major effort to capture Mount Caus, which dominates the area, but the Serbs were holding firm.
Fighting was also reported in Croatia.
Croatian radio said several Serb shells hit the Adriatic port of Zadar.
Serb forces had also been pounding Croatian positions between Zadar and Biograd. — Reuter
Clinton economic plan offers change of direction
PRESIDENT Bill Clinton said yesterday that he would be ‘trying to change a direction of 12 years’ with the economic agenda he will announce this week, and that it would create half a million jobs in the short term.
The White House said that the programme, to be announced tomorrow in a speech to a joint session of Congress, would also include a stab at controlling spiralling health care costs, but that Mr Clinton would not ask for higher contributions from beneficiaries of the Medicare programme, which provides health care for the elderly.
Yesterday the president met congressmen during the day before making an evening television address to the nation to start selling his economic plan two days in advance.
‘We're trying to change a direction of 12 years, take a new course’ from the Reagan-Bush era, he told reporters before meeting Democratic congressmen.
‘I'm going to offer a programme that's going to create half a  million or more jobs in the short run, that is highly  progressive , that is very well balanced, that is faithful to the great middle class of this country and good for the things that we care about, jobs and health care,’ he said of his economic plan.
‘And I think it's going to be very important that I sell it to the Congress and the American people, and that we have a partnership here.’
The White House spokeswoman, Dee Dee Myers, said Mr Clinton would ‘make one of the most important economic statements this country has seen in a decade’ in his speech to Congress.
‘I think in many ways it will set the tone certainly for the coming year and perhaps beyond,’ she said, adding that it ‘turns trickle-down economics around 180 degrees.’
‘Trickle-down economics’ is the Reagan-era notion that economic prosperity can be best assured through tax cuts for the rich.
On health care, Ms Myers said: ‘There will be some cost containment measures in the (president's) package.’
To a questioner who asked whether upper-income elderly people would be asked to pay higher premiums to the government for Medicare coverage, she said: ‘The beneficiaries will not be affected.’
Asked whether Mr Clinton would seek limits on what doctors and hospitals could charge the government for services to Medicare patients, the spokeswoman nodded but declined to give details.
She said there would be about 150 spending cuts in Mr Clinton's economic agenda, amounting to about $34 billion, but she declined to say whether this included health care savings.
Asked why Mr Clinton appeared to have stopped using the word ‘sacrifice’ and started using the word ‘contribute’to describe what he would ask of Americans in his plan, Ms Myers said: ‘The problem with the word sacrifice is that it implies nobody gets anything out of it.’
Mr Clinton's televised remarks last night were expected to echo themes he raised in a Saturday radio broadcast in which he urged Americans to embrace his programme of economic change and shared sacrifice to lift the country back to prosperity.
‘Under my economic programme, we will build an America where even the most privileged pay their fair share, not because we want to soak the rich, but because we want to stop soaking the middle class and ask everybody to bear their fair share,’ he said.
Informed sources expect the president's plan to include these main elements:
An economic ‘stimulus’ package of about $31 billion, divided evenly between an increase in federal spending on public works and other programmes, and an investment tax credit to spur private investment.
An increase in the top marginal tax rate for individuals to 36 per cent from the current 31 per cent, as well as a surtax on millionaires.
An increase in the top corporate income tax rate to 36 per cent from the current 34 per cent.
A new energy tax, either a sales tax or a tax based on the heat content of fuels.
A tax on 85 per cent of Social Security benefits paid to upper-income elderly, instead of the current 50 per cent.
A start at controlling health care costs, to be followed up later when a commission chaired by the First Lady, Hillary Rodham Clinton, makes its recommendations.
Defence cuts of up to $8 billion more than the Bush administration had planned for the fiscal year beginning in October.
A new USA Today/CNN/Gallup Poll indicated that the American public was sceptical about Mr Clinton's plan.
It said 56 per cent of those asked believed the president had misled the public during last year's election campaign when he said he would not raise taxes on the middle class to pay for his programmes.
But 64 per cent thought he would be able to improve the economy.
— Reuter and AP
New Lithuanian leader renounces communism
LITHUANIA'S former Communist Party leader Algirdas Brazauskas emerged as the republic's new president yesterday and promised to speed up privatisation and promote foreign investment.
But his defeated rival, the nationalist Stasys Lozoraitis, said Mr Brazauskas' programme would not resolve Lithuania's economic crisis and amounted to no more than cosmetic changes.
In the first presidential election since independence in 1991, Mr Brazauskas won 60 per cent of the votes on Sunday to 38 per cent for Mr Lozoraitis, the election commission said.
‘Now we can say that Lithuania is a democratic country with a democratic system’ the victor told a news conference.
Mr Brazauskas, 60, was head of Lithuania's Communist Party when it rebelled and split with Moscow in 1989.
He said his past role in the party did not mean that he had supported communist ideology.
‘In that system, if you wanted to get anywhere you had to be a member.’
He said his Democratic Labour Party, the unexpected winner in parliamentary elections in November, was social democratic and not communist.
Voters indicated they were more interested in Mr Brazauskas' competence in trying to drag the country out of the economic morass than in his political past.
He has preached pragmatism towards Moscow and a cautious approach to economic reform.
Mr Lozoraitis, 69, an emigre and Lithuania's ambassador in Washington, told a news conference that most of the new president's team had no understanding of how a market economy worked.
He said Mr Brazauskas's programme amounted only to cosmetic changes.
‘There is no Lithuanian vision in it, we do not know what direction we are going in.’
The former Lithuanian nationalist leader Vytautas Landsbergis, who led the country to independence, said he was surprised at the ‘success’ of Mr Lozoraitis.
‘A practically unknown person managed to collect nearly 40 per cent of the vote after only three weeks’ work.’
Mr Brazauskas said that privatisation of state property should be speeded up.
‘I think it is one way to increase (foreign) investment in the market,’ he said.
He said he would appoint a new ambassador to Moscow and new members to a team dealing with outstanding issues between the two countries to increase the emphasis on economic questions.
‘We have a big interest in Russia and Russia has the same in Lithuania — they need access to the Baltic and to (the Russian enclave of) Kaliningrad,’ he said after casting his vote on Sunday.
‘Our relations must stabilise.’
Mr Lozoraitis had raised eyebrows in Moscow by a suggestion that Lithuania might one day regain Kaliningrad, a region ceded to Russia by defeated Germany after the Second World War.
Lithuania is dependent for its oil supplies on Russia but has been plunged into the same economic crisis as its neighbour by the collapse of the communist system.
— Reuter 
Algirdas Brazauskas: ‘We have a big interest in Russia’
Clerides to stall on Cyprus talks
GLAFCOS Clerides, elected president of Cyprus with hardline backing, said yesterday he would ask for a postponement in UN-sponsored peace talks.
On the other side of the divided island, the Turkish-Cypriot leader, Rauf Denktash, said resuming the talks next March as had been planned would be futile.
Mr Clerides, who beat incumbent George Vassiliou with a narrow majority of 1,998 votes in Sunday's election, said that before he could go to the peace talks in New York he needed to consult with the Cypriot and Greek political leadership.
He said that immediately after his inauguration on 28 February he would travel to Greece to discuss the convening of a joint conference of all Greek-Cypriot and Greek political parties.
‘Irrespective of the Panhellenic conference, we will need to co-ordinate our policy in the immediate next few months with the Greek government and political leadership,’ Mr Clerides said.
Asked whether he would ask for a postponement of the talks Mr Clerides said: ‘This was my position in the election campaign, and it still stands.’
He said he would meet the UN special representative in Nicosia, Oscar Camilion, in the next few days.
Earlier yesterday Mr Denktash, who heads a breakaway state in the north recognised only by Ankara, invited Mr Clerides to meet him in Cyprus and said holding talks in New York would be futile.
‘The March talks have lost all meaning,’ he told a news conference in Nicosia.
‘I consider myself totally without authority in the matter of continuing the talks,’ he said.
Mr Denktash refrained from personal criticism of Mr Clerides, an old political sparring partner and urged him to accept face to face talks.
‘I extend my hand to the new president of the Greek-Cypriot people in south Cyprus,’ he said, deliberately choosing language which challenges the legitimacy of the Cyprus republic.
‘I invite him to come and have sincere talks here with us to see whether there is a way out of the stalemate into which (UN Security Council) Resolution 789 and the report of the secretary general and his map have put us,’ he said.
Mr Clerides refused to comment on Mr Denktash's statements.
Turkey, which seized the northern third of Cyprus in 1974 and still has up to 30,000 troops here, withheld immediate comment on Mr Clerides' victory.
The UN proposals call for the island's Greek-Cypriot south and Turkish-Cypriot north to be re-united under a federation comprising territorial zones for each community.
— Reuter
Talks between the two communities have been deadlocked since November.
— Reuter 
Glafcos Clerides: to consult Greece on future of Cyprus
A bloody hatred closes in Ethnic tension in Kosovo is about to reach breaking point and friends are set to become foes, says Jonathan Ledgard
IN 1990, I was in Kosovo to report for The Scotsman.
There was anger on the streets among ethnic Albanians: the schools had been divided between Albanian and Serbian children and Albanian politicians had been stripped of power.
There were 4,000 Albanian children who had, it was claimed, been poisoned by Serb nationalists.
There was an anger but it was redeemable.
Now there are no schools for Albanian children, there are no hospitals for pregnant Albanian women, there are no Albanians in the police force.
In fact Albanians have been ‘cleansed from government’.
Albanian men are imprisoned, tortured and often shot without any recourse to justice.
There is a hatred now that may well be irredeemable.
Serbs and Albanians rarely talk to each other now and are mutating their image of the opposing culture into something evil and sinister.
Albanians say the Serbs are fascists who want ‘to wipe Albanians from the earth’.
Serbs say Albanians ‘are Muslim fanatics who enslave their own people with cruelty and primitivism’.
In the December elections, the democrats of Milan and Panic failed to win even a token seat in the Kosovo parliament.
Serbs preferred to pitch their lot in with the nationalists, most notably with Arkan, a wanted war criminal who won eight of the 24 seats available.
Arkan won because Albanians boycotted the election.
He drew support from Serbs like Dragan Krpovic, a foreman in a power station close to the main Kosovo town of Pristina.
‘Panic wanted to sell us to Albania but Arkan is a hero.
He has fought for Serbia in Croatia and he will protect us from genocide.’
Krpovic blames the situation on Albanian nationalists.
‘The Albanians can never have enough.
They just want to destroy us.
The best thing for us is to have a war.
It is the only way out.
Nowadays the Albanians are fed Serb hatred in their breast milk.’
At the illegal Sami Frasheri school, hidden away in the warren of Pristina's old town, Albanian teenagers described how they felt about the situation: ‘We want our school back.
We want freedom.
We are prepared to die for it.’
The idealism of the Albanian youths carries a lot of weight in Kosovo where more than half the population is under 15 years-old.
Asked whether they hated the Serbs, one boy said no but he was shouted down.
‘Don't lie!
They hate us and we hate them.
We should have listened to our grandfathers.
They told us that the Serbs were dangerous.’
Another boy declared: ‘We have to kill them before they kill us.’
The Serbs are actively considering ways to reduce the 91 per cent Albanian population in Kosovo.
One report which I uncovered, sanctioned by the Serbian socialist party, states: ‘All means necessary will be used to stamp out Albanian nationalists.’
The strongest weapon the Serbian state has employed against the Albanians has been an economic one.
More than 70 per cent of adult Albanians have been dismissed on ethnic grounds from jobs as various as toilet cleaners, museum curators and power plant directors.
Almost all have been without welfare benefits or explanation.
There are no jobs for teenagers and nearly 400,000 Albanians have fled to Germany, and even Albania.
In a rare interview, Arkan told me he did not despise Albanian people.
‘Those Albanians who want to look towards Belgrade I welcome them and if they want to be in Albania I'll help them back there.’
Arkan said he had been elected to protect the Serbians in Kosovo from Albanian terrorists.
He wanted to stamp out the drug running among Albanians, profits from which he claims are being used to buy arms.
QUESTIONED about his war crimes, Arkan responded vigorously by saying: ‘I don't give a damn about Bill Clinton and his war crimes trials.
He has done more war crimes than I have.’
Asked about the underground Albanian government of Ibrehim Rugova, Arkan replied: ‘Rugova is a tourist in Serbia, an Albanian tourist and he will be leaving very soon.
Believe me.’
Arkan is wanted by Swedish and Italian police for murder and bank raids.
He is disliked among liberal Serbs but his method of pillaging in Bosnia and Croatia has made him a very rich man and in the fragile economic state of former Yugoslavia, rich men are very powerful.
Arkan showed his less affable side when he tackled the photographer who accompanied me around the throat, throwing him out of his office and smashing his video camera underfoot.
Several of Arkan's soldiers jostled us on to the street and having made their fists and revolvers known to us, said: ‘Arkan is the police here.
You can tell your Albanian friends that.’
With such a man as their representative, Albanians can only look to the West for help before it is too late.
Battle anniversary
THE ANNIVERSARY of the Battle of the Atlantic — the longest of the Second World War — is to be celebrated with the largest Royal fleet review since the Queen's Silver Jubilee in 1977.
The Duke of Edinburgh will review 40 warships from 16 nations and ships from the Merchant Navy off Anglesey on 26 May to mark 50 years since the end of the 4-year battle.
Liverpool and the Mersey were the HQ of Western Approaches Command and the convoy system which was Britain's lifeline for food and munitions from the US and Canada.
The review fleet will consist mainly of frigates and destroyers and the Novy hopes that HMS Ark Royal will have returned from the Adriatic to act as flagship.
Vessels are coming from Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Italy, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Russia and the US.
After the review, five days of commemorative events will take place in Liverpool, with the Queen officially opening the Merseyside Maritime Museum, visiting Liverpool Football Club and meeting Second World War veterans on 28 May.
She will also hold a reception on the Royal yacht Britannia.
There will be an hour-long air display by modern and historic aircraft, a march by more than 2,000 sailors and veterans, a massed band concert, and a Service of Commemoration at the Anglican Cathedral attended by the Prince and Princess of Wales.
The Battle of the Atlantic began within hours of war being declared in September 1939.
It cost 109,600 lives on the Allied side and 29,000 German submariners.
It ended in May 1943 when German Admiral Doenitz withdrew the U-Boat wolf packs which had caused major shipping losses for four years eight months and four days.
More than 4,700 Allied and neutral ships were sunk and 700 U-boats were destroyed.
Coatbridge aiming to dump the favourites
By Roddy Mackenzie
IT IS 18 years since Coatbridge last won the Royal Bank Scottish Men's Cup, but their tradition in the competition is such that their appearance in another final this year cannot be discounted.
On only three occasions since the club were formed in 1969 have they failed to reach the last four of the competition.
They have lost in the final four times — in 1983, 1985, 1988 and 1992.
In this season's semi-finals at Wishaw Sports Centre on Saturday, Coatbridge face Su Ragazzi, who have never appeared in a final before, but are arguably the favourites.
Tommy Dowens, the Su Ragazzi coach, is taking no chances on his team falling at the semi-final stage again.
The clash with Coatbridge is due to start at 10am and Dowens will have his squad of players in the hall at Wishaw by 8:30am to go through their warm-up programme.
Su Ragazzi have lost only once this year — to Jets earlier this month — but showed they are back on the rails on Saturday by defeating Team Fife for the loss of only 13 points, 15-3, 15-5, 15-5.
Jets are also bidding to reach the cup final for the first time and their semi-final with West Coast is likely to be the closest of the day.
By recruiting four players from Telford's cup-winning squad from last season, Jets have considerably strengthened their ranks and, having been effectively counted out of the championship race, are gambling on cup success.
Having beaten both West Coast and Su Ragazzi this season, Jets are well capable of winning the cup for the first time, especially as they possess two of the most talented players in Scotland in Geoff Marshall and captain John Gaughan.
In the women's semi-finals, Glasgow Powerhouse captain Morag Brown is bidding for a 12th Scottish Cup final appearance.
Powerhouse, the holders, meet the 1991 winners, Jets, on Saturday.
Team Components Bureau and Streamline Hazlehead meet in the other semi-final, neither side having won the trophy.
Components Bureau have rescheduled their league showdown with Powerhouse, postponed in controversial circumstances last month, for 23 February in Whitburn.
Hospital murders trial told of tragic twins
A HEALTHY baby girl whose twin sister died mysteriously in hospital, had ended up severely brain damaged after doctors left her in the care of nurse Beverley Allitt, a court heard yesterday.
Nine-week-old Katie Phillips had been admitted to Grantham and Kesteven General Hospital for observation after her sister Becky died, John Goldring, QC, told Nottingham Crown Court.
When Katie was eventually discharged she was seriously and permanently disabled — one of a catalogue of similar horrifying incidents, said Mr Goldring.
Allitt, 24, of First Avenue, Grantham, Lincs, denies murdering four children and attempting to murder and causing grievous bodily harm with intent to ten children and a 73-year-old woman.
The charges include the murder of Becky and the attempted murder of Katie in April 1991.
Mr Goldring told the jury of seven men and five women that at the time of the incidents involving the twins, it never occurred to anyone that Allitt might have caused them.
The girls' parents had held her in high regard and they had become firm friends.
The parents had even asked Allitt to become Katie's godmother.
But the court heard that after the defendant had been left alone on the ward with Katie for about ten minutes, she had turned blue and stopped breathing.
She had been resuscitated and her condition improved.
Two days later, when Allitt was again alone with the child, she had convulsions, her lungs collapsed and she suffered fits causing severe brain damage.
Becky had been admitted to hospital earlier with a stomach upset and died at her parents' home the night she was discharged.
Mr Goldring claimed Allitt had injected her with insulin and said a test after her death had found a high level of the drug in her blood.
Four child patients had died and nine others suffered mysterious heart attacks or respiratory failures during a two-month period in 1991 when Allitt had been a nurse at the hospital.
The horrifying story did not end there, said Mr Goldring: ‘The collapses followed the defendant around.’
Allitt had worked regularly at an old people's home and been spotted by an auxiliary nurse one night giving an injection to a 73-year-old diabetic, Dorothy Lowe.
Mr Goldring claimed the syringe contained a large amount of insulin.
Miss Lowe had become very ill, her blood sugar level had fallen so low it was unrecordable in a test, and in hospital she had been diagnosed as suffering insulin-induced hypoglycaemia, lack of sugar in the blood.
After Allitt's arrest in May, she had been released on police bail and gone to stay with the family of a fellow nurse and former flatmate, Tracey Jobson, in Peterborough.
Mr Goldring claimed she gave 15-year-old Jonathan Jobson his diabetic grandmother's hypoglycaemic tablets.
One day he had noticed chalky bits in a drink she prepared for him, and collapsed soon afterwards.
His mother had thought he was dead but he had later recovered.
Summarising the prosecution case at the end of his opening speech, Mr Goldring said: ‘She did commit the assaults.
At the time she intended to kill.
We cannot tell you why.
It may be no-one will ever know.’
The trial continues.
Home Alone woman held
THE actress mother of ‘Home Alone’ girl Gemma Gibson was arrested as soon as she arrived back on British soil last night from Spain.
Yasmin Gibson, 31, was led from the plane by four airport police on her arrival at Heathrow.
Ms Gibson cried out: ‘I didn't do nothing.
I invited her on holiday,’ as she was led away.
She did not pass through the normal arrivals lounge and was driven away in a police van.
— PA
Strike call as university faces sisters with sack
By Frank Urquhart
AN Aberdeen lecturer is being forced to choose between becoming the first Scots academic to be made redundant and putting her sister out of a job.
Officials at Robert Gordon's University in Aberdeen have told Sheena Falconer, a senior lecturer, that there is only room for one textile lecturer's post within the School of Food and Consumer Studies.
The other job is held by Mrs Falconer's sister, Barbara Diack.
Now lecturers at the university are poised to take strike action over the affair.
Mrs Falconer, who has been a member of staff since 1966, is being removed as part of a staff restructuring programme.
She has been offered only the statutory minimum of £4,715 in redundancy pay.
However, Mrs Falconer has been offered an alternative — the reduced post of lecturer, the job held by Mrs Diack, who would have to make way for her sister.
The ultimatum being faced by the sisters has led to a demand for an immediate strike ballot of all 130 lecturers who are members of the Association of University Lecturers.
A hundred lecturers, members of the Manufacturing Science and Finance Union, are being asked for their support.
The board of governors of RGU is also to be asked by the union to intervene in the dispute.
Lecturers voiced their overwhelming support for Mrs Falconer and her sister at a meeting at RGU yesterday.
After the meeting Jack Dale, further education secretary of the Educational Institute of Scotland, of which the AUL is part, condemned the actions of the Principal, Dr David Kennedy, and gave warning that the decision to sack Mrs Falconer could open the floodgates to similar redundancies in other Scottish universities.
‘We are now in official dispute with the university,’ said Mr Dale.
‘This is the first time in the history of higher education in Scotland that any lecturer has been threatened with compulsory redundancy.’
Dr Alastair McLeish, secretary of the local AUL branch, declared: ‘Mrs Falconer has an unblemished record of 27 years’ service.
The fact that Barbara and Sheena are sisters makes it even worse.’
In the letter informing Mrs Falconer of her redundancy, Iain Kennedy, the personnel officer at RGU, states that the level of staffing required for textile teaching had diminished from two full-time to 0.8 full-time equivalent unpromoted staff.
No alternative employment within the school or other university department could be identified.
Mr Dale said: ‘She is highly regarded by leaders of the textile industry and I know that many are astonished by what is happening.’
An RGU spokesman said ‘We currently have two teaching posts which are supported by Scottish Office money and these are for approved courses in textiles.
Next session the approved courses and funding will only support one post.
‘The longest serving member of staff has been offered the one post that we will be able to fund from the Scottish Education Department for next session and currently we are waiting for a decision on that matter.’
Spending figures ease threat of tax increases
By Chris McLaughlin Political Correspondent
THE PROSPECT of tax increases in next month's Budget appeared to recede yesterday as the Chancellor, Norman Lamont, received the first good news in a year on Britain's public spending.
It came on a day of positive signs for the British economy, with the Bank of England saying it thought inflation would remain below the Government's target of 4 per cent for the next two years, and cautious indications of a pick-up in high street spending.
Downing Street drew attention to the latest public spending figures, which show the Government may sharply undercut its £37 billion public spending borrowing requirement target for this year.
Though it was wary of placing too optimistic a gloss on the latest figures, the larger than expected PSBR surplus of £3.8 billion for last month was seen as a cautious signal that Mr Lamont will be able easily to avoid increasing the tax burden in next month's Budget.
Only £21.6 billion of the total has been accounted for so far, leaving 42 per cent outstanding with just two months of the financial year to go.
John Major said the latest inflation figures provided the best basis for recovery, both for output and employment.
He said January's figures, showing inflation rising at just 1.7 per cent a year, were excellent news and added that surveys showed the UK would have one of the fastest growing economies in Europe this year and next.
Meanwhile, the Bank of England published a 45-page document outlining its view of the progress made on underlying inflation and where it is heading over the subsequent 24 months.
‘In the short run, it is possible that inflation will exceed the top of the target range during calendar 1993, but it is more likely that inflation will remain in the 3 per cent to 4 per cent range in the absence of any unexpected shocks,’ the report said.
The bank gives warning that industry expectations of inflation had still not reached the level consistent with keeping price rises in the target range.
‘Steady progress has been made towards achievement of the Government's inflation objective.
But further progress is required.’
High street sales last month showed their strongest year-on-year growth since May, but Nigel Whittaker, chairman of the the Confederation of British Industry's distributive trades panel, who carried out the survey, said: ‘Given the levels of consumer debt and the continuing rise in unemployment, it is too early to be sure we are seeing a sustainable recovery in consumer spending.’
View from the Bridge, Page 17
Arrests as angry crowds confront officers
By Audrey Gillan
ANGRY crowds gathered outside a police station in Bootle on Merseyside last night where protesters believed the three youths arrested in connection with the murder of James Bulger were being questioned.
Around 100 people congregated around the murder inquiry headquarters at Marsh Lane in the early hours of this morning shouting and confronting police on duty outside.
Violence flared and on at least one occasion stones were thrown at the police.
One member of the crowd said at least 30 people had been arrested.
‘We want to be arrested as well, we want to get inside to sort them out,’ he said.
One woman shouted: ‘Let us in, let us at them.
Our children go to the Strand as well’.
Extra police were drafted in to attempt to move the crowds away.
Police refused to confirm how many people had been arrested, saying only that there had been a number of arrests for public order offences.
Earlier, there had been disturbances in Snowdrop Street in the Kirkdale area of Liverpool where it is understood one of the youths being questioned was arrested.
Eye-witnesses told how eight police vans and three patrol cars swept up to a house in the street, flooding the area with police officers.
One police van was backed up to the door of the house and a boy was taken out with a blanket over his head.
An 80-strong crowd gathered in the street outside, some jeering as the convoy whisked away.
Police said two people were arrested at the scene.
It is understood that the three youths being questioned were being held at separate police stations in Liverpool.
Shoppers warned of dangerous fake goods
SHOPPERS have been warned to be extremely careful about buying cheap goods after dangerous chemicals were found in packets of household washing powder.
Unscrupulous sellers could counterfeit virtually anything, and in many cases the fakes could be dangerous, said the Institute of Trading Standards Administration.
The warning came after a woman in Yorkshire suffered skin burns when she used a bogus packet of Blue Horizon washing powder, which contained a caustic chemical.
The North Yorkshire assistant trading standards officer, Edward Chicken, said at least 3,300 cartons were bought as fire-damaged stock, filled with a caustic chemical, then sold as ordinary washing powder.
Genuine Blue Horizon cartons contained blue powder, but the fakes were filled with a white substance, he said.
Labour's consumer affairs spokesman, Nigel Griffiths, called on the Department of Trade and Industry to issue guidelines to firms disposing of damaged goods to ensure that packaging did not fall into the wrong hands.
‘It is a very serious matter that the packaging of a reputable product can be so easily acquired by unscrupulous and criminally insane cheats,’ he said.
The chairman of ITSA's fair trading committee, Tony Northcott, said: ‘Shoppers should be extremely careful.
The main rule is to make sure you know what you are buying.
Some items are not cheap for fun — they're cheap for a reason.’
Trading standards officers often discovered dangerous counterfeits, he said.
In one case, a market trader offered cheap sunglasses, claiming they protected the wearer from ultraviolet solar rays.
The glasses were plain plastic.
Counterfeit car parts uncovered included fake brake pads which got mixed up with genuine ones, Mr Northcott said.
‘As the fakes wear out twice as fast as proper pads, the driver could hit his brakes one day and the car would swerve violently to the side where the real pad has been fitted,’ he said.
Shoppers who encountered dangerous goods should contact trading standards officers immediately, he added.
— PA
Salvation Army acts over £6m fraud
THE Salvation Army began a High Court action yesterday to recover more than £6 million it believes was stolen from its accounts in a huge fraud.
Writs were issued against a Birmingham businessman, Stuart Christopher Ford, his firm, Tilen Securities, and an Egyptian, Gamil Naguib, with whom he was thought to be associated.
An officer at the army's London headquarters has been suspended after the discovery last month of the disappearance of the $8.8 million, pending a full investigation.
Now the accountancy firm Coopers & Lybrand has started a full-scale inquiry to try to discover what has happened to the missing millions.
‘We believe we have been the victims of a substantial fraud,’ said the army's legal and parliamentary secretary, Capt Peter Smith.
The army said that in spite of repeated requests for the return of the money, only $500,000 has been reinstated.
$520,000 more, traced to a Luxembourg bank account, was frozen last month as a result of action by the army.
‘This leaves nearly $7.8 million to be recovered and we are taking vigorous action to trace this money,’ said Capt Smith.
Lawyers are concentrating on the civil action as the army's priority is to recover the money, but Capt Smith added: ‘We may well need the police to be involved in the very near future.’
He refused to discuss the involvement of Mr Ford and Mr Naguib with the army but was optimistic that all or most of the money could be found.
‘We're not talking about disappeared money,
‘It's money that has gone missing and the High Court proceedings are an attempt to recover it.
We're not treating it as lost yet.’
As well as the writs issued against the two men, 12 writs were obtained by the army's solicitors, Slaughter & May — mostly to gain access to confidential documents or accounts where funds are thought to be held.
In spite of the loss of the money — at least temporarily — the army insisted last night that its work helping the needy and homeless would not suffer.
— PA
Pop star's band wins royalties
THE pop star Shakin' Stevens yesterday lost a £500,000-plus legal battle against his old band.
The former Sunsets band accused Stevens and a record producer, Dave Edmunds, of cheating them of royalty payments from their first album.
Judge John Weeks, QC, at Cardiff High Court, decided that the guitarist, Carl Petersen, the bassist, Steve Percy, the drummer, Robert ‘Rocking Louie’ Llewellyn, and the saxophonist, Paul Dolan, were each entitled to thousands of pounds.
Stevens and Edmunds were ordered to pay costs, estimated at more than £500,000.
A district judge will decide later the amount of money and interest the musicians must receive from royalties.
The Sunsets, left behind when Stevens hit the top of the charts, claimed they were never paid when their first album, A Legend, was re-released.
It was recorded in 1970 by Edmunds.
In the 1980s, Stevens found fame and the album was re-released and eventually sold more than 100,000 copies.
The court heard Edmunds initially took 10 per cent of the earnings but with nothing for the Sunsets.
However, Edmunds later gave Stevens 8 per cent after he was challenged by the singer.
Edmunds claimed no contract was signed for the album but the band argued they were still entitled to a share of the earnings.
Judge Weeks criticised Edmunds.
‘His memory seemed to me to be so defective and selective as to make his evidence worthless.’
Stevens declined to give evidence and was not in court for the ruling.
The former Sunsets manager, Paul Barrett, took out a separate action against Edmunds and was also awarded a share of royalties.
But he did not get costs.
— PA
After the case, Mr Llewellyn said: ‘We have not got a clue as to what it means to us financially.
‘We regret it had to go this far.
We were all mates and feel Shakey has betrayed us.’
Blaze kills four brothers as they sleep
FOUR young brothers died yesterday when a blaze swept through the family home in London.
Twins Barrington and Wesley Moses, aged four, and their brothers, Calvin, eight, and Leon, six, were found unconscious in their top-floor bedroom.
The boys' mother, Tracey Gardiner, 29, and her five-month-old son, escaped unharmed after a neighbour and a passing mini-cab driver broke down the door and woke them up.
Firefighters formed a human chain to carry the four brothers to safety but they found to be dead at hospital.
The cause of the fire in the three-storey home in Llanover Road, Plumstead, is not yet known.
— PA
Strike planned by customs officers
UP TO 2,000 customs officers plan a one-day strike at airports and seaports tomorrow in protest at what they claim is a pay cut.
Travellers are unlikely to suffer any hold-ups since European Community border controls ended on January 1.
Since then many customs officers formerly involved in border control work have been switched to flexible anti-smuggling teams, often working on tip-offs.
HM Customs & Excise is seeking to introduce pay arrangements giving officers a yearly allowance for flexible working, rather than automatic overtime for working Sundays and other days.
The Civil and Public Servants' Association opposes the move, which it said will mean pay cuts of up to £2,000 a year.
Carl killing convict on hunger strike
ONE of the three men serving life for the 1978 murder of a newspaper boy, Carl Bridgewater, has gone on hunger strike.
Vincent Hickey, 38, was moved out of Long Lartin top security jail last weekend after he was found bleeding from razor slash injuries, but is now refusing food at Birmingham's Winson Green jail.
News of Hickey's latest protest to prove his innocence was today given to his mother, Mrs Ann Skett, by his solicitors.
He was told less than two weeks ago of the Home Secretary, Kenneth Clarke's, refusal to refer the Bridgewater case to the Court of Appeal.
IRA admits it shot soldier
THE IRISH Republican Army admitted yesterday that three of its gunmen had shot dead an off-duty soldier outside his Belfast home on Monday night.
The soldier had been named earlier as Mervyn Johnston, 38, a lance corporal in the Royal Irish Regiment.
He was the fourth member of the Royal Irish Regiment to be murdered since the amalgamation of the Ulster Defence Regiment and the Royal Irish Rangers last summer.
— PA
Horse case move
A MAN being questioned by police investigating a series of attacks on horses across the south of England was released last night after being eliminated from inquiries.
The man, in his early 30s, from the Winchester area, was detained earlier yesterday.
More than 20 horses have been attacked, many sexually, in Hampshire in the past year.
Rewards totalling £20,000 have been offered for information leading to the conviction of those responsible.
Detectives, who believe more than one person is behind the attacks, are using a sophisticated computer system to aid their inquiry.
Veteran rocker Rod Stewart collects special pop award
ROD STEWART and Simply Red's lead singer, Mick Hucknall, competed for starring position last night at The Brit Awards.
A special award went to Stewart at the annual pop ceremony for a lifetime's achievement, while Hucknall took best British male artist and best British group trophies.
Stewart, 48, has had seven No 1 hit singles including Do Ya Think I'm Sexy.
His appearance at the pop industry's high-profile knees-up in London's Alexandra Palace was one of the highlights of the show.
Crowds waited outside the venue to catch a glimpse of pop stars turning up for the awards ceremony, being televised on ITV by Carlton tonight.
But there were more middle-aged executives in the audience than glamorous celebrities, at a ceremony where the awards tended to ignore nominees such as Madonna, George Michael and Elton John in favour of many less international names.
Hucknall's double award came as no surprise.
His album Stars was last year's best seller and spawned a string of hit singles.
The classical award went to Nigel Kennedy for his Beethoven's Violin Concerto — some welcome news for Kennedy after a spate of bad publicity.
Annie Lennox also scored a double, taking best British female artist and best album, Diva.
Best British producer went to Peter Gabriel and pint-sized performer Prince — proof that last year's sellout concerts in Britain had paid off.
Best single by a British artist went to teeny-bop idols Take That for Could It Be Magic and Tasmin Archer took the best British newcomer award.
The 29-year-old singer from Guiseley in West Yorkshire had overnight success last year when her debut single Sleeping Satellite reached No 1.
Best music video went to Shakespears Sister for Stay and best soundtrack was won by Wayne's World, the off-beat American film which was one of the surprise box office successes of 1992.
Prizes were also awarded to REM for best international group and Walkers Nirvana for best international newcomers.
— PA 
Rod Stewart: one of the highlights of the show
‘Home alone’ case woman arrested at airport
THE ACTRESS mother of the ‘home alone’ girl, Gemma Gibson, was arrested as soon as she arrived back on British soil last night.
Yasmin Gibson, 31, was led from the plane by four airport police on her arrival at Heathrow, London.
An emotional Ms Gibson cried out: ‘I didn't do nothing.
I invited her on holiday,’ as she was led away.
She did not pass through the normal arrivals lounge and was driven away in a police van.
Gemma, 11, was found alone at a flat in Hammersmith a fortnight after her mother left for a month's holiday with a male friend on the Costa del Sol.
Gemma was taken into care by Hammersmith and Fulham social services.
Her mother, although made aware of her plight, at first said she intended to continue her holiday.
But yesterday she changed her mind and flew home via Brussels.
Spanish police had been asked to find Ms Gibson to tell her about her daughter's being taken into care.
Spanish detectives went to the apartment where she was staying with an Arab friend.
The officers spent two hours telling her of the concern expressed by police and welfare authorities in England about the way Gemma had been left.
A senior detective at Marbella said last night: ‘This lady told our detectives that she had no idea there was that much concern in London for her daughter and assured them that she would now return home as soon as possible.’
It is thought she will face questioning about whether she made proper arrangements for Gemma to be looked after while she was away.
A Hammersmith and Fulham Council spokeswoman, Louise Raisey, said it was very unlikely she would see her daughter until today.
‘We are taking it one step at a time and working with the police.’
The social services department was being kept informed of developments and would be interviewing Ms Gibson in the near future, she said.
Gemma is staying at a children's home but Ms Raisey would not comment on whether Gemma would be told that her mother had returned.
Ms Gibson was taken to Hammersmith police station and was said to be too distraught to be interviewed, a CID spokesman said.
Det Sgt Pat Lewis, of the child protection team, confirmed she had been examined by a doctor and added: ‘We will be speaking to her in the morning.
She's not very happy,’ he added.
‘The doctor decided, having examined her, that she was not in a position to do herself justice.
She is being given the night to calm down.’
Her solicitor will be with her when she is interviewed, he said.
Arrested: A distraught Ms Gibson shouts to reporters after being held at the airport
Television under fire for rising violence in society
SOCIETY is more violent and suffering a moral vacuum — and television is playing a part in the change, two former Home Secretaries said yesterday.
Kenneth Baker, who was Home Secretary from 1990-92, told the BBC Radio 4 programme Today that young people faced a moral vacuum.
‘I think television and the screen has some effect upon this because it is such a memorable means of communication,’ he said.
The murder of two-year-old James Bulger was horrific, Mr Baker went on.
‘When a young, innocent toddler is killed in a brutal way, then you are beyond the edge of evil, you are into the heart of darkness.’
Lord Merlyn-Rees — Home Secretary from 1976-79 — told the programme: ‘I do believe as time goes on, watching the great influence of television on children, that they begin to believe that the normal life they lead is not normal, that what they see on the television and on the film is something they ought to emulate.’
The two were speaking as Mrs Mary Whitehouse, president of the National Viewers' and Listeners' Association, called for a clamp-down on screen violence.
Mr Baker, who said society had become more violent and more selfish, made an indirect attack on the Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr George Carey, and other church leaders, calling on them to concentrate on juvenile crime instead of the European Social Chapter on workers' rights.
‘I wish our church leaders would deal with the problem of young, male violence in the inner cities rather than talk about the Social Chapter,’ he said.
A different approach to juvenile crime was also needed.
‘I think what we need is a new type of juvenile detention in secure schools where those young boys can actually have better training and education so you can change their life-style.’
Mrs Whitehouse said that she was writing to the heads of the BBC, the independent TV companies, and the British Board of Film Classification to demand that they personally institute cuts in screen violence.
‘There can be no doubt that the obscenely violent films and videos now transmitted contribute greatly to the climate of violence for which a terrible price is now being paid, even the life of a two-year-old child,’ she said.
‘There is something innately obscene about the identification of cruel and sadistic violence with entertainment, and all who condone this situation carry responsibility for the death of this child.’
— PA 
Editorial, Page 12
Armed police play waiting game at siege cottage
By Frank Urquhart
ARMED policeman were last night playing a waiting game outside a country cottage where a man armed with a shotgun was defying all attempts for a negotiated end to the siege.
More than 24 hours after the siege had begun, Brian Say, 44, an oil worker, was still barricaded inside his home at Craigmuir Croft on the outskirts of the hamlet of Ythanbank, near Ellon, in Aberdeenshire.
Mr Say is said to be distraught after a domestic dispute at his home.
His wife, Celia, and the couple's daughter had left the house before the siege began at 7:10pm on Monday night.
It is understood that Mrs Say had left a note with a neighbour saying she was leaving her husband.
The police were called to the scene after a concerned relative contacted the Grampian force.
Thirty police officers, some of them armed, have surrounded the two bedroomed bungalow, and the area has been sealed-off to members of the public and the media.
Throughout the day trained police negotiators kept up a dialogue with Mr Say by telephone and at the door of the bungalow.
Cigarettes were passed to Mr Say during the day.
Supt Max Wallace, the officer heading the police operation, said no attempt would be made to end the siege by force and that the police were prepared to sit it our for days if necessary.
He said Mr Say was distraught and very upset.
Supt Wallace added: ‘We are very sympathetic to the situation he finds himself in.
We would certainly like to him to come out of his own free will and that's what we are trying to persuade him to do for his own good.
There is no question of us trying to move into the house.’
He said Mr Say was not considered to pose a threat to anyone other than himself.
Shocked neighbours voiced their hope for a peaceful end to the siege.
One villager said: ‘They were a very pleasant couple and no one can understand what has gone wrong.’
The charges in full ALLITT is charged with murdering Claire Peck, 15 months, Liam Taylor, eight weeks, Timothy Hardwick, 11, and Becky Phillips, nine weeks.
She is accused of attempting to murder and causing grievous bodily harm with intent to Katie Phillips, Becky's twin, Kayley Desmond, 14 months, Paul Crampton, four months, Henry Chan, two, Christopher Peasgood, eight weeks, Christopher King, five weeks, Patrick Elstone, seven weeks, Bradley Gibson, five, Michael Davidson, six, Dorothy Lowe, 73, and Jonathan Jobson, 15.
All 15 are from the Grantham and Newark area except Jonathan Jobson, who comes from Peterborough.
Christopher and Joanne Taylor, of Gonerby Hill Foot, Grantham, whose eight-week-old son Liam was one of the children to die, are due to give evidence today.
Briton held in Thai jail found with heroin
A BRITON being held in a Thai prison on possible drug smuggling charges has been found with heroin which police suspect he bought in prison.
Officials said yesterday that Robert Lock, 29, from Cambridge, had been on remand after a court hearing last week when police detected the heroin, believed to be for his own use.
The officials said he had swallowed the drug in a small capsule but police had found it after forcing him to excrete it.
Lock and a companion, Sandra Gregory, 27, from Aberdeenshire, were arrested at Bangkok's Don Muang airport on 6 February after police found a condom filled with 150 grams of heroin in the woman's body.
They were preparing to check in for a flight to Tokyo.
Lock, who has denied involvement in the narcotics trade, and also denies knowing Gregory, is expected to face a separate charge for the latest alleged offence, a British Embassy spokeswoman said.
‘We expect this to be treated as a separate case of possession of heroin for personal use,’ she said.
A drug smuggling conviction usually produces a life sentence in Thailand.
Prosecutors have 84 days to bring the case to court.
— Reuter
Narcotics are widely available in prison, with prison officials illegally selling heroin to inmates, sources say.
Gregory, who has been teaching English to Thais for two years, is being held in a women's prison.
She says she was only a courier in an operation organised by Lock.
Her parents Stan and Doreen, who arrived in Bangkok last week, have visited her twice in prison, the embassy spokeswoman said.
— Reuter
Collapses ‘followed defendant'
THE horrifying story did not end with the death of Claire Peck at the hospital, according to the prosecution.
‘The collapses followed the defendant around.
In one case to a small village in Leicestershire, in another to the outskirts of Peterborough,’ said Mr Goldring.
Allitt had worked regularly at Lancaster House, an old people's home in Waltham on the Wolds, Leicestershire, where Dorothy Lowe, a 73-year-old stroke victim and diabetic, was a resident.
On the night of 26 April, a nursing auxiliary had noticed Miss Lowe was hot and sweaty but Allitt had told her not to worry, said Mr Goldring.
At 5am, the auxiliary had looked in and found Allitt by Miss Lowe's bedside.
‘She had a syringe in her hand.
She was giving Dorothy Lowe an injection into her arm,’ Mr Goldring told the jury.
As soon as the auxiliary came in, Allitt had removed the syringe.
Within an hour, Miss Lowe was becoming unconscious and was taken to hospital.
Mr Goldring said Miss Lowe had been injected with a very large amount of insulin.
Allitt was arrested on 21 May and released the next day.
In interviews, she had claimed there were no diabetic residents at Lancaster House and that she had no access to insulin even though it was kept in an unlocked refrigerator, he said.
From June, Allitt had begun to live in Peterborough with the family of a nurse and former flatmate, Tracey Jobson.
Mrs Jobson's 15-year-old son, Jonathan, had begun to suffer dizzy spells and extreme craving for chocolate — a symptom of people exposed to excessive insulin.
His grandmother, who lived with the family, was a diabetic and later had noticed her tablets had been interfered with.
There were more than there should have been.
On 4 August, Allitt had prepared a blackcurrant drink for Jonathan and he had remarked on some chalky bits at the bottom of the glass, said Mr Goldring.
Then Jonathan had fallen ill.
‘There was a pain in his heart and chest.
He collapsed.
His lips were blue, his face very grey, and Mrs Jobson thought her son was dead.’
Allitt had been asked to help.
‘She did nothing at all.
She stood by detached.
She made some comment about his lips and she asked: ‘Is he dead?’ ' said Mr Goldring.
Jonathan had been taken to hospital and his blood sugar level had been found to be abnormally low.
After Allitt moved out of the Jobsons' home, his dizzy spells, craving for chocolate and sudden collapses had stopped.
Mr Goldring said the accused had been giving him his grandmother's tablets.
The prosecution's case could be summarised in four short sentences, Mr Goldring told the jury.
‘She did commit these assaults.
At the time she intended to kill.
We cannot tell you why.
It may be no-one will ever know.’
The case continues.
Nurse was link to Ward 4 deaths, says QC
Boy, 5, ‘lucky to survive’ heart attack in series of mysterious incidents
A FIVE-YEAR-OLD boy was lucky to survive in hospital after being left alone with Beverley Allitt, the young nurse accused of murdering four children, a court was told yesterday.
Bradley Gibson was suffering from bronchial pneumonia but it was far from a life-threatening illness when he was taken into Grantham and Kesteven General Hospital in Lincolnshire on 29 March 1991, said John Goldring, QC, prosecuting.
That evening, 24-year-old Allitt was left alone with the youngster.
Allitt, of First Avenue, Grantham, has pleaded not guilty to a total of 26 charges, including the murders of four children, attempting to murder 11 other people and grievous bodily harm with intent.
Mr Goldring told the jury on the second day of the trial, which is expected to last for three months, that Bradley had been put on an intravenous drip but in the early hours of the next morning he shouted out, complaining of pain around the drip site.
Allitt went over to check on the boy and then shouted to a staff nurse to come quickly.
Mr Goldring said Bradley suddenly collapsed and fell forward suffering from a heart attack.
His heart stopped beating and doctors who were summoned took 32 minutes to restart his heart.
‘It was very difficult indeed for the doctors, although they succeeded, to restart Bradley's heart.
He was lucky to survive, although he did suffer some permanent damage.’
Mr Goldring said Bradley was transferred to a hospital in Nottingham where doctors found it difficult to understand how such a young child could have suffered a cardiac arrest.
‘It did not occur to them that the wrong drug had been introduced not by accident but deliberately.
There was no natural reason for Bradley Gibson to have a heart attack.
Something was done to him.
We cannot be certain what it was.
You may conclude that it was a drug which was administered to him.’
Mr Goldring said the only possible candidates were the defendant and staff nurse Morris but the staff nurse was not on duty on 28 March when another child was injected with a massive dose of insulin.
‘There is only one common link, members of the jury.
She is in the dock.’
When the trial started on Monday, Mr Goldring said that following a number of mysterious incidents involving youngsters at the hospital, it became clear there was a criminal at large on Ward 4, the children's ward.
Hospital staff were puzzled after children collapsed with cardiac arrests and respiratory attacks.
Mr Goldring continued the prosecution opening yesterday by outlining the circumstances of some of them:
HENRY YIK CHAN
Two-year-old Henry was admitted to hospital on 28 March.
‘He had fallen from an upstairs window and he had fractured his skull,’ said Mr Goldring.
‘Of its type, it was not the most serious injury.’
Henry's mother hardly left his side but he improved and at 8pm on 31 March she went to have something to eat, leaving her son playing in the doorway of his room.
Allitt came on duty at 9pm when Henry was alone in his room asleep.
But at 9.15pm, according to a nursing note she wrote, Henry was ‘upset and inconsolable’.
She called other nurses.
‘What they found was this,’ said Mr Goldring.
‘Henry was not crying.
He was not inconsolable.
He was lying on his back, his back was arched and stiff.
He was not breathing.
He was dark blue.
‘A person goes blue if deprived of oxygen.
A hand over the nose and mouth will deprive a baby of oxygen.
The longer that a person is deprived of oxygen the bluer a person becomes.
It takes some time, you may conclude, to become dark blue.’
Henry was given oxygen but appeared to recover of his own accord.
Allitt was selected to look after him.
‘She was therefore with him and he collapsed again,’ said Mr Goldring.
He was sent to a hospital in Nottingham where he recovered.
MICHAEL DAVIDSON
Michael, a boy of nearly seven, was admitted on 7 April to have an air gun pellet removed from his stomach.
Two days later, Allitt helped a doctor make up a drug he was being treated with and was left alone in the treatment room while the doctor saw another patient, said Mr Goldring.
The doctor had injected no more than a quarter of the syringe when Michael suddenly went rigid.
There was something in the injection to cause the attack but they did not know what, the jury heard.
Michael later recovered and there were no long-term effects.
CHRISTOPHER PEASGOOD
Christopher, who was eight weeks old, was admitted on 12 April with bronchial illness.
He was put in an oxygen tent with alarms set up to go off if he stopped breathing or if the oxygen in his blood dropped too low.
The nurse in charge of him, staff nurse Claire Winser, asked Allitt to look after him because she was busy.
Fifteen minutes later, the breathing alarm went off and the staff nurse rushed into the room to find Allitt behaving in an ‘extraordinary way’, said Mr Goldring.
‘She was doing nothing at all to help this baby in such distress.
She must have been there as Christopher Peasgood became increasingly blue.
Why?’
Christopher was transferred to Nottingham and Allitt insisted on accompanying him, said Mr Goldring.
‘She was in a jovial mood.
In that mood she said she had been present at a lot of attacks that had occurred on Ward 4.
She said maybe it was a jinx.’
CHRISTOPHER KING
Five-week-old Christopher was admitted on 12 April because of vomiting and was found to be suffering from a narrowing of the exit of the stomach.
On 14 April, Allitt was alone with him and called a nurse.
Christopher had turned blue as if he had been short of oxygen.
He recovered.
Two days later Allitt called nurses after Christopher suffered a similar attack.
She was subsequently alone with him for much of a two-hour period when his condition deteriorated and one consultant thought he was going to die, the court heard.
Mr Goldring claimed Allitt had done something to Christopher, possibly involving asphyxiation and even drowning.
After he was transferred to Nottingham he improved quickly.
CLAIRE PECK
Claire was 15 months old when she was admitted to the children's ward suffering from asthma.
She was put on an intravenous drip in a treatment room and left alone with Allitt.
Claire was later found lying on the couch and she was dark blue.
Her back was arched and she was not breathing.
The defendant was standing by doing nothing, said Mr Goldring.
Claire recovered but when Allitt was again left alone with her almost immediately came the inevitable words ‘She's gone’, he told the jury.
Shortly before Claire's death a sample of her blood was taken and this showed the level of potassium was extremely high.
PATRICK ELSTONE
Seven-week-old Patrick was not seriously ill when he was admitted to the hospital with an ear infection but had to be taken to Nottingham as an emergency patient.
How that came about had ‘a horrifyingly familiar ring,’ said counsel.
After recovering from an attack of shallow breathing he recovered and one nurse said he was smiling and cooing in his cot.
But later Allitt was heard shouting: ‘Oh my God, come here’.
Patrick was grey and blue about the mouth and he appeared to have stopped breathing and his oxygen level was low.
He started to have fits and he suffered permanent damage.
THE PHILLIPS TWINS
Becky Phillips, a nine-week-old premature twin, was admitted on April 1 with a stomach upset.
Allitt was off-duty and did not return until 3 April when there was ‘an odd incident’, said Mr Goldring.
The next day Becky was well enough to go home.
Allitt fed her at 12.30pm and her parents collected her at 4pm.
‘She was sweating, crying and unsettled.
She started to have convulsions again.
She fell asleep for a short time but it was about 3am that Mr and Mrs Phillips noticed she was not breathing,’ said Mr Goldring.
A test taken within an hour of her death found a very high level of insulin in blood taken from Becky's heart.
Mr Goldring said that after Becky died her twin sister Katie was brought into the hospital purely for observation.
Tragically, with hindsight, when Allitt came on duty at lunchtime on 5 April, 1991, she was allocated to look after Katie, said Mr Goldring.
Katie had convulsions and her lungs collapsed.
She was rushed to a hospital in Nottingham where it took doctors three hours to stabilise her condition.
She continued to have fits and suffered serious and permanent brain damage.
Beverley Allitt with baby Katie Phillips, who suffered permanent brain damage after being left alone with the nurse
AIRDRIE
Two in court after man's death
TWO men, aged 22 and 26, are expected to appear at Airdrie Sheriff Court today in connection with the death of a man found in a house in the town.
James Cunningham, 44, of Dudley Drive, Coatbridge, was injured in an incident in a house at Robertson Street, Airdrie, on Monday night.
He later died from his injuries.
GLASGOW
Planning approval for hospital hotel
COUNCILLORS yesterday approved an application for a £2 million patients' hotel to be built at Glasgow Western Infirmary.
The 64-room unit will be the equivalent of a three-star hotel.
It will house short-stay patients, freeing beds in acute wards.
Planning permission was granted after councillors were assured that all accommodation will be free.
DUMBARTON
Transfer of council houses approved
MORE than 200 council houses in the Cordale area of Renton are to be transferred to a community-based housing association.
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton made the announcement yesterday after the proposals were approved by Dumbarton District Council.
The 223 houses are to be bought for £1,169,950.
Scottish Homes will contribute £1 million toward the acquisition costs and planned improvements.
ABERDEEN
Man killed in car accident named
A PEDESTRIAN who died after being knocked down by a car in Aberdeen's Market Street early yesterday morning was named as John Duncan, 45, a fisherman, of Glenburn Road, Burra, Shetland.
Police said a report on the accident would be submitted to the procurator-fiscal.
Strike threat dropped as workers wait for Albion decision
By Graeme Stewart Industry Correspondent
WORKERS at Glasgow's Leyland-DAF plant may know by tomorrow if their Albion axle-producing factory is to be saved, it was said yesterday.
During a meeting, the workforce was told the Government would not put any money into the campaign to save the British operation of Leyland-DAF.
The banks have been given only two more days to agree to support the receiver's rescue plan.
However, the meeting agreed not to walk out on strike in protest at the 1,600 job losses, 67 at Glasgow, announced by the company's receivers on Friday.
The decision was taken in spite of an almost three-to-one ballot for the strike by workers at the Albion works in Scotstoun.
A majority of the United Kingdom workforce decided against strike action and the mood of the Glasgow workers was so clear yesterday that a vote did not have to be taken.
Union representatives at the plant have called for the reconvening of a meeting with the Scottish industry minister, Allan Stewart, whom they met last Friday in an attempt to win government backing for their fight against the redundancies.
Mr Stewart said there was little hope of government intervention but said he would be working strenuously to ease the plight of the Albion workers.
Last night, the acting convener, Tommy Gorman, said the workforce was disgusted at the way in which the 67 men who had been made redundant had been treated and the fact they would receive the minimum statutory payoffs.
‘We are really looking for some sort of justice for these people.
They are getting the worst deal of any group of British workers involved in a mass redundancy.
The way the whole thing was done was just absolutely outrageous,’ he said.
The top payoff was just over £6,000 while the average was £2,670, said Mr Gorman.
‘It is bad enough losing their job but at least if they got the redundancy package that was available under Leyland-DAF, they would not be so badly off.
For some of these guys, maybe in the fifties or 60 years old, it could mean the difference between having their homes repossessed or not,’ he said.
Neighbouring management and striking workers at the Yarrow warship yard on the Clyde, yards from the Leyland-DAF plant in Scotstoun, are again at stalemate in spite of brief talks between the two sides on Monday.
No new offer was put at the meeting between management and the 25-strong shop stewards' committee, called by Yarrow's managing director and chief executive, Murray Easton, who wanted to put his case to the full committee.
The strike, now into its second week, is over a five-point change in working conditions including cutting Friday teabreaks, reducing other breaks and changing overtime payments, sickness and sea trials payments.
MIDLOTHIAN
First council rents rise in four years
COUNCILLORS in Midlothian yesterday decided to increase the district's council house rents for the first time in four years.
Rents are to rise in Midlothian by 11 per cent or £1.95 on average.
That compares with a 42 per cent increase in the average council house rent in Scotland since 1989.
LIVINGSTON
Accident witnesses sought by police
A NAVAL mechanic employed at Rosyth was killed by a car on Monday after walking along the M8 motorway near the Livingston Interchange.
Police were last night appealing for witnesses to the accident in which James McDonald, 22, from Carmona Drive, Balloch, Dunbartonshire, died.
Fish farmers attack ‘carping politicians’
By Auslan Cramb Environment Correspondent
THE ‘carping and negative’ attitude of government politicians was attacked yesterday as salmon farmers gave warning of the threats facing a vital industry for the Highlands and Islands.
On the opening day of the Scottish Fish Farming Conference in Glasgow, delegates were told that the business could face a chaotic period of boom and bust if production rates were not managed properly across Europe.
The way ahead, said David Windmill of McConnell Salmon, one of Scotland's biggest producers, was the creation of producer organisations in Scotland, Norway, Ireland and other farming nations, which would control production and, if necessary, intervene in the market to remove fish when demand was exceeded.
The idea of compulsory producer organisations is supported by individual farmers and by the two industry bodies representing producers in the Highlands and Islands and on Shetland.
Their establishment is required under EC fisheries policy.
However, the Scottish Office fisheries minister, Sir Hector Monro, favours voluntary measures.
He has claimed that statutory controls would ‘stifle new developments and new jobs in the Highlands and Islands and raise costs when we face tough competition from efficient producers in Europe and elsewhere’.
Mr Windmill replied yesterday: ‘Wrong, Sir Hector.
The PO system would bring about stability which will, in the long term, help protect investment and keep businesses and 6,000 jobs alive within our economy.’
He added that the system had worked for commercial fishermen and had now been introduced through the Common Agricultural Policy in everything from sheep to milk, cereals and oilseeds.
‘Can supply management be right for them and wrong for us?
The mix of supply management and last-resort intervention can and will work.
‘We would have more respect, certainly for the politicians, if they were to be positive, imaginative and constructive instead of carping and negative in their approach.’
New regulations will require an act of Parliament, but without POs, the industry fears the present rush to increase production, brought about by improved prices, will lead to oversupply in two or three years and another crash — effectively a repetition of events in recent years.
A voluntary system has been ruled unworkable by the industry because individual farmers would not accept limits on their production if other farmers, or countries, were benefiting by breaking the arrangement.
Earlier, the environmental improvements introduced by the business — including lower stocking densities and reduced use of chemicals — were praised by Jim Munford, marine adviser for Scottish Natural Heritage.
He said he would like to see the environmental burden removed from the industry in the future and salmon farmers paid, in the same way as agricultural farmers, for sound conservation practice.
However, Barry Martyn, a commercial director with Safeway, who opened the three-day conference, said the major challenge still facing the industry was meeting consumer concerns for environmentally sound production.
PAISLEY
Plans for airport hotel approved
GLASGOW Airport is to have a £4 million hotel.
The plan, by Scottish Airports Ltd, was approved yesterday when councillors at Paisley rejected objections from management of the Forte Crest Hotel, who claimed the proposed two/three-star hotel, on a site yards from the former Excelsior Hotel, would lower the tone of the airport.
Airport bosses argued that the facility was to cater for those who could not afford four-star charges.
Not proven verdict on mugging charges
TWO men accused of killing a pensioner when a mugging went wrong had the charge found not proven at the High Court in Glasgow yesterday.
Finlay Young, 24, of Lincoln Avenue, Knights-wood, Glasgow, walked free from the High Court in Glasgow at the end of the nine-day trial.
His co-accused, Denis Smyth, 23, of Glendinning Road, Knightswood, was found guilty of an unconnected housebreaking and jailed for one year.
Both men had denied assaulting and robbing Marion Henderson, 74, near her home in Athelstane Road, Knightswood.
She received a blow to the back of her head during the assault and died two days later.
Donald Findlay, QC, for Young, and Gordon Jackson, QC, for Smyth, had lodged special defences of alibi.
It took the jury of seven men and seven women just over an hour to find the charge not proven against both accused by a majority.
They found Smyth guilty of breaking into a house at Athelstane Road, also on October 3 last year, and a breach of the Bail Act.
The judge, Lord Mayfield, jailed Smyth for a year and told him he was a persistent offender with a bad record.
Pathologists who carried out a post-mortem examination on Mrs Henderson said she had developed a chest infection and died from complications due to her head injury.
The court heard that, on the afternoon of the mugging, Mrs Henderson had been to a jumble sale with friends, and refused a lift home as she wanted to go shopping.
She was seen by neighbours as she made her way along Athelstane Road towards her home, minutes before passers-by found her lying on the pavement.
Two men were seen running from the area, and one witness said they looked like the two accused.
But Young and Smyth denied knowing anything about the attack or the woman's death, and the court heard that Young, a self-confessed drug addict, said he was at home suffering from withdrawal symptoms on the day of the mugging.
STONEHAVEN
Keeper accused of possessing poisons
A GAMEKEEPER on a Highland estate has been charged with possessing illegal poisons.
Alasdair Thomson, a keeper on Dunecht Estate, Aberdeenshire, is said to have kept the substances in an unlocked outhouse on the estate.
Thomson, 48, Floors, Forest of Birse, Finzean, near Banchory, pled not guilty at Stonehaven Sheriff Court yesterday.
He is due to go on trial on June 10.
DALBEATTIE
Lorry collision victim named
A MOTORIST killed in a crash on the outskirts of Dalbeattie, Kirkcudbrightshire, on Monday night, was named yesterday as Thomas Muirhead, 33, a forklift driver, of High Street, Dalbeattie.
His car was involved in in collision with an articulated lorry.
The lorry driver was unhurt.
Drugs claim ninth victim in Glasgow
THE toll of drug-related deaths in Glasgow has risen to nine so far this year.
The body of John Carroll, 28, was found in a close in Balglass Street, in Glasgow's Possilpark district on Monday afternoon.
More than 70 people have died in Strathclyde in the last 15 months as a result of drug-taking.
Mr Carroll, whose address was given by Strathclyde Police as East Street, Monance, Anstruther, in Fife, originally came from the Possilpark area.
A police spokesman said there did not appear to be any suspicious circumstances.
A report will be submitted to the procurator-fiscal.
IRVINE
Court escaper is arrested
JOHN RAE, 25, who escaped from custody at Cunninghame District Court at Irvine on 10 February, was arrested yesterday in Birmingham.
Peterken in fresh talks on future
By Alan Forbes
THE general manager of Greater Glasgow Health Board, Laurence Peterken, held further talks about his future with the board yesterday.
The only announcement given after the meeting was that Mr Peterken's position was under discussion within the board.
Inquiries to Mr Peterken were being redirected to the board's press office.
Uncertainty over the future of Mr Peterken, who has held the senior post since 1986, comes at a time when the board, the largest in Scotland, is facing major changes.
A chairman, Bill Fyfe, will be appointed on 1 April, and the chief administrative medical officer, Dr George Forwell, will retire in the summer.
Mr Fyfe, currently chairman of Ayrshire and Arran Health Board, has already made his presence felt at Greater Glasgow.
He has held talks with Mr Peterken and he has said a decision about the general manager's future with the board will be made ‘quite quickly.’
The board is also having to readvertise for a replacement to Dr Forwell after Mr Fyfe insisted that he must have a say in the appointment.
Dr Forwell, in his final annual report released in December, made a stinging attack on Government policy and drew a direct link between deprivation and ill-health in Glasgow.
The board yesterday decided to close 11 of its 77 community clinics after it was told that studies had shown that doctors' practices were taking on responsibility for child health surveillance.
Such practices were operating in or near the communities affected by the closures, which must be approved by the Scottish Office.
Three clinics at Carntyne, Milton and Westerton have been reprieved.
The Milton clinic remains partly because use of its needle exchange had increased considerably.
Laurence Peterken: decision on future ‘quite quickly’
Slash needed 123 stitches, court is told
A YOUTH who inflicted what a sheriff described yesterday as an appalling gaping face wound on a teenager he slashed was ordered to be detained for 15 months in a young offenders' institution.
Surgeons had to put 123 stitches in the victim's wound, which ran from the top of his face down to his mouth, Paisley Sheriff Court was told.
David Arthur, 18, of Blackstoun Avenue, Linwood, Renfrewshire, claimed during a trial that he had lashed out at the victim, Greig Mooney, 18, with a broken umbrella he had found discarded in the street.
However, Sheriff Colin Higgins said that the wound was razor-sharp, and had been described by medical witnesses as a clean surgical cut which left the victim's face wide open.
It was more in keeping with a wound caused by a Stanley cutter than a broken brolly, he said.
Arthur changed his plea half-way through his trial earlier and admitted the offence.
Sheriff Higgins said yesterday when Arthur appeared for sentence that witnesses said the accused had threatened earlier that he was going to hurt his victim.
Sheriff Higgings told Arthur that he could do nothing other than give him a custodial sentence.
He said: ‘Enough has already been said about the use of weapons in this area.’
Rail inquiry told of track system ban
SCOTRAIL had won initial approval for its planned junction at Newton in spite of a nationwide embargo on single-lead track systems after an accident, a fatal accident inquiry in Glasgow heard yesterday.
The green light for Newton, where four people were killed and 22 were injured when two trains collided head-on in July 1991, revealed an apparent inconsistency in the approval system.
At the time, ScotRail was also attempting to get through a similar application for the junction at Westerton, outside Glasgow.
It had been stopped in its tracks by the Railway Inspectorate and a public outcry.
The then general manager of ScotRail, John Ellis, anxious to push the work through because of the poor condition of the signalling at Westerton, had offered to introduce temporary safety measures while the Chief Inspector of Railways considered the implications of the Bellgrove crash.
They included provisions designed to prevent head-on collisions, like those at Bellgrove and later at Newton.
British Rail had been advised that it could go ahead only at its own risk — and it declined to do so.
At a meeting soon afterwards, and having laid out its draft proposal for Newton, it had been given permission to go ahead with detailed planning although it did not offer the same safety provisions.
There had been considerable confusion over the interpretation of the embargo, the inquiry was told.
Two seemingly conflicting letters had been issued by the CIOR and those had been compounded by a third ‘interpretation’ issued to regional managers by the then director of operations for BR, Ivor Warburton.
As the man responsible for operations throughout the UK, he had had difficulty in understanding exactly what the CIOR meant, he said.
An attempt to clarify the position as to what works would or would not be affected by the ban had further confused the issue.
As a result, he had set up a meeting of regional engineers, himself, and the deputy inspector of railways.
They had studied 24 schemes at a single meeting to determine whether they fell within the embargo or not.
He could not recall, when questioned by the procurator-fiscal, Andrew Normand, how much time had been devoted at the meeting to Newton.
‘It was just one of 24 schemes we considered that day,’ he said.
Asked which of the three interpretations of the embargo had been employed at the meeting, he replied: ‘Our thinking that day was fairly flexible.
We were not working to any specific set of criteria.’
Sheriff Brian Lockhart, who is presiding over the fatal accident inquiry, asked whether the Newton plans, referred to throughout five weeks of the inquiry so far as ‘single lead’ had not been considered to be so at the time.
Mr Warburton replied that since Newton had had single-lead aspects in the past, it had not been considered to fall within any of the interpretations of the embargo.
Asked by Mr Norman if his reasoning for that decision had not been noted at the time, he replied: ‘My scribbles were not entirely consistent in quantity or meaning.
I was insufficiently consistent to put down every nuance of every argument.’
He stressed that his advice to go ahead with detailed planning for the £5 million junction had been for guidance only and that the full approval of the CIOR would still have to be sought before the junction was commissioned.
Earlier the inquiry had been told that a four-platform layout for Newton, which could have prevented the tragedy, had been discounted on grounds of cost by the Strathclyde Passenger Transport Executive.
The inquiry continues.
Glen Moriston ‘new age’ group vow to stay put
By Tom Morton
A GROUP of so-called ‘new age’ travellers have vowed to stay in the Highlands, in spite of what they claim is continual police harassment.
The ten travellers, who have four children with them, are all that remains of a 60-strong encampment on Forestry Commission land at Glen Moriston.
Most of the rest moved to Loch Laggan, after charges of trespass were brought against some of them last year.
Police visited the Glen Moriston site on Saturday and charged those present under the 1865 Criminal  Trespass Scotland Act.
Yesterday morning several of the same travellers were charged again after a second police raid.
‘This is definitely harassment,’ said one of the travellers, Ian Forrest.
‘They are attempting to drive us from the Highlands, but they cannot.
It is not only immoral, it is financially ludicrous.
No matter how much they fine everybody, they're never going to recover the cost of these operations.
I do not see how they can justify it.’
Mr Forrest said the police could not legally force the travellers to move on without obtaining either an eviction order or an interdict.
He continued: ‘With criminal trespass, all they can do is go down on a daily basis and charge people.
It may be a legitimate thing for them to do, but they're using the law purely to harass people.’
A spokesman for the Northern Constabulary at Inverness denied the accusations of harassment but confirmed that the site had been visited twice in the last few days and that several people had been charged.
‘I think raid is too strong a word,’ he said.
‘We were acting on complaints of long standing made by the Forestry Commission, who own the land in question.’
When asked if the police would continue to charge the travellers if they did not move on, he replied: ‘I presume so.’
Mr Forrest said: ‘Most people have moved on to Loch Laggan.
At the moment, people are making what plans they can to move.
The winkling season will start soon, there will be good tides and we will want to move west, but the issue's been forced now, with these raids taking place at dawn or at eight in the morning.’
JOHN PAUL Defiant: Some of the remaining ‘new age’ travellers at the Glen Moriston site who have made claims of police harassment.
They are determined to stay on.
Misconduct case awaits legal decision
THE disciplinary hearing of a senior council official accused of gross misconduct has been delayed until a legal dispute is settled, writes John Smith.
Central Region agreed yesterday not to start the hearing in to the actions of Jock Stewart, 53, a principal officer in the education department suspended since May, until an  interdict is heard.
The authority's agreement came after Sheriff Principal John Maguire at Stirling said ill-health would prevent his considering the interdict being sought by counsel for Mr Stewart, of Newtoft Farm, near  Auchterarder in Perthshire.
His replacement will hear it.
The interdict seeks to prevent the authority proceeding with its hearing in the absence through illness of Mr Stewart.
Yesterday counsel for both parties agreed the case should be heard on March 12 and 15.
Alan Hamilton, advocate, for Central Region, gave an assurance no disciplinary hearing would be resumed till the interdict case concluded.
Mr Stewart's advocate, Craig Scott, is hoping to persuade the court to order Central Region to hand over documents which he claims are vital to his client's case.
Man was shot in family row, court told
A MIDNIGHT row between two brothers led to one shooting the other without warning, a jury was told yesterday.
Robert McLaren, 30, made the claim at the High Court sitting at Perth when his brother was accused of endangering his life and attempting to murder him.
Alexander McLaren, 37, is alleged to have shot Robert with a rifle, struck him with bottles, attempted to gouge out his eyes and attempted to strangle him.
At the time of the alleged crime, the brothers lived a few yards apart in the Perthshire hamlet of Aberargie.
The accused, who now lives in the neighbouring village of Bridge of Earn, pleads not guilty and has entered a special defence of self defence.
Robert said that ill-feeling between him and his brother had made him so annoyed that he had used a large knife to slash a rubber dinghy which they owned jointly.
A row had followed: he had been returning home when he had heard a noise.
He continued: ‘When I turned round my brother was pointing a gun at me — then he shot me.
I was hit on the right leg and nearly fell.
‘When I managed to get upright I saw him cocking the gun again, thought he was going to shoot me again and moved towards him to defend myself.’
He had ended lying on the ground with the accused sitting on his chest.
‘He was breaking bottles over my head…like a maniac.’
Robert denied a defence suggestion that he had been advancing on his brother and his family with his knife when he was shot.
The trial continues today.
GLASGOW
Nelson Mandela visit postponed
NELSON Mandela's visit to Glasgow next week has been postponed on the advice of his doctors, it emerged last night.
He is understood to be suffering from exhaustion.
The African National Congress leader was due to accept the freedom of the City of Glasgow on 25 February during a trip to Europe.
He was also to have been presented with the freedom of seven other British cities and districts, including Dundee and Midlothian.
No alternative date for his visit had been suggested.
LOANHEAD
No fire escape at home for elderly
A SURPRISE inspection of a home for the elderly at Loanhead, near Edinburgh, has revealed it was failing to comply with fire regulations.
The fire escape on the first floor of Kilbreck House had been removed during building work on an extension.
The eight residents have been given alternative accommodation until the building is made safe.
South Side's residents back drink curbs
By Sarah Wilson
THE SOUTH SIDE Association in Edinburgh yesterday backed the proposals to restrict late-night drinking in the city.
Margaret Wilson, who chairs the residents' organisation, has written to the licensing board to encourage members to vote for the proposals.
The board is considering requiring pubs to close at 1:30am across a three-mile-square area of Edinburgh, where many licenced premises remain open until 3am or 4am.
Ms Wilson said that noise, vandalism and violence were rife on the South Side and earlier closing times would restore some order to the streets.
‘The suggestion that tourism will be affected by this policy is quite incredible.
Tourists come to Edinburgh to enjoy the delights of the Old Town, Holyrood Park and the Crags and not because they can bevvy up, create noise and nuisance until after 3am,’ she added.
Fears over future of Princes Street Mile
By Severin Carrell and Sandy Sutherland
THE future of the Princes Street Mile road race in Edinburgh is in doubt amid fears that the chief sponsors of last year's inaugural race may substantially cut their support for this year's event.
Mike Wilson, managing director of Gameplan, the company which organised the first event last September, said he was still searching for ‘someone to fire the starting pistol’ with a commitment to guarantee the necessary money.
A meeting will take place on Monday among the three main sponsors of last year's event, Lothian Regional Council, Lothian and Edinburgh Enterprise (LEEL), and the insurance firm Standard Life, at the request of the region and Gameplan.
The three bodies last year put up a total of £245,000 of the event's total cost of more than £300,000.
After pledging £20,000 for wheelchair races, the region's support increased to £95,000 after a substantial shortfall in the commercial sponsorship which now appears certain to be repeated this year unless additional major supporters can be found.
Both LEEL, which put up £75,000, and the region, are understood to hold deep reservations about maintaining the same level of support.
LEEL's investment was for feasibility work into the inaugural event, and Standard Life has yet to extend its commitment beyond 1992.
‘This is too good an event for Scotland to lose,’ Mr Wilson said.
‘But we need someone to start pressing some buttons now — my only interest is to secure the long-term success of something which I believe is a very good event.’
Around 25,000 spectators watched a series of Princes Street Mile races last year, which attracted an international field, including Olympic women's 800 metres champion Ellen van Langen and Olympic men's 1500 metres champion Fermin Cacho.
Mr Wilson said the budget would not increase this year, and he had already secured the agreement and support of the police, the regional council's highway department, the British Athletics Federation, and BBC's Grandstand.
Carol Park, communications director of Standard Life, said she would not preempt Monday's meeting and could not discuss the company's future support.
But, she added, the company had undertaken to sponsor only the inaugural event.
A spokesman for LEEL said they wanted the event to continue, adding: ‘However, our involvement was in helping to establish the feasibility of the first event.
The results showed the race would always require a strong element of commercial sponsorship, an area in which LEEL would not see itself becoming directly involved.’
Keith Geddes, the leader of the region's Labour group, said the council's support would depend on ‘whether other players put their cards on the table.
It would be difficult for us to fund it on our own’.
Keith Geddes: ‘council support depends on others.’
KIRKCALDY
Rail vandals put lives in danger
VANDALS endangered the lives of hundreds of train passengers travelling through Fife on a London-to-Aberdeen train.
They cut through a cable controlling signalling equipment then put a bed frame on the line at Den Road in Kirkcaldy just before 10pm on Monday.
A fail-safe system triggered a red signal, giving the driver of the train time to stop and remove the obstacle.
Repairing the damaged cable took workmen about two hours, and trains had to escorted through the area until the system was running properly.
£2000 fine for student who caused road death
A SPEEDING motor-cyclist who knocked down and killed a 73-year-old man was fined £2,000 at Edinburgh Sheriff Court yesterday.
Sheriff Richard Scott told Alasdair Paton, 22, a graphics student, of Seaview Terrace, Portobello, that conviction on such a charge would normally merit a prison sentence, but it was not appropriate in this case.
‘I don't see fit to compound this tragedy by adding to the deep distress that the incident must already have caused to you, the deceased's relatives and others,’ he said.
Paton was convicted in January by a jury of causing the death of Hugh Cochrane by reckless driving.
The jury heard that Mr Cochrane, formerly of Whitson Place West, Edinburgh, died after being hit by Paton's bike as he crossed Stevenson Road after a night out.
Eyewitnesses had estimated that Paton was travelling at speeds of between 60mph and 70mph seconds before the fatality on 15 October, 1991.
The road had a 30-mph speed limit.
Paton told the court he could remember nothing of the crash and claimed he had lain unconscious in hospital for five days afterwards.
The pillion passenger, Malcolm Sinclair, of Smithfield Street, Edinburgh, was also injured in the accident, it was claimed.
Paton had denied causing Mr Cochrane's death by driving recklessly and speeding, but was convicted after trial.
Sentence had been deferred for background reports.
Defending, David Allan, said the crash was something his client regretted and which had caused great distress to both sides.
‘He has asked me to apologise to the family of the deceased for his part in the distress that they have been caused,’ said the lawyer.
Paton had been physically and mentally scarred by the accident and had not driven since because of a risk of epilepsy caused by his injuries, the court heard.
Fining Paton, the sheriff said he took account of reports which revealed the ‘exceptional background’ in his personal life and also noted the information contained in medical reports.
‘You will have to live with this for some time,’ the sheriff added.
Paton was also banned from driving for ten years and fined £100 on separate driving charges to which he had pled guilty earlier.
Four Labour privy councillors named
FOUR senior members of the Labour Party were named by Downing Street as privy councillors yesterday: Margaret Beckett, the deputy leader, John Cunningham, the shadow foreign secretary, Derek Foster, the opposition chief whip, and Lord Richard, leader of the Opposition in the House of Lords.
The practical effect is that that gives them precedence of speaking in Parliament.
They are also known as ‘Right Honourable’.
Maastricht bill hits fresh legal obstacle
By Chris McLaughlin, Political Correspondent
A FURTHER legal hitch to the Maastricht bill was under urgent scrutiny by government lawyers last night.
As Labour and Conservative MPs vowed to continue the fight against legislation to implement the Maastricht treaty, Downing Street officials were seeking advice on whether an opposition amendment could seriously flaw the bill.
Doubts over aspects of the legislation came as the Labour leader, John Smith, accused the Prime Minister of trying to prevent the Commons having a say on the social chapter.
Mr Smith claimed John Major was using ‘slippery manoeuvres’ to get the legislation through intact.
Mr Major insisted that the Government would abide by normal parliamentary procedures.
But if the Labour move to reverse the opt-out of the social chapter is successful, the Government could be forced into a position of unconstitutionally spending money from the consolidated fund without parliamentary approval.
That is because the Government is committed to paying a proportion of the administrative costs of the social chapter, whether Britain adopts it or not.
Last night Mr Smith wrote to Mr Major urging him to publish through the Commons library the legal advice given by the Government law officers on Labour's controversial clause 27, with the apparently contradictory legal advice given to the Foreign Office.
The Attorney-General, Sir Nicholas Lyell, has already rejected a claim from Labour that exclusion of the social chapter opt-out would leave Britain open to legal challenges in the European Court of Justice from workers claiming rights and conditions applicable in other EC countries.
During bitter exchanges in the Commons, Mr Smith challenged Mr Major over the about-turn in the Government's view that the passing of Labour's amendment — with the support of Tory rebels — would wreck the bill.
On Monday the Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, said that the treaty would be ratified whether or not the Commons passed the amendment.
Mr Smith said it was a ‘curious coincidence that the prospect of political defeat has caused a revisal of the legal opinion’.
He demanded: ‘Why is the Government so anxious to prevent the House from deciding this issue?’
Mr Major replied: ‘It is for this House to decide by its vote on the third reading whether to approve the European Communities (Amendment) Bill and enable the Government to ratify the treaty.
There is no question of the Government ratifying the treaty except through the normal parliamentary procedures.’
Earlier George Robertson, the Labour spokesman on European affairs, vowed that the Opposition would press ahead with the social chapter amendment to allow the Commons to express its view.
The mood of Tory rebels was reflected by James Cran, MP for Beverley, who said: ‘Believe me, this battle is by no means over yet.
I think everything is to play for.’
Bart's faces closure in London shake-up
THE Health Secretary, Virginia Bottomley, pledged £170 million for health care improvements in London yesterday, as part of the Government's response to the controversial Tomlinson proposals to cut hospital beds.
The money will be directed at community GP services and primary health care over the next six years, with £43.5 million available in the coming year, Mrs Bottomley told the Commons.
But there was scant comfort for some of London's famous teaching hospitals, like St Bartholomew's in the City, which faces closure.
Mrs Bottomley said there were three options on Bart's: closure, merger or the creation of a much smaller specialist unit.
Whatever happened, it would not continue in its present form.
Asked how she felt about reducing the 800-year-old hospital to a shadow of itself, she said her aim was to secure better health care for Londoners.
‘It is not my job to be an arm of the Department of Heritage,’ she said.
‘It is my job to ensure that the £100 million we spend each day is delivered as cost-effectively as possible to ever higher standards of patient care.’
In her statement to MPs, Mrs Bottomley said the reforms would be carried through by an implementation group, and a London initiative zone would make sure the reforms cover the most deprived areas of the city.
Planned closures, to include some accident and emergency units, would be subject to a 12-week consultation.
A series of reviews would determine how specialist services including cardiac, cancer, neurosciences, renal, plastic surgery and specialist children's services are best organised.
Each review will be led by an eminent clinician from outside London and a senior NHS manager of a purchasing authority.
It will aim to reduce duplication of services and its findings will be reported to ministers by the end of May.
The Government believes changing patterns of health care and other factors could cut the need for beds in the centre of the city by up to 2,500 within five years.
Mrs Bottomley's announcement confirmed reports that she had opted to water down some of the Tomlinson proposals, but it still came under almost immediate attack from Labour and the unions.
The shadow Health Secretary, David Blunkett, called it ‘a damp squib with a long fuse attached to a powder keg’, and the Trades Union Congress firecast the plans would cost thousands of jobs.
Hector Mackenzie, who chairs the TUC's health services committee, said: ‘Hundreds of thousands of pounds of taxpayers’ money have been spent on training many of these people.
These expensive skills will be lost.’
The Government's response was welcomed by the Royal College of Nursing.
Its general secretary, Christine Hancock, said: ‘The investment in primary health care and the six specialty reviews make it unnecessary for any nurse to lose her job.’
The Government proposes:
Setting up a new body to monitor changes to GP and primary care.
Rejecting Tomlinson's proposal to resite the Royal Brompton and Royal Marsden hospitals at the Charing Cross Hospital in west London.
Plans for the future of Charing Cross Hospital to be drawn up by the autumn.
University College Hospital and Middlesex hospitals to merge on one site.
Three options for Bart's — keeping it as a smaller specialist hospital; closing Smithfield site with services moved; or combined management with the Royal London and London Chest Hospitals.
Talks on merger of Guy's and St Thomas's.
Slimming down accident and emergency services.
The British Medical Association last night backed Mrs Bottomley's move to put off making final decisions until more information is available.
It said more evidence was needed, and added: ‘The information upon which the Tomlinson report based its recommendations was wholly inadequate.’
But the BMA statement also claimed it was ‘essential that decisions are made soon in order to avoid hospitals and staff suffering the effects of the blight’.
And there was criticism from health professionals.
The Royal College of Physicians attacked Mrs Bottomley's failure to reach firm decisions on the four teaching hospitals under threat, which it said were left in limbo.
Mrs Bottomley later dismissed suggestions that she had failed to grasp the nettle.
She told a London press conference that a raft of decisions had been announced and a tight timetable set up for future reforms, designed to prevent the spiral of decline predicted in the report if action were not taken.
— PA
Gummer criticised for not declaring pond improvement
THE agriculture minister, John Gummer, should have declared work paid for by a giant food company to restore a pond on his own land, MPs ruled last night.
The work was paid for by Hillsdown Holdings as part of a small agricultural show organised for European farm ministers at a two-day gathering hosted by Mr Gummer during Britain's presidency of the European Community.
Hillsdown spent £2,615.91 towards demonstrating environmental restoration work on a pond and hiring a marquee in his grounds at Winston Grange, near Debenham, Suffolk.
The Commons members' interests select committee's report followed a complaint by a Labour MP, Dale Campbell-Savours, that Mr Gummer had failed to declare the work in the MPs' register.
Mr Gummer argued that he was justified in not registering the work as the show did not benefit him financially.
The cost of making good the damage done to his grounds as a result of the event had left him out of pocket.
Since the event was well publicised and sponsorships clearly identified, there was nothing secret to be brought out in the open, he told the committee.
But the committee said that in accepting sponsorship of the restoration work carried out on his pond, Mr Gummer received a benefit he should have registered.
Mr Gummer, in a letter to the committee chairman, Sir Geoffrey Johnson-Smith, last night welcomed the committee's acceptance that there was no intent to conceal the work nor the sponsorship that financed it.
He would make an appropriate entry in the register.
In a letter to the committee last month, Mr Gummer said he and his wife willingly and enthusiastically did everything to make the event a success.
‘We should therefore hate the committee to think that we are complaining when we say that, far from having a benefit to declare, we were clearly disadvantaged and out of pocket.’
The committee said it had no reason to doubt Mr Gummer was out of pocket and it accepted there was no intent on his part to conceal the work.
But these points were not relevant to the central issue.
‘We consider that where a benefit is received which is covered by the rules for registration, it does not become exempt from registration simply because, when offset against associated costs or inconvenience, it can be represented as a net disbenefit to the recipient.’
The committee said that because ministers occupied positions of power there were particular risks for them in any activity which overlaps the border between their public duties and private interests, however worthy the motives may be in any individual case.
— PA
Council curbs ‘threaten jobs’
By David Scott Local Government Editor
MANY jobs and services in local government are under threat as councils draw up their budgets for the coming year, it was claimed yesterday.
Councillor Charles Gray, president of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, was speaking on the eve of a Commons debate on grant support for local authorities.
He said Government restrictions meant that at least half the councils in Scotland would not be able to increase their spending by more than 2.25 per cent.
For many, the figure would be less if they were to avoid having their spending capped.
Pointing out that the grant settlement was based on wage awards from zero to 1.5 per cent, Mr Gray added: ‘Even assuming that such a level of wage settlement can be negotiated, there is no doubt that some very difficult service and job-loss decisions will require to be taken in the next few weeks.
Many jobs and services are definitely at risk.’
COSLA has issued MPs with briefing papers on the revenue support grant order which will be debated tonight.
In a separate statement on housing support grant, which is also due to be debated tonight, COSLA claims that spending resources are being cut by £56 million.
Mr Gray said that the outlook for tenants was bleak, with the Government showing that council housing was low in its priority list for spending.
Average rent rises of £2-£2.50 a week would result in an average rent of about £27.25.
Cash help for union ballots to end
THE Government acted last night to phase out public subsidy for trade union ballots.
To Labour protests, Michael Forsyth, the Employment Minister, said continued state cash support was ‘inappropriate’.
Introducing a clause to the Trade Union Reform and Employment Rights Bill, he said that the subsidy, which amounted to £4.2 million last year, would be phased out between now and 1996.
Opposition MPs claimed that the move was just another way of ‘putting the boot in’ to the unions, which they said were loathed and detested by the Government.
Mr Forsyth denied that ministers were anti-trade union.
He also moved new clauses to stop unions from sending out ‘propaganda’ with voting papers in merger ballots.
For the Opposition, Sam Galbraith said he was particularly angry that the Government was reneging on the ballot subsidy.
‘When it was introduced, it was supposed to be a continuing commitment,’ he protested.
The Government believed that postal ballots were essential for the nation's industrial recovery and regeneration, Mr Galbraith said.
‘If it is that important, it is important for the taxpayer to fund it.’
The clause to withdraw the subsidy was approved by 300 votes to 250, a Government majority of 50.
MPs went on to discuss wages councils.
The shadow employment secretary, Frank Dobson, claimed that their abolition could result in pay levels falling.
— PA
Mr Dobson claimed the Government was seeking to create a ‘DIY third world’ in Britain by condoning ‘poverty level wages’.
Academic turns league tables on politicians
By Douglas Fraser, Education Correspondent
ARE YOU getting value for money from your MP's worldwide junketing?
And which politicians have the highest truancy rate?
Such questions have been raised in the world of education, where those at the chalkface are fed-up with being assessed and put into league tables.
Sir David Smith, the principal of Edinburgh University, has suggested that the MPs who shout most loudly for league tables of schools should be subject to the same treatment.
‘The sense of outrage that some of those MPs would feel at such intrusiveness might help them to understand current feelings in certain sectors of education,’ he said.
Speaking to the university's general council, Sir David said that the information should go beyond the straightforward information on the regularity of attendance at debates and the quality of members' speeches.
‘There could be a range of other performance indicators calculated by independent assessors, such as:
Cost-effectiveness.
Value for public money of trips abroad.
Proportion of time spent on private business interests.
Qualifications of secretaries.
The revenge of the educationists comes in the wake of extensive trawls through universities for research ratings, quality assessments of teaching and an audit of the quality assurance systems themselves.
In Scottish schools last year, the Government's publication of exam result tables on two occasions sparked anger among critics of Scottish Office education policy.
There are plans to follow up with further information on truancy rates, costs of schooling per pupil and the destinations of school leavers.
Sir David asked why education should be subject to such intensive assessment.
He suggested, ‘with my tongue heavily in my cheek,’ that family doctors should be subject to a parallel system in which independent assessors would move into a GP practice and interview patients about the efficiency of correspondence, with marks from fellow doctors on the reliability of diagnoses.
Sir David returned to his previous comments that universities were being swamped by paperwork.
That has provoked more paperwork, or at least strongly supportive letters to him from complete strangers in higher education, schools and the health service.
‘Clearly the series of ill-thought-out and often hastily assembled radical new ideas currently being imposed on various sectors of the national workforce bring in their wake huge tidal waves of paperwork that completely swamp any enthusiasm for change,’ he said.
Nevertheless he has not been slow to seize on the results of such paperwork and the publication of tables, which have shown Edinburgh's research ranks in the top four British universities.
He told staff yesterday that the university had more staff whose research was given the top grade five rating than all the other Scottish universities put together.
The only big centres to have outperformed Edinburgh in the research rankings were Cambridge, Oxford and University College London.
Sir David Smith: proposes performance indicators
MPs rally round to support Clarke
By Joanne Robertson Scottish Political Correspondent
BACK-BENCH Labour MPs rallied round the shadow Scottish secretary, Tom Clarke, yesterday in an attempt to end an alleged whispering campaign against him.
In a letter to The Scotsman, James Hood, the MP for Clydesdale, condemned what he described as the media's continued barrage of attacks on Mr Clarke.
Mr Hood was backed by a large number of Scottish Labour MPs, although a section of the Parliamentary Labour Party remains severely critical of Mr Clarke.
Many of Mr Clarke's supporters believe that the attacks on him originate from his unexpected success in the fiercely fought shadow cabinet elections last August.
In his letter, Mr Hood warmly praises Mr Clarke's abilities: ‘Tom Clarke is a man of honour and integrity.
His knowledge of Scottish politics is unrivalled on any side of the political spectrum.
The attacks on him are born of jealousy and political snobbery.’
‘This indulgence by journalists and sadly a small number of politicians has been transparent since the shadow cabinet elections in August.’
William McKelvey, the MP for Kilmarnock and Loudon, said that most Scottish Labour MPs were behind Mr Clarke.
But he made clear his support for more autonomy for the Scottish party, in particular over the appointment of the Scottish Labour leader.
‘The portfolio is currently a matter of patronage,’ he said.
‘I would prefer the portfolio of the shadow Scottish secretary to be voted on by the Scottish group and the Scottish party.’
Meanwhile Mr Clarke's opponents returned to the attack.
A Scottish Office minister, Allan Stewart, defended the financial sector — which Mr Clarke had described last Friday as being worthless and of little help to the economy — as ‘one of the bedrocks of our economy’.
Mr Stewart stressed the importance to Scotland of the 220,000 jobs dependent on it, over 8 per cent of the total workforce.
Mr Stewart gave warning against any attempt to tackle, as Mr Clarke suggested, the sector's ‘vested interests’ to ensure that everyone benefited.
Mr Stewart claimed that any move to impose a supertax would result in Scottish jobs being lost to London.
In a letter to Mr Clarke, Mr Stewart suggested that he adopt the approach of the Labour leader, John Smith, to the financial community.
He said: ‘We are all aware of how desperately John Smith, in the run-up to the last election, tried to woo London's financial community with endless ‘prawn cocktail’ lunches.
He would not even contemplate wiping out all his hard work with such a hare-brained scheme as a supertax.’
The Scottish National Party leader, Alex Salmond, blamed Mr Smith for the delay in clearing up the confusion over Labour's policy on public ownership of water services.
He claimed that Mr Smith had been forced into supporting public ownership in Scotland to prevent the party splitting over the issue but predicted that Labour would try to dilute its commitment.
Mr Salmond said: ‘As soon as circumstances allow, Smith will resume his attempt to water down the manifesto on which Labour won the general election in Scotland.
In his attempt to appeal to Basildon Man, Smith has lifted the anchor of ideology and set Labour adrift on a sea of fudge.’
Points of View, Page 12
Man with no TV wins 17-year fight over licence harassment
By John Robertson Law Correspondent
A MAN who complained of 17 years of hounding by the television licensing authority although he had never owned a TV set won a remarkable legal battle and £5,500 expenses yesterday.
Ironically, David Guest's victory came on the day that television cameras were allowed for the first time to record proceedings in a Scottish court.
He alleged that inquiry officers had lied about seeing a flickering light in a bedroom window of his home when they applied for a search warrant.
That claim was denied but TV Licensing conceded that there had been insufficient grounds for obtaining the warrant.
A delighted Mr Guest said after the hearing at the Justiciary Appeal Court that in addition to the expenses of the case, he would be seeking a five-figure sum in damages.
Asked if he thought inquiry officers, whom he had described as unsavoury and none too polite, would now moderate their behaviour, the 45-year-old electronics  engineer replied: ‘I jolly well hope so.
They have been challenging people without reason to declare that they are innocent of a crime.
If the police were to do that, there would be public outrage.’
Mr Guest, of Newmills Crescent, Balerno, near Edinburgh, had been charged with obstruction after he refused to allow an inquiry officer into his home in October 1991.
He challenged the validity of a search warrant which had been obtained from a sheriff, alleging that statements by inquiry officers about a flickering light being seen at a bedroom window were a blatant and malicious fabrication.
Although the charge against Mr Guest was abandoned by the Crown, the appeal court ordered evidence to be heard into the circumstances of the granting of the warrant.
Yesterday, Lord Ross, the Lord Justice-Clerk, sitting with Lords McCluskey and Morison, was told that the hearing had been cancelled because the licensing authority now conceded that there had not been enough evidence to justify applying for the warrant.
Matthew Clarke, QC, for TV Licensing, part of the Post Office, maintained that two officers who had called at Mr Guest's house had genuinely believed that they had seen a flickering light.
However, there was no reasonable basis for their believing that it was a television set.
It could have been any of a whole range of other things.
The authority was not accepting Mr Guest's allegation of a blatant and malicious fabrication by the officers but there had been insufficient material to obtain the warrant.
Mr Guest told the court that the case had to be seen against a background of 400,000 people in the United Kingdom who did not own a set but who were routinely hounded and subjected to abuse by the licensing authority.
At an earlier hearing he had explained that initially he and his wife, Alison, a music lecturer, would answer letters from the licensing people after computer records showed no licence for their home.
Eventually he got fed up and told them to stop bothering him and ignored their letters.
That had led to after-dark house calls by ‘unsavoury and heavily-built men who were none too polite’.
Lord Ross declared that the warrant had been obtained on inadequate information and the court awarded expenses to Mr Guest.
Those were not opposed by the licensing authority.
Mr Guest said later that his modest estimate of the expenses was £5,500.
He would also be seeking compensation and if the authority made no offer he would have no hesitation in suing for a five-figure sum.
The cameras were in court for a test run, not for broadcasting.
Last summer, Lord Hope, the Lord President, gave the go ahead for the televising of criminal and civil appeal courts.
He said a great deal of investigation would be needed into exactly how it should be done and yesterday's filming was part of that process.
Union finds ‘deepening jobs crisis’ in manufacturing
By Graeme Stewart, Industry Correspondent
FIGURES which show that more than 300,000 manufacturing workers have been made redundant in the past two years, revealed a ‘deepening jobs crisis’, one of Britain's biggest unions said yesterday.
A survey by the million-strong Amalgamated Engineering and Electrical Union, the largest in manufacturing, reported 33,352 job losses in the industry in the past four months involving 377 different companies.
Losses for the same period last year totalled 33,085.
The AEEU survey showed that the south-east of England and the west Midlands were the worst affected regions.
The latest losses mean that 305,344 manufacturing workers have been made redundant by more than 3,000 firms since February 1991.
Bill Jordan, president of the AEEU, said the statistics represented a watershed of shame for the Government's economic record.
‘The survey reveals that the jobs crisis is deepening further and an ever-increasing number of skilled men and women now face the tragedy of a lifetime on the dole.’
He added that no household-name company had escaped making job cuts over the last two years.
Gavin Laird, the union's general secretary, said the devaluation of manufacturing industry continued relentlessly.
‘The lurching from one crisis to another, compared to the decisive action being taken abroad, demonstrates that the Government has entirely lost its grip.
It is clearly incapable of producing the strategy for jobs and the direction for economic recovery that Britain desperately needs,’ he said.
The breakdown of the latest job losses for the month of January reads: Scotland, 3,562; north-west England, 3,039; north-east, 3,995; west Midlands, 4,653; east Midlands, 2,572; south-west, 1,099; London and south-east, 4,949; Wales, 1,986; Northern Ireland, 347.
A further 7,150 redundancies have been announced by companies for January, but the affected regions are still to be specified.
The Chancellor Norman Lamont is expected to make the battle against unemployment a priority in his budget to be announced next month.
Lenten aid campaign for Africa starts
A SCOTLAND-WIDE effort to provide aid to the starving in the famine-stricken countries of Africa was begun yesterday by the Scottish Catholic International Aid Fund, writes Gary Duncan.
For the first time, SCIAF's annual campaign for Lent features billboard posters throughout the country and posters on buses in selected areas.
Lenten boxes and educational material are also being sent to Catholic parishes and schools, and on 19 March a 24-hour Fast for Africa will be held, endorsed by the footballer Paul McStay.
The campaign will culminate on the fourth Sunday of Lent, 21 March, with a collection in churches.
SCIAF's director, Duncan MacLaren, who leaves for Somalia today, said the campaign was the most ambitious undertaken by the charity, following on from its pledging of nearly £500,000 of relief to eight African countries.
Princess tells of loneliness of AIDS sufferers
THE Princess of Wales spoke movingly of aching loneliness and rejection among AIDS victims yesterday as she appealed for compassion for sufferers and gave warning of the dangers of ignoring the disease.
She described her first heartbreak meeting with a woman dying of AIDS, her body, racked by infections, visibly wasting away.
‘Her wasted hand reached out for help and support.
She had been abandoned by her family, seen as an unbearable embarrassment and disgrace,’ the princess told a conference of medical researchers seeking a cure for AIDS.
‘And I am still meeting patients like her, rejected by family and past friends,’ she went on.
‘Leaving them with the fear of not being able to find someone to share their emotional overload, their physical disablement and ultimately their death.
‘It is hard to find words to express the aching loneliness and rejection I have found them experiencing as they approach the end of their lives.’
Too many people, she said, had used AIDS as an issue to which they could add their own prejudices.
‘If their views were voiced to help fight the disease that would be fine.
However, too often, their attitudes reveal only a narrowness of mind and a sad lack of common humanity,’ she said.
‘It is doubly difficult to deal with AIDS in a country like Britain where there is still an understandable reluctance to have frank and open discussions on emotional issues.
‘We need to learn how to break through this ‘barrier of inhibition’ before we are ready to face fully the challenge of AIDS.’
The princess was warmly applauded by the scientists for her speech.
Dr Jonathan Karn, of the Medical Research Council in Cambridge, said she had shown a good grasp of the issues and he praised her role in changing public attitudes to the disease.
‘She has a very acute awareness of the need to inform the public,’ he said.
‘The work she does is absolutely vital.
It has a more direct effect than anything we are doing now.’
— PA
Tough new car test dropped by ministry
By Jim Dunn Motoring Correspondent
THE Government could face repair bills from thousands of motorists whose car engines have been damaged in tests on toxic emissions from diesel exhausts.
The check was part of a tough MoT test introduced on 1 January and involved a tester revving the engine up to maximum speed while electronic test equipment measured the level in the exhaust gases.
The diesel check, described by one test station owner as ‘the worst possible thing you could do to any engine,’ was suspended yesterday pending the results of an inquiry into the damage claims.
Emission tests for petrol-driven cars are not affected by the move.
The announcement came in a Commons written reply by the roads minister, Kenneth Carlisle, but by that time most of the UK's 9000 test stations had already halted the test and replaced it with the old visual check for excess smoke.
Yesterday's move follows action by the Department of Transport on 5 February when officials issued testing stations with disclaimer forms for motorists to sign before their vehicles could be tested.
It explained that the test should not affect an engine which had been properly maintained, and said any damage resulting from the test would be the liability of the owner or the testing station.
By that time, the test was coming under heavy criticism from the trade bodies, including the Scottish Motor Trade Association, which took the unprecedented step of arranging special insurance cover to protect its members against possible damage claims.
The ban was applauded by both the SMTA and the Royal Automobile Club in Scotland.
Sue Nicholson, for the RAC, said: ‘We have been inundated with complaints from members that the testers are revving their car engines to the limit and possibly causing damage…
It was a bit of a Catch 22 situation because without signing the car could not be tested and without a test it could not be driven on the road.’
PLO ‘tried to block airlift'
A JEWISH group that helped about 80 Bosnian mostly Muslim refugees fly to Israel yesterday says the Palestine Liberation Organisation made a last-minute bid to prevent the flight because it did not want Israel to look good.
The World Jewish Congress (WJC) also said the French government withdrew its offer of a plane to fly the refugees to Israel, leaving organisers to scramble to find another aircraft.
The Bosnian Muslims left Croatia yesterday on a flight for Tel Aviv after Israel accepted a plea from European Jews to help people fleeing the fighting in Bosnia.
A WJC spokesman said in New York that Israel's Council of Mayors of Arab Towns and Villages, which had originally agreed to resettle the Bosnians in two Arab villages, reversed their decision after coming under heavy pressure from the PLO.
The spokesman, citing information received from Israel, said the PLO did not want Israel to look good in the world's eyes for taking the refugees in, especially after having been widely criticised for recently expelling 400 Palestinians into a no man's land in Lebanon.
‘The PLO tried to sabotage the departure of the Muslims.
They want to play chess using Bosnian Muslims as pawns,’ the WJC spokesman said.
The spokesman said the Council of Mayors of Arab Towns and  Villages refused to accept the Bosnians even after it was given the text of a message from the vice president of Bosnia approving the flight.
The French government gave no explanation for withdrawing its offer to give the Bosnians a plane, the spokesman said, adding that finally a prominent French businessman gave the refugees his private plane to use.
— Reuter
Bosnian Muslims leave Croatia for refuge in Israel
ZAGREB, Feb 16, Reuter — More than 80 refugees, mostly Bosnian Muslims, left Croatia yesterday on a flight for Tel Aviv after Israel accepted a plea from European Jews to help people fleeing the fighting in Bosnia.
Srdjan Matic, secretary-general of the Jewish community in the Croatian capital, Zagreb, said 83 men, women and children of all ages had left for Israel where they would be accommodated in relief centres or temporary housing.
The refugees, who had been staying in camps in Croatia, were accompanied by Jean Kahn, president of the European Jewish Congress, which made the appeal for more action from European countries and Israel to provide a refuge for Bosnians.
‘You know we are Jews and Jews remember what happened 50 years ago and during this time nobody in the world was doing anything to save the Jews,’ Kahn told reporters at Zagreb's Pleso airport.
‘That is the reason why everywhere in the world where people are suffering and where men, women and children are in danger we cannot stay quiet,’ he said.
More than two million people have fled their homes in former Yugoslavia since Serbs began a battle against Croatian secession from Yugoslavia in 1991 and against Bosnian independence a year later, according to U.N.
figures.
Anti-drug group set to kill Escobar
AN undercover paramilitary group emerged in Colombia yesterday dedicating itself to ending the country's wave of bombings and drug terror and offering a $5 million reward for the cocaine king Pablo Escobar — dead or alive.
The organisation claims the support of prominent industrialists and of former members of the security forces.
Its reward raises the price on Escobar's head to $11.7m.
The group, calling itself Free Colombia, is the second such undercover organisation to have announce its formation this month.
It announced its existence in a group interview with the news magazine Semana.
A number of hooded men brandishing sub-machine guns and standing in front of a Colombian flag told the magazine that their organisation had 150 full-time employees, was financed by big business and was well connected with the security forces.
An aide to President Cesar Gaviria, speaking on condition of anonymity, confirmed to Reuters the government was treating the existence of the new paramilitary group as genuine.
Escobar announced last month that he was declaring war on the state and the government has since blamed him for a series of bomb blasts in Bogota and other cities which have killed more than 40 people.
The formation of Free Colombia comes only 15 days after that of another anti-Escobar group, Pepes (People Persecuted by Pablo Escobar), which has vowed to kill the drug baron and his family.
— Reuter
Second Malawi party leader arrested
POLICE in Malawi have arrested a second opposition leader for alleged embezzlement, four months before a national referendum on the country's political future.
Bakili Muluzi, chairman of the United Democratic Front, was detained on Monday after surrendering to police in Blantyre, party officials said yesterday.
Watson Deleza, a minister without portfolio, said Mr Muluzui was charged with embezzling Malawi Congress Party funds when he was secretary general in 1981. — AP
SOUTH AFRICA
Doctors order Mandela to rest
DOCTORS have ordered Nelson Mandela to cancel a trip to Europe later this month, the African National Congress said yesterday.
Mr Mandela, 74, had put off all engagements until further notice on the advice of doctors who said he should have a complete rest, a brief statement said.
It gave no details of his medical condition but an ANC spokesman said the movement's president was suffering from exhaustion.
— Reuter
RUSSIA
Yeltsin summons urgent congress
PRESIDENT Boris Yeltsin called yesterday for an urgent session of the country's highest legislature to end a power struggle threatening to derail his reform plans.
A statement issued after talks with his conservative rival Ruslan Khasbulatov said the meeting of the Congress of People's Deputies to ratify an expected power-sharing agreement could take place in the first ten days of March.
— Reuter
PERU
‘Priceless’ Inca treasures stolen
GUNMEN have stolen nearly 60 gold and silver artefacts, dating from Inca and pre-Inca times from a museum in the southeastern Peruvian city of Cuzco.
The pieces are considered some of Peru's finest archaeological treasures and are said to be of incalculable value.
— Reuter
AUSTRALIA
Couple crash out of love
A QUARRELLING couple drove over the same cliff in matching vans after losing control as they careered through Sydney following a heated argument at home, police said yesterday.
The couple were reported to be in ‘satisfactory condition’ in hospital.
The wife's son said his mother and stepfather had decided to end their eight-year marriage after the St Valentine's Day row.
— Reuter
No raw pain promise as US awaits Clinton plan
From Tim Cornwell, Washington
PRESIDENT Bill Clinton will announce a $500 billion programme today to stimulate the American economy, cut the US government deficit, and create half a million jobs.
But he will also detail new taxes that could pose a severe political test for a president elected on a minority vote.
In his State of the Union speech, Mr Clinton will announce higher taxes on wealthy American couples earning over $175,000 a year.
But anyone earning over just $30,000 a year will also feel the pain, Clinton aides admit.
‘I think when you see the whole programme it won't be raw pain,’ Mr Clinton insisted yesterday.
‘I think most middle class Americans, when you look at the cost plus the benefits, are going to be much, much better off.’
The speech, one of the annual set-pieces of American politics, is billed as the grand overture to a presidency that has had a rocky start.
Mr Clinton borrowed a leaf from Ronald Reagan's book by running a curtain-raiser in a TV address broadcast live on Monday night.
He was at pains to explain why his election promises to lower middle-class taxes had actually turned 180 degrees.
‘I had hoped to invest in your future by creating jobs, expanding education, reforming health care and reducing the debt without asking more of you,’ he said.
‘And I've worked harder than I've ever worked to complete that goal.
But I can't.’
Mr Clinton claims new, higher estimates of the US government's budget deficit forced him to sharply revise his election platform.
Polls show American voters more willing to pay taxes than a few years ago.
But they are strongly opposed to his expected tax on oil, coal and other energy sources.
Mr Clinton this week temporarily abandoned his cosy, common touch and wrapped himself in the full trappings of the presidency.
Monday marked the first time he spoke from the Oval Office, sitting at John F Kennedy's desk, on a national holiday celebrating George Washington's birthday.
He asked Americans to pull together in the name of patriotism.
‘If you will join with me, we can create an economy in which all Americans work hard and prosper.
This is nothing less than a call to arms to restore the vitality of the American dream,’ he said.
Mr Clinton intoned ominously that within minutes of his speech tonight to a joint session of Congress, the ‘special interests’ would be out in force.
It was a pre-emptive strike against attempts to rewrite and water down his proposals in the months ahead.
The plan includes a short-term $31 billion public works programme to create jobs.
It promises higher top-rate income taxes for individuals and corporations — and on the wealthier retirees who also receive government benefits.
That may run foul of lobbyists for older Americans, one of the most implacable political lobbies in America.
Republicans promised co-operation, then leapt to the attack yesterday.
The president was admitting to voters that ‘everything I told you in the campaign was not true,’ said Republican Senator Phil Gramm.
Wall Street's early reaction yesterday was a firm thumbs down, as stocks fell fast before levelling out.
But Mr Clinton will win plaudits from most economists if he carries through plans to cut the budget deficit.
Clinton cabinet members will fly to their home states on Thursday to build support.
Mr Clinton will also take to the road, from New York to the West Coast.
Congress speaker Thomas Foley meanwhile ruled out the president appearing before Congress after his speech to take questions in the style of the British Prime Minister.
The idea, touted by some Clinton aides, ‘needs further study’, Mr Foley said.
Call to arms: President Clinton briefs Senator George Mitchell and other Democrats on his programme yesterday
Move to postpone French reforms
FRANCE'S conservatives, poised to win power in next month's general election, said yesterday that plans to reform the constitution were likely to be delayed.
A panel appointed by President Franois Mitterrand recommended on Monday offsetting the head of state's overwhelming powers by boosting the role of parliament and introducing Swiss-style referendums.
But the conservatives, fearing a Mitterrand manoeuvre to split them, have denounced the proposed reforms as an attempt to distract voters.
They claim that other problems are more urgent.
A leading Gaullist, Charles Pasqua, said: ‘If we win the parliamentary elections, as is likely, we will not embark on reforming the constitution before the presidential elections (in 1995).’
The panel also proposed retaining the controversial renewable seven-year presidential term, the longest period in office for a western elected ruler.
Mr Mitterrand, who at 76 is in the fifth year of his second term, has himself said that ‘twice seven years is too long’, and there has been pressure to cut the term to five or six years.
Mr Mitterrand is now expected to submit his own proposals to parliament for debate after next month's election.
Politicians described the panel's proposals for the first major reform of the 35-year-old Fifth Republic's constitution as modest.
Meanwhile the justice ministry said yesterday that it had barred a judge from investigating how the prime minister, Pierre Beregovoy, came to receive an interest-free loan in 1986 from a financier later charged with insider trading.
Judge Thierry Jean-Pierre had sought permission to extend an inquiry into the affairs of the late Roger-Patrice Pelat to cover the million franc (£128,000) loan to Mr Beregovoy.
But a justice ministry spokesman said yesterday: ‘The state prosecutor found no evidence to suggest the loan was of a fraudulent nature and the ministry decided there were no grounds to extend the (judge's) mandate.’
— Reuter
UN in battle of wills with Serbs over relief convoys
UN aid officials said yesterday they were prepared for a battle of wills with rebel Serbs in an attempt to get trucks loaded with emergency supplies through to starving Muslims in eastern Bosnia.
‘We are not going to take no for an answer,’ said Lyndall Sachs of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees' (UNHCR) office.
One UN convoy was still stranded at the Drina river frontier between Bosnia and Serbia after Bosnian Serb militia stopped it crossing on Sunday.
Although a second group of trucks was allowed over the river by the Serbs yesterday, UN officials fear it may be halted short of its destination.
But Ms Sachs said in Belgrade that the UNHCR was determined to get the supplies through and both convoys would remain at Serb checkpoints until they were allowed to pass.
‘We are firm in our resolve,’ she said.
‘We'll sit it out if necessary.’
An estimated 100,000 Muslims have been cut off in eastern Bosnia since Serbs rebelled against the declaration of independence by Muslims and Croats.
The first of the two ten-truck convoys was due to spend its third night just inside the Serbian border.
It was intended to go to Cserka, where 25,000 Muslims are trapped by besieging Serbs.
The second has Gorazde, also under siege, as its destination.
It was allowed through the Bosnian Serb frontier checkpoint.
But previous UN convoys to Gorazde have also been permitted to cross the border, only to be stopped short by the Serbs at Rogatica, 20 miles from the besieged town.
Ms Sachs said the Gorazde convoy left Belgrade too late to reach Rogatica by nightfall.
It would stop along the route and attempt to pass the Serb blockade in the morning.
The Muslim-led Bosnian government came under criticism from the UNHCR for its decision to boycott distribution of aid in Sarajevo until the Muslims in the east are fed.
‘Until the authorities in Sarajevo decide to stop playing politics with humanitarian aid and decide to stop depriving their own people of food, we won't be able to deliver,’ UNHCR spokeswoman Sylvana Foa said in Geneva.
But UNHCR officials in Sarajevo denied a statement by Ms Foa that people were running after the agency's trucks in the city and begging.
Muslim-controlled Sarajevo radio reported that Serb forces launched heavy attacks for the sixth day running on the city's western suburbs of Stup and Azici, using tanks and infantry.
The two strategic suburbs are the last Bosnian-held areas west of the main highway linking Sarajevo with the airport and if they fall the Serbs will control the vital road.
The city was also blacked out.
The electricity authority said the only high-voltage power line had been brought down but it did not say how or by whom.
Sarajevo's main bakery, relying on generators because of power interruptions since the siege started ten months ago, said it had stopped producing bread.
It had run out of diesel fuel for the generators because of the aid boycott.
— Reuter
UNITED STATES
Barbara Bush ‘in hospital’
BARBARA Bush was admitted to hospital in Miami yesterday after being taken ill on a Caribbean cruise, a local radio station reported.
It quoted a hospital official at the Jackson Memorial Hospital as saying that the former first lady was not in a life-threatening condition.
— Reuter
Every day a little older, wiser and stronger
Michael Portillo has been little known outside Westminster, but that is now changing, for he is the minister with the welfare state in his sights, says Joy Copley
YOUNG Michael Portillo's cherubic face smiled out sweetly from the television set.
The prophetic words uttered in reassuring tones were: ‘Each day a little older, a little wiser, a little stronger.’
Since those days — when he starred as the original Ribena Kid at the age of eight — Michael Denzil Xavier Portillo has taken that motto to heart and gone from strength to strength.
As Chief Secretary to the Treasury, he is the youngest member of the Cabinet and its fastest rising star.
He has never been in a stronger position since he entered Parliament in 1984 — and he is not 40 until May.
Now openly tipped as a candidate to succeed Norman Lamont as the next Chancellor in a summer reshuffle, the bookies have also cottoned on to him as a possible future leader of the party and cut his odds from 33-1 to 16-1.
Portillo is one of those infuriating types to whom mud never seems to stick.
Ultra-confident, dashing and with a swashbuckling air he is the archetypal head boy or captain of the rugby team.
The original Teflon man.
Who remembers or cares that it was he, who as minister of local government, introduced the poll tax and defended it passionately to the death?
In a classic piece of political misjudgment he even told his party conference in a speech that the poll tax would win the Tories the next election.
‘If he can survive dropping the poll tax, he can survive anything,’ said one admiring Tory MP.
Instead MPs and the media showed far more interest at the time in gossiping about his stylish new haircut — transformed from a flat basin cut to a bouncy super quiff.
After making a political volte-face he went on, without even a glimmer of embarrassment, to be responsible for bringing in the council tax.
A man with a great eye for detail, he took lead role of the committee stage of the bill leaving Michael Heseltine, the environment secretary, who prefers the broad brush approach, mercifully free of the tedious bits.
Heseltine dubbed Portillo his ‘AA man’— when Hezza didn't know the answer he knew a man who did!
Portillo, who has been described as tinder dry economically and the most talented right-wing politician of his generation, still holds a candle for Margaret Thatcher in the Cabinet.
He was one of three loyalists who went to Downing Street to plead with her to stay on.
Such was his ardour that he forced his way into the room where Thatcher sat in tears, threatening in the process to ‘flatten’ Sir Peter Morrison, who was barring the door.
Since then he has been seen by the right-wing as Maggie's prince-in-waiting, but his skill has been that he has remained very much in favour with the Major Government where his ability and amiability won him respect.
In 1985 he wrote the famous No Turning Back pamphlet and was a member of the Adam Smith Omega Project which drafted the privatisation blueprint for the second Thatcher government.
Things he predicts have a habit of coming true.
In his maiden speech he suggested a reappraisal of the current taxation and spending procedures of the Autumn Statement and the spring Budget, which Lamont announced last March.
He also maintained that increases in public expenditure would lead to increased taxation and higher unemployment.
Last summer he suggested that the appalling state of government finances called for a fundamental reassessment of the way it spends £250 billion a year of taxpayers' money.
Last week he announced that he was to undertake a radical review of public spending and to look at the ‘nitty gritty’ of the welfare state.
To see Portillo as the chief axeman even sent shudders down the spine of some Tory back-benchers who argued for keeping large areas of the welfare state out of the Government's review, particularly health and pensions.
Portillo, however, has a glint in his eye.
He wants to breath new fire into the cause of aggressive free market Conservatism at the point in political history when it is being discredited and there is a muddled attempt to return to consensual government.
Portillo is a conviction politician and is determined to use the spending review to reopen the debate about the boundaries of the welfare state.
The more the Major Government is seen to be drifting and accident prone, the more people scan around for a strong helmsman.
Portillo wants a further swing from the state towards the individual in social welfare, education and health and closer targeting of benefits.
This could be a pivotal review as the direction of any government depends crucially on the level of its spending commitments and how it uses its resources.
He is thinking long term and is in an all-powerful position as the man in charge of the review.
By presenting the choices starkly on public spending and increases in taxation he could get the answers he wants.
Portillo, in whom Nigel Lawson saw ‘something quite out of the ordinary’, is the son of a Spanish law professor who fought for the republicans in the Spanish civil war and a left of centre Scottish school teacher.
He was bought up as a Catholic and a socialist and was educated at Harrow County School for Boys and Peterhouse, Cambridge, where he gained a first class degree in history.
It was at university under the tutelage of Maurice Cowling and others that he changed his political views and became a believer in Friedmanite economics.
After a short spell working for a freight company at Heathrow airport he acquired a post in the Conservative Research Department under Chris Patten, where he was nicknamed ‘The Spaniard’.
He and his wife Carolyn, a head-hunter in the City, live close to the Commons in Westminster.
They have no children.
Few senior ministers are so little known outside Westminster and the City.
But Portillo is fast becoming flavour of the month and will increasingly find himself in the public eye.
He does not court publicity having witnessed other ministers who were tipped for the top and never made it.
In the past he has worked for John Moore, Cecil Parkinson and Nigel Lawson.
He knows he too could be a shooting star that fizzles out or a politician whose time will come.
One thing is for sure: Every day he grows a little older, wiser and stronger.
Strength to strength: once the Ribena Kid, Portillo is fast becoming flavour of the month
Frustrated UN halts all relief operations in Bosnia
THE United Nations suspended humanitarian aid operations in Bosnia-Herzegovina yesterday because of obstruction and interference by all three civil war factions.
Sadako Ogata, the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), had announced earlier that all operations were off except those in central Bosnia.
But hours later, her special envoy based in former Yugoslavia, Jose Maria Mendiluce, suspended those as well.
‘The high commissioner and the special envoy are requiring from the factions new guarantees and firm assurances that aid will reach the victims of the war in Bosnia,’ the UNHCR spokesman in Zagreb, Peter Kessler, said.
‘The Bosnian Serbs are using humanitarian aid as a military weapon and the Bosnian government and Croatian groups are using it as a political weapon.’
He was alluding to blocked relief convoys in Serb-besieged east Bosnia, to a Muslim government boycott of aid to Sarajevo and to Croat harassment of relief columns in the south-west.
Ms Ogata, speaking in Nairobi, said: ‘I have done everything I can to persuade leaders to distinguish humanitarian aid from the conflict, but they have not allowed us to carry out our mandate.’
In Sarajevo, Bosnian President Alija Izetbegovic accused Ms Ogata of engaging in blackmail of the rich against the poor.
Instead of targeting those who were holding up relief convoys, he said, the UN was targeting the action against hungry people.
The UNHCR announcement coincided with fierce fighting in Sarajevo as Bosnian troops threw reinforcements into battle, resisting tank, artillery and infantry attacks by Serb siege forces.
British troops from B Company of the Cheshire Regiment returned fire twice after coming under attack in Gorni Vakuf.
There were no casualties.
— Reuter
Falkirk directors charged with fraud
THE former chairman and vice-chairman of Falkirk Football Club have been charged with fraud by Central Scotland police after an eight-month investigation into the club's affairs.
Hamish Deans and his son George Deans, both directors of Falkirk FC, have been interviewed and cautioned by police.
Both men were ousted from their respective posts after a meeting of the club's board last May.
Det Supt John Ogg, head of Central Scotland CID, issued a statement yesterday saying that two people had been charged with fraud and that a report would be sent to the procurator-fiscal.
Central's fraud officers were called in by Falkirk after an independent auditors' report on the club's finances.
An interim report was sent by police to the Falkirk fiscal, George Scott, in August last year.
£9m budget surplus lets Lothian aim low on council tax
By David Scott Local Government Editor
LOTHIAN Region's council tax will be lower than expected a a result of savings made from a year of spending restraints, it emerged yesterday.
Councillors were told by David Begg, the finance committee chairman, that the regional council's £9.2 million budget surplus was equivalent to a reduction of £18 a head in the poll tax.
Speaking at a finance committee meeting, Mr Begg said poll tax payers in the region in the last financial year had contributed £141.8 million towards the cost of local services.
According to the latest figures, they would be required to contribute £132.6 million in the first year of council tax after it was introduced in April.
That reduction does not take account of further savings of £19.6 million that the council has to make if it is to avoid having its expenditure capped by the Scottish Secretary.
Lothian's spending limit was set at £588.4 million, compared with the council's projected spending of £608 million.
The council's Labour administration is expected to comply with the capping restrictions.
In a report to the committee, David Chynoweth, finance director, called on the council not to set a budget any higher than its capping limit in order to avoid the inevitable disruption of business and impairment of council tax collection which would follow any action by the Scottish Secretary.
Council tax figures for each of the eight property bands will be announced by Lothian early next month, with a final decision being taken on 10 March.
Committees discussing spending will have to identify budget reductions before the figures can be finalised.
One figure which has been proposed already, however, is a council tax water charge of £70 for properties in the ‘middle range’.
The poll tax water charge is £30 but a direct comparison is inappropriate as poll tax charge is levied on each adult whereas the council tax water charge will apply to households.
In addition, a proportion of the cost of tax collection is to be allocated to the council tax water account in 1993-94 in order to show the ‘true’ cost of the service.
The committee was also told yesterday that the threat of bankruptcy action against deliberate non-payers of the poll tax was having a positive effect in reducing debts which stand at more than £100 million for a three-year period.
Mr Begg gave warning that the consequences of being declared bankrupt would be harsh and severe.
He hinted, however, that the sanction might not apply to Ron Brown, the former Labour MP for Leith, who was a prominent non-payment campaigner.
Asked by a Conservative councillor about the former MP's position, Mr Begg said he was reluctant to comment on individual cases because of the Data Protection Act.
He pointed out, however, that since Mr Brown had already ‘gone public’, he could reveal that the council already had been successful in obtaining a court decree against the former MP.
‘I am very confident that, in the near future, Mr Brown's debt will be paid off,’ he added.
Mr Begg called on anyone experiencing genuine hardship over payment of poll tax arrears to contact the council.
‘We shall be as flexible as possible in collecting the debt from them,’ he said.
John Stephenson, leader of the council's Tory group, said his members fully supported the action taken by the council to enforce poll tax collection.
Koo Stark hurt in road accident
KOO Stark, a former girlfriend of the Duke of York, was being kept in hospital last night after being involved in a road accident in London.
The photographer suffered facial cuts, a spokesman said.
Ms Stark, 36, is thought to have stepped into the street while photographing the actress Ruthie Henshall outside the Prince Edward Theatre and been struck by a taxi.
— PA
Abducted woman left abandoned in blazing car
DETECTIVES are hunting two youths who kidnapped a woman driver, sexually assaulted her and abandoned her in a burning car.
Police said last night that they were treating the incident as attempted murder and warned all women motorists to keep doors locked when driving on their own.
The 38-year-old married woman was last night recovering at her home in Luton, Bedfordshire, after her two-hour ordeal at the hands of her abductors.
Chief Supt Alan Marlow, of Luton police, said he had been astonished by the inhuman, calculating and ruthless nature of the attack, and Chief Inspector Colin Woolf said: ‘She is still very traumatised.
It was a quite horrendous incident.’
The woman's ordeal began shortly before 8pm on Tuesday when she slowed her Vauxhall Astra car for two youths who were pushing a dark blue or black Ford Escort across the road.
They ran over to her car.
One pushed her into the passenger seat while he got into the driver's seat and the other jumped into the back.
They then pulled on balaclavas before driving a short distance where they stopped, pulled the woman into the back, placed a plastic bag over her head and bound her with a rope around her neck and hands.
They also took her jewellery, including her wedding and engagement rings.
The youths drove on until they reached a stretch of unmade road where they pulled up, but quickly left after they were disturbed by the sound of a barking dog.
The youths then abandoned her, still bound, in the car park of the Toddington Services on the M1.
Police said after they stopped the car, the bag was pulled from the woman's head and her face was splashed in a petrol-like liquid.
It was also splashed over the back seat of the car, which was then set ablaze by the pair, who then fled into the darkness.
The woman, whose hands were still bound, clambered from the back seat into the front of the two-door car and then struggled to safety.
A lorry driver heard her screams and rushed to her aid.
The youths were both said to be aged 16 to 18, 5ft 7in to 5ft 8in tall, and one had the name Pete tattooed on his knuckles.
— PA
Porn channel to double output
THE hard-core porn channel Red Hot Dutch is to start broadcasting six nights a week instead of three.
Mark Garner, a consultant with the channel's parent company, Continental Television, said: ‘The extra three nights will have films in Italian, German and French instead of English but it shouldn't be a problem for British viewers because dialogue isn't our strong point.’
— PA
‘Home alone’ mother on bail
THE MOTHER of the ‘home alone’ girl Gemma Gibson was last night thought to be staying in a council safe house where social workers will decide when she should be reunited with her daughter.
Yasmin Gibson, 31, an actress, was freed on police bail earlier yesterday after being questioned about allegations that she abandoned Gemma to go on holiday to Spain.
Gemma, 11, will remain in council care until next week.
She is now a ward of court and no decision about her future can be made until the next court hearing on Tuesday, said a social services chief with Hammersmith and Fulham Council in west London.
Police say a report on the affair will now go to the Crown Prosecution Service.
Ms Gibson, 31, was arrested on Tuesday night after cutting short her month-long holiday and flying home.
Protesting her innocence, she was taken in a police van from Heathrow to a police station, near the flat where Gemma was found alone after Ms Gibson left for the Costa del Sol with a male friend.
— PA
Ethnic-minority phones listed
A TELEPHONE directory for Britain's estimated seven million ethnic-minority community was promoted yesterday.
The Home Office minister Peter Lloyd said the UK Black Pages would help in the development of black businesses.
— PA
Disabled man survives new attempt on life
A LOYALIST gunman yesterday shot and wounded a Catholic man who had been disabled in an earlier murder attempt.
The victim, in his 30s, was hit in the arm and leg by the gunman outside a Belfast training centre for the disabled where he was learning computer skills.
His condition was later said to be stable in hospital.
The Ulster Volunteer Force admitted responsibility for the shooting and claimed that the man was an active Irish Republican Army member who had been involved with the killing of four Ulster Defence Regiment soldiers at Downpatrick, Co Down, in April 1990.
The man was disabled eight months after the soldiers died when UVF men shot him in the back.
— PA
Moves made to ease Maastricht's passage
By Chris McLaughlin, Political Correspondent
THE GOVERNMENT moved yesterday to stem the confusion surrounding the Maastricht Bill with a pledge that law officers would be on call for the rest of its gruelling passage through Parliament.
The decision was made as the Labour leader, John Smith, resoundingly beat off a challenge from his own Euro-rebels bent on destroying the treaty.
Labour sceptics were preparing to join Conservatives in a fresh pincer movement on the bill by focusing on the issue of a Central European Bank and the European exchange rate mechanism.
The Labour dissidents failed at a private meeting of the Parliamentary Labour Party, by 112 votes to 46, to commit Labour to oppose an independent bank during the passage of the European Communities (Amendment) Bill.
Mr Smith saw the move to ensure the institution's senior management were elected and accountable as a straightforward wrecking attempt.
The shadow cabinet has agreed that while Labour must oppose the Government on various aspects of the treaty, it should do nothing that would lead to its fall.
The vote on a motion tabled by the Kingswood MP, Roger Berry, opposing an ‘independent and unaccountable European Central Bank’ was seen as a test of Mr Smith's leadership and control of his party over the issue of Europe.
He told the meeting of MPs that he would prefer to see a more democratically-accountable bank but that he refused to support anything which jeopardised the treaty.
There was pressure from the Liberal Democrat leader, Paddy Ashdown, for Mr Smith to declare firmly which way the Labour Party would be voting when the bill came up for its third reading, which many of the rebels were targeting for a full-scale revolt.
The Labour leadership is under pressure from its own MPs to vote against the bill on third reading because the Maastricht Treaty exempts Britain from the social chapter.
Mr Ashdown said: ‘The fact remains that we cannot have the social chapter if the Maastricht Bill is destroyed.
‘It would greatly help the case for the chapter if he were to indicate now that his party supported the Maastricht Treaty.’
For the Tory dissidents, a leading opponent, William Cash, said: ‘The European Central Bank arrangements under the treaty are for the whole of Europe, yet it comprises unelectable, unaccountable bankers making decisions on behalf of the people of this country and elsewhere.
‘It should be opposed by the Labour Party as well as by Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats,’ he told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme.
Bryan Gould, who resigned from the shadow cabinet over Maastricht in the autumn, said:’ If we were to abandon that position now it would be a remarkable break not only with tradition but certainly with principle.’
Kinnock takes Mirror row to Commons
THE row over the ‘enforced’ departure of the Daily Mirror's political editor, Alastair Campbell, spread to the Commons yesterday.
Neil Kinnock, the former Labour leader, tabled a motion expressing lack of confidence in David Montgomery, the former editor of Today, who became the Mirror Group Newspapers' chief executive in October.
Charles Wilson, the MGN managing director, said Mr Campbell ‘resigned, he decided of his own volition, and left’.
But Mr Campbell told Radio 4's Today programme: ‘I'm not sure that I have resigned.
I have left the paper for reasons which I think have been fairly clear.
Obviously I am very sad about it.’
He left on Monday after David Seymour, executive editor of Today, was moved in over his head by Mr Montgomery.
Labour MPs fear that his departure signals a shift from the Mirror's traditional support for the party.
More than 150 of them signed Mr Kinnock's motion.
Labour's leader, John Smith, said he regretted Mr Campbell's departure and was concerned at a possible change in the paper's political stance.
The paper tried yesterday to rebut such views in an editorial comment, adorned with Labour's red rose insigne.
Mr Campbell said he was glad to see the Mirror restate its commitment to Labour.
‘Words are very important, and there they are in black and white, and it is up to the Mirror to make sure that they are adhered to.’
Mr Kinnock's motions says: ‘This House, recalling the clear undertakings given by David Montgomery to Mirror staff when he became chief executive of MGN that he would give the group's editors freedom to edit and not interfere with the editorial and political direction of the papers, deplores the actions which forced the departure of Alastair Campbell…
‘It is a watershed because there could be no clearer definition of the political direction in which Mr Montgomery wants to steer the Mirror Group.’
— PA
Long-term finance for new Daf operation in balance
By Graeme Stewart Industry Correspondent
DAF yesterday won a vital cash injection from the Belgian and Dutch governments, but long-term finance from banks needed to fund a new, slimmer Daf had still not been agreed last night, even although the deadline for agreement is today.
Leyland Daf workers and trades union leaders in Britain criticised the British Government for not taking similar action to the Belgian and Dutch governments, which will invest something in the region of £80 million to help Daf resume production on the continent.
While Dutch administrators have been working on plans to transfer part of the former Daf into a new company known as New Daf, it is not yet known if the rescue package will help save jobs at the five Leyland Daf plants in Britain.
Tommy Gorman, the acting convener at Leyland Daf's Albion plant in Glasgow, where 67 of the 550 workforce were made redundant last Friday, said: ‘It is not the Dutch and Belgian Governments that should be looking after jobs in Glasgow — it is the British Government that should be doing something.’
John Allen, the Amalgamated Engineering and Electrical Union's chief negotiator, said: ‘This rescue package has now been put forward, led by an intervention from the Dutch and Belgian Governments — our Government is still sitting on its hands.’
Crippling losses and mounting debts forced Daf, Europe's sixth biggest truckmaker, to file for court protection from its creditors two weeks ago.
The administrators hope to salvage core businesses, but the slimmed-down Daf must secure funding from creditors to buy important assets it needs to keep making trucks.
Dutch and British administrators have given warning that many of Daf's 12,650 employees in The Netherlands, Britain and Belgium would lose their jobs, even if some operations were saved.
Marriage guidance visit for princess
THE PRINCESS of Wales yesterday visited a marriage guidance centre and attended a training session aimed at helping couples to patch up their marital problems.
In her capacity as patron of Relate, the princess was making what is believed to be her first visit to such a centre since her separation from the prince was announced late last year.
Throughout her hour-long visit in Barnsley, South Yorkshire, the princess looked glum but later cheered up when she was greeted by a crowd of about 2,000 people waiting outside.
She told Relate officials that she was suffering from flu and had lost her voice.
During her tour she attended a confidential 30-minute training session aimed at building self-confidence.
Pat Sanderson, a counsellor who led the session, said later: ‘This was a confidence-building group, looking at the subject of learning new skills.
We have been offering similar sessions to the public for the past 18 months.
‘It was very relaxed, friendly and warm.
The princess contributed to the discussions.’
The centre's manager, Rachel Cave, said: ‘This was a tremendous morale booster for us.’
Strangeways riot accused escape
A TOP-LEVEL inquiry was begun last night after five prisoners being tried in connection with the Strangeways jail riot escaped from a court.
The Home Office said the men fled from Manchester Crown Court at about 5:30pm while in the custody of prison officers.
They were named as Barry Morton, 23, John Murray, 24, Anthony Bush, 27, Mark Azzopardi, 23 and Alan Lord, 31.
Two months after the 1990 riot, Lord escaped while being held in police cells in Bolton awaiting transfer to Wakefield prison.
He was recaptured a few days later in Liverpool in an operation involving more than 60 police officers and a helicopter.
The Home Office said all five were on trial on charges connected with the Strangeways riot.
The men all denied charges of conspiracy to riot and conspiracy to cause grievous bodily harm when they went on trial in October last year.
Lord and Murray also denied conspiracy to cause violent disorder.
Millions of pounds worth of damage was caused during the 25-day siege in April, 1990.
Azzopardi has also escaped before, fleeing from a prison minibus in December last year while en route to Manchester Crown Court from Hull prison.
— PA
‘Home alone’ woman freed on bail
THE MOTHER of the ‘home alone’ girl Gemma Gibson was last night thought to be staying in a council safe house where social workers will decide when she should be reunited with her daughter.
Yasmin Gibson, 31, an actress, was freed on police bail yesterday after being questioned about allegations that she abandoned Gemma to go on holiday to Spain.
Gemma, 11, will remain in council care until next week.
She is a ward of court and no decision about her future can be made until the next court hearing on Tuesday, said a social services official with Hammersmith and Fulham council in west London.
Police said a report on the matter would go to the Crown Prosecution Service.
— PA 
Surplus lets Lothian set lower council tax
By David Scott, Local Government Editor
LOTHIAN's council tax will be lower than expected due to savings made from a year of spending restraints.
Councillors were told yesterday by  David Begg, their finance committee chairman, that the regional council's £9.2 million budget surplus was equivalent to a reduction of £18 a head in the poll tax.
Speaking at a finance committee meeting, Mr Begg said poll tax payers in the region in the last financial year contributed £141.8 million towards the cost of local services.
According to the latest figures, they would be required to contribute £132.6 million in the first year of council tax after it was introduced in April.
The reduction does not take account of further savings of £19.6 million which the council requires to make if it is to avoid having its expenditure capped by the Scottish Secretary.
Lothian's spending limit was set at £588.4 million, compares with planned spending of £608 million.
The council's Labour administration is expected to comply with the capping restrictions.
In a report to the committee, David Chynoweth, finance director, called on the council not to set a budget any higher than its capping limit in order to avoid the inevitable disruption of business and impairment of council tax collection which would follow any action by the Scottish Secretary.
Council tax figures for each of the eight property bands will be announced by Lothian early next month, with a final decision being taken on 10 March.
Spending committees will need to identify budget reductions before the figures can be finalised.
One figure which is already proposed, however, is a council tax water charge of £70 for properties in the ‘middle range’.
The poll tax water charge is £30 but a direct comparison is inappropriate as poll tax charge is levied on each adult whereas the council tax water charge will apply to households.
In addition, a proportion of the costs of tax collection is to be allocated to the council tax water account in 1993-94 in order to show the ‘true’ cost of the service.
The committee was also told yesterday that the threat of bankruptcy action against deliberate non-payers of the poll tax was having a positive effect in reducing debts which stand at more than £100 million for a three-year period.
Mr Begg gave warning that the consequences of being declared bankrupt would be harsh and severe.
He hinted, however, that the sanction might not apply to Ron Brown, the former Labour MP for Leith, who was a prominent non-payment campaigner.
Asked by a Conservative councillor about the former MP's position, Mr Begg said he was reluctant to comment on individual cases because of the Data Protection Act.
He pointed out, however, that since Mr Brown had already ‘gone public’, the council had already been successful in obtaining a court decree against him.
‘I am very confident that, in the near future, Mr Brown's debt will be paid off.’
Mr Begg called on anyone experiencing genuine hardship to contact the council.
‘We shall be as flexible as possible in collecting the debt from them,’ he said.
John Stephenson, leader of the council's Tory group, said his members fully supported the action taken by the council to enforce poll tax collection.
Emma Thompson on track for Oscar success
EMMA Thompson is set for a glittering Hollywood career as she became Britain's hottest chance to win an Oscar.
It was confirmed yesterday that she has been nominated as best actress for her part in the film Howards End.
American producers are taking a great interest in her, and her career is sure to take off whether or not she wins the coveted statuette.
The nomination comes at a crucial time in her life.
In Britain, people have tended to feel that she and her husband, Kenneth Branagh, were becoming over-exposed.
They both had parts in Peter's Friends, a comedy about a university reunion, and they starred alongside each other in the psychological drama Dead Again.
Most recently, Thompson played Beatrice in Branagh's film version of Shakespeare's Much Ado About Nothing.
But in the Edwardian love story, Howards End, her co-star is Sir Anthony Hopkins and it gives her the chance to shrug off the Olivier/Leigh and Burton/Taylor labels she and Branagh have collected.
The film has already won her Hollywood's Golden Globe for best actress and she is in line for the same award from Bafta, the British ‘Oscars’, on 21 March.
Based on the 1910 novel by E M Forster, it tells of two rival families — the cultured Schlegels and the business-minded Wilcoxes — united by marriage.
Thompson's is the pivotal character and the New York, London and Los Angeles critics have already voted her best actress for it.
Thompson was born into a  theatrical family in London.
Her father was Eric Thompson, who devised the Magic Roundabout, and her mother is the actress Phyllida Law.
Her younger sister, Sophie, is also in the profession.
More film roles are expected to come rolling in after the Oscars on 29 March, although Thompson claims she is a no-hoper for glamorous parts.
‘I am not a pretty face.
That is not how I'm seen and never have been.
The sort of parts Michelle Pfeiffer or Sharon Stone get, I would not because I do not look right.
‘Even if my face was right, my body is not.
And if you think I'm going to spend four months on a health farm trying to turn my body into something it never was and never will be, forget it.
Life's too short.’
Thompson studied English at Cambridge and discovered a love of acting there alongside Hugh Laurie and Stephen Fry in the Footlights group.
After graduating, she concentrated on comedy, touring in revues and writing and performing in fringe venues.
That led to TV appearances on Carrott's Lib and Saturday Night Live, but her career took an unexpected turn when she spent 16 months with Robert Lindsay in the West End musical, Me And My Girl.
Television roles followed.
She played alongside Robbie Coltrane in Tutti Frutti, and proved her chameleon-like quality with the 1987 drama, Fortunes Of War.
On set she met and fell in love with her screen husband, Branagh, and they announced they were to marry in 1989.
Ironically they were playing a warring couple on stage in John Osborne's Look Back in Anger at the time.
A few months after their wedding, they were seen as a married couple again — this time, in the film Henry V.
Her only career mistake was the 1988 BBC comedy series she wrote and starred in herself.
The critics panned it.
She has just written her first screenplay, an adaptation of Jane Austen's Sense And Sensibility.
Thompson is the 4/9 favourite with William Hill to win the best actress Oscar, the shortest odds they have ever given for a British actress nominated for a prize.
— PA 
AP
Pivotal role: Emma Thompson has already won the acclaim of the critics for her part in Howard's End and is a firm favourite to win a coveted Academy Award
Late betting plan approved
By Ewen MacAskill, Political Editor
OPENING hours for betting shops in Scotland are to be extended until 10pm during ‘summer months’, MPs decided yesterday.
The move, effective from April, created furore at Westminster as Labour MPs complained the measure had almost no support in Scotland and had been pushed through by English Tory MPs.
The Scottish Office minister Lord James Douglas-Hamilton faced a barrage of interventions from Labour MPs as he defended the move.
In a noisy and at times shambolic committee, opposition MPs objected that the longer hours could create more social problems because of an increase in gambling.
The move brings Scotland into line with England and Wales.
MPs on another committee voted last week that hours should be extended in England and Wales.
Yesterday's committee, though dealing with a Scottish measure, was packed on the Government side with English Tories.
Lord James was the only Scottish Tory on the committee.
When the committee voted, the measure was carried by nine votes to eight, with all the Tories voting for and all the Opposition voting against.
Opponents were further incensed because two of the English Tories who voted in favour had expressed scepticism, and in one case outright hostility, during the debate.
Labour MPs shouted at the end that it was an affront to democracy.
Lord James told the committee an extension of hours had been under consideration since the 1970s.
He said there had been representations from the bookmaking and greyhound racing industries in Scotland opposed to evening opening, though there had also been comments from the bookmaking industry supporting the principle.
Opposition MPs claimed that there had been only one small bookmaker in favour and that everyone else had either objected or been neutral.
They claimed the move had been simply to bring Scotland into line with England and Wales and that the initiative had come from the big bookmakers, who would be the main beneficiaries.
Allitt trial hears father tell of letting son die
A FATHER told a murder trial yesterday of the agonising decision to switch off his baby son's life support machine after he had been severely brain damaged while in the care of the nurse Beverley Allitt.
Christopher Taylor blinked back tears as he described how he had arrived at the hospital to find his son, seven-week-old Liam, had suffered a mysterious collapse.
‘He was lifeless.
He was just lying there with doctors and nurses round him,’ he said.
‘I asked Miss Allitt what had gone wrong, and she said he had been violently sick.’
The father went on: ‘I believe she said he had stopped breathing for a couple of seconds, and if we hadn't had him at the hospital when it happened we would have more than likely lost him.’
Allitt, 24, from Corby Glen, near Grantham, Lincs, denies murdering Liam and three other children, and attempting to murder and causing grievous bodily harm with intent to ten children and a 73-year-old woman.
Mr Taylor, of Grantham, said Liam had gradually improved, and his voice choked with emotion as he described how the next afternoon his son had opened his eyes and reached for his teddy bear.
At 5am the next day, doctors had awoken Mr Taylor and his wife Joanne to tell them their son had had a heart attack and suffered severe brain damage.
A decision had been taken to switch off his life-support machine.
He had been christened that morning and died the same afternoon.
Allitt had written in nursing notes that Liam had suffered violent sickness and diarrhoea.
Margaret Geeson, the nurse in charge of the Grantham and Kesteven Hospital children's ward that day, said she could not remember Allitt ever informing her of the incident.
Allitt ought to have told her, and she would have told a doctor immediately, Nurse Geeson told day three of the trial at Nottingham Crown Court.
The court heard that it was a nursing auxiliary who had spoken to her about Liam after finding him alone in his room and looking pale in his incubator.
Nurse Geeson said she had been a staff nurse on the children's ward for ten years up to 1991 and had only come across four or five occasions when children suffered heart or respiratory attacks.
James Hunt, QC, for the defence, put it to nurse Geeson that Allitt had told her after Liam suffered his first attack but she had forgotten.
She replied she would have remembered because she would have had to take action.
The prosecution abandoned plans to call Mrs Taylor as a witness after the judge, Mr Justice Latham, said families of the victims should not be exposed to any more trauma than was absolutely necessary.
Kidnap fear as racing donkey disappears
THE kidnapping of one of Ireland's top racing donkeys is suspected after the animal vanished from a field.
Toby, a chestnut-coloured former All-Ireland champion thoroughbred, disappeared from a field near Ballymoney, Co Antrim, police confirmed yesterday.
Now, a search is under way on both sides of the Irish border to try to track him down.
The suspected kidnapping comes almost exactly ten years after the Aga Khan's top racehorse, Shergar, was stolen from a stud farm in Co Kildare.
The double Derby-winner is believed to have been killed after ransom demands were issued.
Yesterday, Toby's owner, Jack McKillen, a farmer, of Cloughmills, Co Antrim, said he was devastated by the donkey's disappearance last week.
He said he had recently resisted several offers from people who wanted to buy Toby, who won five races in Co Antrim last year.
‘He was in a field with a pony, but it was left behind.
Obviously somebody knew what they were doing and I imagine Toby was taken away for racing or stud,’ said Mr McKillen.
‘There are very few chestnut donkeys and I would know him anywhere.
But he's probably well away from this area now.
It won't stop me looking for him, however.’
A Royal Ulster Constabulary spokesman said: ‘Although he may have been coming to the end of his racing career, he was potentially valuable for stud purposes.’
— PA
Dental jobs threatened by ‘broken promises’
By Bryan Christie, Health Correspondent
A STRONG attack has been made on ministers for failing to deliver on promises made three years ago to build a new dental hospital in Edinburgh.
It could mean that over the coming 18 months Edinburgh University will have to make up to 40 staff redundant, because of the lack of progress with the scheme.
They are employed at the moment at the university-run dental school which is due to close next year.
The plan, agreed in 1989, was to replace it with a purpose-built dental hospital and postgraduate institute.
However, in spite of promises made at the time by the then Scottish Secretary, Malcolm Rifkind, nothing has happened.
Now the Scottish Office says the future of the dental hospital lies in the plans being drawn up by the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary to become a self-governing trust.
The university's principal, Sir David Smith, said neither ministers nor Scottish Office officials appear to have given any real thought to some of the practical implications.
‘Not least among these is how you close the dental school and maintain the specialist services its staff have provided, if the repeatedly-promised, but still not delivered dental hospital is not established.’
Sir David added there are very expensive costs to the university and ultimately the taxpayer from closing the dental school.
The university aims to redeploy and retrain staff wherever possible, but it is unlikely to be able to offer continuing employment for all dental school staff.
Half of the 40 employees will lose their jobs this autumn and the remainder a year later.
‘So here we are, three years on, with little apparent progress and a buck-passing to the university, which leaves us with a potentially expensive and fiercely unwanted situation,’ said Sir David.
The agreed plan for a postgraduate institute was on the basis that it would be partly financed by National Health Service funds — a commitment made in writing at the time by the then Scottish health minister, Michael Forsyth.
Sir David said that in the last few days, the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, has written to say that NHS funds cannot be used in this way.
A Scottish Office spokesman said changes have taken place in the health service since 1989 and the previous plan did not fit in with the present set-up of purchasers and providers.
It is now suggested that the proposed Royal Infirmary hospital trust offers the best means of taking the plan forward.
He added that the Scottish Office remained committed to the new dental hospital and institute and had guaranteed capital funds for three years.
The dean of dental studies, Prof Philip Sutcliffe, praised staff for the way they had responded during what has been a very unsettling period.
He remained hopeful that something could be worked out and the continuity of service could be maintained.
‘We see it as a Scottish Office responsibility,’ he said.
‘It has committed itself to this new dental hospital and we are looking to it to deliver.’
A lawyer prepared to fight to the death
Sarah Wilson meets Kenneth Richey's lawyer who has devoted his career to defending on Death Row
TROY was sentenced to death on his 16th birthday.
His lawyer reckons he is probably the youngest person on Death Row in the world.
But having lived in a Louisiana prison for five years, he is a relative newcomer.
Another man has been existing in a tiny cell in Georgia for 20 years — waiting to die.
Clive Stafford Smith, who has devoted his legal career to defending those facing execution, says: ‘Who gets killed is utterly arbitrary.
What you get on death row for is primarily determined by how good or bad your defence lawyers is.’
Troy has the mental age of a seven-year-old and he was sentenced to death for kidnap and murder, though Mr Stafford Smith does not accept that he did it.
He says: ‘Troy held up a grocery store with a friend after the alleged killing and stole a packet of vanilla wafers and some milk.
‘They were just kids play acting and now Troy is on death row.’
Most defendants in capital cases are black and they cannot afford legal representation, so they are assigned counsel by the state.
Few of these state lawyers have the time or the expertise to defend their clients properly.
As a result there are currently over 2,600 people sentenced to death in the US and 28 people were executed last year.
Mr Stafford Smith is doing his best to reverse the growing trend towards execution and so far he has been very successful.
But there are not many like him around.
Of the 150 death row cases Mr Stafford Smith has been involved with during his nine-year career, only three have ended in execution.
He has never lost a case at trial.
The three he failed to save had their appeals turned down.
‘It's not difficult to beat the death penalty, if you really do the work.’
Though most of his trials are in the southern states, Mr Stafford Smith recently took on the case of Kenneth Richey, the young Scot who faces execution in Ohio.
‘I wish I'd been involved with his case two or three years ago,’ says Mr Stafford Smith, ‘because the best shot you have is on direct appeal.
In his case, the court voted four to three to uphold his conviction on appeal, which is very close.’
He is still optimistic that Richey's conviction will be overturned, but the case could drag on for another six years or more.
Mr Stafford Smith is one of four lawyers who work at the Southern Centre for Human Rights in Atlanta, Georgia, which is the only office of defence lawyers funded solely by private contributions.
Four years ago there was no-one to defend the accused except state lawyers.
Now there are 15 resource centres funded by the federal government, but these are designed only to fight appeals.
In any case, they cover less than half the 37 American states which have the death penalty.
About a third of those on death row are retarded, estimates Mr Stafford Smith, and often do not understand the questions being asked by police and prosecutors.
The famous case of Derek Bentley, who was hanged in Britain, was a classic example of the kind of people who slip through the cracks in the US and end up being executed, says Mr Stafford Smith.
Bentley was mentally deficient and many believed he should not have been held responsible for his actions.
‘In the US, irresponsible politicians pretend to the electorate that by killing a few people you're going to solve society's crime problem and people believe them.’
Instead of investing money in education programmes which might help counteract rising crime, politicians prefer to hold up the death penalty as evidence that they are doing something tough about crime.
‘But when push comes to shove,’ says Mr Stafford Smith, ‘it's a lot easier to say you're for the death penalty than to actually kill people.
People are really ambivalent about what they are doing.
‘The real question is not the rights and wrongs of the death penalty, because that's just not worth debating.
The real question is what does it achieve, why do people go through all this stuff.
Psychologically it's quite interesting except unfortunately they are killing people.’
The death penalty is certainly not a means of saving money, as many have claimed.
According to Mr Stafford Smith, there have been studies showing that each execution costs $3.5 million.
By contrast it costs about $600,000 to keep someone in prison for life if they live for another 40 years.
Most of the money spent in capital cases goes towards the litigation, which can take over a decade before all the avenues of appeal have been exhausted.
The prosecution is allowed to fly in expert witnesses from around the country.
The lawyers mounting the defence, however, rarely get more than $1,000 for the entire case, says Mr Stafford Smith.
When he wanted to bring witnesses from New York to a court in Georgia, the judge only allowed $1.50 per day for meals and hotel bills.
His office took up the slack, but the witnesses had to travel for 30 hours by bus to get there.
‘I would normally expect to put in about 1,000 hours on a case.
That works out at a dollar an hour which is less than the federal minimum wage.’
The Southern Centre has successfully sued both Mississippi and Florida on this basis and they now have to pay $25 an hour to defence lawyers.
A similar suit is pending in Louisiana.
But in most states defendants are still represented by state lawyers.
One of Mr Stafford Smith's clients in Mississippi was represented at trial by a third-year law student.
‘Her first words to the judge were: ‘Your honour, may I compose myself, I have never been in a court room before.’
‘She was representing him for his life.’
He ended up getting the death penalty, not for murder, but for molesting a 12-year-old.
‘However bad a crime like that might seem to people, in the great scheme of things, when there are 55,000 murders each year in the US, that is not the sort of crime that should be getting the death penalty.
‘They never seem to get the people who commit the most terrifying crimes.
It's just a lottery and there is no rhyme or reason to who lives and who dies.’
Battling on: Clive Stafford Smith, left, and Kenneth Richey
HIGHLANDS
50 jobs lost at oil rig yards
MORE than 50 workers are to lose their jobs at two Highland oil rig yards.
At the McDermott-Scotland yard at Ardersier, near Inverness, 40 workers are to go after its last job, a jacket for Amerada Hess's Scott oilfield, was shipped out on Tuesday.
The yard will be run down over the next three weeks with the loss of 600 jobs.
Employment is to end for 16 men at Highlands Fabricators at Nigg, on the Cromarty Firth, leaving 820 hourly-paid workers.
Work on a platform for Elf's Froy field begins in March.
ST ANDREWS
Lyle scores with course design
THE golfer Sandy Lyle has won his first contract to design an 18-hole championship course, about 25 miles from Berlin.
The former Open champion signed the contract at St Andrews yesterday and said he was delighted to be involved in the venture.
The £85 million course is likely to be completed by September next year.
GLASGOW
Man's death may have drugs link
POLICE investigating the death of a man in Glasgow are considering the possibility that it may be drugs-related.
If it is, it will bring the total of drug deaths in Strathclyde to more than 70 over the past 15 months.
Stephen Cuisick, 27, of Cheapside Street, Anderston, was found unconscious in a close in Denmark Street, Possilpark.
He died on the way to Stobhill Hospital.
A report has gone to the procurator-fiscal.
DUNFERMLINE
Three-year jail term for break-ins
AN unemployed gardener, Colin Edmiston, 51, of Inchcolm Court, Edinburgh, was jailed for three years at Dunfermline Sheriff Court yesterday when he admitted breaking into four houses in Dalgety Bay, Fife, and stealing goods to the value of more than £34,000.
Charles Scott, 25, of Findlay Gardens, Edinburgh, who admitted acting with Edmiston in one of the break-ins, was jailed for 15 months.
The court was told both accused had extensive criminal records.
DUNS
Toy library thief must repay money
A WOMAN who stole £2,700 from the Berwickshire Toy Library Association was yesterday ordered to repay the money.
At Duns Sheriff Court, Sheriff James Paterson warned 34-year-old Mary Warnock, of Stobswood, Duns, that unless she made substantial inroads to the total within 12 months, she would face a prison sentence.
Warnock had admitted stealing the money over a two-year period while she was the toy library's treasurer.
She had also forged accounts.
Sheriff Paterson told her the charity had been devastated as a result of her actions.
STROMA
Refloating of ship delayed
SALVAGE specialists were forced yesterday to delay plans to refloat the Danish cargo ship aground on an island in the Pentland Firth.
They had hoped to use a tug in an attempt to pull the Bettina Danica off the rocks.
An examination of the vessel has revealed that her hull was more badly damaged than had been thought.
ABERDEEN
Poll tax rebels bankrupted
TWO MORE Grampian poll tax rebels were sequestrated — made bankrupt — at Aberdeen Sheriff Court yesterday for non-payment of community charge arrears.
Seven cases were dismissed for various reasons at the civil hearing held before Sheriff Alexander Jessop.
The sequestrations follow civil action brought by Grampian Regional Council's legal department as part of their continuing operations against poll tax defaulters.
ORKNEY
Social work leader attacks film plans
PROPOSALS by the BBC to make a drama-documentary about the Orkney child abuse affair have been criticised by a British Association of Social Workers chief.
Speaking after a visit to Orkney this week, Harry Garland, BASW Scottish convener, said it ‘would only lead to further distress for all concerned, and is not likely to lead to any clarification of the issues’.
He said the media should consider the interests of the children.
Youth detained for life for lawyer's murder
A TEENAGER, Alexander Sommerville, was detained for life yesterday for the senseless and brutal murder of a middle-aged lawyer.
The solicitor, Gerard Friel, 47, had been out walking his dog when he was involved in a shouting match with two youths near his home, the High Court in Glasgow heard yesterday.
Mr Friel had become so frightened that he took refuge in a friend's house nearby until he thought the coast was clear at midnight.
On his way home, he had come face to face with the two youths with whom he had argued earlier.
Robert McMartin, 17, and the 15-year-old boy he had encountered earlier were now with Sommerville, 19, and other youths.
Alistair Campbell, prosecuting, said: ‘Mr Friel shouted: ‘Don't come near me,’ but the youths kept coming and the 15-year-old boy knocked him to the ground.’
McMartin had joined in punching and kicking the lawyer and then Sommerville had stabbed the victim four times on the back.
Mr Friel had staggered back towards his friend's house and they had heard him shouting for help.
An ambulance had rushed him to hospital, but attempts to save him had failed.
Sommerville, of Redburn, Bonhill, Dunbartonshire, admitted stabbing and murdering Mr Friel, who lived on the same estate, in the local shopping centre on 30 October last.
McMartin, also of Redburn, Bonhill, and the 15-year-old boy, who had initially been charged with murder, admitted punching and kicking the lawyer repeatedly.
The judge, Lord Cowie, who was told the youths were first offenders, sent Sommerville to a young offender's institution for life.
He put McMartin on probation for 18 months and deferred sentence on the 15-year-old for a year, warning him to be of good behaviour.
Mr Campbell said that during the first incident, when Mr Friel and the two younger accused had been shouting at each other in the shopping centre, the lawyer had struck the 15-year-old on the face with the dog leash.
Later, Mr Friel had refused his friend's invitation to escort him home, then met up with the accused again by chance and been assaulted.
Next day, McMartin's parents had noticed that he was taking a great interest in news of the murder and he had told them some things about the incident.
As a result they had taken him to the police, and then Sommerville had been questioned.
Sommerville had told officers: ‘I had a knife and I just stabbed him.’
The knife later had been recovered from its hiding place.
A post-mortem on the body of Mr Friel had revealed that three stab wounds had penetrated the lungs and death had been caused by bleeding.
Donald Findlay, QC, defending, said that Sommerville bitterly regretted his folly at becoming involved and had expressed genuine sorrow, regret and shock at what had happened.
‘He did not start the incident but reacted to it with fatal and tragic consequences,’ said the counsel.
Kevin Drummond, QC, for McMartin, said the accused had gone to the police with his parents almost immediately and he had pled guilty to greatly reduced charges.
Gordon Jackson, QC, for the boy, said the accused had been severely shaken by what had happened and his months on remand.
Skippers fear tankers adrift at Sullom Voe
SHETLAND fishermen fear lives will be lost in the busy grounds north of the islands.
There, they claim, boats risk colliding with oil tankers waiting to go to Sullom Voe oil terminal.
Those often cut their engines and drift out of control off Muckle Flugga, possibly to save fuel.
At busy times, 100 or more fishing boats often work in the area.
Skippers say up to a dozen tankers can be seen drifting among them.
The skipper of one Shetland boat, Magnie Stewart, said the tankers would put up two red lights to give warning that they were not under command.
He called for tanker masters to be ordered to stop using that signal routinely.
If the tankers were genuinely in trouble, tugs should be sent from Sullom Voe, he added.
The Shetland MP, Jim Wallace, is also looking into the fishermen's claims.
Mr Stewart said that there was an accident waiting to happen and he feared lives would be lost.
CUPAR
Boy dies after bus accident
AN eight-year-old boy died last night after an accident involving a bus on the outskirts of Cupar in Fife.
He taken to the Victoria Hospital, Kirkcaldy, suffering from severe injuries but later died.
The accident happened on the Cupar-Springfield road at about 4:30pm.
Fishermen will campaign for seal cull off Orkney
ORKNEY fishermen are to campaign for a seal cull controlled by the Government after claims that numbers are getting out of control and threatening the livelihood of fishermen.
The Orkney Fisheries Association executive committee has agreed that a request should be made to the Government.
Geordie Costie, a committee member, forecast that if a properly-regulated cull were not organised, there was a danger fishermen could start shooting the seals themselves.
‘Over the last ten years it's been getting much worse.
The seals have been robbing the creels blind.
There's more and more of them all the time,’ said Mr Costie.
‘Nobody wants to exterminate them but it's for their own good.
The seals are starving due to overpopulation and that's why they're getting into creels.
‘In the early days we were not sure what was doing it, possibly otters or something, but now there are lots of ways of proving it's the seals.
‘One fishermen told me he saw seals in the area where he shot 20 creels and when he came back 20 minutes later they were all robbed.
‘I can easily understand how people can see seals as dewy-eyed little things but if you're a fisherman who has just had 200 creels robbed and you haven't even made enough money to pay for your fuel never mind make a living, you would view them differently.
‘If there's not a properly controlled Government cull, fishermen are going to start shooting them from open boats and you are going to end up with injured seals.
MPs claim new orders extend landlordism into the sea
By Auslan Cramb, Environment Correspondent
PLANS to ranch shellfish on the Scottish seabed have been condemned as a greedy scramble for natural resources by Calum Macdonald, the Labour MP for the Western Isles.
He claims a new form of scallop farming, due to begin soon in Loch Crinan in Argyll, extends the principle of landlordism into the sea and must be opposed.
With other Highlands and Islands MPs, he has signed an early day motion in the Commons objecting to a recently granted Several Order, a little-used mechanism which can entitle an individual or company to exclusive farming rights on the sea bed.
The first order has been granted by the Scottish Office, three years after the original application, to Scallop Kings of Crinan, one of Scotland's biggest shellfish operators.
Seventeen others are being considered, covering sites in Skye, the West coast and Orkney.
Mr Macdonald claims the orders will deny traditional fishermen access to areas they have used for generations.
A number of local fishermen's associations have objected to the development.
Mr Macdonald, his fellow Labour MP Norman Godman, and the Liberal Democrat MPs Ray Michie and Jim Wallace, have been condemned by shellfish growers for failing to understand the orders or their impact.
Large and small shellfish companies have applied for Several Orders, and they are being promoted for environmental and economic reasons by the industry body, the Association of Scottish Shellfish Growers.
The order does not confer ownership of the seabed, but is designed to stop rustling of stock introduced to the sea.
The association's Doug Macleod said: ‘Scallop ranching is not only more environmentally friendly than traditional methods, as it is an equipment-free method, but there is no scenic impact and no impact on vessel movements.’
He added that the public fishery should benefit from the spatfall (the shellfish spawn) which would be released into the sea from the ranched scallops.
Ranching is seen in the industry as a way of transferring barren seabeds into productive aquaculture.
The scallops would be put on to the seabed after about two years growth in special nets, and grown on for a further two years before harvesting.
Michael Stewart, the managing director of Scallop Kings, said he had dived in Loch Crinan and the area was devoid of scallops.
Mr Macdonald, he claimed, had not been well briefed.
‘The MPs have reacted to pressure from their fishing  constituents ,’ he said.
He claimed there should be no erosion of traditional fishing areas, and stressed that each application would have to go through a long process before being granted.
If there was one objector, there would have to be a public inquiry.
Mr Wallace, the MP for Orkney and Shetland, who signed the early day motion, said the orders appeared to neutralise the area involved from other activities.
Calum Macdonald: claims the orders deny traditional access
Braer disaster pay-outs are not being made, say salmon farmers
SIX weeks after the Braer disaster, Shetland farmed salmon may be starving to death because compensation has not been paid for losses, writes Auslan Cramb.
The Shetland Salmon Farmers Association said yesterday that the compensation system meant to save the industry from financial hardship was not yet working.
Three operations are said to be on the verge of bankruptcy because their claims — submitted through the ‘one door’ compensation office in Lerwick — have not been met.
The SSFA said the cash flow problems of the salmon farmers inside the fishing and harvesting exclusion zone should have been relieved by the £1 million bridging fund set up by the Scottish Office.
However, the chief executive, James Moncrieff, said that the government money was being used to deal with the cash flow problems of the international compensation funds, rather than the farmers themselves.
He was aware of only one pay-out to a salmon farm, and he was not sure if that money had come from the emergency fund.
The association has made repeated complaints to the Scottish Office, and to the administrators of the £55 million compensation funds.
The money is provided by Skuld, the ship insurers, and the inter-governmental International Oil Pollution Compensation Fund (IOPCF).
Mr Moncrieff added: ‘Instead of providing short-term cash flow assistance to producers, the bridging fund is apparently going to provide cash flow assistance for the oil funds.
So it is really the same money as the oil funds.’
Payments from the IOPCF were made on the basis of direct economic loss, rather than cash flow problems.
The latter had affected those who were meant to harvest fish when the Braer struck the coast.
Under agreement with the IOPCF, 600,000 mature contaminated fish inside the exclusion zone will be slaughtered and paid for.
However, one farm which has only young 1992 fish has been told by its bankers that they do not believe the fish will ever be accepted for sale, even if tested clean, because of the public perception of the oil spill.
As a result, the bank has refused to extend an overdraft to allow the farm to grow the fish on, and the salmon are now starving.
Chris Young, SSFA chairman, speaking at the Scottish Fish Farming Conference in Glasgow, said: ‘Hopefully there will be some money flowing shortly.
So far, the bridging fund has not been applicable to many of the circumstances farmers have been needing to apply for.’
Mans Jacobssen, director of the IOPCF in London, insisted yesterday that there was no row with the Shetland salmon farmers, and no intentional delay.
He confirmed that the Scottish Office money could cover only cash flow difficulties from the oil funds — not the producers.
But there was enough money to compensate farmers, and claims were being worked on as fast as possible.
One farm had received £150,000 from the oil fund, and nine claims were being dealt with, three of which should be paid as advance hardship payments today.
A spokesman for the Scottish Office said its £1 million was handed over to Shetland Islands Council and claims against it would be passed on through the IOPCF.
It was no longer a Scottish Office matter.
Travellers plan protest
By Tom Morton
NEW age travellers in the Highlands are to stage a protest against what they claim is police harassment tomorrow outside Inverness Sheriff Court.
One traveller, Lisa Miller, is due to appear in court on charges of criminal trespass dating back several months.
Yesterday, Ian Forrest, who has just moved his home, a truck, from Glen Moriston to Laggan, said the protest would involve residents of both the 40-strong Laggan site and the ten remaining at Glen Moriston.
‘We want to draw attention to what the police have been doing,’ he said.
’ They have raided the Glen Moriston site twice this week already in strength, and they said they would return before the end of the week.
It is simple harassment.
They also told us that next time they would hold people in custody until the next court sitting.’
Northern Constabulary has confirmed that two visits have been made to the Glen Moriston site, during which several people were charged under the 1865 Criminal Trespass (Scotland) act.
Claims of harassment have been strongly denied.
A Scottish Office spokesman confirmed that the whole issue of so-called new age travellers was being considered by the Secretary of State's standing committee on travellers.
He gave the official definition of a traveller, as in tinker or gipsy, as’ a person of nomadic habit of life, irrespective of race or origin’.
That he added, included new age people.
‘They do come within that definition, although this is open to intepretation’ he said.
‘In other words, it's open to the police to harass us,’ said Mr Forrest.
Highland Regional Council's policy and resources committee nominated four councillors to serve on a special Highland liaison committee on travellers, in spite of strong objections from some members to the committee considering the new-age phenomenon.
‘The problem is not with the indigenous travellers as we used to know them,’ said councillor Valerie MacIver, a member of the Secretary of State's travellers' committee.
‘It is with what is called new age travellers.’
Young Glasgow aviator is over the moon
PAUL REID
Andrew Blaikie, 17, on right, an aviation enthusiast, has a lot to grin about, and a double reason for looking forward to the coming year, writes ALAN DRON.
A sixth-year pupil at Glasgow's Kelvinside Academy, he takes to the air this summer after winning a Royal Air Force flying scholarship, which will give him 30 hours at the controls of a light aircraft and see him going solo during his course.
He won one of just over 100 places from 2,000 applicants after interviews and computerised tests at RAF Biggin Hill.
Andrew, of Whittinghame Drive, Kelvindale, senior non-commissioned officer of his school's Combined Cadet Force air force section, will also spend a fortnight in North America, after winning one of just 12 places for UK cadets on the International Air Cadet Exchange Scheme.
Designed to foster links amongst young people with an interest in aviation, the scheme will give him flights on both civil and military aircraft.
He plans to complete a degree in economics and international relations at St Andrews University before deciding whether to make the RAF his career.
Short, sharp weather shock
SEVERE snow falls and high winds are expected to hit substantial parts of northern Scotland, Stonehaven and Drumochter northwards, for up to 24 hours from tonight, forecasters say.
Weather-Watchers say a short spell of very cold weather is due to arrive in Scotland later today, particularly affecting the northern Highlands.
Milder weather is expected to return over the weekend.
Man held in custody as siege ends
THE long police siege at an Aberdeenshire cottage ended peacefully yesterday afternoon — more than 40 hours after an oilman had locked himself inside his home, allegedly in possession of a shotgun.
Brian Say, 44, had been allowed to sleep undisturbed during the night at his home at Craigmuir Croft, in the small village of Ythanbank, near Ellon.
A dialogue with trained police negotiators resumed at 8am.
A Grampian Police spokesman said the incident had been successfully concluded at 2.40pm, adding: ‘A man was taken into custody and a report will be submitted to the procurator-fiscal.’
The scale of the police operation had been substantially reduced during the day.
The number of officers surrounding the house was cut from 30 to 12, although the area remained sealed off to members of the public and the media.
INVERNESS
Criminals left flat by new technology
TWO BUNGLING criminals thought they would keep one step ahead of police by using a high-technology scanner device to eavesdrop on them.
But Thomas Reid, 32, and Neil Anderson, 21, were each jailed for four months at Inverness Sheriff Court yesterday when they admitted trying to break into Torvean golf course.
The pair, both of Bridgeview Drive, Inverness, had fled in heavy snow after an alarm went off and police had followed their footprints.
They were found under a bridge, listening to their scanner, but its batteries had run down and they weren't aware the police were so close.
The incident happened on January 11 this year at the premises of the municipal gold club at Torvean.
Fiscal depute James MacGillivray said father of two Reid, of 20 Bridgeview Drive, Inverness and Anderson of 37 Bridgeview Drive, Inverness disabled one alarm with a rake and shovel.
But when they tried to disarm the other with spray foam, it went off and police and dogs were called out.
Defence agent Jack Gowans said: ‘It was not the best day for my clients to chose because it was a dawdle for the police to catch up with them.’
And Mr Gowans went on to criticise the ease with which scanners can be bought to monitor police broadcasts.
However he revealed that although stores were not acting improperly, police have now persuaded them to keep a register of the names and addresses of people purchasing a scanner.
Sheriff William Fulton jailed both men, who admitted attempted theft by housebreaking, for four months in view of their previous records which they admitted.
And he told them: ‘You have been in this court many times last year and obviously haven't learnt a lesson.
This expedition was a determined and organised attempt, despite the outcome.’
Attempt to block Falkirk meeting refused by judge
By John Robertson, Law Correspondent
THREE directors of Falkirk FC face being ousted from the board tonight after a judge refused to block an extraordinary general meeting.
The meeting had been called by the Premier Division club's majority shareholders, Hamish and George Deans, who have been involved in a bitter dispute with fellow club directors.
The Court of Session heard that the original plan had been for the Deanses to use their 57 per cent shareholding to remove four directors — Wilson Young, James Johnston, Alastair McKenzie and Clive Scott.
That would have left only the Deanses and the club secretary, Alexander Moffat, on the board.
Fifteen shareholders went to court seeking an order to stop the meeting.
They alleged that with a three-man board, the Deanses would be able to ride roughshod over anyone's wishes but their own, to the prejudice of minority shareholders.
During the hearing, however, Neil Davidson, counsel for the Deanses, gave an undertaking that they would no longer be moving at the meeting for the removal of Mr Johnston as a director.
In addition, a fifth, independent, director would be co-opted to the board.
He was to be someone acceptable to the Deanses and to Mr Moffat and Mr Johnston and a ‘business figure of standing’ had already been approached.
No name was revealed.
Lord Cullen, who had imposed restrictions on the reporting of many allegations made in the case, decided in light of the undertaking to refuse to ban the meeting.
The matter was thrown into further confusion, however, when leave to appeal was granted to the minority shareholders.
Their counsel, John Mitchell, QC, said that it had yet to be decided whether an appeal would be pursued and it was unclear whether that could be arranged before the meeting at Brockville tonight.
After the case, Hamish Deans said that as far as he was concerned the meeting would be going ahead as scheduled.
Radical reform of transport wins approval
A RADICAL 12-year plan to provide a better service for pedestrians, cyclists and users of public transport in Central Scotland was given final approval yesterday.
The plan, known as ‘All Change,’ which is also designed to discourage the use of private cars, received overwhelming cross party support at a full meeting of Central Regional Council.
It involves capital spending of £79 million over the next 12 years, plus up to £3.3 million a year revenue spending on schemes including pedestrianisation, traffic calming, cycle paths, improved bus facilities, more railway stations, and new rail links to Alloa and, later, to Grangemouth.
The architect of the plan, the transport officer, Alex Macaulay, said that an extensive consultation exercise had shown public support of a level that was ‘really quite remarkable’.
Art gallery's curator goes after inquiry
By John Smith
THE SUSPENDED curator of the Smith Art Gallery and Museum in Stirling, Pamela Diamond, has resigned after an inquiry prompted by concern over falling attendances.
After a meeting last night of the committee which runs the museum, a statement said the decision had been based on an ‘amicable agreement’ between the two parties.
The inquiry was conducted by senior officials from Central Regional Council and Stirling District Council, who provide most of the Smith's funding.
The statement said Ms Diamond was relinquishing her post ‘because of mutual concerns about the operation and direction of the museum and gallery.’
It added that the committee would consult the Scottish Museums and the Scottish Arts Council before making any decisions on ‘restructuring staffing arrangements and proceeding to make an appointment’.
In 1990, soon after Ms Diamond's appointment, visitors to the museum peaked at 36,000.
They fell in 1991 by 11,000, and by 6,000 more last year to just over 19,000.
University in black for second year
By Frank Urquhart
ABERDEEN University has recorded a surplus for the second year in succession, underlining the turnaround in the institution's fortunes during the past decade.
Figures released yesterday show a surplus of £2.1 million last year, after the £601,000 surplus in 1991.
Michael Yuille, the university's finance director, said: ‘The results show that the difficulties of the 1980s are now behind us and we can look forward with greater confidence.’
However, Dr Richard Ellis, convener of the finance and estates committee, cautioned: ‘The recent changes in government policy towards higher education contain little to cheer the university sector.
It is therefore increasingly important to operate with a reasonable surplus.’
The financial report reveals that the university's total income increased by 15 per cent during the year to £75.5 million.
There were increases in income from almost every source, with a 65 per cent rise in fees from overseas students totalling £5.7 million, and a 17 per cent increase in income from research to £11.5 million.
The report also states that the university is to borrow £20 million over the next 25 years to finance the provision of 2,000 extra bed spaces for students by 1995.
Some of the bed spaces will be leased, but the majority will be purpose-built and owned by the university.
Opt-out tactic fails to save school
By Douglas Fraser Education Correspondent
PARENTS of children at Dalmuir primary school in Clydebank have failed to secure self-governing status for the school.
The Scottish Office announced yesterday that the attempt to use the Government's opt-out law to thwart Strathclyde Region's plans to close the school had not succeeded.
The parents had been warned that was likely in December.
A similar announcement last year ended the self-governing hopes of a like-minded group of parents with children at London Street primary in Edinburgh.
The decision comes as an embarrassment to the Scottish Office, which once planned opting-out as a centrepiece of its schools policy but has had to veto both the Yes votes so far — favouring Labour-run local authorities over parents.
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, the education minister, emphasised yesterday that opting-out was not an escape route from closure threats, where councils were spending millions of pounds maintaining empty seats in empty classrooms.
Dalmuir has 161 pupils, and space for 462.
‘Rationalisation of school provision is necessary, however painful at the time, and I would encourage all education authorities to continue their efforts to ensure that taxpayers’ money is better spent on other aspects of our education service,’said the minister.
Three other schools are to have ballots of parents on opting out, in response to regional rationalisation plans.
In south Glasgow, two secondaries are beginning a rolling programme which is aimed at thwarting a major shake-up by Strathclyde.
In Dunblane — in the most plausible opt-out attempt so far — parents at St Mary's Episcopal primary school are seeking to halt Central Region's plans to reduce the school from three to two teachers.
In spite of the embarrassment, Lord James repeated his encouragement to schools to use the self-governing powers and claimed that the Scottish Office has received 60 inquiries about such a change since June.
‘Self-governing status gives parents and schools direct local accountability for their children's education, taking into account the needs and priorities of their schools and their area,’ he said.
‘I am confident that, in due course, self-governing schools will become as accepted, as successful and as beneficial a part of the Scottish education system as school boards have become.’
Strathclyde may reroute its ScotRail subsidy
By Alan Forbes
GLASGOW could have a light rail transport network much sooner than expected if Strathclyde's investment freeze on ScotRail services becomes permanent.
The regional council says that unless it gets guarantees about the money it wants to spend on a railway service now facing privatisation, it may have to switch the money to its own plans to upgrade Glasgow public transport.
Such a policy change could see the city renewing its love affair with trams years before the end of the century when their modern equivalent, light rail transport (LRT), was to be introduced.
Strathclyde has told ScotRail that it cannot invest more in local rail services, including the largest suburban network outside London, unless the Government gives assurances that it will continue to have a major say after privatisation.
The regional council gives £30 million a year in subsidies to ScotRail and is providing £150 million in capital for service improvements.
Strathclyde's chairman of highways and transport, Malcolm Waugh, has said he will give no blank cheque to ScotRail's future owners unless he gets assurances that the role of the council is written into franchising arrangements.
Talks between Strathclyde and ScotRail are continuing, but if they fail, the region's moratorium on spending could become a hard freeze, Charles Gordon, the region's depute chairman of highways and transport, said.
Mr Gordon said: ‘If this happens we want to take projects off the shelf to keep up our level of investment, and we would have to look earlier at light rail transport schemes.’
Strathclyde has outlined a £250 million LRT scheme, which would link the city centre with the peripheral housing schemes Easterhouse, Castlemilk and Drumchapel.
The council may also decide to invest in guided buses, latter-day trolley buses, which do not incur the heavy costs of disturbing underground cable, pipes and sewers, that a comprehensive LRT network would.
The environmental pressure group Glasgow For People said that it had called on MPs to urge Strathclyde to cancel its plans for Glasgow road projects costing more than £200 million.
GFP's vice chairman, David Holgate, said that the proposed twin bridges across the Clyde, beneath the Kingston Bridge, would increase congestion and a dual carriageway from Townhead to London Road would act as a barrier between the east end and the city centre.
Mr Gordon accused GFP of being ‘fundamentalists’ about roads and said: ‘It is a myth that other cities are spending nothing on roads.
Our studies show that most European cities see ring roads as a way of keeping traffic out of their centres.’
NITSHILL
Man held over pub death
A 47-YEAR-OLD man was in custody last night in connection with the death of James Weir outside a pub in Nitshill, on the south side of Glasgow, on Tuesday.
Mr Weir, 28, of Newfield Square, Nitshill, died in the city's Southern General Hospital after an incident outside the Cavendish Bar.
The man being held by police is expected to appear at Glasgow Sheriff Court today.
Old lay-out ‘would have prevented Newton disaster'
THE Newton and Bellgrove rail crashes could both have been avoided if track lay-out had not been changed, a British Rail executive yesterday told a fatal accident inquiry.
Had the two junctions not been converted to single track it would be impossible for two trains to collide on them, BR's then director of operations, Ivor Warburton, agreed.
Two people were killed in a train crash at Bellgrove and four at Newton on similar single-lead junction lay-outs.
In spite of a fatal accident inquiry into the Bellgrove accident, no action was taken in time to prevent Newton, it was alleged.
Instead, a British Rail executive bypassed a possible ban on the £5 million junction in Lanarkshire.
It was the chief inspecting officer of railways (CIOR) who placed an immediate embargo on single-lead junctions after Bellgrove.
Mr Warburton told the Newton inquiry that he had felt he could not have ‘sensible or rational’ discussions with the CIOR over the matter.
Instead he had called in the deputy inspector and regional engineers for provisional evaluations of a number of schemes which could have been affected.
Newton was one of them, and in spite of public fears over a similar junction elsewhere, it had been given the go-ahead.
Under working practices at the time, junctions so approved could be put into full operation before final safety checks were carried out by the inspectorate.
Mr Warburton, whose responsibility it was to run an efficient, economic, and safe railway, had considered the CIOR's embargo to be prohibitive and had issued his own perceived clarification of it to regional managers before the meeting at which the new Newton lay-out was approved.
He had felt, at the time, ‘utter frustration’ he told the hearing, and he had always believed and still does that single-lead junctions were no more dangerous than any other.
Cross-examined by Leeona Dorrian, QC, for the Department of Transport and the Health and Safety Executive, he acknowledged that the collisions at both Bellgrove and Newton would not have occurred had their current single-track lay-outs had not been introduced.
British Rail has said it will reinstate Newton as a double-track junction.
The inquiry continues.
CASTLEMILK
Police appeal to taxi driver
POLICE in the Castlemilk area of Glasgow yesterday appealed for a taxi driver to contact them, in the hope that he can provide a clue to the murder of 66-year-old Daniel Currie at the weekend.
The driver dropped off an elderly female passenger in the Holmbyre Terrace/Holmbyre Road area close to where Mr Currie lived, just after midnight on Saturday.
Det Supt Kenny Morrison said it was important for the driver to contact him.
Council chiefs face jobs axe in shake-up
SENIOR council officers face having to reapply for their own jobs under a major review by Hamilton District Council.
Councillors have approved a plan to streamline operations by putting the running of the council in the hands of a chief executive, his deputy and only four directors.
There are currently a chief executive, six directors, a general manager of direct works and head librarian.
They would have to compete for the reduced number of jobs.
The leader of the ruling Labour group, Tom McCabe, believes the move will have the support of the electorate because ‘we are aiming to give the people of Hamilton District value for money’.
Opposition councillors, however, are refusing to take a seat on the council's restructuring working party.
A Liberal Democrat, Ian Blackstock, said: ‘We are not being told exactly what is going on.
We also feel it is waste of time…when the whole system is set to change under local  government re-organisation in two years’ time anyway.’
Fight on to save rural schools
By William Chisholm
MORE than 30 small schools in the Borders could be threatened under plans for closing rural primaries to save money, it was claimed yesterday.
A new association aims to prevent any further attrition of the country schools network, however, unless the closures are backed by local parents.
The group is warning Borders Regional Council to expect vigorous opposition whenever a school is singled out for review.
The formation of the Small Schools Association, with membership from 13 villages including Traquair, near Peebles, and St Abbs, on the Berwickshire coast, follows the closure of Ashkirk and St Abbs schools.
‘Basically, someone has to take a stand now otherwise all the single-teacher schools in the Borders could go in a very short time,’ declared the association chairman, Annmarie Crowe, of St Abbs, yesterday.
‘By singling out these rural establishments, the council believes it can weaken opposition.
Our role will be to defend the potential victims.’
There are already moves to save St Abbs school by petitioning the Scottish Secretary.
Two previous attempts to shut down the school and transfer the pupils to Coldingham were successfully resisted.
‘We are involved in fund-raising for our campaign, and local fishermen have donated boxes from their catch to be auctioned for the cause,’ said Mrs Crowe.
‘There are seven pupils at present but that would rise to twelve in two years if the school [St Abbs]stays open.
The small primaries are essential in sustaining the fabric of village life and that's what we are fighting for.’
Jock Houston, Borders secretary of the Educational Institute of Scotland, the main teachers' union, said: ‘The council seems determined to close one school after another.
The EIS supports small schools in cases where communities want them to stay in existence.
Savings the education authority hopes to make are not always achievable.’
Borders Regional Council's education committee chairman, Riddle Dumble, denied there was a hit-list of schools and rejected allegations that each review process was a foregone conclusion.
It had been estimated that savings of up to £40,000 a school could be made through closures, but that was not the only factor taken into consideration, he said.
‘We also recognise the school is often the centre of village life, so we must look at what is best for the community and the children involved.’
The one-teacher school at Heiton, near Kelso, is the subject of consultations which could result in closure.
The association says Traquair and Longformacus primaries will be next on the education committee agenda.
EDINBURGH
‘Save water’ plea after mains burst
PEOPLE in Edinburgh have been asked to conserve water over the next three days until engineers can repair a water mains which burst this week.
Gus Ferguson, a depute water and drainage director at Lothian Region, said residents of Alnwickhill, Liberton, Gilmerton, Burdiehouse and high areas may notice loss of pressure or water discoloration.
He stressed that water quality should not be affected.
Brown outlines new party thinking
THE LABOUR party's new thinking on the economy was outlined yesterday by the shadow chancellor, Gordon Brown, who declared the old battle between state power and market forces dead.
He called for a new partnership economy with the private and public sectors working together.
Labour was not against wealth and would cut taxes if it was prudent to do so, he told MPs and Labour's finance and industry group in Westminster.
Calling for a people revolution with more investment in skills and training, Mr Brown said a new British learning ethic must be harnessed to the traditional work ethic.
The concept of redundancy must be replaced by the sure prospect of retraining, he said.
A new University for Industry, bringing together universities, industry and broadcasters, would give people the opportunity throughout their lives to update their skills.
The new venture using satellite telecommunications would also help spread the most up-to-date information to industries.
Openly rejecting old Labour policies, he said: ‘Firstly, the old battle of ideology between state power and free market forces is dead.
‘To pursue a doctrine of state power or market forces is counter-productive.’
He stressed the value of low inflation as a necessary economic objective, adding: ‘We are not against wealth.
We are against poverty and the unfair waste of individual potential.
If we can cut tax when it is prudent to do so, or cut spending programmes where there is waste, we will.’
Mr Brown argued for changes to the tax system so that it assisted people who undertook training, and for new incentives for companies which upgraded staff skills.
He also called for further tax changes which would encourage research and development activity, and a regional aid system with incentives for training.
The 21-hour limit affecting those on benefits who studied should be scrapped to encourage people to train themselves.
Mothers should be urged to upgrade skills through the family support system.
He also said that employers who failed to train staff should face the penalty of a higher training levy and spoke of the need to enhance the value of labour to attain a high skill, high tech, high productivity and a high wage economy.
In a speech which will be seen by some as marking a move to the Right, he went on to consolidate Labour leader John Smith's recent dismissal of the clause four debate about public ownership.
‘Because the issue was public against private rather than the relationship between private and public, Britain has suffered from a less than fully productive public sector and a less than fully responsible private sector, neither of which were satisfactory engines for growth.
‘The real answer has been, and is, a proper partnership between public and private sectors.’
Mr Brown stressed: ‘We reject both the dead hand of the command economy and the invisible hand of the untrammelled market.’
— PA
15,000 face loss of free legal aid in rule change
By Chris McLaughlin, Political Correspondent
UP TO 15,000 Scottish benefit claimants would lose entitlement to free legal aid in civil cases under rules aimed at saving the Government up to £8 million.
Changes announced yesterday mean that anybody with a disposable income of more than £61 a week will have to contribute a maximum of one third of his or her income above the limit rather than the present quarter.
That is expected to entail payments on a sliding scale ranging from £7 to £86.
If the rules applied in the current year, about 15,000 claimants would lose free representation, according to a Scottish Office estimate.
The threshold, which will run until 1 April is £75.
Some predictions that ministers were planning to drop the threshold to £42.50 were confounded.
Criteria for eligibility in criminal cases remains unchanged and will continue to be based on the test of undue hardship.
Ministers argue that the total expenditure on legal aid has more than doubled in five years, from £49 million in 1987 to a forecast total this year of £104 million.
In a letter to all Scottish Labour MPs, Lord Fraser of Carmyllie, the Minister of State at the Scottish Office, wrote that  expenditure on civil legal aid and on the advice and assistance scheme had increased dramatically.
In the ten months to last January, spending on civil legal aid had reached £20.5 million compared with £16.6 million for the whole of 1991-92.
Spending on advice and assistance — a scheme unique to Scotland, where solicitors are consulted initially to consider bringing cases — had reached £19.2 million compared with £15.4 million.
‘Action is clearly necessary to control this very high rate of increase,’ Lord Carmyllie said.
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, the minister responsible for home affairs in Scotland, confirmed that the Government had backed down on a proposal to abolish a contributory band for those applicants seeking advice and assistance.
As with legal aid, those on income support or family credit, or with a weekly disposable income of less than £61 will be eligible for free advice and assistance.
The Government came under heavy pressure from the Law Society of Scotland to retain the contributory band to ensure that applicants were not encouraged to waste police and court time by using legal aid procedures to delay an eventual plea of guilty on the first day in court.
Announcing the changes in a Commons written answer, Lord James said that planned spending on legal aid would still rise by 40 per cent over the next three years, in spite of the changes, with more people than ever being granted legal aid.
The Labour spokesman, John McFall, the MP for Dumbarton, claimed that the increases in cost of legal aid represented an artificial blip because the recession was forcing lawyers' offices to press for payment on accounts.
He claimed that the actual increase in numbers of cases granted legal aid was only 5 per cent this year — from 271,759 to 288,000 — and cited a Scottish Office report on spending plans which forecast a peak in claims in 1992-93, followed by a decline.
Union issues warning over civil service jobs
By Graeme Stewart, Industry Correspondent
MORE than 11,000 civil service jobs in Scotland are under threat and thousands more could go over the next few years, the Civil and Public Services Association leader, Barry Reamsbottom, will state at a rally tomorrow.
The rally, at the City Halls, Glasgow, will be attended by civil servants from the West of Scotland to protest at the Government's market testing (or privatisation) programme.
‘Everything is up for grabs with this Government.
Even jobs which have been successfully relocated in areas such as East Kilbride, increasing employment opportunities, could end up being moved away again should they be privatised.
The impact of any such moves on areas of high unemployment will be devastating,’ he said yesterday.
He claimed his members were being attacked on all sides — on market testing, privatisation and pay.
Michael McCann, CPSA's Scottish officer, said: ‘Even though the work they do will still be required, no civil servant has any long-term security.
To then ask our members to accept a pay increase this year of between 0 and 1.5 per cent on the basis that they are in secure employment adds insult to injury.’
Members of the civil service unions will campaign in the coming months for high quality, properly funded and publicly accountable services.
Rat poison two sent for sentencing
TWO youths who had spiked a social worker's toast with rat poison were yesterday referred to the Children's Hearing for sentence.
The boys, now aged 15 and 16, had admitted culpably and recklessly contaminating toast and other foodstuffs in the kitchen of the Edinburgh children's home where they lived, to the danger of staff and other children, on 27 May.
The alert had been raised when a social worker at the home discovered blue pellets in toast made by one of the boys.
She had spent the night in hospital and staff had found other food in the kitchen had been laced with the poison.
Edinburgh Sheriff Court had heard that the boys bought the rat poison from Boots, and offered to cook dinner.
The younger boy had offered to make toast for a social worker, Elizabeth Weepers, who had just returned from sick leave.
She had realised there were seeds in the toast, later identified as poison.
The poison was described as virtually harmless when taken in small amounts.
Sheriff Scott told the youths they had appeared in court on a very serious charge, but appeared to have learned from the experience.
SNP pledges to remove all rail privatisation
By Joanne Robertson Scottish Political Correspondent
AN INDEPENDENT Scottish government would remove any form of privatisation or franchising from the rail network, the Scottish National Party declared yesterday.
Kenny MacAskill, the party's transport spokesman, spelt out its determination to return ScotRail to public ownership if the Government's plans for its sale went ahead.
The SNP's policy commitment follows its undertaking, if in power, to renationalise Scotland's water and sewerage services if necessary.
That comes on top of the party's long-standing pledge to renationalise key public utilities such as electricity, gas and British Telecom.
Mr MacAskill claimed that the party would be able to finance the move through North Sea oil profits and other measures such as cancelling the Trident programme.
However, at last year's SNP conference, a call to drop the commitment to renationalise the public utilities was made by the convener of publicity, John Swinney, and was supported by a former party leader, Gordon Wilson.
Although the move was defeated and the renationalisation policy endorsed, party members voted to remit the controversial proposal for further consideration.
Details of the party's policy commitments are expected to be set out in its budget proposal next month.
However, costings on the estimated expenditure resulting from buying back ScotRail will not be included.
Party leaders will wait until after the service is privatised before making specific spending promises.
Underlining the party's position, the SNP leader, Alex Salmond, said: ‘All European examples on the most successful rail networks are fully incorporated in the public sector and run as a national service for people and industry.
‘An early priority for an SNP government in an independent Scotland would be to remove any privatisation or franchising from the Scottish rail network and to expand the public service to meet the requirements of Scottish industry wishing to exploit the European single market.’
Mr MacAskill argued that Scotland was already losing out to the south of England in terms of investment with £65 million spent over three years north of the Border compared with £1.2 billion allocated by the Government to fund the Jubilee Underground line in London.
EC rules out inquiry on high price of compact discs
THERE are no grounds for an investigation into the high price of compact discs in Europe, the European Community has ruled.
Officials in charge of competition policy said they were satisfied with findings by the Office of Fair Trading in Britain that there was no evidence of collusion among record companies and shops.
‘Rather, the higher level of compact disc prices is because prices have settled at a level which, on the whole, the market appears willing to bear,’ according to an EC written reply to the leader of Labour MEPs, Glyn Ford.
He called for an inquiry into why a Madonna compact disc sells for the equivalent of £6.88 wholesale and £8.33 retail in the US compared with £13 and £15 in Britain.
Sir Leon Brittan, then commissioner in charge of competition policy, says there is insufficient evidence to suggest that differences are the result of anti-competitive behaviour.
On the difference between compact disc and prerecorded cassette prices, he says: ‘Producers and retailers have taken advantage of the willingness of consumers to pay a higher price for the perceived higher quality of a compact disc.’
— PA
‘Cardboard hopes’ attack by Clarke
By Joy Copley Parliamentary Correspondent
THE Government's handling of local government finance has been a disaster and an administrative nightmare for councils, Tom Clarke, the shadow Scottish secretary, said last night.
He gave warning of cuts and redundancies and predicted that services in some areas would be eliminated altogether, during the annual Commons debate on grant support for local authorities.
Allan Stewart, the local government minister for Scotland, described next year's settlement of just over £5 billion as fair and reasonable.
‘This represents an increase of 3.5 per cent on the 1992-3 figure…‘
He said that there should be no need for cuts in services if local authorities kept pay settlements in the range 0-1.5 per cent and maximised the scope for savings.
Every year there were warnings of savage cuts in services, he said, yet spending by Scottish local authorities had grown.
He insisted, to Labour jeers: ‘With the scope for efficiency savings, which there always is, there is no need for cuts in services and jobs that we always get scare stories about every year.’
The debate came the day after Councillor Charles Gray, the president of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, gave warning that jobs and services were under threat and that at least half the councils in Scotland would not be able to increase their spending by more than 2.25 per cent.
Mr Clarke, a former president of COSLA, said that the level of grant would be greeted with anger by the majority of Scots.
All councils faced massive problems, he said, with Lothian being £19.68 million above the capping limit; Strathclyde, £20 million; and Fife, £11.3 million short of the figure it needed to maintain services.
He said that capping levels had been set at a devastatingly harsh level and fairness was completely absent from the settlement.
‘We foresee enormous problems for local authorities in all areas, including education and housing, which are all being denied resources,’ he said.
Social work departments were facing even greater demands, unemployment was rising, the economy was weak and poverty and homelessness were on the increase.
‘The only prospect the Government offers is cardboard homes and cardboard hopes,’ he said.
He protested that the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, had been present at only the start of the debate.
Drug baron's limousines go up in smoke
A PARAMILITARY group dedicated to exterminating cocaine king Pablo Escobar has set fire to his expensive collection of limousines and motorcycles, apparently to avenge terrorist attacks against civilians, police said yesterday.
Police said ten armed men broke into a warehouse late on Tuesday night in the south of Medellin, Escobar's home town, poured petrol over six Rolls-Royces, a Mercedes, a Porsche and 20 motorcycles and set them ablaze.
The vehicles were destroyed.
The attackers told witnesses they belonged to a group called People Persecuted by Pablo Escobar (PEPES), which has sworn to destroy the drug lord and his organisation.
Police say the group has murdered more than 37 Escobar associates and blown up buildings belonging to his family since announcing its formation at the start of February.
The PEPES had vowed to attack Escobar and his family each time the Medellin cartel boss plants a bomb or attacks innocent civilians.
The government accused Escobar of masterminding a double car bombing in Bogota on Monday which killed four people and injured dozens more.
On Tuesday, a second anti-Escobar group named Free Colombia announced its existence in a magazine interview.
Free Colombia also said it wanted to liquidate Escobar, but preferred to gather intelligence on his whereabouts rather than carry out attacks.
— Reuter
Former Beregovoy aide to stand trial
A FRENCH judge yesterday ordered a former top aide to Prime Minister Pierre Beregovoy and eight other suspects to stand trial for insider trading in collusion with a close friend of President Franois Mitterrand.
The decision highlighted scandals plaguing the ruling Socialist Party just five weeks before parliamentary elections.
The case centres on large-scale purchase of shares in the United States company, Triangle Industries Inc, just before it was taken over by the French state-run aluminium firm, Pechiney SA, in 1988.
The principal accused are Alain Boublil, charged with giving the key tip-off when he was Beregovoy's personal chief-of-staff at the finance ministry, and two businessmen close to the ruling Socialist Party, Samir Traboulsi and Max Theret.
The main beneficiaries were Theret and Roger-Patrice Pelat, a financier and longtime friend of Mr Mitterrand, who died shortly after being indicted in 1989.
The judge found they made an illicit profit of 48.4 million francs (£6.2 million).
The accused face up to two years in prison and fines of up to five million francs for insider trading if convicted.
Two foreign suspects who did not reply to the judge's summons will be tried in absentia.
They were named as Lebanese citizen Charles Ghanem and Israeli citizen Leo From.
Adding to the Socialists' embarrassment, the prosecutor's report said Boublil gave Pelat the key tip-off at a lunch in a Paris restaurant celebrating Mr Beregovoy's 40th wedding anniversary.
It did not suggest Mr Beregovoy was involved.
The prime minister acknowledged this month he had accepted an interest-free one-million-franc loan from Pelat in 1986.
He was an opposition member of parliament at the time.
Mr Beregovoy said the loan was legally registered and repaid in full.
The French media has criticised his judgment in taking it.
An opinion poll published by the magazine Paris-Match yesterday showed that 48 per cent of voters questioned thought Mr Beregovoy's conduct over the loan was reprehensible, while 42 per cent said it was not.
— Reuter
China frees dissidents in gesture to West
CHINA yesterday freed three dissidents — including a student, Wang Dan, who topped the most-wanted list after a 1989 crackdown on democracy protests — in a move to check Western criticism of its human rights record.
Mr Wang, 23, looking relaxed but pale, told reporters that despite his three-and-a-half years in prison he still believed in the principles of democracy.
‘My political views have never changed in the past and will not change in the future,’ he said soon after court officials ordered his early release from a Beijing prison.
‘I hope that someday I will be able to make more contributions.
I don't regret a thing.’
He said he planned to write a book about the 1989 protests and that he had no plans to go overseas, as several other released political prisoners have done.
The official Xinhua news agency said the freeing of Mr Wang and Guo Haifeng several months before their four-year prison terms expired marked the end of China's punishment of the students who led the protests.
‘So far, all the students who violated the criminal law during the anti-government disturbances in 1989 and were sentenced to different terms of imprisonment have been released,’ the agency said.
Analysts said the statement was phrased in a way that made it difficult to confirm or refute.
Numerous people arrested after the army assault on Tiananmen Square are known to be still imprisoned, even though Beijing may not classify them either as students or political prisoners.
China also released a Roman Catholic bishop yesterday.
The case of Bishop Zhu Hongsheng, 76, sentenced to 15 years in prison, was unrelated to the pro-democracy protests but led to international calls that China allow more freedom of worship.
Beijing, worried that the United States' new administration of President Bill Clinton will be tough on human rights, has recently released a handful of imprisoned dissidents and let others leave the country.
‘It would seem the Chinese government has made a decisive move and decision to put 4 June behind it,’ a Hong Kong-based human rights activist, John Kamm, said.
‘Certainly this is going to help relations with the United States and other Western countries,’ Mr Kamm added.
The releases could be part of China's bid to sway the International Olympic Committee to award the 2000 Olympics to Beijing, which has made clear it will do anything to win the Games.
Mr Wang, 23, was sentenced on 26 January, 1991 to four years in prison and one year's deprivation of political rights for counter-revolutionary propaganda and incitement.
He was due for release on 1 July, 1993.
Mr Guo, 27, also a prominent dissident sentenced to four years in prison, was scheduled to be released on 3 June, 1993.
‘During the imprisonment, Wang Dan and Guo Haifeng observed prison regulations,’ Xinhua said.
Mr Wang was a top student leader of the 1989 demonstrations that saw more than a million people take to the streets calling for more democracy and demanding the end of corruption and special privileges for officials.
Mr Guo, who like Mr Wang was a Beijing University student, was once chairman of the Beijing Students Autonomous Federation, one of the main groups orchestrating the protests that took over central Beijing's vast Tiananmen Square, the symbol of Communist Party power.
The demonstrations, which began with the death of a former Communist Party leader on 15 April, 1989, ended with an army assault on Tiananmen Square on 4 June that killed hundreds of people.
— Reuter and AP 
Reunited: Wang Dan at home yesterday with his mother, Wang Linyun, sister Wang Jinging and nephew Chen Tian, after his release from prison in Beijing
Strike threat in polluted town
THE heavily-polluted Czech town of Chomutov has threatened to call for a general strike unless the government cleans up the air, a town official said yesterday.
Chomutov's town hall on Tuesday sent an open letter to President Vaclav Havel saying it would deny access to all transport and would talk to unions about calling a general strike if its environmental demands were not met.
The town in North Bohemia, one of Europe's most environmentally devastated regions, declared an emergency last Friday after being engulfed in dense, sulphurous smog for days.
The letter demanded that air cleaning equipment be installed in coal-fired power plants in North Bohemia within two years and that power production be cut to a minimum whenever air pollution levels deteriorated.
It said it would cut the power supply to the national grid if its demands were not met.
Levels of sulphur dioxide in the air reached 2,400 microgrammes per cubic metre over the weekend.
The safe level over a two-hour period is 150.
A hospital in nearby Teplice reported the number of child patients had doubled, mostly due to respiratory problems.
Children, pregnant women and the old and sick were advised to stay indoors.
Authorities ordered coal-based power production cut to 50 per cent on pain of fines up to five million crowns (£129,000).
Experts say the pollution in North Bohemia is due to 40 years' emphasis on heavy industry under communist rule.
— Reuter
Nobel group seeks pressure on Burma
EIGHT winners of the Nobel peace prize demanded yesterday that Burma's generals unconditionally release Aung San Suu Kyi, a fellow winner of the world's most prestigious award.
Tibetan spiritual leader the Dalai Lama called for a tougher line, including an arms embargo, against the junta which has held the democracy campaigner under house arrest since July 1989.
‘The idea of an arms embargo, I think that this is practical, and morally speaking I think this is right and really worthwhile to consider,’ the Dalai Lama, accompanied by the other laureates, told reporters in Bangkok.
Ms Suu Kyi won the peace prize in 1991 for her resistance to the regime which seized power after brutally suppressing a pro-democracy uprising in 1988.
Burma's generals have condemned the laureates' mission as interference and refused to let them into the country.
Thailand's new democratically-elected prime minister admitted the eight Nobel winners despite opposition from China and his own powerful military chiefs.
Beijing says any hospitality to the Dalai Lama helps his campaign for Tibetan independence.
The military chiefs complain the laureates' visit could damage relations with Burma and with China.
Some of the laureates will travel to north-west Thailand today to visit Burmese refugees there.
But Burmese dissidents in the area, including a representative of Aung San Suu Kyi's own party, said yesterday that Thai local authorities had barred them from meeting the Nobel winners.
Next week some laureates will take their campaign to the UN Human Rights Commission in Geneva, where their appeal is expected to be backed by other peace prize winners including former Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev.
They also are expected to call for a UN arms embargo.
In recent years, China has become a close ally and the main arms supplier to Burma, which is already under an arms embargo by the European Community and the United States.
Last year the UN General Assembly called on the junta to release Aung San Suu Kyi and transfer power to her National League for Democracy.
The party won a May 1990 general election by a landslide but the junta refused to hand over power and arrested or intimidated into silence its most influential leaders.
Another of the laureates, former Costa Rican president Oscar Arias, urged the world to rally behind the fight against oppression in Burma and in seeking Ms Suu Kyi's release.
‘Having been brutally denied her rightful place to be an elected leader of her people, Aung San Suu Kyi remains courageously committed to the principles of freedom and democracy,’ he said.
‘Refusing to accept the offer of her own liberty on condition of exile from her country, she continues to inspire the people of Burma,’ he said.
‘Her courageous vigil reminds them that one day the atrocities of the State Law and Order Restoration Council (the junta) will be only a gruesome memory.’
The other laureates are South Africa's Archbishop Desmond Tutu; Northern Ireland's Betty Williams and Mairead Corrigan-Maguire; Adolfo Perez Esquivel of Argentina; Ross Daniels representing Amnesty International and Donna Kyle Anderton, representing the Quaker organisation the American Friends Service Committee.
— Reuter 
Aung San Suu Kyi: inspiration to the people of Burma
Religious prize for former Nixon aide
THE convicted Watergate figure Charles Colson, once known as ‘the toughest of the tough’ in the Nixon White House, won a million-dollar prize yesterday for bringing religion and hope to prisons.
Mr Colson, 61, won the 1993 Templeton Prize for religion for his work as the founder of the Prison Fellowship, which seeks to rehabilitate prisoners by spreading the gospel in jails in the United States and 55 other countries.
‘God moves in mysterious ways, his wonders to perform,’ said the Rev Wilbert Forker in presenting the world's largest annual cash prize to Mr Colson.
The ex-convict discovered the need for his ministry while serving a seven-month jail term for leaking FBI documents that contained damaging information about Daniel Ellsberg, the man who leaked the Pentagon papers about the Vietnam war to the press.
The former White House counsel pled guilty and says to this day he feels guilty about that and his role in the Watergate scandal as a key Nixon defender.
He told reporters he was  overwhelmed by the unexpected prize and said he plans to donate it to the Prison Fellowship.
In President Nixon's White House, Mr Colson was often described as ‘the toughest of the tough.’
A popular legend grew up that quoted him as saying he would run over his own grandmother for the president.
— Reuter
Clinton calls an end to the Reagan Revolution
From Tim Cornwell, Washington
PRESIDENT Bill Clinton was due to turn the course of American economic policy on its head last night when he detailed proposals to the US Congress that embrace a range of new taxes and reject 12 years of the ‘Reagan Revolution’.
In his first days in the White House President Clinton launched on a liberal social agenda, dismantling conservative policy on abortion and pushing the cause of gay rights.
Yesterday he was taking on the anti-government creed of the 1980s which left economics to the free market.
Even as Mr Clinton prepared for his State of the Union address, the annual American equivalent of the Queen's Speech, his administration was seeking to rally support for an economic plan which sparked the biggest fall in Wall Street stocks in 18 months.
Mr Clinton himself was due to call Ross Perot yesterday, courting the maverick businessman who earned 20% of the vote in the November election.
Mr Perot, as the guest on at least one night-time TV show, was to give his own public verdict on Mr Clinton's speech.
Mr Perot campaigned with a promise to ‘clean house’ in Washington and close the yawning shortfall between the US government tax revenues and its spending, expected to reach $327 billion this year.
His support could be critical.
‘A lot of the things that the president addressed in the economic plan are things that Mr Perot agrees with — like a serious commitment to deficit reduction, like honest budgeting, like investment in things that matter,’ said the White House press secretary, Dee Dee Myers.
Mr Clinton has promised a four-year, $500 billion package of new taxes and spending.
He justifies the new taxes as the basis for roughly halving the budget deficit by 1997 and funding a $31 billion package to stimulate the economy and create several hundred thousand jobs.
His new taxes include a top level personal income tax approaching 40% and an energy tax on oil, coal, and natural gas.
But he played down new taxes on foreign companies operating in the US, which raised alarm bells in Europe during the election campaign.
Mr Clinton may be staking the future of his presidency on his plan, details of which have been leaked over the past week.
The early response has not been enthusiastic, though aides insisted yesterday that for many households the new tax bills would amount to only a few dollars a month.
The dollar dropped to a near-record low against the yen yesterday, and there was dollar selling in Europe blamed on concern new taxes would slow the American economic recovery.
Mr Clinton's treasury secretary, Lloyd Bentsen, dismissed the stock market fall simply the end of a ‘speculative run-up’.
The New York Daily News headline yesterday was ‘Bill's Flip Flops’, a reflection of several broken campaign promises.
Conservative commentators are urging Republicans to stage an all-out attack on Mr Clinton as an old-fashioned ‘tax-and-spend’ liberal, locked out of government for the first time since 1981,
That may unnerve Democrat lawmakers whom Mr Clinton is relying on to vote his proposals into law.
Some will be up for re-election in two years.
They report hearing voters who are ‘ready to sacrifice’ but are still skeptical of how Mr Clinton will use the money his new taxes raise.
‘People understand this ox is in the ditch in a way I've never heard before.
They understand that we'll all have to be in there pushing it out,’ one Congressman told the Los Angeles Times.
To lay the ground for his plan Mr Clinton has tarred opponents in advance as ‘defenders of decline’ who have ‘already lined the corridors of power with high-priced lobbyists’to prevent the changes he wants.
The tactic plays to a public perception of Washington as a place that has sold out ordinary citizens.
Germany and France in joint finance defence
FRANCE and Germany pledged yesterday to defend the French franc if it came under further attack from speculators, but they dismissed suggestions that they might link their two currencies in a mini monetary union.
Finance ministers Theo Waigel of Germany and Michel Sapin of France said after talks in Bonn that close co-operation between their two countries had successfully fended off speculative attacks on the franc.
‘We have, I believe, passed the most difficult point,’ Mr Waigel said.
‘We have the will to overcome together any further challenges that arise.’
— Reuter
FRANCE
Paris postal strike spreads
A POSTAL workers' strike over planned job cuts spread through Paris yesterday and the state-run company La Poste said nearly half the capital's postmen were not doing their rounds.
The five unions who called the indefinite strike said up to 80 per cent of postal workers stayed away from work in some areas.
Unions are demanding that La Poste drops plans to cut 280 jobs in a reorganisation.
— Reuter
UNITED STATES
Divorcee beams up $4.5m
EILEEN Roddenberry, the ex-wife of Star Trek creator Gene Roddenberry, has been awarded more than $4.5 million in residuals and profits from the highly successful television show and its spin-offs.
In a civil trial that began in 1987, Eileen Roddenberry sued Norway, the company set up by her ex-husband, for her share of profits from the original television show, as well as Star Trek: The Next Generation, Star Trek: Deep Space Nine, and the Star Trek feature films.
A jury also awarded Mrs Roddenberry $900,000 in punitive damages after finding Mr Roddenberry, who died in 1991, and his company had tried to hide Star Trek profits from her.
— Reuter
JAPAN
Sailor gets by on pedal power
AN ADVENTURER who pedalled a boat 4,700 miles from Hawaii to Japan arrived home to a hero's welcome yesterday after 110 days at sea.
‘The first thing I want is a bath,’ said Kenichi Horie after coming ashore on the southern island of Okinawa.
Mr Horie, 54, set out from Hawaii on 29 October in a canoe-shaped boat with a set of bicycle pedals connected to a propeller.
— Reuter
Bosnians battle to save key Sarajevo suburbs
BOSNIAN defenders threw reinforcements into the defence of two key Sarajevo suburbs yesterday, resisting Serb tank, artillery and infantry attacks with rifles and home-made grenades.
‘This is difficult, very difficult,’ said one Bosnian soldier as he crouched in a trench about to sprint across open ground under the sights of Serb gunners.
As his unit of 25 men tried to reinforce a company under  assault by a tank, a dozen soldiers came out of the tree line near the suburbs on the western edge of Sarajevo.
They were clearly fresh from the battle.
One man dragged a light machinegun as he made his way through the trench.
Two of his comrades had relatively minor head wounds and received first aid in the trench before heading back to a safer area.
Shells and spent bullets whistled overhead as a heavy machinegun thumped away in the background.
The battle for Stup and Azici, two Sarajevo suburbs on the western flank of the city's vital airport road, was in its seventh day yesterday.
Bosnians said the situation was quiet overnight, but heavy fighting picked up again in the afternoon.
Although rebel Serb radio broadcast that Stup had fallen yesterday, Bosnian soldiers and ammunition were being rushed through the town to the front throughout the day.
Local commanders said the situation in Azici was difficult, but they vowed not to surrender the two towns.
Stup is the key to Sarajevo's defence in the west.
Once a largely Croat place of farm plots, industrial buildings and single-family homes, it escaped the rigours of war for many months.
Stup flourished as a black market centre until September.
When rival gangs began fighting for black market spoils, the ethnic war which has engulfed Sarajevo and Bosnia for 10 months spilled over into Stup.
Neighbouring Azici, an even more rural community, is said to be completely destroyed.
Azici is of value to Bosnians now only as a buffer between Sarajevo and Serb siege forces.
Otes, to the west of Stup and Azici, fell to them in early December.
The Bosnian defence of Stup and Azici is complicated by the enormous disparity in firepower between Bosnians and Serbs.
Drawing upon stores of the former Yugoslav national army, the Serbs have thrown tanks, heavy machineguns and artillery into battle.
Although Serb lines are within range of Bosnian artillery on nearby Igman mountain, the Bosnians have only a few tanks and not much ammunition.
Their defence depends mostly on fighters using small arms and home-made anti-armour grenades.
‘They have tanks and we have Kalashnikovs,’ groaned one Bosnian soldier picking bullets for his Kalashnikov assault rifle from a sack before heading to the front.
Fighting around Sarajevo has cut the Bosnian capital's utility lines, leaving both defenders and besiegers without heat, light or main water supplies as midday temperatures hover around freezing.
‘There is no gas, no water and no electricity for the whole area,’ said Major Michel Maufrais, a French combat engineer with the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) in Sarajevo.
The line carrying natural gas into the city was damaged by a shell on Sunday in Azici.
Sarajevo's power went out late on Tuesday afternoon when fighting in the northwest of the city cut the only remaining electricity line in two places.
The loss of power in turn stopped water supplies because the main pumping station was left without electricity, Major Maufrais told reporters.
— Reuter 
Shelter from the storm
IT IS always worthy of remark when impressions align with statistics, and the more so when the Government's statistics mesh with those generated by pressure groups.
In towns and cities across Scotland, people have lately grown increasingly conscious of the homeless: often young, often pitiful, often begging for money in a style once thought of as the very antithesis of the British way.
What is now beyond dispute is that the impressionistic evidence is well-founded.
The young homeless are more visible because there are more of them.
Scottish Office figures suggest a 124 per cent rise over the Thatcher decade in the number of homeless ‘households’ seeking help in Scotland, and a 101 per cent rise in the numbers assessed homeless.
In 1990-91, both Shelter and the Scottish Office agree, around 34,600 households were homeless and seeking help.
Nearly half were single people, of whom more than half were aged under 25 and a fifth under 18.
That, by common assent, is only a fraction of the problem: many more simply fail to register in official awareness.
There are also thought to be around 10,000 young homeless Scots in London at any given time.
It would be wrong to accuse the Government and its agencies of doing nothing.
Earlier this month, to take one example among several, Scottish Homes announced a £2 million programme to develop more furnished accommodation for key categories of homeless people.
But it is fair to say that provision has comprehensively failed to grow in line with need and, in some respects, has worsened.
This is not just a question of resources, but also of practice.
As yesterday's solidly-argued report to the Scottish Office by a Glasgow University team demonstrates, procedures in social work and housing departments for identifying, assessing and helping the young homeless were drawn up when the problem was much smaller than it is now.
The report's sensible proposals for reform merit serious response.
But at least as instructive is its analysis of why the problem has so burgeoned.
The picture that emerges is of a grim tide of sociological, economic and policy factors that has simply washed many young people to the fringes of society.
Ever more homes are broken and unhappy, and ever more of them are poor.
The poverty gap which the past decade's economic orthodoxies have opened across the developed world has widened faster in Britain than in any other EC country.
Restricted access to benefits for the young has, paradoxically, led both to more of them being ejected from parental homes and to them having less to live on when they are.
Both employment and housing options have steadily narrowed.
Private rented accommodation has been increasingly freed of rent control, taking it beyond the reach of the young homeless.
Council house building has all but stopped, while sales have stripped out the better stock.
At least everyone now accepts that there is a problem.
But the remedies being advanced can neither disguise nor obviate the bigger need, which is prevention.
A society that does not shelter its young is a society starting to unravel.
Jury still out
THE mask which Chinese leaders like to present to the world is not as impenetrable as might seem.
It is true that Beijing will adopt an unbending stance when cherished positions are under threat or there is a risk of losing face.
If its political and ideological principles are challenged the Chinese leadership does not hesitate to take powerful action to defend them.
Yet, when competing interests are at stake it is quite capable of making pragmatic choices.
The trickle of prominent dissidents released from jail over recent weeks shows that.
In the latest round, two student leaders of the pro-democracy movement were released yesterday, as was a Roman Catholic bishop.
The students were freed only a few months before the end of their sentences, but the move is clearly intended to polish up China's image abroad.
There are good reasons for that.
The country is very keen to host the summer Olympics in the year 2000 and, with a visit pending from an International Olympic Committee delegation, Beijing is determined to show that it has put the Tiananmen Square massacre behind it.
More significantly in trade terms, China does not want to lose its Most Favoured Nation status with Washington.
While George Bush was content to soft-pedal on the communist state's human rights record, President Clinton has indicated that he intends to be tougher.
Rather than risk losing its MFN position, the Chinese government has clearly thought it expedient to make a good-will gesture to the new Clinton administration,(though at the same time appending warnings that outsiders should stop interfering in China's internal affairs.)
The bigger question is the extent to which this represents a change in Chinese policy towards the dissidents.
Human rights groups suspect that thousands of pro-democracy demonstrators are still in prison, although one activist in the field believes that an amnesty is under way.
Asia Watch, however, makes the point that workers and intellectuals were the real target of the authorities' retribution after the 1989 protests, and says it is too early to talk of a more liberal approach until many more of those prisoners are released.
As a result of the last Communist Party congress, younger functionaries are getting hold of the levers of power and recent developments may signal a genuine wish to adopt a less hard-line political course.
But it is still too early to be certain, and the jury must remain out until there is sufficient evidence of a true change of heart to distinguish it from the earnest gestures of political expediency.
Increased bloodshed and violence
Many of the incidents in your report (‘Pregnant woman stabbed in weekend of terror’, 8 February) would appear to have involved bloodshed and violence of a type which all commentators state is on the increase.
You then proceed, in the sports pages, to publish a sickening colour photograph showing two men quite literally trying to beat each other into bloody submission.
I am not alone, I feel, in believing it to be high time boxing is recognised for what it really is, a sordid and revolting spectacle of the baser human urges, demeaning alike to those who support or take part in it.
It is now to be hoped that your editorial policy will quickly realise that to in any way publicise this loathsome ‘sport’ is counter to your normal upholding of standards of common decency.
Further, that in recognition of this, you will see fit in this world of ever-growing gratuitous violence to help just a little by keeping your pages free from any future commentary or reportage of this activity which in no way deserves the name ‘sport’.
Fistful of nominations for Clint Eastwood
WHILE Clint Eastwood topped the listings with nine nominations, the full list of nominees in the top nine categories for annual Oscar awards announced by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences yesterday are:
Best picture:
The Crying Game, Stephen Woolley, producer.
A Few Good Men, David Brown, Rob Reiner, Andrew Scheinman.
Howards End, Ismail Merchant.
Scent of a Woman, Martin Brest.
Unforgiven, Clint Eastwood.
Best actor:
Robert Downey Jr (Chaplin)
Clint Eastwood (Unforgiven)
Al Pacino (Scent of a Woman)
Stephen Rea (The Crying Game)
Denzel Washington (Malcolm X).
Best Supporting Actor:
Jaye Davidson (The Crying Game)
Gene Hackman (Unforgiven)
Jack Nicholson (A Few Good Men)
Al Pacino (Glengarry Glen Ross)
David Paymer (Mr Saturday Night).
Best Actress:
Catherine Deneuve (Indochine)
Mary McDonnell (Passion Fish)
Michelle Pfeiffer (Love Field)
Susan Sarandon (Lorenzo's Oil)
Emma Thompson (Howards End).
Best Supporting Actress:
Judy Davis (Husbands and Wives)
Joan  Plowright (Enchanted April)
Vanessa Redgrave (Howards End)
Miranda Richardson (Damage)
Marisa Tomei (My Cousin Vinny).
Best Director:
Neil Jordan (The Crying Game)
James Ivory (Howards End)
Robert Altman (The Player)
Martin Brest (Scent of a Woman)
Clint Eastwood (Unforgiven).
Best Foreign Language Film:
Close to Eden (Russia)
Daens (Belgium)
Indochine (France)
A Place in the World (Uruguay)
Schtonk (German).
Best Original Screenplay:
Neil Jordan (The Crying Game)
Woody Allen (Husbands and Wives)
George Miller and Nick Enright (Lorenzo's Oil)
John Sayles (Passion Fish)
David Webb Peoples (Unforgiven).
Best Adapted Screenplay:
Peter Barnes (Enchanted April)
Ruth Prawer Jhabvala (Howards End)
Michael Tolkin (The Player)
Richard Friedenberg (A River Runs Through It)
Bo Goldman (Scent of a Woman)— Reuter.
Divided by a common language
EVER since the US presidential election, the news and social commentators have been busy at the old old story of explaining the use of words by the Americans.
They use many of our words, but with different meanings, the rascals.
We have already flinched at ‘oatmeal’, and of course they spell whisky the Irish way.
Certainly the stuff is much the same, but ours is better.
Other puzzlements arise at the table, and it is as well to know them.
They eat jelly, but the word most often used is Jello, which is a trade name and much protected.
Not that it does the quiverer much good.
Then what about ‘cobbler’, which is a fruit pie, maybe named by some exile from Arrochar?
And of course you know about ‘cookies’, which is the American name for biscuits.
That lets them use such phrases as ‘smart cookie’ and ‘that's the way the cookie crumbles’— meaning the inevitability of some outcome.
I have not yet come across in the US anything like our Scotch cookie, a most desirable item of teabread.
There are many American experts in the usage of words, and the good ones are very good.
Some study language and literature under titles of seminars which baffle the honest seeker.
I have been looking at the wares offered at spring seminars by the Folger Institute, a consortium of 29 universities, with Yale and Princeton in, but Harvard out.
You are just too late to sign on for the one about Renaissance music, which will ‘aim to understand the study of Renaissance occult mentalities as a case-in-point of the historiography of otherness’, with Gary Tomlinson of the University of Pennsylvania presiding.
There has also eluded you Julie Solomon on ‘The Values of Contingency, or Legitimating the Particular with Francis Bacon and Friends’.
Don't be too disappointed.
There is still time to get your name down for Donald Hedrick of Kansas State University on: ‘Flower Power: Shakespearean Deep Bawdy and the Botanical Perverse’.
So you see there is something for everyone.
It would be sad if our own seats of learning were behind-hand in this confusion.
The Scottish Business Insider quotes some of the projects being undertaken at the Parallel Computing Centre of Edinburgh University.
One will do —‘Brute Force Molecular Replacement Translation Function’.
Alastair Dunnett
Death of man who saw charred body of Hitler
ILY BRATINA, an economist and veteran of two world wars and the Russian Revolution who said he saw the charred body of Adolf Hitler in his Berlin bunker, has died aged 96.
During the Second World War, Bratina worked for the Office of Strategic Services, the predecessor of the Central Intelligence Agency.
He said he was with a US Army unit that met the Soviet soldiers who had captured the German fuhrer's bunker in April 1945.
Hitler and his wife, Eva Braun, had committed suicide, ‘and their bodies were charred,’ Bratina said in a 1991 interview.
‘The Russian physicians were there and they didn't know how to take the bodies out to be sent to Moscow.
The soldiers poured gasoline over Hitler and lit a match to them.’
Born in Slovenia, Bratina trained with the Austrian Olympic gymnastic team before the 1914 games were cancelled by the First World War.
He served in the Austro-Hungarian army in the war before deserting to fight with an independent Yugoslav army formed with the help of Czar Nicholas II of Russia.
He later fought alongside the Russians against the Bolsheviks and for the Czechs against the Germans and Austrians.
Bratina emigrated to the United States in 1927 and earned a graduate degree in economics at New York University.
He worked as an economist at the Pentagon, and retired in 1967.
He is survived by his wife, Josephine, three children and five grandchildren.
— AP 
Killer weapon
I was disgusted to see the picture on page one of The Scotsman today showing Bill Clifford, the manager of the weapons testing range at Dundrennan, Kirkcudbrightshire proudly holding the new electro-magnetic railgun.
From the tone of your report you would seem to suggest that there is cause for celebration here, but surely this railgun has only one purpose, to kill people, or have the great minds of physics and engineering got something more ethical planned?
I wonder if Mr Clifford would be as enthusiastic to pose for a photograph beside the results of his ‘ultimate tank weapon of the future’?
Abductors believed to have killed James
By Audrey Gillan
THE two boys who abducted James Bulger are likely to have been his murderers.
Merseyside police have revealed that they probably killed James a few hours after they took him from the Strand shopping centre in Bootle.
Detailed descriptions of the boys were released yesterday after police photographic specialists enhanced the security video pictures of the boys leading two-year-old James from the shopping centre.
One boy, about 13 years old, is 5ft 1in tall, slim with short, dark, straight hair.
He is described as clean looking, very pale with brown eyes and black eyebrows.
He has a long nose and a long face.
His companion is about 11 or 12, about 4ft 9in tall.
Police described him as chubby but not overweight.
He has a rounded ‘cherub-like’ flat face and a small nose.
He had very dirty, ungroomed hair and wore a shiny black zip-up jacket.
The new picture shows the two youths, face on, walking close together in the shopping precinct.
It provides a much clearer image of the ‘cherub-faced’ boy than anything produced so far, though the features of the other boy remain indistinct.
Last night, hundreds of calls were received by police after the BBC Crimewatch programme reconstructed the moment that James wandered away from his 25-year-old mother, Denise, while she was in a butcher's shop.
The man in charge of the murder inquiry, Det Supt Albert Kirby, flew down to London to appeal to the public live on the programme.
He revealed earlier that he was almost certain that the two youths on the security video killed James.
‘The more witnesses come forward and the descriptions remain the same, the more I am now convinced that the abductors must have caused his death,’ he said.
‘There is no indication that an adult has been involved whatsoever.
‘There is no way that those two boys would not have been affected by what took place,’ said Mr Kirby.
‘I would appeal to anyone who does see children that are disturbed and have a complete change in behavioural patterns since Friday to come forward.’
The pathologists' evidence and his own observations suggested that James ‘came by the fatal aspects of his injuries at some time in the early evening on Friday’.
New witnesses have told police that they saw the two youths with James in Walton.
They asked for directions to Walton Hall police station.
James's mutilated body was found on a freight train track not far from there.
Merseyside's chief constable yesterday defended the handling of the arrest of a 12-year-old in the hunt for James's killers.
He revealed that the boy was only one of 135 juveniles taken in during the inquiry.
Several vehicles attended the scene of the arrest in the Kirkdale area of Liverpool on Tuesday night amid scenes of mob anger.
The Merseyside chief constable, Jim Sharples, told a police authority meeting that his officers were acting with due sensitivity.
He said: ‘When police officers attended the scene it became apparent that the media were also in attendance — how they came to be in attendance is not known and not through any action on our part.
‘I must stress the fact we have visited the homes and brought in 135 juveniles in connection with this inquiry since last Friday.’
In no other incident were crowds present, he said.
He added that other vehicles were despatched when it was realised the press were in attendance and that other people in area might be there.
Bomb threat grounds flight from Glasgow
AN American Airlines Boeing 767 en route from Glasgow to Chicago was grounded at a Canadian air base last night after a passenger made a bomb threat on board.
The Royal Canadian Mounted Police was searching the airliner and all 130 passengers and crew were being ‘secured’ at the base in Goose Bay, Newfoundland, Lieutenant Larry Pittman said.
An American Airlines spokesman said the aircraft landed after an ‘unknown passenger’ made the threat.
‘At this point we assume it is a hoax,’ he said.
‘But we never takes things like this lightly, so everyone was taken off the aircraft so it could be searched,’ he said.
— Reuter
Coppers narked as thieves steal their thunder
By Frank Urquhart
THE villagers listened patiently as a very senior policeman tried to persuade them they could do without their village bobby.
But, as David Beattie, Grampian's assistant chief constable was speaking in the primary school at New Deer, Aberdeenshire, thieves were proceeding in a westerly direction towards the locus of Newlands Garage, just 300 yards away.
And they got away with a large quantity of tools and car batteries.
Last night the local district councillor, Robert Chapman, said: ‘The police must be embarrassed.
I think it reinforces the case, not so much for retaining the bobby in New Deer, but for increasing policing in country areas where crime is increasing just as much as it is in the towns.’
He said the meeting, which had also been attended by the local policeman, Constable Mike Munro, had attracted about 20 villagers.
‘But I think that the general feeling in the village is that the station is going to close anyway and that the decision has virtually been made.
Many felt there was little point in turning up.’
Norma Thomson, secretary of New Deer Community Association, said: ‘Perhaps whoever did the break-in knew there wouldn't be a policeman going back and forth and that he would be tied up at the meeting.’
However, she had been satisfied with the assurances given by the police chiefs about the future policing of the community should the cover be switched to Mintlaw, eight miles away.
Meanwhile, Mr Beattie said: ‘It is regrettable.
It is one of life's coincidences.’
Bomb hoax grounds flight from Glasgow
AN American Airlines Boeing 767 on a flight from Glasgow to Chicago was grounded at a Canadian air base yesterday after a passenger made a bomb threat on board.
The threat was later found to be a hoax.
The Royal Canadian Mounted Police searched the airliner at the base in Goose Bay, Newfoundland, but found no bomb, an American Airlines spokesman said.
‘We never takes things like this lightly, so everyone was taken off the aircraft so it could be searched,’ the airline spokesman said.
A Canadian Forces official said all 130 passengers and crew were going on to Chicago, and no arrests had been made.
— Reuter
PC fights for life after being hit by brick
A POLICE officer was last night fighting a desperate battle for survival on a hospital life-support system after a half-brick hurled ‘like a bullet’ through his patrol car windscreen thudded into his head.
PC John Robinson, 37, suffered terrible injuries but his quick-thinking colleague PC Michael Mohon, 31, saved his life by driving to Sunderland general hospital.
Last night colleagues were stunned by the horror of the mindless attack on PC Robinson, who has a string of commendations for his police work.
Chief Supt Bob Bensley, head of Northumbria Police's traffic division, stressed there was nothing new about what happened.
‘It is something which has gone on in this force for almost two years but has now reached epidemic proportions and something has to be done,’ he declared.
Last night PC Robinson — who remarried 10 months ago and has a daughter from his first marriage — was described as in a critical but stable condition in Newcastle Upon Tyne general hospital, which specialises in head injury cases.
He was transferred there from Sunderland and placed on life-support.
The officer was the passenger in a Rover patrol car travelling at 70mph while responding to a call about a stolen Nissan 200 ZX Turbo being driven fast and erratically in Sunderland late on Wednesday.
As they drove on the A183 dual carriageway the brick was thrown, penetrating the windscreen like a bullet, Mr Bensley said.
Minutes later two officers in another car, driver PC Stephen Pick and Sgt Jane Hinde, suffered whiplash injuries when the Nissan Turbo — stolen 70 miles away in Harrogate — rammed into them.
Both vehicles are write-offs.
PC Pick, 31, was trapped in his vehicle.
But Sgt Hinde, 37, ran after the four men who fled from the Nissan.
Two locals, one aged 19, the other in his early 20s, were arrested and were helping inquiries last night.
Det Chief Insp John Stoddart described the brick-throwing as a callous, premeditated attack on a police officer who was acting in the public's interest.
He said there was so far no evidence to link the brick-throwing with the stolen Nissan, but police were not ruling that out.
Mr Bensley felt it was too early to link the incidents — but pointed out the disturbing pattern of attempts by youths in stolen cars to lure police patrol cars into ambushes.
That was apparently the case in Cleveland last week when an officer was knocked out by a concrete chunk thrown through a windscreen.
There have been similar incidents in Northumbria.
Cats left well-off by widow's will
A WIDOW has left nearly £135,000 to an animal charity on the condition that her cats are well looked after for the rest of their lives.
Katrina Deeley, 39, of Oxford, who died in November, split her £268,497 estate between the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals and National Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Children.
An RSPCA spokeswoman said the cats, Kim and Willow, were in a cattery ‘until we can find them a good home.
We shall pay all their expenses for the rest of their lives and an inspector will visit annually’.
Allitt trial told of surprise at baby's death
A DOCTOR choked back tears yesterday as he told the Beverley Allitt murder trial how a seven-week-old baby had died inexplicably.
‘I was quite confident that we were winning,’ said Dr Charith Nanayakkara.
His voice quivered with emotion, he sniffed and wiped his eyes and took some time to recover.
He said he had been taken completely by surprise when Liam Taylor had suffered a heart attack.
He had shown no signs of heart problems and it was extremely rare for babies to have heart attacks.
Liam's mother Jo hurried out of the public gallery in tears moments after Dr Nanayakkara broke down.
Allitt, 24, from Corby Glen, near Grantham, Lincolnshire, denies murdering Liam and three other children in her care in 1991, and attempting to murder 10 other children and a 73-year-old woman.
She also denies 11 alternative charges of causing grievous bodily harm with intent.
Allitt was with Liam constantly the night he died and the prosecution at Nottingham Crown Court alleges she did something to cause his death.
Dr Nanayakkara, consultant paediatrician at Grantham and Kesteven Hospital, had diagnosed blood poisoning and pneumonia in Liam, and under cross-examination agreed that was possibly life threatening.
‘At the time (of his death) I said this is not totally unexpected, but I started reflecting and then had to wonder: ‘Is this natural’?’ he said.
Normally, he said, it was not difficult to revive babies who suffered collapses, but it had taken quite some time to get signs of life from Liam.
Liam eventually had been revived but had suffered brain damage through lack of oxygen and a decision had been taken to switch off his life-support.
He had died later that day.
The court heard that an oxygen tube had been wrongly inserted into Liam's throat and stomach and not his wind-pipe.
Dr Marc Cartwright, anaesthetist on the cardiac arrest team, said it took several minutes to spot the mistake and insert the tube properly.
He said that while it was in the wrong place it would have hindered Liam's breathing.
Dr Nanayakkara said Liam's death had caused him grave concern and he had been eager a specialist children's pathologist should carry out the post-mortem examination.
The trial was adjourned until today.
Dr Charith Nanayakkara: broke down in court
Breeding centre plan for London zoo
LONDON ZOO yesterday announced its latest mission — to take the institution safely into the 21st century with a £21 million development programme.
The scheme will turn the 36-acre Regents Park site into a first-rate animal conservation and captive breeding centre.
The eight-phase plan is designed to ensure the 166-year-old zoo — the world's oldest — against previously threatened closure.
Zoo director Jo Gipps said: ‘London Zoo will become an increasingly interesting and enjoyable place to visit and our aim is to attract more visitors by telling them that we are an exciting and relevant zoo of the future.
‘We will focus very strongly on the important and valuable conservation work which is carried out here.
‘The plan has been put together to enable London Zoo to move forward in practical, achievable stages and represents the relaunch of this great London landmark.’
Central to the plan will be the renovation of the Grade II listed Mappin Terraces.
Other features include a Madagascar Centre for the endangered and unique animals of that country, a World of Invertebrates, a breeding centre for endangered macaws and a walk-through aquarium and redeveloped children's zoo.
Making the announcement, which follows two years of uncertainty about the zoo's future, Dr Gipps said £2.5 million was already assured for the capital project which would begin in the next financial year.
The last phase, which includes a carnivore conservation centre and renovation of the tropical bird house, is scheduled to be completed by April 2001.
Private money is to be used for the funding of all the projects and considerable effort is to be placed on greater fund-raising and promotion over the period.
Car production shows increase
CAR production rose ‘encouragingly’ by 14.6 per cent last month compared with the January 1992 figure, it was announced yesterday.
Car output in January 1993 was 109,124, compared with 95,245 in January 1992, said the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders (SMMT).
Production for export rose 21.21 per cent and commercial vehicle production rose 14.81 per cent, with commercial production for export falling by 3.09 per cent .
— PA
Clinton to receive top Oxford honour
PRESIDENT Clinton is to receive Oxford University's highest honour, it was announced yesterday.
The US leader, a Rhodes Scholar at Oxford's University College from 1968-70, has been proposed for the Degree of Doctor of Civil Law by Diploma — a special honour reserved for royalty and heads of state.
Current holders of Degrees by Diploma include the Queen, the Prince of Wales, the Duke of Edinburgh and the Queen Mother.
Briton gets life sentence for drugs trafficking in Thailand
A BRITON escaped with a life sentence for drugs trafficking in Thailand, but his two Canadian colleagues were sentenced to death, the Thai Criminal court confirmed yesterday.
Melvyn Wallace, 39, a disc-jockey, originally from Rochester, Kent, was said to be in tears when the Thai court handed down the sentences in a five-minute appearance.
At the time of his arrest Wallace, who had worked as a DJ on Radio Pattaya, a commercial station serving the Thai beach resort, said: ‘I am not worried.
They have got nothing on me.’
The two Canadians, Michael Karl McNeil, 26, and Ralph Wilson, were arrested in April last year in the lobby of the Chiang Mai Orchid Hotel in North Thailand.
According to police they had 3.7 kilos of heroin, valued at US$7 million on the streets of New York.
Their arrest was lauded as a triumph of international co-operation among the police forces of Canada, Britain, New Zealand and Thailand.
Wallace, who also had an address in Southampton, was the only one to plead guilty to the charge.
Thailand has not carried out the death penalty for several years.
The two Canadians may have the sentenced reduced to life imprisonment on appeal.
Last November Peter Heather, 27, from Kingsley Holt, North Staffordshire, and Brian Mounsey of Liverpool were sentenced to 40 and 50 years respectively for drugs trafficking.
Two other Britons, Sandra Gregory, 28, from Sowerby Bridge, West Yorkshire, and Robert Lock, 30, from Cambridge, were arrested last week at Bangkok's Don Muang airport.
Miss Gregory was reported to have 150  grammes of heroin, carried internally in three condoms.
Yesterday Wallace, McNeil and Wilson were transferred to Bangkok's top security prison at Bangkwang.
‘Stupid’ design of courthouse cited in escape
THE DESIGN of the courthouse from which five alleged Strangeways rioters escaped was branded as ‘breathtakingly bloody stupid’ last night as the hunt for the men continued.
The Prison Officers Association said it was astounding that it was so easy to escape from a building which was supposed to be secure.
And the local MP, Bob Litherland, revealed that he had warned the Home Office of security worries over the building.
The men, two of whom have escaped before, climbed into a space in the ceiling from a supposedly secure area.
They then scrambled along ducting and into Court No 2 at Manchester Crown Court before escaping to the street through an unlocked fire door.
The five men, including one convicted murderer, were being tried on charges relating to the 25-day Strangeway prison riot in which inmates caused millions of pounds in damage.
The Home Office prison service has begun a top-level inquiry, and police gave warning that all five are dangerous and should not be approached.
David Evans, general secretary of the Prison Officers Association, said the Lord Chancellor's Department was responsible for security in the design of court buildings.
‘You can imagine our horror at finding a false ceiling in a secure establishment and ducts like this.
It's breathtakingly bloody stupid.’
Mr Litherland, Labour MP for Manchester Central, said he had drawn attention to the security flaw after a building worker told him of his concern while working at the court building.
Last night, a spokesman for the Lord Chancellor's Department said: ‘The secure area of the court was refurbished in 1989 and as always the Home Office was consulted throughout the proceedings.
Home Office requirements for alterations were incorporated into the refurbishment design.’
Derek Lewis, director general of the Prison Service, said a preliminary report by the Leeds Prison governor, Tony Fitzpatrick, into the ‘very serious escape’ would be completed today.
‘In the light of his report I will decide what further action needs to be taken to ensure that such an incident does not happen again.
‘It would be wrong to anticipate the conclusions of the inquiry but I do want to assure the public that this matter is a cause of great concern to the Prison Service and that all aspects of the escape, including the role played by prison staff, will be very carefully examined.’
Among those on the run are Alan Lord, 32, jailed for life for stabbing to death a father-of-three, David Gilbert, in 1981, and Mark Azzopardi, 23.
Both have escaped and been recaptured since the Strangeways riot.
The other three were named as Barry Morton, 24, John Murray, 22, and Anthony Bush, 27.
The five are among 12 defendants accused of conspiracy to riot and conspiracy to injure police and prison officers during the riot
The trial, which began on 14 October, continued yesterday without the missing men.
Hogg protests to Iran over Rushdie affair
THE Government last night protested directly to Iran at the ‘outrageous infringement’ of Salman Rushdie's rights from the renewed death threats against him.
The Foreign Office minister, Douglas Hogg, told Tehran's most senior diplomat in London that the threats against the author were a violation of international law and amounted to an incitement to commit murder.
Mr Hogg summoned the Iranian charge d'affaires, Gholamreza Ansari, to the Foreign Office to protest at the continuing death sentence or ‘fatwa’ against Mr Rushdie.
Iran's spiritual leader, Ayatollah Khamenei, renewed the sentence against Mr Rushdie on Sunday, the fourth anniversary of the original fatwa.
Actress seeks ban on obsessive fan
THE actress Helena Bonham Carter is asking a court to protect her from an obsessive fan who is making her life a misery.
Ms Bonham Carter, 26, has given the High Court in London a map marking out an area of several hundred yards around her home from which she wants the man barred.
The star of the hit film Howards End, which has received nine Oscar nominations, also wants Andrew Farquharson, 27, from Inverness, to stop phoning her at her family home in Golders Green, north London.
A writ has been issued by the actress and her parents asking for him to be banned ‘from entering or trespassing on the property or on the actual road’.
Her solicitor, Warren Reed, from Ratcliffe and Co, said yesterday: ‘Helena Bonham Carter and her parents very much regret that they have had to arrange for the issue of a writ against Andrew James Farquharson.
‘They have been extremely patient with him for several years and have taken this step after careful consideration of the limited options available to them.’
The case is likely to be heard soon in private in a judge's chambers.
If he issues the injunction and Mr Farquharson ignores it, he could be jailed for up to two years for contempt.
The unemployed fan is believed to have moved from Scotland to Peckham, south London two years ago to be closer to Helena, whose films include Lady Jane and Room With A View.
He persistently called at her home, sent letters and made phone calls.
Last year he was bound over to keep the peace after being arrested on her doorstep.
A Golders Green police spokesman said: ‘He seemed to be obsessed with her and is known to the police as a pest who has been to court.’
— PA 
Helena Bonham Carter: action taken with regret
Rumours stalk streets of James Bulger's village The lack of quick arrests is fuelling emotions and even wild speculation among the bitter people of Walton, Audrey Gillan finds
THE ELBOW was propped on a window sill as a woman stuck her head out through the open casement.
Her neighbour, from the next door tenement, was standing on the pavement.
The two were engrossed but their faces were puzzled.
Shocking it was.
How could someone do such a thing?
And they must live somewhere near here.
This was Elm Road, a street in Walton, but it could have been anywhere in Liverpool or Bootle.
The killers of James Bulger have still not been caught.
And people here are becoming more and more bitter.
Confusing stories are circulating along with rumours and half-truths as people, in their desperation, try to help find the murderers.
In Walton village, next to the railway embankment where James's mutilated body was discovered, everyone wants to add a new piece of information.
Kevin Whelan, 12, the boy who found the hood from James's jacket, claimed to know the youths who committed the murder.
Yesterday, at the railway embankment, he and a group of friends all reckoned to know the two youths who abducted two-year-old James.
They claimed that they lived in Walton village.
A name was mentioned, a street and a door.
‘Yeah, we know it were him,’ said a woman as she added another bunch of flowers to the hundreds piled on the embankment.
‘It looks like them.
It's the same weight, the same haircut, height, everything,’ Kevin said.
Asked what made him so positive, he said: ‘No sooner was the body found than he ran away from home.
I think he's back now.’
A cocky 12-year-old in an expensive Goretex jacket, Kevin claims that he went to the boy's home and was told by his father that he had not killed anyone.
‘He hasn't been out for days,’ another boy said.
The teenagers claimed that the police had found a footprint on the embankment near where James's body was found, that police had taken trainers from the boy they said did it.
Like many others, the boys can add plenty of gossip to fuel the fires of rumours.
It is a small area and most of the teenagers there mess around together.
They now spend a lot of time exchanging stories about the week's events.
They are also desperate to get their pictures in the paper.
They know the boys who found the body.
‘They told me little James's coat was around his head,’ Kevin claimed.
Another woman corrected him, saying she heard the coat was found a bit farther down the freight train track.
But the boy was insistent.
Described by one resident as a rough area, Walton village lies in the shadow of both Everton and Liverpool football clubs.
The doors of its red brick terraced houses open straight on to the pavement.
The shops, launderette, barber's and butcher's — with their mesh grilles on the windows — are full of theories on what really happened.
The people did not see the two youths — but if they saw them now they say they would lynch them.
One mother in Walton village said a parent must know who the two youths are from the pictures taken by security cameras.
‘The parents would recognise them.
But who would want to give up their son?’ she said.
‘They must be from this area though, because they know it so well.
Kids here play at the reservoir and the tunnel that they went through.
I used to go ratting there sometimes.
I would love to string them up.
I thought it was going to be one of those horrific accidents but it doesn't seem like it now because he was brutally injured.’
The police have told how the youths who had abducted James asked those who challenged them the way to Walton Hall police station.
People in Walton believe that was just a ruse by the youths.
‘If they were taking him to the police station, why did they walk three miles.
Marsh Lane police station is just round the corner from the Strand where they abducted him,’ a middle-aged man said.
Everyone in the community believes that someone is shielding the two youths.
They do not like to think that such a brutal murder could be committed by a Scouser, but the more they think about it the more they believe that it was.
An elderly couple had tears in their eyes as they read the cards on the flowers for the Bulger family.
‘Their mother must have noticed a difference in them.
If you've got a boy of 12 or 14 and he missed his tea or came home acting strangely you would know,’ the woman said.
‘There must have been blood on their clothes or something.’
Clifford Morris, a Liverpool taxi driver, agreed.
‘I believe someone somewhere has got a good idea.
It might be parent protection,’ he said.
‘When they catch them I don't think age should be a consideration.
I wish hanging was brought back.’
Feelings were running high all round.
‘I just want to bury them in the ground.
But first I want to pull all their nails out,’ shouted one man.
‘This is beyond evil.
Give me a gun and I'll kill them for you.’
Back at Gayflowers, the florists where one of the last sightings of James and the two boys was made, Eric Teare said he thought that one of the boys may have been in his shop.
‘Friday was coming up to Valentine's Day and we were really busy.
A scruffy little kid aged between 12 and 14 came in and tried to steal the charity box from the counter.
The time connects with the sightings.
It could have been them.’
Gayflowers is where Walton residents have been going to buy their flowers for James.
Across the city the flowers, teddy bears and other cuddly toys were continuing to pile up.
Yesterday the Liverpool Echo had 37 moving death notices for James Bulger.
At the scene of the two-year-old's death, a telegraph pole bears a long poem pleading with the killers to give themselves up and release the family from their pain.
Only then, it says, will ‘little James’ rest in peace.
Late betting rule unpopular with punters
By Marcello Mega
LOOSE ALICE, also known affectionately as Slack, shot out of the trap in a blur of speed and bore down on the man who was running in front of her squeezing a squeaky toy.
Seconds later she was back at the traps being caressed by her trainer, Ian Carmichael, who with his brother, Stephen, runs Liberton Greyhound Kennels in Edinburgh.
Mr Carmichael was in contemplative mood yesterday after the news that betting shops would be allowed to remain open until 10pm during the summer months, bringing Scotland into line with England and Wales.
The controversial move, which is effective from April, has angered Labour MPs, who claim there is no support for the measure in Scotland.
Yesterday, it became apparent that those involved in greyhound racing feared that it would have a detrimental effect on their business.
Even the independent bookmakers, who might have been expected to welcome the opportunity to extend their hours, were largely against the reform.
Mr Carmichael said: ‘There is a real fear that if the bookies stay open until ten it will hit the greyhound tracks.
I have heard that even if they lose 15 per cent of the money coming in at the moment, some of them could fold.
We have got between 50 and 60 racing dogs here.
What do we do with them if there is nowhere to race them?’
He added that it seemed the Government had been pushed into making the decision by the major chain bookmakers, such as Ladbrokes and William Hill.
Bert Logan, president of the East of Scotland Bookmakers Association, agreed.
‘We are against the late opening of betting shops for many reasons, but primarily because we don't want to endanger the livelihood of those who depend on greyhound racing.’
He added that although the independents could choose not to open late, it was likely they would have to, to prevent their customers drifting to the nearest major chain.
‘I am not sure that the extra hours will bring in significant extra business, but staff will have to be paid for longer hours and security will become more of a problem.
‘There are bound to be more attempts to rob bookies’ premises if they are locking up at 10pm.’
Eddie Ramsay, managing director of the Powderhall greyhound track in Edinburgh, said he did not expect to lose much business if the bookmakers did extend their hours.
He said: ‘People come here for a good night out, the restaurant is always busy and we are opening a new betting shop at the track where punters will be able to place bets tax free.
We will be all right.
‘But I think that it's asking for trouble to let the bookies open so late.
They could become a den for juvenile delinquents.
People think a lot of money is taken in a bookie's so they will be a target for thieves.’
The opposition MPs who opposed the Government move claimed that only one small bookmaker in Edinburgh had been in favour of late opening.
Ironically, that bookmaker, who traded from Easter Road, is not now active in the field.
Hare-raising: Ian Carmichael lets Loose Alice out of the trap on a training run amid controversy over the future of the greyhound racing business
Vigilantes are found guilty after death of man
THREE vigilantes who took the law into their own hands after a burglary were convicted yesterday after a man they confronted was killed on his own doorstep.
The judge, Mr Justice Laws, refused to renew bail and remanded them in custody to await sentence after social inquiry reports.
The victim, Ronald Penrose, 43, was confronted at his home on the Penrhys housing estate near Tonypandy, Mid Glamorgan, south Wales, one night last June.
He died from severe injuries when he was knocked backwards and his head struck a wall.
The fatal punch came from Michael Jones, 40, whose elderly widowed mother had earlier been burgled by two teenagers.
Jones and a group of friends, hunting the culprits, went to Mr Penrose's home after hearing he had been allegedly giving cash for stolen goods, Cardiff Crown Court was told.
Jones, of Llewellyn Street, Pen-y-graig, Rhondda Valley, was found guilty of manslaughter.
His nephew Ian Jones, 23, unemployed, of Wen Graig, Trealaw, Rhondda, and roofer Michael Thomas, 27, of Kenry Street, Tonypandy, were convicted of affray.
But the jury cleared all three of kidnapping Mr Penrose's 15-year-old son Jason.
The prosecution alleged the teenager was driven off in a car and threatened with drowning in a lake unless he gave them information about the burglary.
Two other defendants in the month-long trial, Howard Walsh, 47, and Kelly Thomas, 19, both unemployed, were acquitted of kidnap.
Christopher Pitchford, QC, prosecuting, told the jury: ‘Whatever their feelings were on the home of an elderly woman being broken into by a gang of drug-crazed teenagers, it did not give anyone the excuse to take the law into their own hands.’
The court heard that Jones scoured the Penrhys estate after the burglary and took his friends to Mr Penrose's house because he believed he could lead them to the culprits.
After the case, Mr Penrose's relatives said police found no stolen goods in his house and he was an innocent victim.
His uncle, a former miner, Ernest Davies, 63, welcomed the jury's verdicts.
‘I feel that at last justice has returned to the Rhondda Valley.
Ronald had had problems in the past but he was not the villain he was made out to be during the court case.
He died on his doorstep defending himself and his children.’
Two youths have been dealt with in court for the burglary.
— PA
Students start shake-up of associations
By Douglas Fraser, Education Correspondent
STUDENT leaders have started an unprecedented shake-up of their associations in an attempt to stave off imminent legislation to end compulsory membership.
Included in their package of proposals are a national scrutineer and adviser on student association accounts and activities.
There would be limits on political campaigning and ballots at least every three years on membership of the National Union of Students.
The draft student charter would allow students to opt out of their associations and would constrain unions within the law on charitable status.
The plans come as ministers are understood to be finalising plans for legislation to introduce voluntary membership of student unions, with a bill likely next parliamentary session.
At present, each student has a subscription paid automatically to student associations where they exist, and they almost all affiliate in turn to the National Union of Students.
Jim Murphy, president of the NUS in Scotland, said that a ministerial announcement is expected by the end of this month.
‘This will confirm our fears that they intend to rip the soul out of student associations and the NUS,’ he said.
‘It appears the Government have lost sight of their stated aims of ensuring accountability of public funds and choice for students.’
The union expects a white paper to propose that association activities be split, with all students having automatic access only to publicly-funded core services.
Those would be defined by ministers and might include welfare and housing advice and representation of students within the university or college.
Non-core services would involve almost everything else, to be paid through contributions from individual students.
Those could include sports, catering, bars, entertainment and campaigning on student issues.
The alternative NUS student charter involves a radical shake-up of how associations are run.
It would require them to conform to stricter accounting and electoral procedures, and suggests scrutiny by the National Audit Office.
On the political campaigns for which the NUS has long been criticised by Conservative MPs, the charter suggests that associations and the union should be allowed to lobby on issues which affect students.
That could include non-educational matters, such as the effect of rail privatisation on reduced fares for young people.
The NUS is taking an unprecedented risk in arguing for regular ballots of students to choose whether to affiliate.
Its leaders argue they provide student unions with a national profile, training and support and that they are recognised by Government and decision-makers as a source of advice.
Fatal crash trial will test new driving law
A TEENAGE jogger died after being hit by a drink-driver and being thrown through the air, a court heard yesterday in what could be a landmark case.
The youngster was struck as the car overtook a lorry in Poolewe, Ross-shire, last July.
On trial is William Ballantine, Caberfeidh, Birchburn, Altbea, who admits causing the death of Louis Innes-Loo, 16, Glen Nairn Londubh, Poolewe, by driving carelessly and while over the limit.
He denies causing the boy's death by driving dangerously.
The case is the first in Scotland under a law introduced less than two weeks before the accident.
The new section of the Road Traffic Act, 1988, makes it a specific offence for drivers to cause death by careless driving and while under the influence of alcohol.
The court heard from Clive Murray, 44, a gardener of Poolewe, that Ballantine, 51, was seen leaning against a wall crying after the accident, and that later he spent three days in hospital.
A garage owner, Colin Forbes, 45, from Aultbea, told the trial at Dingwall Sheriff Court yesterday that he was driving his lorry through Poolewe at about 10:45pm on 13 July when he saw Ballantine's Volvo come up behind him.
Around the same time, he saw a boy or young man wearing light clothes running at the side of the road.
At the edge of the village, Mr Forbes said, Ballantine's car began to overtake.
‘As I passed the boy I saw in the mirror the car had pulled out sharply to overtake and I just heard the bang.
That was when the car hit the boy.’
He said he saw the boy being thrown through the air on impact, and the car crossed in front of the lorry, mounted the pavement and stopped on the foreshore.
Mr Forbes said Ballantine told him the boy was dead and told him to phone the police.
The trial continues.
Three Falkirk directors forced to quit
By John Smith
THREE directors of Falkirk FC were ousted last night at a stormy extraordinary general meeting of the club.
Majority shareholders Hamish and George Deans were faced with hostility from more than 50 small shareholders at the meeting at Brockville over their motion to remove the men.
In spite of overwhelming opposition on a  show of hands, the Deanses, who have a 57 per cent stake in the club, were able to oust Alistair MacKenzie, Clive Scott and Wilson Young from the seven-man board.
The directors Jim Johnston and Sandy Moffat are to stay on after the Deanses agreed that an independent chairman be appointed to the board.
Earlier this week, the other directors failed in a Court of Session action to block last night's meeting, called by the Deanses.
Hamish Deans and his son George, who were removed from their positions as chairman and vice chairman at the club in May, were on Wednesday charged with fraud after an eight-month police investigation into the club's affairs.
Last night angry shareholders called on the Deanses to go now for the good of the 117-year-old club.
One shouted:’ Better meddle with the deil than the bairns o' Falkirk’, but the two men remained impassive.
Hamish Deans rose to his feet early in the meeting to read a statement after being asked about the charges laid by the police.
He said he and his son ‘emphatically deny the allegations of fraud in relation to the matters complained of in the charges’.
He continued: ‘These charges relate solely to the issue to us in 1991 of company credit cards, and to payments amounting in total to £838.32.
‘The directors of Falkirk Football Club were aware of and approved the application for the cards.
All payments credited were made to defray legitimate club business expenses.’
Payment of that sum and other monies from the Deanses to the club was referred to by the outgoing financial director, Clive Scott.
He said that the Deanses had now paid a total of £86,000 into the club —‘which would not have been paid otherwise’.
He told shareholders the latest sums were £33,000 in settlement of a civil action by the club — £15,000 of that the cost of an audit investigation — and £838 in a case involving credit cards.
Mr Scott added that all the media attention since May had undoubtedly damaged the good image of the club.
Mr Scott's removal from office was demanded by one shareholder who said that he was at the helm when the company's finances went in to the red.
Defending his financial management, Mr Scott replied: ‘I am part of a seven-man board, albeit a split board.
Let us be clear the figures…are Falkirk Football Club's figures.’
DUNDEE
Inquiry after fire kills 250 pigs
POLICE are investigating a fire which killed 250 pigs at Scotland's largest pig farm.
The blaze, at Muir of Pert Piggery, Tealing, near Dundee, was discovered early yesterday.
It followed a fire at 8:45pm on Wednesday night at the same farm in a shed containing almost six tonnes of straw.
Police are treating both fires as suspicious and damage is estimated at £40,000.
LINLITHGOW
Fine and ban for motorcyclist
A MOTORCYCLIST who had been drinking and was doing 122mph when stopped by police on the M9 near Linlithgow, was fined £350 and banned from driving for three years at Linlithgow Sheriff Court yesterday.
Bruce Mearns, 34, of Arns Grove, Alloa, admitted speeding and driving his motorbike with more than one and a half times the legal limit of alcohol on 6 February.
His solicitor, Raymond McMenamin, said his client had been in a hurry to get to Edinburgh.
EDINBURGH
Embezzlement of £5,000 alleged
AN ABERDEEN man appeared in court yesterday, charged with embezzling more than £5,000 from a hotel and country club.
David Greetham, 28, of Wales Street, Aberdeen, is accused of embezzling £5,135.08 while working at the Dalmahoy Hotel, Golf and Country Club at Kirknewton, near Edinburgh, between 1 February and 8 November, 1991.
Trial was fixed for April after Greetham pled not guilty to the charge at Edinburgh Sheriff Court.
WEST LOTHIAN
Ban on smoking for council staff
FEARS of compensation claims from passive smokers have led to a ban on smoking at work for West Lothian District Council's 1,700 staff.
‘We are worried about compensation claims from passive smokers whose health has been damaged by other people's bad habits,’ said councillor Frank Anderson.
‘The floodgates will be open after the recent award of £15,000 to Veronica Bland by the council in Stockport.’
The West Lothian ban will also apply to members of the public visiting council offices to pay their rents or make inquiries.
FALKIRK
Planning leave for superstore
THREE hundred jobs may be created at a superstore at Falkirk.
Wm Low Supermarkets has been granted planning permission for a store and car park on the Ladbrokes Retail Park site in the town's Grahams Road.
Work is to start this summer, with completion expected in autumn 1994.
Footballer denies assault charge
DUNDEE UNITED'S internationalist striker, Duncan Ferguson, has denied a charge of assault at a Fife hotel.
He pled not guilty by letter at Cupar Sheriff Court yesterday.
The charge alleges that Ferguson, 20, of Glasgow Road, Stirling, assaulted Graham Boyter on 21 November last at the Royal hotel, Anstruther.
Francis Downie, 48, of St Adrians Place, Anstruther, also pled not guilty to committing a breach of the peace by threatening Mr Boyter and challenging him to fight.
Trial was fixed for both accused for 8 June.
DUNFERMLINE
Man remanded on murder charge
A FIFE man was charged at Dunfermline Sheriff Court yesterday with the murder of Patrick O'Donnell of Pentland Terrace, High Valleyfield, earlier this week.
Kevin Brown, 23, of James Hogg Crescent, Oakley, made no plea or declaration and was remanded in custody.
Centenarian fish may figure on menus
By Tom Morton
FRIED 100-year-old sea monster in breadcrumbs could be on Scottish menus next year, depending on a £50,000 research project into deep water fish stocks west of the Hebrides.
Little-known species such as orange roughy, grenadier, black scabbard and blue ling are all already titillating French palates, after the decision of a Breton company, Jego-Query, to form a Scottish subsidiary, Brescot, and base eight supertrawlers at Lochinver in Sutherland.
The French boats have targeted the monstrous, bug-eyed fish varieties, which can command premium prices.
Found off the UK Continental Shelf at depths of up to 3,000 metres, grenadiers are thought to reach maturity at the advanced age of 50, while orange roughies fished elsewhere have been estimated at 100-years-old.
‘That is arguable, though,’ said Dr John Gordon of the Scottish Association for Marine Science, which is conducting the research for Highlands and Islands Enterprise.
‘These figures were arrived at using radio isotopes.
One of the aims of our study will be to determine how old these fish are when caught and how sustainable a commercial fishery could be.’
Of the 120 fish types which live at depths of between 500 and 3,000 metres to the west of Scotland, 25 were of potential commercial importance, according to Dr Gordon.
Spanish and Norwegian skippers were now looking at the possibilities such unusual fish offered.
‘One of the problems in the Scottish fleet is the availability of large boats,’ said Dr Gordon.
‘The French were fortunate in that they had vessels of the right kind available.’
One of the possible catching methods which could bear most fruit was, he added, long-lining, once universal along the Scottish coasts and mostly abandoned.
Orange roughy, once called the director fish in Scotland, is extensively exploited in New Zealand and Australian waters and yields a firm, white flesh beneath an oily skin.
It sells in Paris, where it is known as either beryx or emperor fish, for up to £12 per kilo, and is considered a delicacy.
The grenadier is more cod-like in taste and texture, while the scabbard (sabra in France) is popular in Madeira, where it is called the espada.
The blue ling is a Japanese favourite.
Sandy Cumming, HIE's director of natural resources, said the survey would determine whether a fishery was viable on commercial and ecological grounds.
‘Any development of a deep water fishery will be long-term and will be dictated not just by the availability of fish stocks but, equally importantly, by an identified customer market.’
Whether the average Scot will fancy black scabbard and chips remains to be seen.
The orange roughy: considered a delicacy in Paris
Inquiry after aircraft alert
AN INVESTIGATION was started yesterday after a Loganair Advanced Turboprop aircraft landed short of the runway at Kirkwall Airport in Orkney.
The plane with 20 passengers on board was caught in a strong down draught but managed to touch down safely ten metres short of the runway.
The incident happened the day after British Aerospace, the plane's manufacturer, sent its head of corporate marketing, Peter Black, to Orkney to reassure travellers after a spate of problems involving ATPs at Kirkwall, Sumburgh and Aberdeen airports.
Yesterday Capt Roy Beaumont, Loganair's operations director, said that although the plane involved was an ATP, the down draught could have had the same effect on any aircraft coming in to land.
He said engineers had carried out an inspection of the plane — with advice from British Aerospace — and had found no damage.
Another company spokesman said that the ‘minor incident’ was being investigated.
He added: ‘The plane touched down just a short distance before the runway itself.
Most passengers would not have known that anything was amiss.’
Loganair usually operates a Shorts 360 aircraft on the Edinburgh-Wick-Kirkwall route.
Yesterday's ATP was a stand-in.
But the airline plans to introduce ATPs on a Glasgow-Orkney-Shetland service later this year.
1,000 firms in university green study
By Frank Urquhart
ABOUT 1,000 companies are to be surveyed as part of a major study by the Robert Gordon University, aimed at improving the greening of Scottish industry and commerce.
The initiative will seek to identify the best examples of environmental management to be used for setting a benchmark for the future.
The study is to be conducted by the university's Centre for Industry and the Environment and the results are expected to be published by the end of the year.
John Moxen, the joint project director, said the growing pressure from European and domestic legislation and a strong green lobby made it vital that industry and commerce move towards best environmental practices.
Some companies, he claimed, were paying only lip service to environmental improvements and pollution safeguards.
‘Environmental management is an important factor in deciding which firms succeed and which fail,’ he said.
‘The managerial and cultural changes which Scottish companies have introduced in response to the green agenda are not well understood and we can say very little about the effectiveness of these changes.’
The survey would seek to identify examples of environmental excellence to set a benchmark for other companies to follow.
Mr Moxen went on: ‘The results of the study will provide a series of key recommendations and action points which raise environmental standards in Scottish industry and increase the competitiveness of Scottish industry in the environmentally conscious Nineties.’
The survey was welcomed by Scottish industry leaders.
Ian Lakin, managing director of the Donside Paper Company in Aberdeen, said: ‘There is no doubt that environmental costs are a key issue which all manufacturing companies are having to address.
We have to understand that it is going to cost many millions of pounds throughout industry in Scotland and we had better get it right.’
He added: ‘A lot of products from Scottish manufacturing companies are going into international markets and that cannot be ignored.
We could be closed out of a lot of markets if we don't employ environmentally sound principles.’
ABERDEEN
Man in court over shotgun incident
AN OIL worker appeared from custody at Aberdeen Sheriff Court yesterday after a 44-hour police operation at a country cottage in Aberdeenshire.
Brian Say, 44, of Craigmuir Croft, Ythanbank, near Ellon, was charged with conducting himself in a disorderly manner at his home while in possession of a loaded shotgun between 15 and 17 February, repeatedly threatening to shoot himself and committing a breach of the peace.
Say was remanded to Royal Cornhill Hospital in Aberdeen and the case continued was without plea until Thursday.
ABERDEEN
Fishermen rescued as boat sinks
TWO fishermen were rescued by the crew of another vessel yesterday as their boat began sinking five miles off Aberdeen.
The two man crew of Aberdeen-based Viking Queen were transferred to the Loch Maravaig shortly before their vessel disappeared beneath the waves off Girdleness.
The vessel sank as the Aberdeen lifeboat was preparing to go to the aid of the stricken boat.
The crewmen were Alan Wood, Loriston Place, and Andrew Robertson, Ferryhill Terrace, both Aberdeen.
DUMFRIES
Police praise for elderly victim
AN 87-year-old woman who was bound and gagged by robbers in her home was praised by detectives last night.
Ethel Tiley, of Bower Drive, Minnigaff, near Newton Stewart, was described by a Dumfries and Galloway CID spokesman as a very brave lady.
He continued: ‘She is very resilient and was able to give us good information about what happened.’
Police said they were looking for three young men in connection with the raid on Wednesday night.
The three are  described as all aged between 17 and 20, between 5ft 5in and 5ft 10in tall, and wearing dark-coloured jackets.
Opt-out vote could keep schools open
By Alan Forbes
THE leader of Strathclyde said yesterday opt-out legislation may prevent his regional council from closing four secondary schools in Glasgow.
Robert Gould expressed his frustration at the tactics being used by parents at two of the schools threatened with closure on the south side of the city.
The parents of St Gerard's Roman Catholic secondary and Queen's Park secondary, which is non-denominational, are taking part in opt-out ballots in an effort to sabotage the closure programme.
The parents have said they do not want their schools to be self-governing but they see the legislation as the only way to avoid closure.
The Scottish Office has said it would not allow schools with low rolls to opt out, but the parents claim they have enough schools ready to join in a rolling campaign of ballots which would delay closures by two years.
Strathclyde has made a direct appeal to the Scottish education minister, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, to change the legislation so that closure programmes are not caught up in lengthy delays.
Mr Gould and Strathclyde's education chairman, Tommy Farrell, strenuously denied a report that the region had changed its mind about closing St Gerard's, Queen's Park and two other south side secondaries, Bellarmine and John Bosco.
Mr Farrell said he was delighted by Lord James's statement in The Scotsman yesterday that opting-out was not an escape route from closure threats.
Mr Gould said that the four Glasgow schools had to close because their small rolls denied pupils a broad curriculum.
‘We won't change our minds on closure but if the legislation means we can't carry that out there is nothing we can do about it.’
Deirdre Gaughan, a leading St Gerard's campaigner, said Mr Gould's comment on the problems posed by the legislation was a step forward.
She called on the council to cancel the closures.
PERTHSHIRE
Protection order on Tay extended
THE protection order on the River Tay, which prohibits fishing for freshwater species without official permits, has been continued for three years by the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang.
The order, originally granted in 1986, is made only when it will result in a significant increase in fishing available to anglers ‘on reasonable terms and conditions’.
Caution on hopes of European aid for Highlands
By Tom Morton
HOPES that the Highlands and Islands could be in line for a huge European Community aid package are a long way from being fulfilled, according to the Highland Regional Council official masterminding the area's campaign for so-called Objective One economic status.
Chris Claridge, the council's deputy chief executive and specialist in European affairs, said it could be June before any definite decision was taken.
It was reported from Brussels yesterday that EC officials had agreed that the Highlands and Islands' gross domestic product reached only 79 per cent of the European average.
It is strongly rumoured that the eligibility ceiling for the increased aid formerly available to ‘Objective One’ areas is being raised from 75 to 80 per cent, thus allowing the Highlands and Islands to scrape into consideration.
However, no decision can be taken until various meetings have taken place.
There was disquiet at Highland Regional Council yesterday that any rejoicing was extremely premature.
The bid to obtain Objective One status is understood to be on a knife edge and caution was the order of the day.
‘In the end it is a political decision which will be taken by the council of ministers with the views of officials placed before them,’ said Mr Claridge.
‘We are obviously happy that the statistics of our case have been agreed, but if the politicians are not convinced, our bid will fail.
It is up to them.’
There was little new in yesterday's reports, Mr Claridge stressed.
‘We have successfully cleared a number of hurdles in our bid for Objective One status, and this was simply another.
There are many more to go.
It is a delicate situation and we really have to wait and see.
‘At the end of the day the politicians could decide not to give us it, and we'd all look pretty silly if people pointed to 18 February and said ‘but it was confirmed back then’.’
University wins £1.5m research grant
A RESEARCH team at Glasgow University has just received a £1.5 million grant from the Science and Engineering Research Council to carry out a project to increase the capacity of fibre-optic cables, writes Eric McKenzie
Prof Richard De La Rue, of the university's department of electronics and electrical engineering, explained yesterday that by the end of the century overseas telephone calls could be as routine as a local call; there would be more international television channels into living rooms; and the rapid world of modern business could become even faster.
In fibre-optic cables each letter or part of a sound is called a ‘pulse’.
Cables currently in use transmit half a billion (500 million) pulses per second which is equivalent to carrying about 100,000 simultaneous telephone calls.
But, Prof Richard De La Rue, of the university's department of electronics and electrical engineering, and his team hope to go 20 times better and develop a cable which will transmit ten billion pulses, or two million simultaneous telephone calls.
NEW LANARK
Man slashed by break-in youth
A MAN was slashed on the face while attempting to foil three men breaking into a garage in the village of New Lanark.
The 28-year-old man, who is not being named by police, had gone to assist a neighbour in Caithness Row who had disturbed three youths trying to enter the premises.
One of the youths slashed him across the nose and he needed eight stitches in the wound.
IRVINE
Mental health centre opened
A CENTRE to provide help for people who have experienced mental health problems was opened at Irvine yesterday.
The Compass Centre is a co-operative venture between Ayrshire and Arran Health Board and the Scottish Association for Mental Health.
SAMH will manage the facility, which will provide 80 places to train people in a variety of skills ranging from desktop publishing to retail distribution, in an attempt to restore the independence of former mental patients.
FIFE
Fight stepped up to save ‘copters
THE FIGHT to prevent the rescue helicopters of RAF Leuchars in Fife being grounded is to be stepped up.
Fife region's policy and resources committee yesterday empowered the administration leader, Councillor John MacDougall, and the chief executive, Dr John Markland, to take whatever action is necessary to try to retain the service.
Pointing out the value of two Wessex machines at Leuchars during the recent bad weather, Mr MacDougall said they were involved on numerous occasions.
He gave warning that centralising the rescue service as planned by the Government, had to affect response time.
Nine years in prison for knife attack
A GLASGOW man was sentenced to nine years in prison for a knife attack.
A judge said it is the duty of the courts to support any attempts being made to prevent crimes of that nature.
A jury at the High Court in Glasgow had found George Harris, 21, guilty of stabbing and attempting to murder John Brown, 30.
The victim had 15 stab wounds, including one to his neck which came within half a millimetre of severing a major blood vessel.
Sentencing Harris, Lord Sutherland, told him that attempted murders involving such lethal weapons were becoming far too prevalent.
He added: ‘It is the duty of the courts to support any attempts being made to prevent crimes of this nature.’
Harris, of Shieldhall Road, West Drumoyne, Glasgow, had been found guilty of assaulting Mr Brown and attempting to murder him on 18 February last year in Shieldhall Road.
He was convicted of repeatedly punching the victim and striking him on the neck with a knife, then chasing him into a garden.
There he stabbed him repeatedly on the head, body and neck.
Apart from the serious wound to his neck, Mr Brown had stab wounds to the back and front of his body, his groin, shoulder and both knees.
The court heard that there was a background of bad blood between the two families.
Shoppers get assurance over glass risk
By Sarah Chalmers
SHOPPERS need have no fear walking under the glass roofs of shopping centres in spite of reports of shattered panes injuring bystanders, a spokesman for The Forge shopping centre said in Glasgow yesterday.
Ian McConnell, building services manager of the retail centre in Parkhead, gave that reassurance after a report in the current issue of the trade magazine New Builder which details a number of incidents of overhead glass exploding in UK buildings during recent months.
The magazine report says overhead glass-pane explosions took place at seven shopping centres, including The Forge, and at the Scottish Exhibition and Conference Centre in Glasgow.
There was one minor injury recorded during an incident at The Forge and four cases which required hospital treatment in Bromley, Kent.
The glass used in those roofs undergoes a special toughening process involving heat treatment followed by rapid cooling.
However, it is thought that that can cause imperfections in the glass which sometimes cause it to explode without warning.
Mr McConnell pointed out that there had been only four such incidents since his centre opened in 1988.
One woman did receive a graze on her hand from a falling fragment, but after the last incident, in May 1992, green gauze was installed under the centre's 13 glass pyramids.
When toughened glass shatters, it breaks into tiny rounded fragments, giving a sugared effect which minimises the chances of injury.
Robert Eynon, marketing manager of the SECC, said the toughened glass was far safer than ordinary glass, or laminated glass which could break into large, sharp and dangerous pieces.
He said that of the nine panes at the SECC which had shattered since its construction in 1985, only a couple had actually resulted in falling glass.
Mr Eynon added: ‘We're in touch with a number of experts.
Their opinion is that the risk diminishes over time.
We find the risk to the public negligible.’
Harold Couch, president of the British Council of Shopping Centres agreed that there was very little risk to the public but said the council was undertaking further research.
Stabbed policeman ‘won't be put off the job'
A POLICEMAN who was stabbed in an Ayrshire town while investigating a routine offence was last night recovering in hospital.
Yesterday, PC John Jobson, 33, told how he had become the latest statistic in the soaring number of knife-related offences.
He was taken to Ayr Hospital on Wednesday night after being injured as he investigated a shoplifting incident at Auchinleck, where he is stationed.
Surgeons had to put three stitches in a deep wound in his shoulder.
But PC Jobson, a policeman for seven years, said: ‘This won't put me off the job.
I'll be back to work as soon as the doctors let me.
‘I didn't feel anything at the time,’ he continued.
‘Then ten or fifteen minutes later I started losing power in my left arm.
I didn't see what kind of weapon it was that caused the injury.’
His divisional commander, Chief Supt John Duncan, of Strathclyde Police's R Division, which covers south Ayrshire, said: ‘I was distressed by the attack.
But I take great pride in the officer's performance.’
He said that the attack underlined the need for the public to co-operate with police in the current Operation Blade campaign.
‘This underlines the dangers that exist when people carry knives.
These situations can spring from the most innocuous of circumstances.
They can suddenly escalate because someone is carrying a blade.’
He added that since the campaign started on 2 February, 175 weapons had been dumped in the bins sited at police stations in his division, 21 of them in the 24-hour period covering the time of the attack on PC Jobson.
Two hundred and fifty-four knives were handed in yesterday throughout Strathclyde.
A total of 2711 have been surrendered so far.
Man sent to jail for shooting brother
A MAN who shot his brother from close range with a .303 rifle was cleared of attempted murder at a High Court sitting in Perth yesterday.
But Alexander McLaren, 37, of Forgandenny Road, Bridge of Earn, was jailed for two years after he was found guilty of a reduced charge.
Jurors decided that he assaulted his brother, Robert, 30, to his severe injury and permanent disfigurement and to the danger of his life by shooting him, pinning him to the ground and repeatedly hitting him on the head with bottles.
But they deleted allegations that he tried to gouge out his brother's eyes, tried to strangle him and tried to murder him.
In their majority verdict they also expressed the view that the crime was committed under provocation.
They were unanimous in finding that McLaren had the rifle and ammunition without a licence.
During a three-day trial, the court had heard how a family argument flared into midnight violence in the hamlet of Aberargie, where the accused had occupied a caravan beside his brother's cottage.
Robert said that his brother had shot him without warning from about ten feet, inflicting a serious thigh wound.
The accused claimed that he had produced the gun to try to hold Robert at bay and then shot him when he advanced on him with a hunting knife.
Lord Cousfield said that although McLaren had been cleared of the most serious charge, the court always regarded the criminal use of firearms as a serious matter
New Forth bridge plans endorsed by Fife
THE Government's plans to construct a new road bridge over the Firth of Forth have been welcomed by Fife Regional Council.
Opposition from Scottish Liberal Democrat council members was heavily defeated yesterday when the region's policy and resources committee agreed that the proposed scheme was vital to the economy of Fife and the north of Scotland and should proceed as quickly as possible.
The SLD members claimed the location of the proposed bridge would act as a drain and take employment away from the region to the Lothians as well as creating an ‘environmental disaster’ on both sides of the river.
Their leader, Councillor Iain Smith, said the Government's document, Setting Forth, did nothing to address the ‘unfettered growth of private cars’ or the need for investment in public transport.
He and his colleagues called instead for the bridge to be built upriver at Kincardine, with provision of the necessary infrastructure and improvements of the road network around Edinburgh.
The committee was told a Kincardine Bridge replacement was likely within the next few years, but was a separate issue and all transport organisations plus the Scottish Office agreed a new crossing of the Forth near the existing bridge was essential.
Saying that the council had been pressing the Scottish Office for a long time to commit itself to a new bridge, the administration leader, John MacDougall, said while welcoming their decision, it was vital that the views of users would be taken into account.
Pledging that opposition to tolls, plus efforts to increase the numbers of rail passengers in a bid to reduce vehicle traffic, would continue, Mr MacDougall also stressed the need for wide consultation.
The committee agreed to urge the Scottish Office to progress as soon as possible and to continue talks on the role of the public sector in the new bridge and its future management.
Students shake-up associations
By Douglas Fraser Education Correspondent
STUDENT leaders have started an unprecedented shake-up of university and college student associations in an attempt to stave off imminent legislation to end compulsory membership.
Included in their package of proposals are a national scrutineer and adviser on student association accounts and activities.
There would be limits on political campaigning and ballots would be held at least every three years on membership of the National Union of Students.
The draft student charter would allow students to opt out of their associations and would constrain student unions by use of the laws on organisations which lay claim to charitable status.
The plans come as ministers are understood to be finalising plans for legislation to introduce voluntary membership of student unions, with a bill likely in the next parliamentary session.
At present, each student has a subscription paid automatically to student associations where they exist, and the associations almost all affiliate in turn to the National Union of Students.
Jim Murphy, president of the NUS in Scotland, said that a ministerial announcement is expected by the end of this month.
‘This will confirm our fears that they intend to rip the soul out of student associations and the NUS,’ he said.
‘It appears the Government have lost sight of their stated aims of ensuring accountability of public funds and choice for students.’
The union expects a white paper to propose that association activities be split, with all students having automatic access only to publicly-funded core services.
Those would be defined by ministers and might include welfare and housing advice and representation of students within the university or college.
Non-core services would involve almost everything else, to be paid through contributions from individual students.
Those could include sports, catering, bars, entertainment and campaigning on student issues.
The alternative NUS student charter involves a radical shake-up of how associations are run.
It would require them to conform to stricter accounting and electoral procedures, and suggests scrutiny by the National Audit Office.
On the political campaigns for which the NUS has long been criticised by Conservative MPs, the charter suggests that associations and the union should be allowed to lobby on issues which affect students.
That could include non-educational matters, such as the effect of rail privatisation on reduced fares for young people.
The NUS is taking an unprecedented risk in arguing for regular ballots of students to choose whether to affiliate.
Its leaders argue they provide student unions with a national profile, training and support and that they are recognised by Government and decision-makers as a source of advice.
WEST LOTHIAN
Councillor quits over bankruptcy
A WEST Lothian councillor, William Burns, resigned yesterday after being declared bankrupt at Linlithgow Sheriff Court on Wednesday.
Mr Burns, 64, won the Burnbrae seat for the Scottish National Party from Labour last May, but now a by-election will put SNP control of the council at risk.
Mr Burns was not available for comment yesterday but the council convener, Jimmy McGinley, said: ‘I understand Willie's problems relate to the collapse of his business and that he has already lost his home over this.
He had only been a councillor for nine months but had been very diligent and effective.’
Old Town groups support drink curbs
By Severin Carrell
CLAIMS that a proposed curb on late-night drinking in central Edinburgh would harm tourism have been rejected by two independent bodies representing the capital's Old Town area.
Both the Edinburgh Old Town Renewal Trust, a conservation body, and the Old Town Community Development Project, have written to councillors on the district council's licensing board to support the planned curbs which are due to be considered next week.
The proposal, which is already supported by police and hospitals, would limit late-night pub and club opening to 1:30am across a three-square-mile area of central Edinburgh, which encompasses about 500 licensed premises.
The council's ruling Labour group split on the issue, after leading opponents of the scheme claimed it would increase violence with drinkers spilling on to the streets at exactly the same time.
They also maintained it would harm pub businesses and severely dent the services offered to tourists.
In a letter to the board, Jim Johnson, executive director of the Old Town Renewal Trust, said adoption of the proposals would greatly help to reduce the levels of personal crime, vandalism and disturbance to residents, a high number of whom are elderly.
He agreed that liberalising daytime drinking helped tourism — a policy the trust supported — but added: ‘It is an entirely fallacious argument that licences extending into the early hours are essential to Edinburgh's role in international tourism.’
Evidence from visitor surveys showed instead that the vast majority of tourists came to Edinburgh for its beauty and its historical associations.
It was the young people of Edinburgh who took advantage of late-night hours, not visitors, he argued.
Stewart Skirving, of the community development project, said the disturbances associated with late-night drinking would put off many tourists.
On the Cowgate, many residents did not venture out late at night, and he said he would fear for the safety of tourists.
Over past years, locals had experienced increasing crime rates and a growing fear of crime.
Because of relaxed licensing in the area, the balance had swung very far indeed from the interests of the large and, it was hoped, growing population of the Old Town.
Medics had to use callbox to seek aid
AMBULANCEMEN treating a casualty had to summon assistance from colleagues by dialling 999 from a callbox, it was claimed yesterday.
A fatal accident inquiry in Edinburgh heard how paramedics taking a child to hospital were flagged down to treat a badly injured man at a garage in Gorebridge, Midlothian.
But when they tried to call their ambulance depot at Mayfield, the radio reception was so poor one of the men had to dash to a phone box.
‘It was so bad, we couldn't raise control,’ said a paramedic, John Donaldson, 31.
He revealed there were blackspots where reception was often poor.
He told the inquiry at Edinburgh Sheriff Court that he had reported the matter to supervisors and a new radio system was planned.
Mr Donaldson emphasised the delay had not contributed in any way to the eventual death of the mechanic, William Donnelly.
He explained that he had continued to treat Mr Donnelly — who had been crushed under a van — while his colleague summoned assistance.
Mr Donnelly, 44, of Greenhall Crescent, Gorebridge, died in hospital on 31 August, three days after the accident at his garage in the Midlothian village.
He was discovered by a delivery driver, Scott Christie, 25, who flagged down the ambulance.
Dr Basil Purdue, a pathologist, said a post-mortem examination had revealed crush injuries, but Mr Donnelly had also sustained brain damage after his oxygen supply was cut when he was trapped.
Sheriff Roger Craik, QC, who described the fatality as a highly tragic accident, said he would give a formal determination in writing.
Polluted land list may never be started
By Auslan Cramb, Environment Correspondent
THE GOVERNMENT is ready to abandon its controversial plans to set up registers of land which may be contaminated.
Ministers are considering an embarrassing U-turn after two disastrous periods of consultation in which they were told that the lists, to be drawn up by local authorities, would cause blight on thousands of acres and hit land and property values.
The move will outrage environmental organisations which claim that the Department of the Environment and the Scottish Office are bowing to pressure from vested interest groups — principally builders and lenders.
A final decision is expected in the next two weeks, although the Government yesterday refused to confirm or deny reports that it was to scrap the registers.
They were meant to reveal pollution left by hundreds of years of industry.
Compilation was to begin last April, when the Government had promised to issue regulations.
But shortly before the general election, local authorities throughout Britain were told they did not have to go ahead and that a second period of consultation was to be held.
That has since happened in England and Wales, although the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities said it had heard nothing in the past year from the Scottish Office.
In the second consultation south of the border the scope of the registers was reduced from all land, to particular categories.
After press inquiries yesterday, lawyers, councils and lending agencies contacted Government offices to obtain clarification of the situation.
The Government's official statement yesterday was: ‘No final decision has been taken.’
However, the lobby group which successfully opposed the plan, and environmental organisations, are now convinced the registers will be dropped.
The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors, building societies, builders and local authorities, will all welcome the decision.
It appears that alternative proposals — put forward by the RICS and others — may require developers to produce a statement on whether land is contaminated when any planning application is submitted.
The information could then be put on a public register.
That would remove the enormous burden which was facing local councils who were expected to compile detailed maps of all the land in their boundaries showing whether it might be contaminated.
Cosla complained it had no extra resources to meet the requirement, and suggested the registers would be unworkable, raising complicated questions of liability if land was found to be contaminated.
Although inclusion on the registers would not mean land was actually contaminated, developers feared it would inevitably mean a drop in values.
Some lenders were already refusing to give money for areas which they thought might eventually be included in the list.
Gordon Carlisle, chairman of the Law Society of Scotland's planning committee, and a partner in Glasgow firm McClure Naismith Anderson & Gardiner, said: ‘The result was going to be something nobody could rely on but which would, nevertheless, affect land values and cause blight.
It didn't make any sense.’
He added that the alternative system suggested, through planning applications, would only need minor adjustment to planning requirements.
Friends of the Earth, however, claimed the Government had ‘bottled out’.
If the system proposed by the RICS were introduced, it would fail to identify housing already on contaminated land and would leave the burden of responsibility with individuals, or with local authorities which were short of money, said a spokesman.
‘The alternative proposal would only show up a handful of sites, not the 100,000 contaminated sites which we estimate exist in Britain.
‘We want to be able to identify the person who left the site in a contaminated state.
They should be made to pay for cleaning it up.
The property and construction industries were afraid the big redevelopment projects would be stopped by nervous bankers and insurers.’
Reactors were closed down during gales
BOTH nuclear reactors at Hunterston power station on the Clyde were suddenly and simultaneously shut down when the local electricity grid was hit by the severe gales last month, writes Severin Carrell.
Scottish Nuclear said yesterday the incident, on 22 January, was unique in the power station's history, and was classified as a Level 1 incident — the second lowest on the International Nuclear Events Scale.
SNL said all shutdown and safety systems operated as planned after high winds and salt spray affected the grid.
It took ScottishPower 35 minutes to restore supplies in part.
The only reactor in full operation took six days to reach full power.
Timex president defends sackings
THE president of Dundee's Timex factory yesterday defended his decision to sack 300 strikers.
Peter Hall said: ‘We had 13 long hours of negotiation last week with AEEU officials, myself and two colleagues from the United States.
Our four-point peace plan has been considered and rejected twice by mass meetings of the workforce.
‘It was an obvious deadlock and we had to move to secure the business.’
Trade unionists gathered at the factory yesterday in support of those sacked by the company on Wednesday.
Two hundred and fifty people marched the short distance from the company's base to Dundee's Camperdown Park for a rally.
George Hood, economic development convener on Tayside Regional Council, called for arbitration to settle the dispute.
He said to protesters: ‘I think the Timex situation is an indication of what has been happening in the country over the last 10 to 15 years.’
‘There has been a deliberate attempt to smash the trade union movement and radically alter the economy.’
Charlie Malone, a shop steward and one of the sacked workers, promised that by the end of the campaign there would be 300 fewer people on the dole.
He said: ‘When we go back it will be  together , with our conditions intact and with our heads held high.’
Robert Gordon lecturers vote on strike over redundancy
By Frank Urquhart
THE staff of the School of Food and Consumer Studies at Aberdeen's Robert Gordon University were balloted for strike action yesterday in the growing dispute over the sacking of a senior lecturer.
The 20 lecturers are being asked to back a one-day strike next Thursday, with the threat of escalating action university-wide if authorities refuse to alter their compulsory redundancy decision.
The staff also passed a unanimous motion of no confidence in Dr Richard Moody, the head of the school, and Dr Joan Stringer, the assistant principal and head of the faculty of health and food.
The dispute was sparked by the university's decision to force a senior lecturer in the school to choose between compulsory redundancy and putting her sister out of a job.
Sheena Falconer, senior lecturer in textiles, has been told by the principal, Dr David Kennedy, that there is room for only one textile lecturer, but that she could stay on as an ordinary lecturer — the post held by her sister, Barbara Diack.
Dr Alastair McLeish, branch secretary of the Association of University Teachers, said the strike ballot result would be declared on Monday.
‘We are calling for a one-day strike next Thursday in the school of food and consumer studies in the first instance.
If the management's reaction to our demands is not favourable we will consider escalating the action to three-day strikes and even further if necessary.
We would also ballot the rest of our membership on strike action.’
Dr McLeish said members would be balloted on working to contract.
He added: ‘There has been no movement from the management.
Dr Kennedy has sent a letter to Mrs Falconer saying that he does not see what benefit can arise from any further extension to consideration of the matter.’
Ransom call for champion donkey
DETECTIVES were last night checking a ransom demand for the kidnapped champion Irish donkey, Toby.
His owner, Jack McKillen, 62, was told he could have his top racer back if he were prepared to pay £500.
The demand was made in an anonymous call to his farmhouse home near Cloughmills, Co Antrim.
The man claiming to hold the former all-Ireland Derby winner, who vanished from a field, spoke with a deep southern Irish accent.
Mr McKillen said: ‘I don't know if it was genuine or not.
He indicated he would ring back with more instructions.
It may have been a bogus call…we will just have to wait and see.’
Toby, a 10-year-old chestnut thoroughbred who has won around 100 races, disappeared in a Shergar-style abduction nine days ago.
Police in Ballymoney, Co Antrim, yesterday confirmed the donkey was stolen.
Mr McKillen, who has offered a £100 reward to help trace the donkey, has not ruled out the possibility that a jealous rival owner may have taken Toby but fears he could already be dead.
— PA 
Britain to open embassies in East
THREE British embassies are to open in the former Soviet Union and former Czechoslovakia, the Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, announced last night.
They will be in the capital cities of Baku in Azerbaijan, Tashkent in Uzbekistan, and Bratislava, in Slovakia, Mr Hurd said in a Commons written reply.
The Baku and Tashkent embassies were specifically requested by British industry, he added.
— PA
£450 limit on replies
THE cost limit on Commons written replies has been raised from £400 to £450, Stephen Dorrell, the Financial Secretary to the Treasury, announced in a Commons written reply last night.
Any reply which costs more than £450 to prepare or obtain information for, will be rejected.
Crypt wedding ban for Catholic couple
A LABOUR front-bencher has been told he cannot marry his bride in the House of Commons crypt because they are both Roman Catholic.
Keith Vaz (Leicester E) and his fiancee Maria Fernandes are being restricted to a blessing ceremony and exchange of vows overseen by an Anglican priest, in the 13th-century chapel of St Mary Undercroft, known as the crypt chapel.
Mr Vaz said last night: ‘It is illegal for Catholics to get married there.
It came as a surprise.’
The ceremony is due to be held in April.
The leader of the Commons, Tony Newton, promised to look into the issue.
— PA
Financial flaws seen in council shake-up
THE planned shake-up of councils will not guarantee financial savings, a professor of politics claimed yesterday, writes David Scott.
Prof Arthur Midwinter, of Strathclyde University, said the financial analysis underpinning the proposed reforms was based on shaky assumptions and errors of classification.
‘There can be no guarantee that any of the options under consideration will actually save money,’ he told a seminar for chief officers of Aberdeen District Council.
He gave warning that the higher the number of small authorities set up, the more the cost would increase.
Prof Midwinter was commenting on four options for single-tier councils put forward in a Scottish Office consultation document.
Asserting that there were fundamental flaws in the case for reforming local government, he challenged the Government's arguments over the need to create councils which would encourage local identity.
Research showed that primary community loyalties operated at a level much lower than district boundaries.
The public would no more identify with the new councils than they did with the present ones or did with the old councils, Prof Midwinter stressed.
He claimed that the Government's vision of enabling authorities — those which would contract out the operation of services — was greatly exaggerated.
Only about 6 per cent of local spending on services was currently contracted out.
‘The bulk of local service provision is, and will remain, municipally provided.’
Labour accused of sex bias
By Joanne Robertson, Scottish Political Correspondent
THE NEXT chairwoman of the Labour Party in Scotland, Johann Lamont, will tell a new pressure group tomorrow of the need to recognise and counter the ‘systematic discrimination’ against women in the party.
The internal Labour pressure group that will meet officially for the first time in Stirling aims to unite and organise women from both wings of the party as well as from the constituencies and trades unions.
Its goal is to increase the number of Scottish women Labour MPs from the present ‘unacceptably low’ number of three, out of 49 Scottish Labour MPs.
Ms Lamont, who will take over as chairwoman in March, will set out in a speech to the group its objectives for the 1990s and urge female supporters to continue the fight to shape the party's agenda to reflect their concerns.
She will also voice reservations about Emily's List, a fund earmarked to sponsor women in the selection battle for winnable parliamentary seats.
Ms Lamont said: ‘Women have been instrumental in the recent modernising processes of the party and, whilst Labour now has a programme to improve women's lives significantly, there is no doubt we still require to have women representing the party at all levels.
‘Not only is this crucially important to women voters, but we need women there to ensure that women's experiences and views are at the centre of our policy.
We do not feel that Emily's List addresses the real problems of the lack of women representatives.
We do not need a fund to get there but rather we need to face up to and deal with the systematic discrimination that women face.’
The pressure group's formation is the result of growing concern among certain sections of the party about women candidates' failure to win key positions.
Margaret Curran, the driving force behind the group's creation, said: ‘This position is no longer tenable and there is a growing anger amongst women in the party in Scotland.
Recent events have confirmed our concerns.
‘Firstly the appointment of the general secretary's post — a man [Jack McConnell]over two leading women.
Secondly the selection of the European candidate in Glasgow — a man [Bill Millar]over two leading women.’
A party spokesman said: ‘It is an interesting initiative although there is of course an official women's organisation within the party, run by women and for women.’
Warning on use of junior doctors in remote areas
By Severin Carrell
THE use of unsupervised junior doctors in accident and emergency units, particularly in rural hospitals in northern Scotland, was potentially unsafe, a committee of MPs warned the Government yesterday.
In a report on accident and emergency provision, published yesterday, the Commons public accounts committee called on the Scottish Office to maintain close checks on the employment of first year, pre-registration junior doctors in four rural and island hospitals, and to end the practice as soon as possible.
Scottish Office officials told the committee that the hospitals in Stornoway, Fort William, Wick and Kirkwall all had special exemptions to use pre-registration doctors with the agreement of the medical profession, but at three, their use was to end.
Officials said that the Stornoway A&E department no longer required the exemption, a decision the committee said ‘they were glad to note’.
The exemption for the units at Fort William and Wick, was due to expire in October 1994.
But the Scottish Office remained unsure how the board could proceed without the use of juniors, and asked how it could continue once the exemption ended.
‘At the fourth hospital, in Kirkwall, Orkney,’ the committee continued, ‘it was very difficult to see how the service could  proceed without a continued exemption, but this will be reviewed over the next two years.’
The MPs noted that health boards catering for dispersed rural populations ‘face special problems in balancing the demand for local accident and emergency services against the possible risks of relying on a limited local service, particular for seriously ill or severely injured patients.’
But they added that in spite of their own reservations about the use of pre-registration house officers, ‘the Scottish Office told us that their approach had been to enable as many rural hospitals to provide accident and emergency departments as it was feasible, practicable and safe to do so.’
The committee noted that although significant sums had been invested in rural hospitals, those still relied heavily on local GPs and larger district general hospitals.
In further recommendations, the MPs said the Scottish Office should exploit this increased investment by giving a much higher priority to improving communications between ambulance crews and A&E departments in rural areas.
The MPS said the Government should prioritise giving paramedic training to enough ambulance crews to ensure full cover for each frontline ambulance in remoter regions.
The provision of specialised consultants for accident units also came under criticism and the committee reported that it took seven years, until 1992, for the number of A&E consultants in Scotland to increase from 11 to 23, even though the most recent review concluded that 34 were needed.
The MPs called on health boards to act quickly to ensure adequate cover in a number of important related areas and said: ‘We are concerned that it has taken so long to achieve such important improvements in the balance of medical staffing.’
Little room at top for women
Joanne Robertson on claims of a glass ceiling that hinders female influence
AT THE Scottish Labour women's conference in Perth last year, one delegate caused hoots of laughter when she described her attempt to stand for election to the district council.
She put her name forward to the chairman of the local party only to find later that he had approached her father to get his consent then double-checked by asking her husband for his permission too.
A number of women in the Scottish party are finding the matter of female representation less humorous and have taken steps to force it to address their concerns.
In Stirling this weekend, a pressure group geared to advancing the case for more women to be given key party posts will be set up.
But how disadvantaged are Labour women supporters?
In terms of representation, the Scottish party is well ahead of the rest of the UK, with women taking ten of the 35 places on its executive.
A quota system adopted by Labour's annual conference in 1990 is expected to have a strong impact on the gender ratios of this year's office-bearers in the constituency Labour parties.
However, the party's representation flounders when it is freed from the rigours of the quota system.
Examining July 1992 figures for the number of women councillors in district, regional and island councils, Labour had 703 of the 1,681 seats, of which 132, or 19 per cent, were held by women.
In spite of compensating for Labour's traditional hold over local government and its high number of long-serving male councillors, the party's 19 per cent equals that of the Scottish National Party, which has 37 women councillors out of a total of 191.
Labour is outstripped by the Tories' 61 women councillors out of 257 (24 per cent) and the Liberal Democrats' 39 out of 137 (28 per cent ).
A more revealing statistic is the percentage of women selected to fight council seats for Labour: 22.
In spite of the party's determination to promote women, it had the lowest number of women candidates: 24 per cent of SNP candidates were women; 27 per cent of Tory candidates were women; while the Lib Dems again scored highest with 33 per cent.
Privately, senior party members claim women do not put themselves forward, are not up to the job and stress that most male MPs have been in place for a long time.
Feminists in the party claim there is a glass ceiling which most women cannot break through to win the most influential posts.
One woman activist summed up the mood: ‘We get crumbs from the table but we're never allowed a seat.’
Abuse of right-to-buy scheme claimed
By David Scott Local Government Editor
ACTION to curb alleged abuses of the council house right-to-buy scheme is to be demanded by representatives of Scottish housing committees.
They agreed at a meeting in Edinburgh yesterday to urge the Government to seek changes in legislation so that tenants who have bought their homes with the benefit of a discount are debarred from buying council houses with similar concessions on a second or more occasions.
Members of the housing committee of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities were told of a complaint by Tweeddale District Council over a request by a tenant, who was exercising his right-to-buy for the first time, that his fiancee be included as a joint purchaser.
She was a former council tenant who had already bought her council house.
She had resold after there was no longer any requirement to repay discount and immediately before moving into the house about to be bought from the district council.
The council's permission to the joint purchase was required because the woman had not been resident for six months.
It agreed to the sale because a refusal would merely have delayed it until the six months' residential qualification had been achieved by the co-tenant, the committee was told.
A report by COSLA officials recalled that it had already raised the issue of unfair profit-making from second right-to-buy purchases under housing defects legislation, but ministers had refused to agree to make any changes.
The report stressed that the original intention of right-to-buy legislation was to enable public sector tenants to purchase the houses they occupied.
Voicing concern about the alleged abuses, Councillor Elizabeth Leitch, of Monklands District, said: ‘We should not be asking for changes here but demanding changes.
If people are able to buy once, that is enough.’
Councillor Robert Lee, of West Lothian, said he was certain that, when the Government brought in the right-to-buy scheme, it had not intended that people should be able to buy, with discount, more than once.
It was not an anomaly but an abuse of the system.
Mr Lee claimed he had personal knowledge of a case in which a person had bought and sold council houses on four occasions.
There should be only one opportunity for discount; otherwise the full purchase price should apply, he said.
The committee also agreed to press for changes to the rule which limits the level of right-to-buy discounts in the case of newly built houses or those recently modernised.
Under the so-called cost floor rule, discounts are restricted according to the level of outstanding debt on the house, but only for five years.
Two district councils, Angus and Cumnock & Doon Valley, have already been pressing for changes and the committee was told that many other authorities were experiencing disadvantages because of the rule.
According to COSLA officials, it can result in a potential loss of houses at prices which provide unduly favourable discount entitlements to individual purchases and can lead to unredeemed debt charges having to be met by remaining tenants.
No equality for Cymric in Wales
A CROSS-PARTY attempt to proclaim both Welsh and English as official languages in Wales was defeated by the Government last night.
A clause moved by a Liberal Democrat, Lord Hooson, was defeated by 124 to 85 during the Welsh Language Bill's Lords report stage.
It stated: ‘English and Welsh are the official languages of Wales and, in the conduct of public business and the administration of justice in Wales, the English and Welsh languages shall be treated on a basis of equality and this is to be achieved as provided in this Act.’
The Government also rejected another move by the Labour peers' former leader, Lord Cledwyn of Penrhos, a former Secretary for Wales, declaring Welsh an official language.
— PA
MPs escape gunfire in Bosnia
A GROUP of MPs have had a narrow escape from gunfire in Bosnia.
Peter Viggers (C, Gosport) yesterday described the encounter on Wednesday as members of the Commons defence select committee made their way south of Vitez to Mostar.
He said: ‘There was a crackle of automatic gunfire as we went through a Croatian checkpoint.
It had no clear origin and we did not wait to investigate.
The area was mortared 15 minutes later.
‘Our visit has impressed us with the skill and the quality of our soldiers, and with the risks they run.
We must keep open the option of withdrawal from Bosnia if the current peace negotiations do not provide a firm way forward.’
The Committee Office at Westminster said that all members of the committee, which was due to return to Britain last night, were taking part in the visit.
They included Menzies Campbell (Lib Dem, Fife NE), Sir Nicholas Fairbairn (C, Perth & Kinross) and John Home Robertson (Lab, E Lothian).
Stuck out in the cold, even at home
Sarah Chalmers on demands for more winter aid for the most vulnerable
IT IS so cold in Alison McNee's one-roomed flat at Anniesland in Glasgow that her breath can be seen when she speaks.
Although the flat has central heating, Mrs McNee, a single parent with two children, can rarely afford to put it on.
Each week she receives just over £100 in benefits, but has only enough money left to feed her children after paying bills, a mortgage and housing repairs.
‘There's nothing I could cut back on,’ she said.
‘I don't spend money on clothes, so I couldn't save there.
We have been without food before, when the chimney came through the roof last year.’
The heating is switched on only for as long as it takes to dry the washing.
Mrs McNee tries to ensure that that coincides with the children's return from school.
To keep warm she often goes to Plus One, a single parents' organisation.
Unfortunately a cold home, heated only when there are wet clothes around, causes damp and consequently health problems.
The children, aged 10 and 12, constantly complain of colds, bronchial coughs and sore bones.
Today Mrs McNee will be among low income families, pensioners and the disabled campaigning in George Square, Glasgow, for more help from the Government to combat the cold weather.
The Campaign for Cold Weather Credits is demanding immediate additional aid throughout the winter to all households receiving means-tested benefits and an enhanced programme of Government investment in home energy efficiency.
In 1988 heating additions were withdrawn from supplementary benefit.
The campaigners estimate that the winter death toll in Scotland rose by 7.5 per cent between 1988 and 1991.
One of the campaign supporters, Marion Robertson, from Strathclyde Elderly Forum, said: ‘We need immediate action to prevent this cull of the old and sick in winter months.
They should not be left to suffer illness and misery because they can't afford to heat their homes properly.’
Mrs McNee said she had watched her children become disillusioned and despondent and feared for the long-term effects on their emotional as well as physical health.
‘My daughter would rather go to her warm school when she is sick than stay off.
They have to sit in the one room, wearing extra jumpers, watching television.
If we had cold weather credits the children could play in the bedroom and have more space.’
PAUL REID Alison McNee in her one-roomed flat in Anniesland, Glasgow: ‘My daughter would rather go to her warm school when she is sick than stay off’
Natural oils emerge as cancer weapon
By Bryan Christie, Health Correspondent
NATURAL oil compounds produced in a former fish drying plant on the Outer Hebrides will be unveiled today as a promising weapon in the fight against cancer.
Cancer specialists from the United Kingdom, continental Europe and the United States will gather in London to hear the results of early studies which point to an important role for fish and plant oils in helping to combat human disease.
Already they are being used experimentally on patients in Edinburgh suffering from pancreatic cancer.
Prof David Carter of Edinburgh University's department of surgery, who is supervising the project, said that hopes were high that good results produced in laboratory studies could be repeated in patients.
‘This is potentially one of the most exciting developments I have been aware of in my experience of pancreatic cancer.’
However, until more work is done in determining the effects on patients, Prof Carter said it would be best to remain cautious.
‘I am anxious not to build up false hopes that we have a magic wand here.’
The compounds, known as gamma linolenic acid (GLA) derivatives, are produced by a British-Canadian company, Scotia Pharmaceuticals, which six years ago took over the former fish drying factory at Callanish on the west coast of Lewis as its principal production unit.
Today it employs just under 30 people, two-thirds of them local, in high-technology surroundings producing a range of chemical derivatives from local fish oils and imported plants such as primrose and borage.
The company's chief executive, Dr David Horrobin, said that employment could be expected to increase if progress continues and the products are licensed by the Government for clinical use in a few years' time.
‘We are clearly hopelessly biased but the investigators involved in studies are beginning to say some interesting things.’
The greatly differing cancer record of various countries has provided the basis for investigating the potential of fish and plant oils in anti-cancer treatment.
Japan, for instance, where fish is an important part of the diet, has one-quarter of the breast cancer cases that western countries suffer.
Scientists have found in trials on animals that tumour growth can be restricted and, in some cases, killed by giving them supplements containing fish and plant oils.
Prof Robert Mansel, of the department of surgery at the University of Wales, who is working on that subject, said: ‘There is a strong case for pursuing the role of essential fatty acids as anti-tumour agents in a wide variety of cancers.
‘The place of nutritional intervention in the management of human cancer remains controversial, but it is an exciting prospect to consider that substances so innocuous and commonplace as essential fatty acids may prove to be of benefit in cancer therapy.’
Scotia is developing compounds which attack cancer in three ways.
One has been shown to have a direct effect on killing cancer cells while leaving normal cells unharmed.
Another appears to protect normal tissue against the effects of radiotherapy, making it possible to apply higher cancer-killing doses to tumours.
The third works by making cancer cells susceptible to laser light which can be used to destroy them.
Prof Carter described the laboratory evidence as really dramatic but said it is too early to say whether the same effect can be produced in patients.
However, he added that pancreatic cancer is one of the most fatal forms and often there is little that can be offered to patients.
‘This is one of the most exciting things available in what is otherwise a very bleak field.’
Other scientists are investigating the compounds' role in treating breast, brain, liver and skin cancers.
Prof David Carter: most exciting development
Bar cleared of race bias against student
THE SCOTTISH bar was cleared yesterday of racial discrimination, a claim levelled at it by a Nigerian student.
Taiwo Oruene, of New Cavendish Street, London, took the Faculty of Advocates to an industrial tribunal in Edinburgh alleging that it discriminated against her because of her racial origin and colour in her efforts to gain membership of the Scottish bar.
In a written decision the tribunal said it was unable to find any action on the part of the faculty which could be described as an act of discrimination.
Ms Oruene claimed that the faculty had varied to her detriment the terms on which it granted membership.
She had a divinity degree from London University and had completed part of a law course at Lagos University when she was admitted to the faculty in 1983 as an entrant preparing to sit her bar exams.
She alleged that the faculty then deviated from its regulations when it came to considering her application for exemption from some exams and also on the standard of scholarship it applied to her.
Ms Oruene told the two-day hearing in Edinburgh last month that only one practising advocate in Scotland was drawn from the ethnic minorities.
She asked: ‘Is it suggested that all the ethnic minority members who passed through its doors were unworthy of membership?’
The faculty denied having discriminated against her and said she had been treated in the same way as all others seeking membership of the bar.
She passed some of the compulsory qualifying examinations and failed others and was granted an exemption from one subject on the basis of a pass in it attained at London University.
The faculty argued that her treatment had been exactly the same as that of any other applicant, regardless of his or her race or colour, who sought to join the bar.
It claimed that Ms Oruene had failed to show she was treated less favourably than any other candidate and that there was not a shred of evidence to show that it had deviated from normal procedures.
The tribunal said it appeared that Ms Oruene had brought the complaint in the mistaken but genuine belief that graduates of English or Scottish universities who did not have passes in the compulsory subjects set by the faculty would still have been granted exemptions from the exams.
‘It was perfectly clear from the evidence that this was not so,’ said the tribunal, which unanimously rejected her application.
Postpone budget plans, says EIS
By Douglas Fraser Education Correspondent
SCOTLAND'S main teaching union yesterday joined parents and education authorities in strongly doubting Government plans to let headteachers take over the running of schools.
The Educational Institute of Scotland argued that introducing the policy nationally should be postponed until the future shape of local government was decided.
Jim Martin, EIS general secretary, said that such changes continuing in education for purely political reasons would not be tolerated by the Scottish public.
The policy would see at least 80 per cent of school budgets handed from councils to headteachers, who would then allocate them in consultation with parents on the school boards.
The programme is intended to start this summer with an introduction period of three years.
Mr Martin claimed parents, councils and teachers had found that the proposals would not improve the quality of education.
The union was not opposed to devolving school budgets, he argued, but it should be to an extent decided by each local authority.
This week saw the country's biggest parent group, the Scottish Parent-Teacher Council, claim that chaos could result from devolving budgets at the same time as council reform.
‘Changes could create a vacuum by setting up new authorities with no educational experience or tradition precisely at the time schools need maximum support for the introduction of their new management systems,’ said the SPTC report.
Red wine the toast for a healthy heart
DOCTORS may be closer to solving the mystery of why Frenchmen who eat rich, fatty food, take little exercise and smoke heavily manage to escape the consequences of heart disease.
The answer could lie in their fondness for red wine.
According to a study published in the Lancet medical journal, red wine in moderation is thought to protect against coronary disease because of its non-alcoholic components.
Researchers in the United States and Israel have found that substances known as phenolic flavonoids, extracted from a Californian red, may prevent the build-up of fat in the artery walls.
Low-density lipoprotein is central to the problem of fat layers which eventually block the arteries.
However, it has to be oxidised before it becomes a problem.
Researchers now believe the phenolic flavonoids, by acting as anti-oxidants, prevent the damaging fat building up in the first place.
‘These data provide a plausible explanation for the French paradox,’ says the Lancet, but it calls for further studies.
— PA
Hundreds feared dead in ferry disaster
HUNDREDS of people were feared dead yesterday after an ageing ferry packed with Haitians taking food and animals to the markets of the capital had sunk in a storm.
Some reports put the number of people on the boat as high as 1,500.
Local radio estimated that about 100 had swum to safety.
The 60ft freighter Neptune is one of two ferries serving the route that links Port-au-Prince, the capital, and Jeremie, a major agricultural production centre in southwestern Haiti.
The ships are always packed to capacity, with passengers clinging to the upper decks.
Poor Haitians use the ships to carry baskets of fruit, farm animals and other cargo to the capital from Jeremie.
‘We may never know exactly how many were on the ferry,’ US Coast Guard Petty Officer Joe Dye said yesterday in Miami.
‘These boats don't keep passenger lists, and they just cram as many people on as they can to make money.’
The accident occurred late on Tuesday or early on Wednesday but was not discovered until a few survivors emerged and bodies began floating ashore.
Some of the survivors said the ferry's top deck had caved in, and this was corroborated by military authorities in Jeremie.
The ship's captain, Benjamin Saint Clair, who was among those who managed to swim to the coast, said passengers had apparently panicked during a heavy rainstorm, contributing to the disaster.
US Coast Guard Commander Larry Mizell quoted one of the survivors as saying that during the storm ‘many of the people went to one side of the vessel, which may have contributed to the problem they had.’
Two Haitian navy ships were searching for survivors yesterday and the US Coast Guard dispatched a Falcon jet, a helicopter and two patrol vessels to help.
Cmdr Mizell said there was ‘no correlation between this and the boat people,’ referring to the tens of thousands of Haitians who have fled their homeland by sea since the army ousted elected President Jean-Bertrand Aristide in 1991.
Ferry traffic was halted for a week in December because of fears that refugees might hijack the vessel to the United States.
Traffic resumed later with stepped-up security.
Relatives of those aboard the ferry were on their way yesterday to the site of the disaster to wait for news.
One, Destina Momrosier of Port-au-Prince, said she had taken the boat several times, usually with 500-600 other passengers, but she estimated that as many as 1,500 probably could fit aboard.
‘It's generally overloaded.
It sways from side to side with people standing, sitting, even up on the roof.’
— Reuter and AP
Talks on Hong Kong election planned
BRITAIN and China, deadlocked for months over plans for democratic reforms in Hong Kong, will hold talks in Beijing on arrangements for 1995 elections in the colony, Chinese sources said yesterday.
They said the Chinese vice-foreign minister, Tian Zengpei, would confer with the British ambassador, Sir Robin McLaren, but one source said the talks would ‘definitely not’ include the plans for political reform proposed by the governor of Hong Kong, Chris Patten.
Mr Patten's plans would give Hong Kong people the right to elect the majority of the legislature in 1995 — two years before the colony passes into Chinese control.
They have been bitterly attacked by Beijing, which has said they must be dropped before talks can resume on the political future of the colony.
The sources said success in the McLaren-Tian talks could pave the way for a meeting between the British Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd and the Chinese foreign minister Qian Qichen.
Earlier yesterday Mr Patten had dismissed as a ‘ridiculous rumour’ a report that Hong Kong would be frozen out of the early stages of any Sino-British negotiations.
One Chinese source said Sir Robin was ideal for the talks, being one of the ‘China hands’ who had dominated British policy before the more combative Mr Patten became governor.
‘At least he understands more the significance of cooperation,’ the source said.
Hong Kong's stock market has soared this week after months in the doldrums on a belief among investors that the worst of the row with China has passed.
— Reuter
Rocard wins support for new centre-left party
MICHEL ROCARD, the former French premier and currently a contender for the presidency, won support yesterday for a plan call to scrap the battered Socialist Party and build a new centre-left movement.
Speaking at a rally on Wednesday night he appealed for what he called a political ‘big bang’ after next month's parliamentary elections, in which the Socialists are expected to lose heavily.
Instead he proposed a new coalition spanning Socialists, ecologists, reform-minded Communists and socially-conscious centrists.
‘What we need…is a big, open, extrovert movement, which is rich in diversity, which even encourages it, a movement gathering all those who share the values of solidarity and a goal of transformation,’ he said.
President Franois Mitterrand, answering viewers' questions in a television appearance yesterday, warned against writing off the Socialist Party as dead and said the first aim must be to reunite it.
‘Before extending its alliances, the Socialist Party must rediscover its own message’ he said, adding that any grouping must have a clear basis and not ‘mix cats and dogs’.
Mr Rocard's proposals received a warmer welcome from the man judged to be the most popular member of the cabinet, the non-socialist health minister Bernard Kouchner.
‘At last, something new,’ he told Europe 1 radio yesterday.
‘It interests me a lot, it really excites me.
Things are moving at last.’
The ecologists' leader Brice Lalonde, who has called for a broad-based ‘Democratic Party’, welcomed Mr Rocard's speech as the first admission by a top Socialist that the party was finished.
The left-leaning newspaper Liberation took a similar view of the speech, calling it a ‘funeral oration’ for the Socialist Party.
But the prime minister, Pierre Beregovoy, pointed out that Mr Rocard had spoken of continuing to renovate the Socialists within a wider perspective.
‘I do not conclude he regards the PS as dead,’ he told reporters.
— Reuter
Europe is kept guessing on trade with US
US PRESIDENT Bill Clinton's economic speech still left the European Community guessing on how protectionist his administration will be.
The executive Commission welcomed Mr Clinton's commitment to agreeing a GATT world trade deal, but coupled this with a warning that any recourse to protectionism to spark economic recovery could lead to disaster.
With transatlantic disputes over steel and public procurement policy unresolved and threats of a new row in the civilian aircraft sector, Mr Clinton's speech to Congress gave few clear signs of how EC-US relations would evolve in the critical months ahead.
Mr Clinton said the successful completion of the GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) Uruguay Round was part of his national economic strategy to expand trade, but he also insisted on ‘fair trade rules in international markets’ and spoke of ‘appropriate safeguards’for US workers.
The external economic relations commissioner, Sir Leon Brittan, welcomed Mr Clinton's commitment to successful completion of the Uruguay Round, which he said he had expected after his talks with US officials in Washington last week.
But in a speech to a local Conservative party meeting in England, copies of which were issued to the press, Mr Brittan said a period of turbulence lay ahead before a GATT deal was sealed.
‘In the short term, the temptation to seek protectionist short cuts to economic recovery will be a real one.
But it must be resisted.
‘If not, it will inevitably arouse strong reactions, and the climate required for constructive advance could be disastrously impaired.’
Mr Clinton said Washington would pay special attention to high-technology industries that were in trouble in America today ‘like aerospace’.
This reference could include the civilian aircraft sector, which Mr Clinton spoke out on publicly last week when he accused the EC of unfairly subsidising exports by the Airbus Industrie aircraft consortium.
The industry commissioner, Martin Bangemann, told reporters yesterday that it was still unclear what line Mr Clinton would take on Airbus, which was the subject of an EC-US subsidy reduction deal last year after a long-running dispute.
‘We knew the administration was going to review things, but they should not have started with Adam and Eve,’ Mr Bangemann said.
On another dispute over foreign access to public utility contracts, on which Washington and Brussels accuse each other of discriminatory treatment, officials of the two sides finished two days of inconclusive talks in Washington on Wednesday.
The United States has threatened to ban EC companies from bidding for a range of government contracts from 22 March if the EC does not drop a three per cent pricing preference for domestic over foreign suppliers in public utility contracts.
A Commission spokesman said there had been ‘progress albeit at a fairly low level’ and that a new round of talks would take place in Brussels on 11-12 March, only ten days before the sanctions date set by Washington.
The question of access to the US public utility market in areas such as transport took on new interest with Mr Clinton's plan to increase investment in areas such as high-speed railways and other transit systems as part of his recovery plan.
The economic affairs commissioner, Henning Christophersen, said the overall Clinton plan was encouraging and compared it with the EC's own plan to spark the economy out of recession.
— Reuter
Washington considers air drops to starving Bosnians
THE United States said yesterday that it was studying the possibility of parachuting relief supplies to civilians in Bosnia, but it emphasised that such an operation might not be successful in the rugged country.
The disclosure by the state and defence departments came as United Nations officials in Sarajevo announced that Serb militiamen had allowed a ten-truck UN relief convoy, halted for days at a checkpoint in eastern Bosnia, to continue towards the encircled town of Gorazde.
But the convoy got stuck again a few miles out of Rogatica, where it had been blocked, by fallen timber thrown on the road, according to Commander Barry Frewer of the United Nations Protection Force (Unprofor) in Sarajevo.
He said a heavy recovery vehicle had been dispatched to clear the road for the convoy, which is carrying 72 tonnes of wheat flour and family parcels.
In Belgrade, Lyndall Sachs of the office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) said the convoy was expected to reach Gorazde today.
She said the Serbs' agreement to let the convoy move on would not affect the UNHCR's decision, announced on Wednesday, to suspend relief operations for Bosnia-Herzegovina because all sides in the conflict there were playing politics with humanitarian aid.
‘We regard this as a one-off thing,’ she said.
‘There will be no relief operations until there is agreement by all parties to ensure secure conditions.’
The head of the UNHCR's Sarajevo office, Tony Land, told reporters yesterday that the agency planned to pull most of its staff out of the city by the weekend.
‘We're putting our operation here in mothballs,’ he said.
‘We want to be in a position to restart our relief effort in 48 hours.’
Most international staff in Sarajevo would be evacuated because the risks of staying on were too great, Mr Land said, adding: ‘We'll be down to a skeleton staff by the weekend.’
In Washington, the state and defence departments said a task force of US government officials was studying a range of options — including airdrops and convoys — to get supplies to those trapped by the civil war in the former Yugoslavia.
But a Pentagon spokesman told reporters that cargo planes dropping supplies might have to be protected by air power, and that ‘it may not be a feasible option’.
The White House declined to confirm or deny reports that the Bosnian president, Alija Izetbegovic, had sent an appeal to President Bill Clinton for US airdrops to get supplies to Muslims trapped in eastern Bosnia.
Sarajevo radio said Mr Izetbegovic had sent such an appeal, telling Mr Clinton that a ‘massive’ number of people were dying in the east.
A spokesman at the state department meanwhile urged a swift reversal of the UNHCR decision to suspend aid.
While the ‘frustration’ felt by the commissioner, Sadako Ogata, at the continued blocking of the relief convoys was understandable, he said, ‘we urge Mrs Ogata to order the resumption of humanitarian aid deliveries at the earliest possible moment.’
— Reuter
US tries to revive Middle East talks
THE US secretary of state, Warren Christopher, on his first foreign mission, arrived in the Middle East yesterday aiming to push Arabs and Israelis to revive their stalled peace talks.
In an arrival statement at Cairo airport, Mr Christopher said: ‘We have come to the region ready to do our best, and we will be assessing whether the parties are ready to do theirs.
I'm here to encourage the parties to resume the peace process.’
Asked about the 415 Palestinians whose deportation by Israel on 17 December has jeopardised peace talks, Mr Christopher said: ‘When we (President Clinton's administration) came to office there was no movement at all on the deportees issue.’
We talked with the leaders of Israel and following those talks they made very important steps to establish a process with respect to the deportees.
‘Subsequently, the United Nations took cognisance of that action, recognising it was an important step forward and urging the parties to resume the peace process.
I am here to encourage the parties to do exactly that.’
The importance of the deportees to the Arab states was underscored even in the brief arrival ceremony.
The Egyptian foreign minister, Amr Moussa, made it clear he expected Israel to offer more than it has so far to return the deportees to their homes in the occupied territories.
‘All of us have to do more in order to get the deportees back to their homes as soon as possible,’ he said.
US officials have repeatedly made it clear there will be no further US pressure on Israel to make more concessions on the deportee issue and that the onus is on the Palestinians to put the crisis behind them and return to the table.
Mr Christopher's week in the region will take him from Egypt to Jordan, Syria, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Israel.
— Reuter
Officials said he would have the same message for all — the time has come to revive direct Arab-Israeli negotiations.
— Reuter
‘We'll be trying to gauge as we go around, whether or not there is a serious endeavour on their part,’ a senior official on Christopher's plane told reporters on the flight to Cairo.
‘It's a big world, there's lots of things to do.
This seemed to us to have a very high priority but it can't continue to have a high priority if we're pushing against a closed door.
‘We have to have some indication of a willingness on their part to take some of the tough decisions,’ said the official.
The Arab-Israeli peace talks have been suspended since Israel deported the 415 Palestinians from the occupied West Bank and Gaza to south Lebanon.
Israel accused them of membership in violent Islamic fundamentalist groups.
Most of the deportees are still there, stuck on an exposed hillside sandwiched between Israeli and Lebanese lines.
Israel has offered to return 100 deportees immediately and cut the expulsion terms of the remainder to a one-year maximum.
But Palestinians rejected the offer and said they could not resume peace talks until all the deportees were returned.
Christopher's schedule already highlights that his style will be very different from that of his predecessor James Baker, who was the architect of the Arab-Israeli peace talks.
Unlike Baker, who rushed from capital to capital at a frenetic pace, Christopher, 67, will spend his first morning in a leisurely tour of the pyramids.
Later in the week, aides said, he would tour parts of Israel and the occupied Golan Heights.
Many analysts believe Christopher will succeed in finding a way to revive the negotiations.
But some predict heavy going once the parties return to the table.
‘The parties will all reassert their commitment to sit at the peace table, but most will display a diminished taste for direct negotiations,’ said Harvey Sicherman of the Washington Institute for Near East Policy.
‘Instead, the Secretary will be importuned to revive their appetites through more extensive US involvement,’ he said.
REUTER AE MR
US condemns Libyan arms  programme 
THE US state department yesterday condemned Libya's active chemical weapons programme but declined to confirm a detailed report of a new Libyan underground plant aimed at making and storing poison gas.
A spokesman for the department said the United States was convinced that Libya was building chemical weapons manufacturing and related facilities.
Support for the programme, the spokesman said, was contrary to the objectives of the recently signed chemical weapons convention and a violation of a UN security council resolution that banned any weapons-related exports to Libya.
— Reuter
GERMANY
Ex-border guard wins acquittal
A BERLIN judge yesterday dropped a charge of attempted murder against an East German border guard who was photographed pointing his pistol at men trying to flee through the Berlin Wall in 1989.
The judge ruled that there was insufficient evidence to show that the former guard captain, Karl-Heinz Becker, 49, had intended to kill when he fired his pistol at one of the two men fleeing through a checkpoint on 8 April, 1989.
Nobody was hit by the bullet and the two fleeing men surrendered.
Becker's case was notable because he was captured by the widely-circulated photographs, but he argued that he had intended only to fire a warning shot.
— AP
ETHIOPIA
OAU move to set up peace force
FOREIGN ministers of the Organisation of African Unity endorsed a plan yesterday to set up the first pan-African peace keeping force, despite a chronic shortage of money.
Their resolution will be forwarded to an OAU summit in Cairo in June, which will also discuss the organisation's parlous financial situation, caused by the non-payment or late payment of membership dues totalling $70 million.
— Reuter
RUSSIA
Hitler's skull ‘in cardboard box'
THE remains of Adolf Hitler's skull have been traced to a Moscow archive, the Russian newspaper Izvestia said yesterday.
It said the remains had been kept in a cardboard box together with bloodstained fragments of wood from a sofa in the underground bunker where Hitler and his wife Eva Braun committed suicide.
— Reuter
Clinton takes to the road to sell his plan
From Tim Cornwell, Washington
PRESIDENT Bill Clinton journeyed to the mid-West yesterday as a salesman for the economic plan he describes as ‘necessary for the continued greatness of the United States’.
With polls showing voters overwhelmingly in his favour, Mr Clinton scheduled stops in Missouri and Ohio while Vice President Al Gore made the rounds of breakfast chat shows urging viewers to ‘belly up to those tough decisions’.
In his State of the Union address on Wednesday night, the president presented a grim picture of America in the next century without the stringent series of new taxes and spending cuts he proposes to close the budget deficit and fund social programmes.
‘If we do not act now, you will not recognise this country ten years from now,’ he said.
‘Whatever you think of the tax programme, whatever you think of the spending cuts, consider the cost of not changing.’
Mr Clinton's ‘new direction’ emerged in a 6,600-word, 59-minute speech in which the high flights of patriotic optimism were noticeably absent.
Instead Mr Clinton devoted much time to a nightmare scenario of an America in the year 2,000, struggling under huge interest payments on an escalating government debt.
Scribbling changes in the margin of his text right up to the last minute, Mr Clinton insisted the burden of his new taxes were spread fairly across American society.
He asked Americans ‘to contribute today so that all of us can prosper tomorrow.’
‘We must ensure that our children's generation is not the first to do worse than their parents.
We must restore the American dream.’
Twelve years ago, he said, President Ronald Reagan had stood at the same podium and said if the national debt were stacked in $1,000 bills, ‘the stack would reach 67 miles into space.
Well, today that stack would reach 267 miles.’
President Reagan himself led the conservative assault yesterday on what he called a return to ‘failed liberal policies of the past’.
Mr Clinton's campaign promises were dropping like autumn leaves, he charged in a newspaper editorial, while ‘taxes have never succeeded in promoting economic growth.’
But Mr Clinton won Ross Perot's support.
As self-appointed spokesman for plain-talking middle America, the Texas millionaire praised the president for ‘a very positive speech.
I would expect the American people would also react very favourably to it.’
‘The devil is in the detail and we don't have all the numbers yet.
It's a good artist's sketch of a building,’ he said, but warned that giving more money to Congress was like giving an alcoholic a liquor store.
Early polls showed 78% of voters believed the Clinton taxes were fair.
The dollar gathered strength, signalling a favourable reaction in international markets.
European stock markets were stronger, with market operators relieved that Wall Street did not repeat Tuesday's sharp 83-point drop, which had come in reaction to early indications of what Mr Clinton had in mind.
It suggested the unfolding White House strategy to build support was beginning to pay off, though many congressmen are uneasy about a possible backlash.
In a TV appearance on Monday night Mr Clinton used prime time television for a brief, personalised appeal to voters.
On Wednesday he invited network news anchors to lunch for a private chat over a mixed grill and broccoli.
‘The President wants to go out, talk directly to the American people and explain to them how these things work together because he believes that they're ready to hear the truth,’ said the White House press secretary, Dee Dee Myers.
The speech sent a strong signal confirming foreign policy is far down on his list of priorities.
Though President George Bush regularly devoted large chunks of his State of the Union address to foreign affairs, Mr Clinton made only passing reference to the end of the Cold War.
He offered 150 separate cuts in spending from eliminating 100,000 government jobs and freezing salaries, to ending subsidies for the rearing of mohair goats and honey bees.
He would ‘responsibly reduce’ the defence budget by cutting new weapons purchases and troop levels.
To frequent applause, Mr Clinton promised that his wife, Hillary, would help him tackle a ‘health care crisis’ in the US.
He pledged more funding for pregnant  women's nutrition, childhood immunisations, and pre-school programmes for  underprivileged children.
On the campaign trail, Mr Clinton did not hesitate to attack opponents who argued that America must tax sources of energy.
But his own energy tax will push up home heating bills and raise the price of petrol in a country that relies on road transport.
Aides are gambling that his broken promise of a tax cut on the middle class was never taken seriously.
CZECH REPUBLIC
Illegal arms caches seized
POLICE have seized 1,600 stolen submachine guns in raids on illegal arms caches in Prague, interior ministry officials said yesterday.
One cache with 900 submachine guns was found in a cellar on the premises of a Prague security agency,’ the national police chief said on television.
The other cache, belonging to a businesswoman, held 700 guns.
— Reuter
Yugoslavia war crimes court nearer after accord at UN
THE five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council agreed yesterday to seek the establishment of a war crimes court for the former Yugoslavia.
The decision came after the United States, Britain, France and Russia, which had agreed earlier to such a step, had enlisted the support of the fifth permanent member, China.
The text of their draft resolution will ask the secretary general, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, to study ways to set up the court.
Its jurisdiction would be limited to the Yugoslav conflict and to war crimes committed after 1 January 1991.
Diplomats said this was an arbitrary date they had chosen.
The draft resolution would give the council authority to compel countries to cooperate with the court for instance, to extradite or hold suspects or to help in investigations.
Agreement on the text by the five permanent security council powers virtually assures passage of the resolution, which was drafted and sponsored by France.
Meanwhile the United States said it was studying the possibility of parachuting relief supplies to civilians in Bosnia, though it emphasised that such an operation might not be successful in the rugged country.
The state and defence departments said airdrops were one of a range of options being studied by a task force of US government officials.
United Nations officials in Sarajevo said Serb militiamen had allowed a ten-truck UN relief convoy, halted for days at a checkpoint in eastern Bosnia, to continue towards the encircled town of Gorazde.
But only a few miles farther on, the convoy was halted again.
A reconnaissance team dispatched to the site found the road cut by a hole some six feet deep by 12 feet wide, Commander Barry Frewer of the United Nations Protection Force (Unprofor) in Sarajevo told reporters.
He said Unprofor would send bulldozers and six dumper trucks loaded with gravel at first light today to plug the hole and clear the road.
The convoy was expected to reach  Gorazde this afternoon.
In Belgrade, Lyndall Sachs of the office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) said the Serbs' agreement to let the convoy move on would not affect the UNHCR's decision, announced on Wednesday, to suspend relief operations for Bosnia-Herzegovina because all sides in the conflict there were playing politics with humanitarian aid.
‘We regard this as a one-off thing,’ she said.
‘There will be no relief operations until there is agreement by all parties to ensure secure conditions.’
The head of the UNHCR's Sarajevo office, Tony Land, told reporters yesterday that the agency planned to pull most of its staff out of the city by the weekend.
‘We're putting our operation here in mothballs,’ he said.
‘We want to be in a position to restart our relief effort in 48 hours.’
Most international staff in Sarajevo would be evacuated because the risks of staying on were too great, Mr Land said, adding: ‘We'll be down to a skeleton staff by the weekend.’
— AP and Reuter 
Lang accused of complacency
By Alison Daniels
THE GOVERNMENT came under fire last night from opposition MPs and trades unions over the latest Scottish unemployment figures.
Labour's shadow Scottish secretary, Tom Clarke, demanded an urgent meeting with the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang.
He criticised the attitude of Scottish Office ministers to what he described as the gravest crisis in employment Scotland has faced since the war.
Before leading a protest outside the Scottish Office, the Scottish Trades Union Congress general secretary, Campbell Christie, said unemployment was now at its highest level for almost four years, with the official figures showing a rise in 13 out of the last 14 months.
‘We believe immediate steps could be taken to generate jobs.
It is time the Government took a lead in addressing the unemployment crisis and laying the foundations for long-term sustainable economic development for Scotland.’
The shadow Scottish industry spokesman, Henry McLeish, said the figures were a scandal and that the real total was nearly 380,000.
He accused Mr Lang of being complacent and said the Government needed to invest in creating jobs.
‘The unemployed cannot wait for the recovery the Tories are waiting for.
They seem content to impose an unemployment tax on every family in Scotland to spend on keeping people on benefit, out of work and in dependency.’
According to the Scottish National Party's employment spokesman, Roger Mullin, the true unemployment total could be 50 per cent higher than the official figures.
‘A worldwide recession is no excuse for these  disastrous figures, unemployment is rising four times as fast in the UK as in the rest of Europe.
Scotland is being dragged down by the sinking ship of the UK.’
The Scottish Liberal Democrats' leader, Jim Wallace, said the Government needed to invest in training, education and the country's infrastructure as well as provide help for small businesses.
‘The remorseless rising tide of Scotland's unemployment demonstrates once again that the Government's economic strategy in Scotland is sinking rapidly beneath the waves.’
However, the Scottish industry minister, Allan Stewart, said Scotland now had the third lowest unemployment rate of all the UK regions.
‘It is noticeable that the rise in seasonally-adjusted unemployment in Scotland last month was the lowest since March.
‘Sustained recovery and employment generation will only occur if Scottish companies continue to improve their competitiveness.’
Taking some comfort from the fact that January's rise was lower than in previous months, the director of the Confederation of British Industry Scotland, David MacLehose, said there were signs the economy was recovering.
However, he warned the Government against introducing inappropriate measures in the next Budget.
‘The Government must recognise that training is the way forward both for the long-term unemployed and for the business community.’
Hunt goes on for two climbers after body is found
By Alan Dron
A SEARCH was under way for the two companions of a hillwalker found dead in the Cairngorms last night.
Earlier, rescuers found another climber who had survived a week stranded on a peak.
An RAF helicopter from Lossiemouth and 40 Cairngorm Mountain Rescue Team members were involved in last night's search.
It was begun after staff at Glenmore Lodge outdoor activity centre received reports of climbers being seen in difficulties.
The body of one was found in Coire an Lochan.
The helicopter involved in the search later found an injured woman with two male companions.
She had a broken leg, head injuries and was suffering from hypothermia and was flown to Raigmore hospital for treatment.
Rescuers said the incident was not connected with the earlier search.
In Inverness, Chris Nicholls was reported to be recovering well in Raigmore Hospital after being stranded for a week without food or water on top of the 3000ft Slioch peak in Wester Ross.
Rescue specialists said he would have died if the weather in the area had not been unusually mild.
Mr Nicholls, 30, a telecom network engineer from Warrington, went on to Slioch last Thursday, then spent most of the week wrapped in a polythene survival bag after twisting his ankle on the summit.
Although well equipped, he had intended being on the mountain for just one day, and had taken only a packed lunch, water, and some chocolate with him.
His main problem, however, was that he had not told anyone of his trip, and his predicament went unnoticed.
He eventually realised his only chance of survival was to make his own way down the peak.
On Thursday he was spotted by a farmer, Ian MacDonald, leaning against an electricity pole.
The Torridon Mountain Rescue Team took Mr Nicholls to the Scottish Natural Heritage field centre at Kinclochewe for first aid and a hot bath.
The rescue team leader, Terry Doe, said: ‘He was emaciated, very gaunt, with sunken eyes, very hungry and very cold and wet.
He was able to carry on a conversation but was not fully in the game.
‘We were very surprised when we heard his story.
I have not heard of anything like this before, certainly not up here.
He was waiting for the mountain rescue team to pick him up but we had no idea he was there and neither did anyone else.‘
A Northern Constabulary spokesman said Mr Nicholls had only himself to blame for his ordeal.
‘He would have spent a lot less time on the mountain if he had left a note in his car saying where he was going and when he was due to return.’
Economy still too fragile for tax rises, six ‘wise men’ tell Lamont
By Clifford German City Editor
SIX OF the seven top economic advisers to the Government have given warning against tax increases in the Budget next month, saying that the economy is just too fragile to sustain them.
Three of the so-called seven wise men approve tax rises next year, assuming that the recovery is well under way by then.
All of them want the Chancellor, Norman Lamont, to explain his forward thinking clearly when he gets to his feet in the Commons on 16 March.
The seven economists, drawn from the City of London and universities and business schools around the country, presented their preliminary report to the Treasury yesterday, less than two weeks after they were commissioned to debate the issues and give the Chancellor the benefit of their conclusions.
If Mr Lamont was expecting them to unite behind a common policy he will be disappointed but if he wanted a variety of views to choose from he will be pleased by the range of forecasts and advice in their preliminary report.
None of them expects miracles in the economy this year and growth forecasts range from a bare 0.2 per cent to 2 per cent.
Next year's forecasts vary from 1.4 to 3.4 per cent.
They all expect the Government's public sector borrowing requirement to rise in the coming financial year to anywhere between £40 billion and £55 billion, and interest rates by the end of 1993 to range from 4.5 per cent to the current 6 per cent.
They also agree that unemployment will not fall this year.
Prof Wynne Godley, of Cambridge University, who has long been pessimistic about the economy's future, expects 3.4 million unemployed by the end of this year and 3.6 million by the end of 1994.
Prof Patrick Minford, from the University of Liverpool and Cardiff Business School, expects 0.2 per cent growth this year but firmly believes in a spontaneous recovery in 1994, provided the Chancellor keeps his nerve and continues to control inflation.
Prof Tim Congdon, from Lombard Street Research in the City, is the only one who wants Mr Lamont to take £3 billion out of the economy in taxes this coming year and £4.5 billion in 1993-94, but that is to balance a loose monetary policy and another cut in interest rates, which he thinks is the best way of stimulating demand without fuelling inflation.
Gavyn Davies, from the investment house Goldman Sachs, thinks the Chancellor should put growth high on the agenda and take some short-term risks with inflation and the pound to ensure strong growth in 1994.
View from the Bridge, Page 11
Two arrested over sewage works body
A MAN and a woman are being questioned by detectives investigating the murder of a man whose body was found in a Lanarkshire sewage works in January, police said last night.
The body of George Hall, 35, a driving instructor, from Milngavie, Glasgow, who was reported missing last October, was found on 5 January at Bothwellbank.
Mr Hall and his wife Jacqueline moved to Craigbarnet Road, Milngavie, in October 1991, soon after the birth of their daughter.
Police said a man aged 34 and a woman aged 30 had been arrested in connection with the death.
Welsh way to beat the traffic blues
By Allan McLean
THESE rugby enthusiasts decided yesterday that the best way to beat Edinburgh's traffic problems on an international weekend was to hail a taxi.
They were among thousands of supporters in colourful and fancy dress — ranging from leeks and nuns to the more traditional Welsh red and white — who were out on the town on the eve of today's match between Scotland and Wales at Murrayfield.
Lothian and Borders police said they were well prepared for the friendly invasion.
But in spite of the availability of extra officers and traffic wardens to help speed people on their way to the international, an early start was recommended for journeys.
Supt Phil Staples said: ‘We would however advise motorists that the police will be operating with tow-away trucks and vehicles parked where they cause an obstruction to pedestrians and other road users will be impounded.’
He appealed to drivers to park sensibly and avoid the inconvenience and expense of recovering vehicles from the car pound.
‘We will do our best to minimise delays to and from the match.
We would ask everyone to be patient and to leave plenty of time for their journey,’ he stressed.
Buses will operate from the city centre and there were plenty of parking places.
A site for a station between Murrayfield and the Heart of Midlothian ground at Tynecastle has been suggested by ScotRail, Donald Gorrie, leader of the Liberal Democrat group on Lothian Regional Council, has revealed.
He said that he and his party colleague, Veronica Crerar of Edinburgh District Council, had discussed the idea with Cyril Bleasdale, director of ScotRail.
In response to proposals by the councillors, Mr Bleasdale had mooted a site on the suburban circle line, which has been proposed for reopening.
100-year-old robbed of funeral savings
By Sarah Chalmers
A 100-YEAR-OLD man was assaulted and robbed yesterday as he walked to the bank to deposit £1,450 he had saved for his funeral.
John McBride, who is partially deaf, was attacked by two youths when only yards from his home in Arden, Glasgow.
He had stopped off to collect some winnings at a nearby betting shop before going to pay his gas bill and deposit three years' savings at a bank.
Mr McBride was still shaken last night.
He said: ‘Two people came up behind me and one of them wrapped his arms around me — I thought it was someone I knew.
‘The other one put his hand in my left pocket and grabbed my savings.
The people from the betting shop came out and called the police but it was too late, the two youths had run away.’
Mr McBride had taken the money after a nephew advised him not to keep it at home.
Originally from Ireland, he worked as a machine operator until he was 83.
His Glasgow-born wife died 13 years ago.
He lives alone and has no relatives in the city.
He did not expect to see the money again.
‘They would probably have jumped on a train and gone to London.
I have never seen them before.’
Strathclyde police described the attack as callous and appealed for information.
The attackers were described as 17 to 18 years old, and both were wearing green anoraks.
John McBride: collected winnings at betting shop
Two boys still held over murder 600 hold candle-lit tribute to James Bulger
By Audrey Gillan
MAGISTRATES on Merseyside last night approved a police request to detain two ten-year-old boys, arrested in connection with the murder of James Bulger, for a further 36 hours.
Murder squad detectives can hold and question the boys until 7am tomorrow.
They can then apply for a further 24-hour extension but after that they must charge or release the pair.
Members of the serious crime squad and operational support division arrested the boys at about 8:30am on Thursday but the public was not informed until yesterday.
Police sources said the news was delayed to prevent a repeat of what they described as a media circus when police swooped on the home of a 12-year-old boy on Tuesday.
He was later released after being eliminated from the inquiry.
Det Supt Albert Kirby, the man in charge of the murder inquiry, said that the two boys they had arrested were from the Walton area of Liverpool.
They were being interviewed in two undisclosed police stations after the violent reaction of local people on Tuesday night when other youths were arrested.
‘It is stressed that the boys are currently being interviewed in relation to these matters,’ Mr Kirby said.
‘At this stage it is not known if charges will follow as this will depend upon the results these interviews and other inquiries.’
The details of the arrests came the morning after the BBC Crimewatch UK programme in which enhanced pictures of two wanted youths were shown.
Hundreds of callers offered information and 43 names were suggested, some more than once.
‘Three names kept cropping up time and time again,’ a police spokesman said.
Staff at the police photographic department, Ministry of Defence laboratories and IBM have been trying to improve the original blurred images of the youths.
James, 2, was abducted last Friday from the Strand shopping centre in Bootle.
He had wandered away from his mother Denise, who was queuing in a butcher's shop.
Security videos showed James being taken from the centre by two youths.
His mutilated body was found on a railway embankment in Walton last Sunday.
Police believe he died a few hours after he was abducted.
The two boys who are being questioned live near where James was found.
As journalists gathered near the terraced house where one boy was arrested, neighbours were becoming restless.
They claimed that a forensic team had taken hundreds of items from the house.
‘We saw police taking them away early in the morning,’ said a next door neighbour.
‘About half an hour later they took several bin bags away.
They even took clothes from the washing line.’
Mr Kirby stressed that his officers would be taking a ‘softly, softly’ approach with the boys.
‘Nothing will be rushed.
We will do it at a nice steady pace,’ he said.
‘You have to remember that we have ten-year-old boys in here.’
Last night more than 600 people, many of them children, gathered in a church near James's home in a candle-lit tribute.
The 45-minute ecumenical memorial service was relayed by loudspeakers to a further 200 huddled in the cold outside.
An Anglican priest, Father Bernard Schunemann, told the congregation: ‘The terrible death of James reminds us of the very real possibility of evil, evil in ourselves, evil in each one of us, evil certainly in young people.’
The service was organised by clergy in response to calls from local people who wanted help to cope with their grief.
Det Supt Albert Kirby: ‘softly, softly’ approach
University loses arts funding over proposed sale
By Gary Duncan
ONE of Britain's leading arts organisations has withdrawn funding from Edinburgh University over its contentious decision to sell off one of two world-class works from its prestigious Torrie art collection.
The Scotsman has learned that the National Art Collections Fund has stripped the university of a purchase grant worth several thousand pounds because of its disquiet at the proposed sale.
As a direct consequence of the Torrie proposal it is also understood that the university's application for its collections to be granted nationally registered status — giving access to a range of vital funding — is likely to be rejected by the Museum and Galleries Commission.
The commission is also expected to ban the university from becoming custodian of any artworks gifted to the nation in lieu of tax if it proceeds with a sale.
The fresh disclosures will increase the already considerable pressure on the university to halt the sale plan.
Yesterday, The Scotsman revealed that the proposal has prompted an extraordinary court action against it by the Lord Provost of Edinburgh, Norman Irons, and the Sheriff Principal of Lothian and Borders, Gordon Nicholson.
Next week, Mr Irons and Sheriff Nicholson are to petition the Court of Session to reverse a decision it took last year, effectively removing them as Torrie trustees, and making the university the sole trustee of the collection.
The court's decision cleared the way for the university authorities to approve in principal the raising of up to £5 million through the disposal of either a 16th-century bronze, Cain and Abel by de Vries, or a 17th-century landscape, The Banks of a River by van Ruisdael.
Mr Irons and Sheriff Nicholson believe the court's decision was based on misleading information.
The removal of the NACF grant was disclosed to The Scotsman last night by a senior source within the university.
The money had been requested to buy a rare organ for its Russell Collection of musical instruments.
The source also revealed the dim view of the sale plan being taken by the Museums and Galleries Commission.
The commission's chairman, Graham Greene, has already described the proposal as ‘a particularly disgraceful episode’.
A senior commission official is now understood to have made clear that the university will never be granted museums and galleries registration status, amounting to a national seal of approval, if a sale goes ahead.
The official also indicated that a sale would mean the commission ruling out the university as a recipient of any items gifted to the nation in lieu of tax.
University collections have recently received several valuable works of this kind.
Asked to comment last night,
An Edinburgh University spokeswoman said last night: ‘If what you say is true the matter will no doubt be reported to the university court in due course.’
Smith accuses Major of treaty secrecy
By Chris McLaughlin, Political Correspondent
JOHN MAJOR came under fresh pressure over Maastricht yesterday as the Labour leader, John Smith, accused the Government of unnecessary secrecy over the legal status of the controversial legislation on the treaty.
Mr Smith renewed his demand for publication of Government law officers' advice which suggests ministers may ignore whatever the Commons votes on the social chapter.
Mr Major has refused on the grounds that legal advice to the Government is traditionally confidential.
The escalation of the row came as the European Commissioner and former Cabinet member, Sir Leon Brittan, intervened in the debate to give warning that Britain would cause disruption throughout Europe and suffer substantial economic harm unless it ratified the Maastricht treaty.
In a speech to members of the Liverpool Chamber of Commerce, Sir Leon said the country would face isolation from other Community nations, who would nevertheless wield power over the domestic economy and possibly over national security.
His remarks follow a strong personal attack on Mr Major from the French president, Franois Mitterrand, who accused him of disloyalty and a lack of solidarity with other EC leaders because of his opposition to the social chapter.
Angered by Hoover's decision to switch 400 jobs from Dijon to Cambuslang, Mr Mitterrand told a television audience that the 11 other nations would eventually force Britain to stop what he described as unfair competition by opting out of the social chapter.
Sir Marcus Fox, the chairman of the Conservative backbench 1922 committee, sprang to the Prime Minister's defence, accusing the French of ‘trying to make excuses and put the blame on us’ for the country's economic problems.
‘They have never been slow to give huge subsidies to win orders.
As soon as people realise that Britain is the place to be for business they shout foul.’
In a letter to Mr Major last night, Mr Smith accused the Prime Minister of giving no good reason why the legal opinion on the Maastricht legislation should not be published or why it overturned the view from the Foreign Office during the last 10 months that a vote in favour of the social chapter would wreck the treaty.
‘Law officers are not civil servants, they are ministers accountable to parliament,’ said Mr Smith.
‘In a matter such as this, the reasoning which led them to their opinion is a  vital piece of information which should not be  withheld from the House of Commons.
‘I believe that it is quite wrong that you should refuse this reasonable request and I regret to say that your attitude is all too typical of the secretive nature of British government, which cries out for reform.’
The European affairs minister, Tristan Garel-Jones, said 500 MPs of all parties supported ratification of the treaty on closer European union.
‘A small minority of Members of Parliament after these weeks and months of debate have still been unable to tell us what they want, where they want to lead this country and who is going with them.’
Pardon refused after First World War executions
THE PRIME Minister yesterday ruled out posthumous pardons for more than 300 British soldiers executed for cowardice and desertion during the First World War.
John Major said: ‘I have reflected long and hard but have reached the conclusion that we cannot rewrite history by substituting our latter-day judgment for that of contemporaries, whatever we might think.’
He said about 30 files in the Public Records Office, including some which were closed to the public, were examined.
‘The files record each stage of the case up to the final decision by the Commander-in-Chief.
No evidence was found to lead us, including the Judge Advocate General, to think that the convictions were unsound or that the accused were treated unfairly at the time.’
The Prime Minister's comments came in a letter to the Thurrock Labour MP, Andrew MacKinlay, who has campaigned for pardons for 307 British soldiers executed during the 1914-1918 war.
Mr MacKinlay said the soldiers were executed in Flanders, the Somme, Gallipoli and elsewhere, for offences including cowardice, desertion, sleeping at their posts, throwing away arms, disobedience, and striking superior officers.
Many of the men were suffering from shell-shock, sleep deprivation and cold, he added.
Nearly all the letters he received in a ‘massive’ post-bag had supported his campaign.
‘Even if I don't succeed in having the Royal Prerogative exercised in favour of the 307 men, they have been vindicated by the most important court in the land British public opinion,’ he said.
Mr MacKinlay pledged to continue his campaign, which he regarded as a matter of right and justice.
He highlighted the case of Pte Harry Farr, 25, who was executed for cowardice at Ville-sur-Ancre in October, 1916.
Pte Farr, whose family came from London, was serving in the 1st Battalion West Yorkshire Regiment.
His granddaughter, Mrs Janet Booth, from Farnham, Surrey, said her grandmother, now aged 98, did not tell the family until recently that Pte Farr was executed for cowardice.
‘She has lived with the shame and humiliation all these years.
A pardon would mean she could rest in peace, and that he was not a coward,’ said Mrs Booth.
— PA 
Editorial, Page 8
Retrial for man jailed after cell mate killed
A MAN convicted of murder who claims he was framed by the police to cover up their guilt was granted a retrial by the English Court of Appeal yesterday.
Malcolm Kennedy had been jailed at the Old Bailey in September 1991 for allegedly kicking to death his cellmate, Patrick Quinn, at Hammersmith police station in west London early on Christmas Eve, 1990.
Kennedy, 46, from Stoke Newington, east London, will remain in custody pending the next trial, which the appeal judges said should be arranged at the Old Bailey ‘as soon as conveniently possible’.
Lord Taylor, the Lord Chief Justice, sitting with Mr Justice Judge and Mr Justice Hidden, said they could not be sure that the original trial jury would have reached the same verdict if it had heard evidence which had since come to light.
‘Accordingly we cannot say the verdict is safe and satisfactory,’ he said.
Lord Taylor said that Kennedy and Mr Quinn, who did not know each other, were arrested separately for drunkenness and were in a cell known as the tank when the fatal injuries were inflicted.
Mr Quinn, 55, suffered 33 rib fractures, serious damage to internal organs and severe head and neck injuries.
Death was due to lacerations of the heart and multiple injuries.
No motive was established or suggested.
The dead man's clothing bore footprints in blood which matched Kennedy's shoes.
Kennedy's clothing was heavily marked with blood.
The defence claimed that a police officer had assaulted Mr Quinn.
‘It was contended that a cover-up operation had been organised by the police to suppress the truth and to use Kennedy as a scapegoat,’ Lord Taylor said.
The defence relied on discrepancies and omissions in police records and evidence.
The jury returned a unanimous verdict.
Lord Taylor said the Court of Appeal had heard evidence from two new witnesses, Samantha Wilson and Sara Dennis, who had been traced since the trial.
They had been at the police station, making statements about an assault on Miss Wilson by a man on the night in question.
One of the officers who responded to Miss Wilson's emergency call and was involved in the man's arrest, PC Paul Giles, was said also to have arrested Mr Quinn.
The documents before the jury showed Mr Quinn's arrest at 11pm on 23 December and the man's arrest at 12:50am.
The effect of the new evidence from the two women was to suggest that the man who assaulted Miss Wilson was arrested an hour earlier, at 11:50pm, and that they were in the police station making their statements at about the time of the murder and the discovery of the body.
That earlier timing was also indicated in a document found during a Police Complaints Authority inquiry.
Lord Taylor said the Crown argued that, although this and other discrepancies demonstrated sloppiness in police procedure, they did not cast doubt on the jury's verdict.
Michael Mansfield, QC, for Kennedy, submitted that the nature of the defence, involving an allegation that a police officer killed Mr Quinn, made the whereabouts and activities of all the police working in and from the station that night important.
Lord Taylor said that the whole of the evidence merited consideration by a fresh jury.
In doing so, the court was not passing any judgment on the rival contentions. — PA
Man held over shooting of businessman
POLICE investigating the murder of the businessman Donald Urquhart, gunned down in central London, are holding a man in connection with the killing, it was disclosed last night.
Scotland Yard said the man, who is in his 30s, was arrested in south London.
Mr Urquhart was shot dead in front of his girlfriend in Marylebone High Street on 2 January in what appeared to be a professional ‘hit’.
— PA
Police in race to find deadly poison
POLICE are racing against time to find five stolen canisters of rodent poison so deadly it cannot be handled without breathing apparatus.
The phostoxin pellets, when broken, release an acrid gas that can kill by causing the lungs to fill with water.
The canisters containing the pellets were stolen on Thursday night by thieves who broke into a storeroom at a Berkshire nature park.
Staff use the poison to exterminate moles and rabbits.
— PA
Second ransom note for donkey
A SECOND ransom demand has been made for the kidnapped champion Irish donkey Toby.
His owner, Jack McKillen, 62, was told he could have him back for £500.
Police involved in the search for the animal, which was taken from a field near Ballymoney, Co Antrim, 10 days ago, confirmed that.
Mr McKillen, a retired farmer, believes Toby is already dead — killed by a jealous rival.
— PA
He said today: ‘I just cannot see him ever coming back, not after this length of time.
‘Whatever chance I had of getting him has gone because of the incredible publicity.
It has been serious and to tell the truth I am sick to the teeth of it.
‘The telephone never stops and I can hardly spare the time even to make myself a cup of tea.
‘I reckon Toby has had it.
Apart from those two demands, which were almost certainly hoaxes, there has not been a cheep from anybody.
I just do not know what to think any more.
It has been an awful time.’
Police in the Irish Republic have been alerted but the RUC has not given up hope of finding the chestnut thoroughbred which romped to victory in the all-Ireland derby two years ago and up to 100 other races.
A senior officer said: ‘We have not exhausted all our enquiries yet and we do not know for certain if those ransom calls were the work of cranks.
For all we know Toby might still be in this area.
‘It is a pretty distinctive looking donkey and the person who has him is hardly likely to parade him around the countryside.
We will just keep looking.’
Meanwhile, a leading donkey sanctuary said Toby could have been stolen for his meat.
Dr Betty Svendsen, administrator of the Donkey Sanctuary in east Devon, said donkey carcases were fetching a lot of money in Europe.
— PA
Paper curbs on young smokers
LEGAL curbs designed to make it more difficult for youngsters to smoke come into force today.
Shopkeepers and cigarette machine operators must display warning notices reminding customers it is illegal to sell tobacco products to anyone under 16.
Failure to put up a notice could result in fines up to £1,000. — PA
Another travel firm collapses
THE tour operators Euro Express yesterday became the second travel firm in less than a week to collapse.
The company was fully bonded and all 1,400 holidaymakers currently overseas on skiing trips in France and Austria with its subsidiary, Kaleidoscope, were expected to be able to complete their holidays while those with bookings would be reimbursed.
Riva Travel collapsed on Wednesday.
— PA
McGregor hits out at Calcutt proposals
THE CHAIRMAN of the Press Complaints Commission has criticised Sir David Calcutt's recommendations that fines and legal strictures should be used to regulate the press and protect individual privacy.
Lord McGregor of Durris told journalists and editors at the annual What the Papers Say Awards lunch yesterday that critics of the present commission had not grasped that in some situations the law was powerless to regulate people's behaviour.
‘Some current proposals seemed designed primarily as job-creation schemes for lawyers,’ he said.
Some members of the National Heritage Select Committee had forgotten that the ‘ordinary’ people they sought to protect from the ‘gutter press’bought popular tabloids, and that these same newspapers did not attract a significant number of complaints.
‘Editorial and lay members constitute the commission.
Editorial members are drawn from the whole press, including the popular tabloids.
Their presence is as essential as that of practitioners on self-regulatory bodies in law and medicine,’ Lord McGregor said.
‘The tabloid editors have been condemned as lacking integrity and behaving on the commission like publicans denouncing the evils of drink at a temperance rally.’
The finding in Sir David Calcutt's report on privacy and the press that the Press Complaints Commission's lay members were dominated by the industry was baseless, Lord McGregor said, as their standing in the worlds in which their reputations had been made ensured they would never kowtow to proprietors or editors.
‘They were all appointed because they are of such standing in the worlds in which their reputations were made that they will never kowtow to proprietors or editors.’
Lord McGregor said his experience of Government bodies and committees was that they had to fight to preserve their independence against officials and Ministers.
During his 10 years as chairman of the Advertising Standards Authority the industry never approached him to change policies or attitudes.
‘But officials in the Department of Trade and Industry did try to intervene.
Indeed the Secretary of State used his influence and sought to reverse the approval the Authority had given to an advertisement featuring a Cabinet colleague,’ he said.
‘In my observation, a body set up by government is more likely to face pressure than one established by an industry.’
Lord McGregor also attacked the view that a commission without legal sanctions was toothless.
‘Whether embodied in judges, a  statutory ombudsman or a tariff of fines, the law is no more capable of compelling editors to observe a statutory code than of extracting  maintenance for children from fathers not supporting their families,’ he said.
‘Some current  proposals seem designed primarily as job-creation schemes for lawyers who would oust editors from their proper task of ensuring that the Code is observed.’
Acknowledging that the PCC's  procedures were imperfect, Lord McGregor said that they would be improved and adjudications speeded up.
He said that at times it appeared that the only effective opposition to what was becoming a single-party government was from the press.
‘No wonder MPs of all parties revile newspapers.
The most depressing aspect he had found had been the neglect of the fundamental issue of liberty raised by MPs’ proposals to prevent what they regarded as abuses by the press.
‘These cannot be tackled ad hoc by this or that legal or legislative intervention without danger to democratic politics.
‘The first stage must be to strengthen and safeguard freedom of speech and expression by a Freedom of Information Act and by entrenching them in a Bill of Rights.’
‘Within that secure framework for a free press, Parliament can settle without conflict such issues as intrusions of privacy and the definition of the public interest, and self-regulation can maintain the proper day-to-day relationship between the press and society.’
A Labour back-bench bill to widen freedom of information and do away with unnecessary secrecy was given an unopposed second reading in the Commons today.
Mark Fisher's Right to Know Bill would reform the Official Secrets Act and allow a general right of access to  official records for members of the public.
But the measure seems certain to be killed off later in its parliamentary passage as ministers are planning to publish their own proposals for greater openness in government this summer.
ANDREW Morton, author of the best-seller, Diana: Her True Story won his second award in a week at the What the Papers Say Awards lunch when he was named investigator of the year for his delving into the Royal Family which led to his best-selling book Diana: Her True Story.
The Investigation of the Year award, presented at the annual What the Papers Say Awards by Lord McGregor of Durris, chairman of the Press Complaints Commission, followed his award last week as Author of the Year at the British Book Awards.
Journalist of the Year is Maggie O'Kane of The Guardian for her reporting from Bosnia as well as for dispatches from Dublin.
Ed Vulliamy of The Guardian is Foreign Correspondent of the Year for his Balkans reporting.
Richard Littlejohn of The Sun became only the second winner of the Irritant of the Year award since Private Eye won in 1968.
The Columnist of the Year award went to former MP Matthew Parris of The Times for his political sketches from the House of Commons and his regular column.
The Guardian's Will Hutton is Political Journalist of the Year.
The editor of Sarajevo's only daily newspaper accepted an award for the courage of himself and his staff who produce a newspaper from an atomic bomb shelter beneath the rubble of its former offices.
Kemel Kurspahic, admitted he might not live to see the liberation of his city or country.
Leaning on a crutch, Mr Kurspahic, editor-in-chief of Oslobodenje (Liberation), told editors and journalists at the awards lunch at London's Savoy Hotel: ‘Thank you for the feeling of not being alone in the world.
‘Thank you for the feeling we belong to a family of journalists.
Our existence proves freedom of the press cannot be silenced by mortars, tanks or machine-guns.’
His paper, born during the German occupation of the Balkans, is due to celebrate 50 years of publication later this year.
It has missed only one edition since the civil war started and even that came out a day late.
Journalists distribute and sell 25,000 copies a day.
When Oslobodenje ran out of paper, fresh supplies were smuggled into the city by journalists with pack horses.
Three of the staff have been killed since April 1992.
More have been wounded and others were victims of ethnic cleansing.
Mr Kurspahic shattered his left leg crashing his car to avoid sniper fire.
He said: ‘We might not see the day of liberation but it will come.’
No emotion in death case nurse, trial told
A NURSE charged with murdering four children had shown no emotion when colleagues spoke to her about the mysterious string of collapses suffered by child patients on the ward where she worked, a court heard yesterday.
Three children had died and at least six others had suffered inexplicable heart and respiratory attacks when Nurse Amanda Poole spoke to Beverley Allitt.
In a statement to Nottingham Crown Court, Nurse Poole said: ‘I said to Bev something like: ‘God, not another one.
Are you all right?’.
I was genuinely concerned that Bev might be under some stress or pressure from the many attacks she was dealing with.
‘Bev said something like: ‘Oh, I'm all right,’ and shrugged the incident off.
She seemed all right and coping.
Bev never showed any emotion to me at all.’
Nurse Valerie Roper said she had spoken to Allitt after the first two or three arrests at Grantham and Kesteven Hospital and mentioned that she had been present on each occasion.
‘Bev didn't say anything at all in relation to what I said, and in fact showed no emotion,’ she said in a statement.
Allitt, 24, from Corby Glen, near Grantham, denies murdering four children in her care in 1991 and attempting to murder nine child patients, the 15-year-old brother of her flat-mate and a 73-year-old woman.
She also denies 11 alternative charges of causing grievous bodily harm.
The court heard earlier about the collapse of 14-month-old Kayley Desmond, who was successfully revived and transferred to an intensive care unit in Nottingham.
She had been admitted suffering from a chest infection.
The prosecution claims Allitt deliberately injected Kayley with air.
The hospital's consultant paediatrician, Dr Charith Nanayakkara, earlier told the court the death of 11-year-old Timothy Hardwick, the second of Allitt's alleged victims, was unexpected.
He said he had never known a child die of an epileptic fit.
The trial was adjourned until Monday.
Death of Tory MP for Newbury
THE Tories face their first by-election of the new Parliament after the death of Judith Chaplin, 53, the Conservative MP for Newbury, and a confidante of John Major.
Mrs Chaplin died at St Mary's Hospital, Paddington, West London, yesterday.
Paying tribute, the Prime Minister said she was a ‘trusted adviser who would have had a wonderful career.’
— PA 
The complex world concerning young persons and criminal law
Gillian Harris looks at some of the problems when a child is charged with a serious crime
A CHILD of ten who appears in court in England charged with murder is treated much like any other defendant.
Unlike most criminal cases involving adults, the charge hinges on the child's understanding of what he or she is alleged to have done.
The difficulty for the prosecution is proving that a child so young intended to commit a crime.
The age of criminal  responsibility was set at ten in England and Wales by the 1963 Children and Young Persons Act.
In Scotland it is eight.
Children under ten in England and Wales are considered by law to be unaware of the consequences of their actions.
Louise Garner, a criminal law practitioner in Manchester who has worked with juveniles, said yesterday: ‘At ten a child can be arrested and charged with an offence but unless it is a very, very serious charge like murder, there is no possibility of a custodial sentence for a child under 14.’
Prosecuting such young defendants is also more difficult.
They may be above the age of criminal responsibility but children aged between ten and 14 are presumed not to know the difference between right and wrong, therefore incapable of committing an offence.
The key to a successful prosecution is proving that at the time of the offence the children understood the seriousness of what they were doing and were not simply behaving mischievously.
‘When a child is arrested, they are questioned by appropriately-trained police officers.
There is also an adult with them at all times, often a parent or sometimes a social worker.
They are also entitled to legal advice,’ explained Ms Garner.
A ten-year-old could be detained in a police cell for up to 36 hours but it is more common for children to be released into the care of social workers overnight.
To keep a child any longer than 36 hours requires consent from a magistrates' court.
The first appearance a child would make after being charged would be before a youth court, formerly called a juvenile court.
A case involving a murder charge would be referred on to a Crown court.
The reporting restrictions which forbid the identification of a child appearing at a youth court would also apply in Crown court, unless they were lifted.
During trials involving child defendants, expert witnesses, usually psychologists, are called to give their assessment of the child's level of understanding.
Graham Davis, professor of psychology at Leicester University, said: ‘To determine a child's grasp of events they would probably undergo a straightforward IQ assessment.
Then conversations would take place about the event and their opinion of what happened.
It would be up to the psychologist to decide whether or not there was any mental impairment to their full understanding.’
If a psychologist throws doubt on the child's comprehension of events, the charge could be reduced from murder to manslaughter.
‘The law is very unsubtle,’ said Prof Davis.
‘You are either mad or bad.’
A charge of manslaughter can still result in a custodial sentence although for a child as young as ten it could be reduced to a supervision order.
Ms Garner said: ‘Whether or not a murder charge stands or is reduced to manslaughter depends entirely on the individual case.
Some children of seven or eight know exactly what they are doing but there are some 13-years-olds who don't seem to know.’
Prof Nick Emler, a psychologist at Dundee University, insists that most ten-year-olds have a highly sophisticated grasp of concepts such as morality, justice and right and wrong.
‘Children have a pretty well-developed insight by the age of ten,’ he said.
The mandatory sentence for anyone found guilty of murder is life imprisonment which for a child means being detained at Her Majesty's pleasure in one of four special secure treatment centres in Co Durham, Birmingham, Essex and Leeds.
After his or her 18th birthday, the young person would be transferred to a young offenders' institution before moving to an adult prison aged 21.
Every year, between ten and 15 young people aged under 18 are convicted and given custodial sentences for murder in England and Wales.
In 1990, the latest figures, eight teenagers aged between 14 and 16 were found guilty of murder.
Fiennes gave up trek ‘within a week of death'
THE polar explorer Sir Ranulph Fiennes said yesterday he had been within a week of death when he finally agreed to ‘be sensible’ and abandon his Antarctic expedition.
Sir Ranulph, 48, acknowledged that his record-breaking journey had taken him to the limits of his endurance.
He had been warned by his colleague, Dr Michael Stroud, never to undertake such a demanding expedition again.
At a news conference at the Royal Geographical Society in London, they described the mental and physical anguish of their 95-day trek.
They told of the agony of walking on feet deformed by infected open wounds, the pain of trying to jam gloves on fingers skinned by frostbite and the tedium of the never-ending white waste.
On several occasions they had come within inches of death — tumbling down 100ft deep crevasses.
Dr Stroud, 37, his frost-bitten fingers still taped up, said: ‘I hope very much I remember just how bad and difficult this was — and never do anything like it again.
I would recommend to Ran that perhaps he does not go on such a big trip again, and I'm going to recommend it to myself.’
They are expected to make a full recovery, but Sir Ranulph is likely to lose part of the second biggest toe on his left foot because of frost-bite.
He has already sacrificed part of his little toe on the right foot on a previous expedition.
In spite of their exhaustion, their jubilation at making the longest unsupported polar trip and the first unsupported crossing of Antarctica was unmistakeable.
Sir Ranulph, said: ‘I'm amazed that we did do it…
Neither of us thought it was really possible, though we did not admit that to anybody other than ourselves.’
During the 95-day expedition, they trekked 10 to 13 hours a day.
In the end, they gave up only because their lives were at risk.
‘We did not complete it because we would probably have faded out and died within a week.
So it seemed sensible not to go on,’ said Sir Ranulph.
At one point, Dr Stroud had been reduced to tears as he tried to pull his gloves over his frost-bitten fingers.
He suffered from hypothermia and the pain in his hands was such it would take him up to six minutes ‘just to have a pee’.
Sir Ranulph said he became bad-tempered and tensions developed between the two men as their strength ebbed away.
‘There were no stresses and strains in the tent, but because of my physical shape…there was definite strain between us.’
The two men, who are hoping to make at least £2 million for the Multiple Sclerosis Society out of sponsorship, will also have contributed to important research into nutrition, diet and the effects of such extreme conditions on the human body.
Sir Ranulph Fiennes: ‘neither of us thought it was possible’
Court case blocking art sale to start next week
By Gary Duncan
A COURT action that will block plans by Edinburgh University to sell one of two world-class works from the Torrie art collection, of which it is custodian, is expected to begin next week.
The Court of Session action is being raised by the lord provost of Edinburgh, Norman Irons, and the Sheriff-Principal of Lothian and Borders, Gordon Nicholson, in an attempt to reassert their rights as co-trustees of the Torrie Collection.
They believe the court was mistaken last year when it granted a petition making the university authorities sole trustee, clearing the way for the proposed sale.
Until that petition was granted, the lord provost and the sheriff-principal were accepted as being Torrie trustees by virtue of their office.
Mr Irons said yesterday that the petition raising the action would be lodged with the Court of Session by the end of next week.
He rejected a claim by the university on Thursday that it was involved in discussions with him and Mr Nicholson and that a meeting was being planned.
He said there was no point to any meeting.
‘There is no constructive dialogue.’
After yesterday's disclosure of the court action, the curator of the university's art collection spoke out in favour of its plans to sell one of the Torrie works.
Dr Duncan Macmillan said he was supporting the university's proposals to sell either a 16th-century bronze, Cain and Abel by de Vries, or a 17th-century landscape, The Banks of a River by van Ruisdael, because of a desperate need to raise money for the care of the remainder of the collection.
Continuing changes in university funding meant that finding an alternative source of financing the care of the Torrie collection and the university's other artworks was essential, Dr Macmillan said.
The university has made clear that any funds raised from a sale will be used only for that purpose and not to clear its accumulated deficit, as originally intended.
‘I would say that nobody who has criticised the proposal to sell has come up with an alternative as to how these things are going to be funded,’ Dr Macmillan said.
‘I am sure anybody who had responsibility for this collection would have to consider this course of action.’
That stance was supported by the university's rector, the rock musician Donnie Munro, who said that although in an ideal world he would hope such a sale would not be necessary, there may be little alternative.
‘If a sensible Government would release adequate funding for higher education institutions — not least to maintain things like the Torrie Collection — then a situation like this is unlikely to have arisen.
But that is not the reality,’ he said.
Mr Irons and Mr Nicholson have made clear that they are not taking any view on the sale of works from the Torrie Collection until the legal issue of their position as trustees is settled.
Police car accident seen by nuclear protesters
A POLICEMAN was injured in his patrol car yesterday in an accident as he waited for a nuclear weapons convoy to pass through Glasgow, writes Alan Forbes.
The patrol car was sitting in an emergency lane of the M8 at Charing Cross when it was involved in a collision with another car.
The accident on the westbound carriageway was witnessed by members of the Faslane protest camp who had been demonstrating against the convoy.
Paramedics treated the driver of the second car for shock and applied a surgical collar to the policeman.
Strathclyde Police later said people had been removed to hospital for treatment.
The accident was seen by Iain Macdonald, a Strathclyde regional councillor who is chairman of the Nuclear Free Zones Scotland organisation: ‘We have seen with our own eyes how simple it is for a road accident to take place and there is no reason why the convoy itself could not have been involved.
‘When you are carrying a lethal load like that anything could happen whether or not police are looking after it.’
The convoy, which had been tracked by anti-nuclear campaigners from the Newcastle area, passed through Charing Cross at 4pm, about an hour after the accident.
The Ministry of Defence maintains a policy of not confirming whether weapons transporters are loaded with warheads when they make their regular trips through Glasgow.
Earlier this month the MoD repeated its claim that transporters are designed to withstand major accidents.
Six ‘wise men’ warn against tax increases
By Clifford German, City Editor
SIX OF the seven top economics advisers to the Government have cautioned against tax increases in the Budget next month, saying that the economy is just too fragile to sustain them.
Three of the so-called seven wise men approve tax rises next year, assuming that the recovery is well under way by then.
All of them want the Chancellor, Norman Lamont, to explain his forward thinking clearly when he gets to his feet in the Commons on 16 March.
The seven economists, drawn from the City of London and universities and business schools around the country, presented their preliminary report to the Treasury yesterday, less than two weeks after they were commissioned to debate the issues and give the Chancellor their conclusions.
If Mr Lamont was expecting them to unite behind a policy he will be disappointed but if he wanted a variety of views to choose from he will be pleased by the range of forecasts and advice in their preliminary report.
None of them expects miracles in the economy this year and growth forecasts range from a bare 0.2 per cent to 2 per cent.
Next year's forecasts vary from 1.4 to 3.4 per cent.
They all expect the Government's public sector borrowing requirement to rise in the coming financial year to anywhere between £40 billion and £55 billion, and interest rates by the end of 1993 to range from 4.5 per cent to the current 6 per cent.
They also agree that unemployment will not fall this year.
Prof Wynne Godley, of Cambridge University, who has long been pessimistic about the economy's future, expects 3.4 million unemployed by the end of this year and 3.6 million by the end of 1994.
Prof Patrick Minford, from the University of Liverpool and Cardiff Business School, expects 0.2 per cent growth this year but firmly believes in a spontaneous recovery in 1994, provided the Chancellor keeps his nerve and continues to control inflation.
Prof Tim Congdon, from Lombard Street Research in the City, is the only one who wants Mr Lamont to take £3 billion out of the economy in taxes this coming year and £4.5 billion in 1993-94, but that is to balance a loose monetary policy and another cut in interest rates, which he thinks is the best way of stimulating demand without fuelling inflation.
Gavyn Davies, from the investment house Goldman Sachs, thinks the Chancellor should put growth high on the agenda and take some short-term risks with inflation and the pound to ensure strong growth in 1994.
View from the Bridge, Page 11
Norman Lamont: was told economy still fragile
ABERDEEN
Helicopter struck by lightning
NORTH SEA oilmen had a lucky escape yesterday morning when their helicopter was struck by lightning.
The S-61 aircraft, owned by British International Helicopters, suffered rotor damage in the incident.
It was forced to land on the Sedco 700 drilling rig, which is doing work for Shell in the East Shetland Basin.
The 17 passengers and two crew escaped injury.
Replacement equipment was being flown out to the rig from the helicopter's base at Aberdeen.
ORKNEY
Storms prevent ship's salvage
HIGH winds and heavy seas have prevented the salvaging of the 1,500-tonne Danish cargo vessel Bettina Danca, which has been aground on the island of Stroma in the Pentland Firth since last weekend.
Bob Sclater, Orkney's harbours director, reported yesterday that the ship had listed 20 degrees to starboard and had shifted closer to the cliff face.
It is feared that she might become a total loss.
GLASGOW
Woman dies after incident
A WOMAN has died in hospital after an incident in Birgidale Road, Easterhouse, Glasgow, on Wednesday.
Heather Elliot, 37, of Ardencraig Road, Easterhouse, died in Victoria Infirmary on Thursday.
A 44-year-old man has already appeared in court in connection with the incident.
GLASGOW
Yarrow talks still deadlocked
THE STRIKE at Yarrow shipbuilders in Glasgow is set to enter its third week after pay talks between unions and management ended in deadlock yesterday.
No further talks have been planned.
Shipbuilding work at the Scotstoun yard has been at a standstill for a fortnight since pay negotiations broke down.
GLASGOW
Witnesses sought after man dies
AN 82-year-old man, John Stewart, of Collina Street, Maryhill, died yesterday while crossing Maryhill Road near Sandbank Street in Glasgow.
Police are appealing for witnesses to the accident, which happened about 8:30am.
Driver faces jail after jogger's death
A PUBLICAN faces jail after being convicted of causing the death of a 16-year-old jogger by driving dangerously while more than twice over the drink drive limit.
A jury returned the majority verdict on Alexander Ballantine, 51, after a two-day trial at Dingwall Sheriff Court.
Ballantine, of Birchburn, Aultbea, had admitted causing the death of Louis Innes-Loo by driving carelessly on the Poolewe to Aultbea road last 13 July and while over the limit.
He denied the alternative and more serious charge of driving dangerously.
Louis, a sportsman and only child, was struck while jogging at the edge of the road.
He was on a visit to his mother's home at Londubh, Poolewe, during a holiday from boarding school in Fort Augustus.
Sentence on Ballantine, a first offender, was deferred until 12 March for background reports, but Sheriff Donald Booker Millburn said it was possible he would impose a jail sentence.
The case made Scottish legal history as it was the first prosecution under Section 3A of the Road Traffic Act 1988.
The section, introduced on 1 July last year — less than two weeks before the accident — made it an offence for a driver to cause death by careless driving and while over the drink drive limit.
The trial was being viewed as a test case for the law, but Isobel Brydie, co-chairman of Scotland's Campaign Against Irresponsible Drivers, said that as Ballantine had been as convicted on the dangerous driving charge it did not test the court's response to the new section.
Law changes will ease claims over asbestos-related illnesses
By Bryan Christie Health Correspondent
CHANGES to the law on damages in Scotland have been given the Royal Assent after a campaign to help the families of workers dying from asbestos-related diseases.
The bill to reform what was seen as an unjust system has made a speedy passage on to the statute book after cross-party agreement to support the move.
It means that claims for compensation can live on after asbestos sufferers die and brings the law in Scotland into line with that in England.
Previously, families could lose out on compensation of up to £30,000 if a sufferer died before the case was settled.
The passage into law has failed fully to satisfy campaigners who argue that proper parity has still not been won for Scots families.
The Damages (Scotland) Act covers the cases of anyone dying since last July, when the bill was first raised by the Labour peer Lord Macaulay of Bragar in the House of Lords.
Bert Connor, chairman of Clydeside Action on Asbestos, said: ‘It's not full parity if some people are excluded from benefiting.’
The group is taking up the case of Christine Byers from Airdrie whose husband died only weeks before the July cut-off date.
Mr Connor said it was unfair that she be refused the help now being offered to others.
‘There is a terrible injustice about this.’
The former deputy prime minister, Lord Whitelaw, was contacted about Mrs Byers's case and wrote to the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang.
Mr Lang replied: ‘I deeply sympathise with Mrs Byers, whose late husband unfortunately died less than a month before the bill was introduced, but hope that she will appreciate that wherever the cut-off point is set, someone will fall just outside it.’
He added that it would be wrong in principle to reopen cases where settlement had already been made.
Although the main group to benefit from the new law are the families of asbestos sufferers, the reform also affects workers dying from other forms of industrial illness, nuclear test victims and people fatally injured in road and medical accidents.
The bill took five months from its second reading in the Lords to the Royal Assent, having been unopposed in the Commons.
That quick route on to the statute book was agreed after talks between Scottish Office ministers and Labour MPs.
Lord Macaulay said: ‘I'm very pleased that it has gone through so readily.
It will be a relief to a lot of families in Scotland.’
Woman to lose half damages after cut in award
By John Robertson Law Correspondent
A WOMAN badly injured when she was hit by a police car on a pedestrian crossing is likely to lose half of a £48,500 damages award after an appeal court ruling yesterday.
The sum was reduced by almost £9,000, taking it below an out of court offer which had been made to Linda Clark by Lothian and Borders Police.
She will therefore have to meet the police expenses in the case, estimated at between £15,000 and £20,000.
Mrs Clark, 41, of Stenhouse Avenue, Edinburgh, suffered severe injuries to both legs in the accident on 2 April, 1987, in Balgreen Road, Edinburgh.
The Court of Session was told that Mrs Clark was crossing with the ‘green man’ when she was struck by a Vauxhall Astra driven by PC Roderick Cooper.
It was alleged the car had been doing 50-60mph on the wrong side of the road.
PC Cooper was later convicted of offences arising out of the accident.
Mrs Clark, a mother of two, had to undergo a number of operations, including skin and bone grafts.
Lothian and Borders Police admitted liability but disputed her claim for £75,000 damages.
A year ago, Gordon Coutts, QC, sitting as a temporary judge, awarded Mrs Clark £48,500.
With interest, that took her beyond the £55,000 offer which the police force had made in June 1991 to settle the case.
Under the system of tenders, if the offer is rejected and is not beaten when the case goes to court, the side making it can recover expenses from the time it was put on the table.
In Mrs Clark's case she did beat the tender, but the police appealed the decision.
Yesterday, Lord Ross, the Lord Justice-Clerk, sitting with Lords Morison and Caplan, decided that Mr Coutts had awarded Mrs Clark too much under claims for loss of wages and the services provided by relatives when she came out of hospital.
The appeal judges reduced the award to £39,634.
Even with interest, that did not match the £55,000 tender and Mrs Clark was found liable to the police force for its expenses from the date of the offer in June 1991.
Since then, there has been the three-day hearing before Mr Coutts, and the two-day appeal.
It is estimated the police expenses will be between £15,000 and £20,000.
Call for £700,000 aid for Shetland
By Auslan Cramb, Environment Correspondent
THE Scottish Office is calling for a £700,000 aid package from the European Commission to help the Shetland fishing industry after the Braer oilspill.
Sir Hector Monro made the announcement yesterday during a visit to the isles with the EC fisheries and environment commissioner, Ioannis Paleokrassas.
The package will cover areas not covered by insurance claims and will be directed mainly at the fish farming industry.
Sir Hector's visit comes as oil pollution 50 times higher than normal background levels has been discovered on the seabed 50 miles south of Sumburgh Head on Shetland.
The surprise findings have worried island fishermen, who want more detailed monitoring to determine whether the oil is localised or spread over a wide area.
The contaminated sediment, containing the highest degree of pollution found in widespread sediment tests around Shetland, is not far from one of the most important herring spawning grounds for the North Sea.
A spokesman for the Shetland Fishermen's Association said it was hoped the grounds would escape damage as herring do not spawn until August and September.
The research vessel Scotia has been diverted from a scheduled cruise to collect extra samples in the area — the Fladen Ground, south east of Fair Isle.
The results were reported by the Scottish Office in their latest monitoring bulletin.
If the plea for EC aid is successful, it will cover costs incurred by the fish farming industry to preserve consumer confidence in their products after the tanker ran aground.
Some aid will go to paying for practical steps already taken, like fish testing programmes.
The remainder will be used to install additional scientific machinery in the North Atlantic Fisheries College in Scalloway, where much of the testing has been carried out.
Mr Paleokrassas said he could not say how much money would be granted to the industry, but added it was likely to be ‘quite substantial’.
Traveller jailed for 14 days after fine
THERE were angry scenes outside Inverness Sheriff Court yesterday when a new age traveller was given no time to pay a £500 fine and jailed for 14 days.
About 20 travellers turned up at the court as one of their group, Gary Frost, 28, father of a year-old daughter, was due to appear from custody.
He admitted three charges of illegally camping in a lay-by and two charges of attempting to pervert the course of justice by giving a false name to police.
A defence agent said Frost and his friends had intended to move on from the lay-by, opposite Invermoriston Post Office, as soon as they got their Giro cheques.
The cash would have been used to fuel their vehicles, allowing them to move west.
Frost maintained the fact that he had been arrested had stopped the exodus.
Temporary Sheriff Donald MacArthur fined Frost £100 on each charge, totalling £500.
He refused to accept a travellers' site at Loch Laggan as a fixed address for Frost, a first offender, who offered to pay at £10 per fortnight.
He gave him no time to pay and ordered he be jailed for up to the alternative of 14 days.
Frost's friends stormed out of court, followed by police who tried to disperse them from the court car park.
Three returned to the court building to persuade a solicitor to appeal on Frost's behalf.
One of them, Julie Watson, 23, said: ‘It is outrageous.
It is obviously a prejudiced system.
Gary only gets £84 per fortnight and the level of fine is ridiculous.
‘The sheriff obviously wanted to set an example and that's not justice.
There have been no complaints about us from anyone other than the police.
I don't see why Invermoriston or Loch Laggan can't be seen as a fixed address.
‘Others of our group have been in court on trespass before and the Invermoriston address has been accepted.’
Another new age traveller, who declined to be named, added: ‘We are fed up of police harassment.
We are now considering calling in other groups in Scotland so we can defend ourselves.’
An appeal has been lodged against Frost's sentence.
Fears over 1,000 computer plant jobs
By Denny Macgee
THE FUTURE of the Digital computer plant at Ayr and the 1,000 jobs there remained uncertain last night.
The US computer giant, which employs 102,000 people worldwide, yesterday confirmed that the manufacturing facility at Ayr and another plant at Galway in the Republic of Ireland, which employs 1,200, are under review as part of the analysis of the company's operations.
Nikki Richardson, manager of Digital's corporate information group at the company's headquarters in Massachusetts, refused to confirm widespread speculation in Scotland and Ireland that the review will result in the company's deciding to retain only one of the two manufacturing plants.
The factories, the largest employers in their respective areas, are of vital importance to their local economies.
The Digital plant at Ayr was recently chosen to assemble computers based on the company's high performance Alpha microchip, which is produced at an £85 million facility at South Queensferry.
The Galway plant employs almost 1,200, and is the major employer in the city.
Digital has run down sections of its operation in Ireland over the last few years, including the closure of a plant a Clonmel with the loss of 350 jobs.
Ms Richardson said the company's current strategy was one of heavy investment in its areas of ‘core competence’ while divesting itself of operations which were not essential to those core functions.
Already, manufacturing operations at some of its plants — including some in North America — were being phased out with production switching to other plants as part of the rationalisation process.
Electronics industry analysts estimate that the rationalisation programme will mean Digital's world-wide workforce being cut from its present figure to between 85,000 and 90,000.
Although Digital has never put a figure on the number involved in what it terms the downsizing of its operations, the company's president, Robert Palmer, has said that those figures would not be out of line.
Ms Richardson said that the plants at Ayr and Galway made computers aimed at different sections of the market.
‘But clearly, although they are not producing computers for the same sector of the market place, they are both manufacturing plants.’
A Dublin government spokesman said last night that  Ruari Quinn, the Irish minister for employment and enterprise, would be flying to Boston tomorrow for talks with the Digital management.
He added that the Taoiseach, Albert Reynolds, had already been in telephone contact with Digital.
Last night spokesmen for both Scottish Enterprise and the Irish Development Agency, said they were keeping in close touch with Digital over the review of their operations.
The IDA chief executive, Kieran McGowan, has been in Boston this week.
Union strike hint on jail privatisation
THE LEADER of the Scottish Prison Officers Association hinted yesterday that his members were prepared to take industrial action against any move by the Government to privatise the prison service in Scotland, writes Eric McKenzie.
Bill Goodall, the SPOA's general secretary, told a rally in Glasgow they had pledged to oppose market testing of the service which they feared could lead to privatisation.
The rally, attended by about 1,000 civil servants from all over the West of Scotland, was part of a national campaign by civil service unions against the Government's market testing programme, which the unions claim puts more than 44,000 civil service jobs in Britain, including 11,000 in Scotland, at risk.
Man jailed for offences with girls
A 48-YEAR-OLD Angus man was jailed for three years yesterday for using lewd and indecent practices to a girl and her older sister over a period of 17 years.
At the High Court siting at Perth, he admitted the crimes, which had been committed when the sisters were aged between six and 15.
It was said that the older girl, now in her mid-twenties, believed that her childhood experiences contributed to the break-up of her marriage.
Her sister, who is still a teenager, was so affected that she attempted to commit suicide two years ago.
Defence counsel said the girls' mother had no knowledge of what had been happening.
The accused had been sexually abused himself as a child and now bitterly regretted the harm he had caused his daughters.
Lord Coulsfield said the sentence would have been longer but for the fact that after the crimes were brought to light, the accused had to wait 15 months for his court appearance.
GLASGOW
Police appeal over knifepoint robbery
A 77-YEAR-OLD woman was robbed at knifepoint in her home in the Mosspark area of Glasgow yesterday by a masked man.
The man is described as 5ft 10in and dressed in a black or navy anorak and dark trousers.
Police are appealing for anyone who can assist them to contact the Pollok police station.
Policeman is fined for use of computer
A POLICEMAN was fined £500 yesterday after using the main police computer to check up on the boyfriend of a neighbour's daughter.
PC Roy McGregor then phoned the girl and said her boyfriend had AIDS — but he had got the wrong name, Kilmarnock Sheriff Court heard yesterday.
McGregor, of Carson Drive, Irvine, denied knowingly breaching the Data Protection Act by using information in the Scottish Criminal Records Office computer for other than police purposes and disclosing the information to another.
The court heard that McGregor had been caught up in attempts by a neighbour to end a relationship between his 20-year-old daughter and an older man.
In the early hours of 14 May last year Saltcoats-based McGregor phoned the Dundee home of Derek Kelbie, 44, and asked to speak to Tracey Ann McLaughlan.
Mr Kelbie listened in on an extension.
Tracey Anne McLaughlan told Sheriff David Smith: ‘He said I had to get out of the house, that Mr Kelbie was riddled with AIDS.
He said he had got the information from a computer.’
Later investigations at Strathclyde Police headquarters in Glasgow revealed that two inquiries to police computers that night had originated in Saltcoats.
Neither named Mr Kelbie but concerned a man of similar name who was listed as an possible health risk, the likely carrier of HIV and hepatitis B.
A local police computer operator, John Brown, told the court that the inquiries had originated from McGregor.
McGregor, who had been approached by a worried neighbour, admitted making use of the computer but claimed it was on legitimate police business.
McGregor, who was found guilty, has received the Humane Society Award for saving life and the Strathclyde Police Award for bravery, and will now face police disciplinary action.
Crash inquiry told of junction faults
A RAILWAY safety inspector acknowledged yesterday that junctions like the one at Newton, near Motherwell, where four people died in a head-on train crash, were unlikely ever to be approved for use again.
Alan Cooksey, deputy chief inspecting officer of railways, told a fatal accident inquiry in Glasgow that when he was first presented with a ‘thumbnail sketch’ of the proposed lay-out he had seen no reason to delay it.
He added that he had made that decision in spite of an embargo on similar junctions after the Bellgrove train crash two years earlier.
When final plans were put to him for approval, however, he had changed his mind.
A junior colleague at the inspectorate, Dr Derek Hill, had identified several similarities between the single-lead junction at Bellgrove and the planned junction for Newton.
As a result, Mr Cooksey had changed his mind.
‘I decided it was sufficiently like a single-lead junction for the public to believe it was one and accordingly that it would not be wise to proceed with the scheme.’
Once the embargo was lifted, the inquiry was told, ScotRail succeeded in gaining approval for it.
Yesterday, however, when asked by the procurator-fiscal, Andrew Normand, if such a junction were likely to be approved now, Mr Cooksey stated: ‘Looking at it with today's knowledge I would have been reluctant to accept it.
The single-track section of line would have given me cause for concern and it is one which could reasonably be removed.’
Similar proposals for another single-lead junction near Yoker had been submitted at about the same time, the inquiry was told, but Dr Hill had insisted that ScotRail justify its use.
Asked by a barrister, Alan Gore, representing one of the drivers killed at Newton, whether similar justification had been sought at Newton, Mr Cooksey replied: ‘Apparently not.’
The inquiry continues.
PAISLEY
Man shot in raid on betting shop
A MIDDLE-AGED man was shot last night during a raid on a bookmaker's shop.
A masked raider wielding a handgun burst into M and S Racing in Well Street, Paisley, around 6:30pm, and seized a three-figure sum of money.
He shot the 46-year-old man in the hand.
The man was taken to the Royal Alexandra Hospital for treatment.
His identity has not been released by police.
Solicitor is accused of shouting at sheriff during trial
A SHERIFF yesterday reported a solicitor to the Law Society of Scotland for what he said was the worst courtroom behaviour he had seen in 40 years.
Sheriff George Crozier accused the lawyer of shouting him down during a trial at Kilmarnock Sheriff Court.
He further criticised him for using information from a confidential social work report to discredit a witness.
Now the solicitor, Gary McAteer, 30, who works for Beltrami and Company, of Glasgow, faces an investigation into his conduct by the Law Society and the Sheriff Principal at Kilmarnock.
The sheriff demanded to know how the solicitor had got hold of a confidential social inquiry report.
He asked why he had continued to use it to destroy the character of a witness after being warned that it was confidential.
Sheriff Crozier told him: ‘I did say to you to stop using it.
I thought it was improper that it should be used.
On the second occasion you persisted, shouting through me.
I had to rap on the bench to stop you speaking.’
He said that if the lawyer had felt he was being unfair to him he could appeal to another court.
Mr McAteer said he deeply regretted his behaviour and apologised unreservedly for being ‘rude, aggressive and unprofessional’.
He had been defending a woman who was accused of driving a car at a mother and her two-year-old child.
She was acquitted at a trial at Kilmarnock Sheriff Court earlier this month, but the solicitor was asked to come back and explain his actions.
Sheriff Crozier said yesterday that it would have been wrong of him to deal with the matter behind the scenes.
Mr McAteer said that he felt that at times his flow of questions was interrupted.
It led to frustration on his part.
Sheriff Crozier said: ‘In over 40 years, I have never come across behaviour such as yours.’
He demanded to know how Mr McAteer had come about the information.
Mr McAteer said: ‘I was in the Sheriff Clerk's Office and asked for the defence documents.
I was handed the report.
I had sight of it for five minutes and decided to use it.’
Sheriff Crozier told him it was a serious matter which could blight the rest of his career.
WEST LOTHIAN
Police warning to women drivers
WOMEN motorists should beware of men attempting to persuade them to stop and leave their cars, police said yesterday after an incident on the A706 Whitburn-Linlithgow road.
A woman stopped and got out of her car in an unlit area at about 6:35pm on Thursday in response to flashing headlights on a white or light-coloured van behind her.
One man got out of the van and grabbed the woman's shoulder, but he went back in and the van sped off after she screamed.
The woman was uninjured but extremely upset.
Witnesses are asked to phone the police on 0506 31200.
College moves closer to aim of university status
EDINBURGH's Queen Margaret College moved closer to its aim of becoming the city's fourth university yesterday, as it won the right to run post-graduate courses, writes Douglas Fraser.
The Scottish Office ex-tended the powers of the institution to award degrees, which it won only last year, so that it will be able to run Masters degree courses from next month.
But the Privy Council Order, which made the change, did not allow a move to research programmes which lead to doctorates.
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, education minister, said the change would bring credit to Queen Margaret's graduates and to Scotland's growing academic standing.
Earlier this week, the college announced plans to extend to a second campus either in the Grassmarket or near Leith.
Its rapid expansion is causing severe strains on its current buildings on Corstorphine Hill.
Man dies after ambulance crew sent to wrong town
A REGIONAL director of the Scottish Ambulance Service, Ian Gibson, admitted last night that human error caused an ambulance crew to be sent to the wrong town in response to an emergency call from the family of a dying man.
Tommy Weir, 66, of Walker Street, in Fauldhouse, West Lothian, died last Thursday of a heart attack after waiting more than 50 minutes for an ambulance which had been sent to Falkirk by mistake.
The call, received by the ambulance service's control room in Edinburgh, was relayed to Motherwell.
But the controller there took down the details incorrectly and sent an ambulance to Falkirk.
By the time a second ambulance had been sent to Fauldhouse, Mr Weir had died.
Mr Gibson said that procedures were being examined to prevent a recurrence and the incident was one in a million.
The Motherwell controller, relatively new to the post, was receiving counselling and had been transferred.
Scots Guard jailed for pub attack
A SCOTS Guard who scarred a man for life in a row over spilt beer was yesterday jailed for 12 months.
The sentence will end Arran Duncan's military career, Edinburgh Sheriff Court heard.
A jury had earlier convicted Duncan of assaulting Andrew Clarkson by punching him on the head and body to his severe injury and permanent disfigurement.
The attack took place at L'Attache Wine Bar in Rutland Place on 29 July.
Duncan, 22, serving with his regiment at Redford Barracks, had been accused of smashing a glass into his victim's face.
But the jury cleared him of the allegation.
The trio heard how the guardsman and other soldiers were drinking in the wine bar when Mr Clarkson passed.
Duncan claimed he was pushed, causing him to drop his pint and when Mr Clarkson refused to replace it, a fight broke out.
Mourners asked to celebrate victim
By Marcello Mega
THE family of Paul Sheldon, the student murdered in Edinburgh a fortnight ago, have asked mourners attending the funeral next week to wear bright colours if they wish.
A notice in The Scotsman yesterday said that the ceremony, to be held in Balerno Kirk on Wednesday, is to be a celebration of his life.
Paul, a 20-year-old student at Newcastle College of Art and design, was spending the weekend with his family, at Cherry Tree Park, Balerno, when he died.
He was stabbed in the early hours of 6 February while walking in Whitehouse Loan with his brother, Peter, and a friend, Tom Cole, who was also stabbed.
Paul died after the attack by two young men.
Paul's brother, John, 22, said the decision to ask people to dress brightly had been taken jointly by the family.
‘He was an artist and he loved bright colours.
He had a bright personality.
He also hated tradition and didn't like to conform.’
He added that the past two weeks had shown the family that Paul had touched many lives.
‘The messages of support and sympathy we have had have helped to keep us going.
We have also been grateful for the messages of sympathy from people who did not know Paul but were moved by the manner of his death.
It would have been difficult to accept if he had been killed so young in a car crash, but when it was so senseless…‘
Det Chief Insp George Brown, who is leading the murder hunt, said yesterday that members of the public had volunteered more than 300 names of people they believed matched the descriptions of the two attackers.
He added: ‘There is a mountain of work to go through but hopefully the answer lies in the mountain.’
He had discussed with the Crown Office the possibility of releasing photo-fit pictures of the suspects.
‘It is now in the hands of the Crown, but if we don't conclude the investigation soon, there is every chance they'll be released.’
Britain urged to step up the appliance of science
By Bryan Christie, Health Correspondent
FAILURE to take advantage of science and technology has been a key factor in Britain's economic decline, it was claimed yesterday.
Sir Graham Hills, former principal of Strathclyde University, said Japan had exploited the British science base more effectively than Britain.
He argued that greater emphasis needed to be placed on the practical applications of scientific work if Britain's economic downturn were to be reversed.
Sir Graham was speaking at a meeting in Edinburgh to debate the future of science in Britain.
It was organised to promote public discussion of the topic in advance of a Government white paper, expected later this year, on the future of science and technology.
One of the stated goals of the Government's review is to establish a framework which assists wealth creation — an objective which, it was said, would find no detractors among the scientific community.
The difficulty arose in how such an objective could be achieved.
Fears were expressed by some of those present that the Government emphasis — and funding — would be concentrated on practical research for which there might be some profitable return rather than on basic research which carried less obvious spin-offs.
Prof David Glover, of Dundee University's department of anatomy and physiology, saw dangers in such an approach.
He said basic research could advance knowledge which could lead, years later, to important practical developments.
He gave as an example some of the early work in genetics which has paved the way for biotechnological developments.
The Government's Advisory Committee on Science and Technology (ACOST) has suggested splitting practical and pure research by setting up separate research councils to handle each.
Sir Graham, who is a member of ACOST, said Britain had proved to be good at increasing the knowledge base but weak at developing the technological benefits.
‘If we do not redress this imbalance, Britain's plight will just go on and on.’
He added: ‘There has been a specific failure to bridge the gap between academe and industry with deleterious effects on career progression for researchers, on industrial support for academic and basic research and, in the end, on the attractiveness of industry to the best minds.’
The meeting, organised jointly by Edinburgh International Science Festival and the scientific journal Nature, is to be followed next month by a similar event in London.
Youth gets four years for rape at disco
By John Robertson Law Correspondent
A YOUTH was sentenced to four years' detention yesterday after he admitted raping a girl at a birthday party.
Alan McKie, 18, of Knockarvie Cottage, Kirkcowan, Wigtownshire, and the victim, also 18, were both at the birthday disco in the Riverside Club, Newton Stewart, on 30 May last year.
The advocate-depute, Paul Cullen, told the High Court in Edinburgh that McKie had asked the girl to go outside, saying he wanted to talk to her away from the loud music.
McKie had become aggressive and although the girl had tried to fight him off, he had raped her before fleeing.
Mr Cullen said that police later had traced McKie, who had told officers: ‘I wish I hadn't done it.’
The defence counsel, Hugh Irwin, said McKie had been drinking.
‘He accepts that what took place was against the will of the girl and that he must take the consequences.’
Lord Ross, the Lord Justice-Clerk, told McKie: ‘This court must do what it can to protect women from men who behave as you did.’
The judge said that he took into account McKie's age in sentencing him.
Midwife's HIV status confirmed
A MIDWIFE who delivered 42 babies and was present at other births was found to be HIV positive, a health chief confirmed yesterday.
Mark Rees, of Bromley Health Authority in south-east London, was speaking after reports that the woman had died of meningitis.
He refused to confirm that the midwife, who worked at Farnborough Hospital, Orpington, for one year and 11 months, was dead.
But he stressed that the risk to patients was negligible.
‘Those people at risk number less than ten,’ he said.
‘We are aware there is a degree of anxiety among the public and so we have taken steps not only to contact those people concerned but to set up a helpline so any member of the public can ring in and have private counselling.’
A spokesman for the Royal College of Midwives said there was no single incident in the world where a midwife or doctor had infected a patient with the AIDS virus.
Health Department guidelines supported by the college say that HIV-infected health care workers could conduct a normal delivery as long as it did not involve invasive surgery.
— PA
Police hunting killer of rare falcon
By Auslan Cramb, Environment Correspondent
A RARE bird of prey has been found shot in an Edinburgh suburb.
The peregrine falcon was recovered from the Water of Leith by staff and pupils from Balerno High School.
The cause of death was a shotgun blast at close range, and police are now investigating the illegal killing.
Peregrines, whose numbers have recovered in recent years after poisoning by pesticides used in the 1960s caused a slump in the population, are given special protection by the Wildlife and Countryside Act.
The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds conservation officer for Lothian and Borders, Peter Gordon, said: ‘The wanton killing of this beautiful bird is sickening in itself and also a setback to the peregrine's attempts to recolonise this part of Scotland.’
Peregrines breed in some cities, but none has moved into Edinburgh — in spite of the ready supply of pigeons — the bird's favourite fast food.
Although there are only a handful of breeding peregrines known in the Lothians, there are sites where they have been seen regularly at the start of the breeding season, and then mysteriously disappeared.
The RSPB uncovers dozens of cases every year of illegal persecution of birds of prey on estates and farms throughout Scotland, but successful prosecutions are difficult to achieve because of the detailed evidence required.
The RSPB is concerned that persecution may be preventing their colonising the region in greater numbers.
Peregrines executing a dive are the fastest animals in the world, but at this time of year they are particularly vulnerable to attack while they are displaying and setting up breeding territories.
In 1991, there were 575 pairs of peregrines recorded in Scotland.
They tend to favour mountains, moorland and sea cliffs in the breeding seasons, and estuaries and coasts in winter.
Their diet includes grouse, ducks and small birds.
Some MPs withdraw support for Clarke
By Joanne Robertson and Peter Jones
TOM CLARKE, the shadow Scottish secretary, has lost support among his fellow MPs after controversies stirred up by his recent remarks about water privatisation and the Scottish financial industry.
While an overwhelming number of Scottish Labour MPs contacted by The Scotsman this week underlined their support for Mr Clarke, some of his original supporters indicated they would not support him in the shadow cabinet elections later this year.
Many back-bench MPs, angered at the recent press coverage of Mr Clarke, strongly backed him and urged their colleagues to end their damaging off-the-record attacks.
The MP for Aberdeen North, Bob Hughes, commented: ‘I gather some people are sniping away off-the-record.
I think it is appalling, quite atrocious — some people seem to have a death wish.’
Out of 23 Scottish Labour MPs, 14 expressed their support for Mr Clarke, four felt he should stand down and one was undecided.
Four other MPs refused to comment.
A number of MPs who were opposed to the Monklands West MP becoming shadow Scottish secretary have remained critical.
Another MP even suggested that he should quit the post before the Scottish party's annual conference in March.
However, the majority of MPs expressed their support, pointing out that he had been elected first time to the shadow cabinet, giving him a mandate and the right to the same loyalty which his predecessors, Donald Dewar and Bruce Millan, had received.
They also said that he was a  capable professional politician recovering from a debilitating illness.
One MP said: ‘It's a rotten job, under constant scrutiny and most of those who are critical would take fright if they were offered it.’
Among Mr Clarke's supporters, there was a recognition that if he did not improve his current standing then he would lose their votes in the shadow cabinet elections.
A number of MPs said they would continue to support Mr Clarke because they were strongly opposed to possible successors from the right wing of the party.
One back-bench MP summed up the mood of the Scottish parliamentary party, saying: ‘If he doesn't make the grade by the end of the year then there's no way I'd vote for him again.
But I've got a lot of time for Tom Clarke, he's a nice man and it would be absolutely disgusting if anyone tried to dump him at the moment.’
Bob Hughes: ‘Some people seem to have a death wish’
Ducking and diving in the rushes
Tufted ducks have been flocking to our ponds in unusual numbers, writes James O'Hagan
‘It was a good idea to give February just the 28 days.
It makes the winter that wee bit shorter,’ said Tam as a spiteful wind whipped sheets of water from the golf-course pond.
I had a feeling that his logic would not bear close scrutiny but was too numb to argue with the ancient greenkeeper.
We were watching the tufted ducks which made up for their late appearance this season by arriving in more than usual strength.
They are the most familiar of all our diving ducks and there are resident birds to be found in most parts of Scotland.
Visitors fly in from Iceland and Northern Europe over the winter and numbers increase greatly.
The drake is smart rather than spectacular in appearance.
It is an unrelieved black except for the white flanks but a watcher catching it in the right light might see the head has an iridescent purple sheen which can be striking.
The only other notable feature is the pronounced crest which gives the bird its name.
As with all water fowl the female is less flamboyant than its partner and the duck is sooty brown with only a hint of a crest.
Often but not always there is a small white face patch behind the bill.
Both male and female show broad white bars on the upper side of the wing in flight but several ducks display white patches of one kind or another and it is not a very useful diagnostic feature.
The scaup in flight is almost identical but although scaups are common enough around the coast they are exclusively winter visitors and not often seen on inland waters.
They have no crest.
I have never heard a tufted duck quack, or indeed make any kind of noise so I was intrigued to learn that the female bird growls.
My excuse for the gap in my knowledge is that tufted ducks are rarely vocal except during the breeding period.
I have always managed to miss the occasional pairs that nest on the Union Canal near my home and I am relying on second-hand reports when I say that the drake whistles softly to his mate who makes raucous growling noises in return.
It seems quite likely for I recall from courting days that my own amorous advances met with much the same response.
AS the old greenkeeper and I turned away, a dog and his ‘badly-trained master pulled each other into the rushes.
A flight of alarmed mallards rose and I counted 25 before a second similar flock and then a third took to the air.
Another five reluctant paired birds took off as the panic spread around the pond.
The tufted ducks gathered into a loose raft in mid-water and eyed the intruders with disdain.
Indeed, the look might have been interpreted as one of ferocity if there is such a thing as a ferocious duck.
The bird has a piercing yellow eye and I think an older generation of wild-fowlers still refers to it as the golden-eye although that name, strictly speaking, belongs to an entirely different species.
I counted more than 30 tufted ducks while at least 80 mallards were making wide sweeps round the pond before resettling.
It was the biggest influx of water fowl I can recall.
Since mallards do not dive there was presumably no great competition between the two species for food but with over 100 birds on such a small stretch of water it was difficult to see how there could be enough to go round.
We were reminded that weather which suits ducks well enough can be more than cruel to other species when we found a dead bird on the path as we turned for home.
Only when I had the body in my hand did see it was a goldcrest.
The yellow and orange feathers that form the head flash can be quite inconspicuous at times but when I spread them out with my fingers they burned like flame in what was left of the winter light.
The sequence of frost followed by thaw followed by more frost produces a particularly damaging situation for goldcrests.
Branches and trunks of trees become wet and then encased in a film of ice.
The small thin bill of the bird is the ideal tool for prising concealed invertebrates out of crevices in the bark but it is a rapier rather then a bludgeon.
When the trees are coated in ice the bird is unable to break through for the life-sustaining food which it so desperately needs.
Pond life: a tiny goldcrest watches from an overhanging tree as a tufted duck, with its unmistakeable headdress and piercing yellow eyes cruises past
New headmistress for St George's
DR JUDITH McClure has been appointed to succeed Jean Scott as headmistress of St George's School for Girls, Edinburgh.
Dr McClure, 47, has been headmistress of the Royal School, Bath, since 1987.
She is an advocate of single-sex education for girls, arguing that ‘there is no doubt that girls as a whole achieve better results in this environment’.
She grew up in the north-east of England and graduated from Somerville College, Oxford, with first-class honours in modern history.
While studying for her PhD at Oxford she lectured at Liverpool University and thereafter was a lecturer in history at Oxford University.
Dr McClure began school teaching in 1981 and within three years she became deputy headmistress at Kingswood School, Bath.
She will take up her Edinburgh appointment next January.
Dr Judith McClure
Professor appointed at Stirling
THE University of Stirling has appointed Dr Brian Murdoch to a personal chair in German.
Dr Murdoch studied at the University of Exeter and at Jesus College, Cambridge.
After university posts in Glasgow and Chicago, he joined the German Department at Stirling in 1972, serving as head of department from 1981 to 1990.
In 1989 he was visiting fellow of Trinity Hall, Cambridge, and in 1992 was awarded the degree of Doctor of Letters at Cambridge fro work in modern and medieval German and Celtic studies.
His principal area of research is medieval literature.
Airports chief John MacGregor, the Transport Secretary, has appointed Peter Grant as chairman of Highlands and Islands Airports, with a four-year term of office from next month.
He is currently chairman of Sun Life Assurance Society.
Mr Grant, who lives near Dingwall, will succeed Robert Crawford.
Airports chief for Highlands
JOHN MacGregor, the Transport Secretary, has appointed Peter Grant as chairman of Highlands and Islands Airports, with a four-year term of office from next month.
He is currently chairman of Sun Life Assurance Society.
Mr Grant, who lives near Dingwall, will succeed Robert Crawford.
Guns fail to halt hot news from the front line
Little electricity, less newsprint, its operations confined to the basement: Susan Nickalls profiles the Sarajevo newspaper that won an award for outstanding service yesterday
THE 20-storey building has been reduced to rubble, newsprint supplies are fast running out, there is very little electricity, communications are almost non-existent and every day journalists risk their lives getting the news into, and out of, Oslobodjenje.
Despite this, Sarajevo's main newspaper, situated only 50 yards from the front line of battle, has published an edition daily, except for the day it was bombed.
Miraculously the printing presses in the basement survived the blast, and with printing staff living underground more or less permanently, Oslobodjenje continues to publish 25,000 copies daily to provide the news-hungry citizens of Sarajevo with an A-Z guide for survival.
In a city without electricity or television and with only limited access to radio, the newspaper is the only source of information as to what parts of the city are dangerous, what is happening and who has died.
Depressingly, two of the eight pages of the paper, now reduced to tabloid form, are devoted to obituaries.
Sarajevo journalist Mensur Camo is one of the handful of journalists literally running around the city, dodging crossfire, to gather information.
‘I am a very good example of a ‘missed man’ from Sarajevo,’he says.
‘Everyone tries to be a ‘missed man’ as it means the snipers didn't get you.
‘The siege causes big problems for me.
With no traffic connections it's hard to reach any spot in the town except on foot, which is very dangerous.
Once you reach your destination, you pray to find the person you want to meet, very often it's impossible.
Around Sarajevo there is always an atmosphere: the voice of bullets, shelling and mortars which has now become an atmosphere of ordinary life.’
As well as contributing to Oslobodjenje Camo is editor-in-chief of Nedjelja, a weekly magazine published by the same company, but which hasn't come out for the last three months.
Camo finds the lack of basic communications a real handicap.
‘To do anything in Sarajevo takes so much time.
There are no phones and no electricity so you can't use the word processor, fax or television.
The only media contact I have with the world is via the car battery and radio which picks up Radio Sarajevo and Radio Belgrade.’
If he's lucky, once he's typed his copy he can use special phone and fax lines at the nearby headquarters of Unprofor, the United Nations peace keeping force, which also controls other necessary supplies.
‘We depend on Unprofor for oil supplies to fuel the generators around the city, but they only give small amounts and are refusing to give us newsprint.’
This is a serious problem for Oslobodjenje, according to its London correspondent, Mirza Hajrich.
‘There is only around five tonnes of newsprint left and it's very difficult getting supplies into Sarajevo.
Despite being on a three-month priority list, 80 tonnes of newsprint and diesel are still being held in Split by the UN.
Paper has been smuggled from Croatia on horseback over the mountains which is very dodgy, and for two days Oslobodjenje was printed on blue and yellow paper as the white had run out.
We can never print enough to satisfy demand but will try to keep going, printing on toilet paper if necessary.’
Once it's finally printed, Oslobodjenje faces just as many problems in trying to reach its audience.
In Sarajevo, journalists like Camo sell the paper themselves, door to door and on the street, often mobbed by news-hungry citizens.
To reach the rest of the world requires a complicated system of phone and fax connections, says Hajrich.
‘Someone takes five copies out of Sarajevo where it is faxed through to Geneva, phoned to Zagreb where it can be relayed by fax to London and it is also printed in Tuzla and Zenica.’
Through the offices of Action for Bosnia in London, the main news stories are translated to provide a regular information service to the British press.
To ensure the continued survival of Oslobodjenje, Hajrich has set up a special fund to raise money to rebuild and re-equip the destroyed offices of the newspaper.
The paper has been published since 1943: maybe the 50th anniversary this year will see it achieve the meaning of its name —‘Liberation’.
South African talks back on track
THE South African government, the African National Congress and its rival, the Inkatha Freedom Party, agreed yesterday to hold the first multi-party talks since all-race democracy negotiations broke down last May.
The government's chief negotiator, Roelf Meyer, said in a statement that the two-day meeting, beginning on 5 March, would plan the resumption of full-scale negotiations by the end of the month.
The meeting will be the first involving the big three of South Africa's 15-month-old democracy negotiations since the Convention for a Democratic South Africa (Codesa) collapsed last May in a row over the powers of local governments.
Mr Meyer said after a three-day meeting with leaders of Zulu Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi's conservative Inkatha party that they had asked for time to consult party officials before the start of the planning conference.
‘This is a reasonable request which will result in enhancing the negotiation process,’ he said.
The government and the ANC proposed after talks last week to hold the two-day planning conference next week, but Mr Meyer said yesterday that the ANC had accepted the new date.
He added that all the smaller parties would be invited to participate.
Robin Carlisle of the opposition Democratic Party said the agreement to return to talks was a major step forward for the halting transition from 300 years of white rule to a non-racial democracy.
‘This is the most important bull signal of the past two years,’ he said, adding that the government and the ANC would return to negotiations with a full commitment to succeed.
The government and the ANC agreed last week in three days of talks led by Mr Meyer and the ANC secretary general, Cyril Ramaphosa, to a form of power sharing after the country's first all-race elections, likely to be held next year.
The two sides have given different interpretations of the accord, but officials on both sides have confirmed the broad terms of an agreement to a transitional government of national unity.
The ANC said in a statement after a stormy two-day leadership meeting in Johannesburg that it would accept multi-party government for a maximum of five years from the first one-person, one-vote election.
‘In the interest of reconstruction and peace and the need to minimise the potential threat to democratic advance…we declare our support for an interim government of national unity,’ it said.
But it stipulated that cabinet decisions should be taken by majority vote, rather than by consensus as the National Party wanted.
— Reuter
The ANC and the government are scheduled to meet for two days from Monday to finalise arrangements for the planning conference and to refine details of their bilateral agreements on transitional rule.
REUTER BB IHM AET
Italian PM loses two more ministers
THE life of Italy's 51st post-war government was hanging by a thread yesterday after the shock resignation of two cabinet ministers.
Prime Minister Giuliano Amato was urgently conferring with coalition allies and state presidency officials in a bid to keep afloat his increasingly frail, eight-month-old coalition.
Opposition leader Achille Occhetto, quick on the attack, called it ‘a dramatic moment for the country.’
The departure of the finance minister, Giovanni Goria, and the health minister, Francesco De Lorenzo, came just nine days after the scandal-tainted justice minister, Claudio Martelli, quit.
The news sent shivers through financial markets which marked down the lira to five-month lows around 960 to the mark while bonds also lost ground.
Only hours before, Mr Amato had pledged his government would continue and held out the spectre of a return to the political chaos of last year when Italy was without an effective executive or legislature for three months.
Mr Goria quit after persistent slurs over his alleged role over a bank collapse 17 years ago and a bribery probe into the building of hospital in his northern constituency of Asti, his ministry said.
Mr Goria, 49, a former Christian Democrat prime minister, had long been a favourite target of opposition MPs and was unpopular in the country because of the chaotic and tactless way he introduced a hated property tax last year.
While householders fumed in queues to find out how they should pay, he was sunning himself on an Indian Ocean holiday.
Italian finance ministers are subordinate in the ministerial pecking order to Treasury ministers and are mainly concerned with the collection of taxes.
Mr De Lorenzo, under suspicion in a vote-rigging inquiry, confirmed his resignation to reporters and said it was ‘irrevocable.’
De Lorenzo's move follows a decision by his Liberal party to retract earlier threats to pull out of government unless Amato gave him public support.
Magistrates accuse him of manipulating votes in his Naples power base during last April's general election.
— Reuter
Amato has seen his Socialist party split and his government rocked by a huge bribery scandal which has been sweeping the country over the past year.
Martelli and Bettino Craxi, ex-leader of the Socialists are among its most prominent victims.
But Amato himself has doggedly refused to heed opposition calls to resign on the ground his administration is morally bankrupt.
‘Italy needs a government — it has a government — and this government will continue,’ he told parliament, after pledges of support from his main Christian Democrat (DC) allies.
Speaking in a Senate (upper house) debate on Martelli's resignation, he said a bitter election campaign now would only create a destructive climate and lead to even more confusion.
‘Italy needs to vote in a system which gives it stronger political groups,’ he added.
‘It does not need a void now.’
Russian war of words warms up
PRESIDENT Boris Yeltsin called on parliament yesterday to sack its chairman, Ruslan Khasbulatov, while Mr Khasbulatov accused the president of playing games over the fate of Russia.
The two rivals' remarks came as attempts to negotiate a truce in the bitter struggle between parliament and Mr Yeltsin's executive seemed close to collapse.
Mr Yeltsin and Mr Khasbulatov agreed on Tuesday to set up a commission to negotiate a ‘constitutional agreement’ for dividing power between legislature and executive but parliament yesterday postponed debate on the subject until next Thursday.
— Reuter
LEBANON
Hundreds protest over Rushdie
HUNDREDS of pro-Iranian militants chanting ‘Death to Britain’ marched in Beirut yesterday and vowed that the Hezbollah movement would carry out the Iranian death sentence on the British author Salman Rushdie.
About 1,000 men, women and children attended the rally, called by Hezbollah to mark the fourth anniversary of the fatwa pronounced by the late Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.
— Reuter
HAITI
Ferry toll ‘may reach 2,000'
AS rescue boats continued their grim search for victims of the Haitian ferry disaster yesterday officials said the death toll could be as high as 2,000.
The Red Cross said that as of yesterday morning 285 survivors had been accounted for, but other sources put the number of survivors at only about 150. — Reuter
TURKEY
Jailers ignored escape warning
EIGHTEEN Kurdish and left-wing militants tunnelled out of a maximum security jail after prison authorities had ignored repeated warnings of possible escape plots, it was disclosed yesterday.
Red-faced officials ordered an investigation after Tuesday's break-out at Nevsehir in central Turkey.
Six of the escapers had been facing death sentences.
— Reuter
GERMANY
Barred Baez bounces back
JOAN BAEZ, the American folk singer, was heaped with flowers and apologies yesterday after night club bouncers in Mannheim had barred her from entry on the grounds that there were too many foreigners in the clubs already.
Ms Baez was on a tour of Germany and had planned to go dancing with her band after a concert.
— Reuter
Egyptian plan seeks deal on deportees
EGYPT has suggested that Israel should take back the remaining 396 Palestinian deportees in three stages up to June in order to end a crisis threatening Middle East peace talks, Palestinian sources said yesterday.
They said the PLO chairman, Yasser Arafat, had discussed the proposal with the Egyptian president, Hosni Mubarak, in Cairo on Wednesday and Egypt had put it to the United States.
The disclosure came as the US secretary of state arrived in Egypt at the start of a tour of the Middle East and met President Mubarak and the foreign minister, Amr Moussa, in an attempt to win their support for an early resumption of the suspended peace talks
At a brief news conference before going on to Jordan Mr Christopher did not touch on the issue of the deportees.
He said the two countries had agreed to intensify their joint efforts to ‘re-energise the peace process’, to encourage the partners to return to the negotiations, and to work together to achieve an early resumption of the next round of talks.
It was not clear whether Mr Christopher had succeeded in persuading Egypt to accept an Israeli offer to allow 101 of the deportees to return home immediately and the rest by the end of the year.
Mr Mubarak said he had accepted an invitation from President Bill Clinton to visit Washington in the first half of April.
— Reuter 
On tour: security agents and officials shadow Secretary of State Warren Christopher as he takes a few moments off from his talks in Cairo yesterday to pay a visit to the Sphinx
Guerrillas wait 2l years for death row
TWO Japanese Red Army guerrillas, including a woman known as ‘The Bloody Empress’, were sent to death row yesterday at the end of a 21-year trial for the bloodiest leftist violence in post-1945 Japan.
The supreme court found guerrilla leaders Hiroko Nagata, 48, and Hiroshi Sakaguchi, 46, guilty of torturing to death 12 comrades they had labelled traitors and shooting dead two policemen and a civilian during a ten-day siege.
The killings took place in 1971 and 1972.
The court ruling was handed down on the 21st anniversary of the first day of the police siege of Red Army commandos at a hotel on Mount Asama, north of Tokyo.
‘The criminal responsibility of Nagata and other defendants is extremely grave,’ chief judge Toshio Sakaue said in his ruling.
He upheld the death sentences handed down by lower courts.
The supreme court also confirmed a 20-year prison term given a third defendant, accomplice Yasuhiro Uegaki.
A fourth defendant, Tsuneo Mori, committed suicide while in police detention.
A fifth guerrilla, Kunio Bando, was exchanged in 1977 for passengers of a Japan Airlines plane hijacked by members of the Lebanon-based Japanese Red Army.
The two Red Army leaders have now exhausted all avenues of appeal.
Capital punishment in Japan is carried out by hanging.
The unanimous ruling by the five judges on the supreme court bench brought the number of Japan's death row inmates to 58.
No-one has been executed for three years, human rights groups said.
Commenting on the snail-paced trial, the justice minister, Masaharu Gotoda, said: ‘Trials just last too long.
I must offer my condolence to the families of the victims.’
Nagata earned the nickname ‘Bloody Empress’ in the late 1970s when she proudly told the court her occupation was a ‘revolutionary’and defended her motives for killing her comrades.
Most of them died of starvation, beatings or exposure to sub-zero weather, bound naked to trees outside the group's mountain hideouts. — Reuter
On the last day of the siege, February 28, 1972, 300 police stormed the hotel held by five Red Army guerrillas, including Sakaguchi and Bando, after a long barrage by water cannon and teargas.
A stunned nation watched the battle on television.
The five guerrillas, armed with rifles and dynamite, shot dead a photographer who volunteered to be exchanged for a hostage, the middle-aged wife of the hotel manager.
Police arrested all five commandos after the gunbattle, in which two policemen died.
After details of the case emerged, the student movement never regained the broad base and wide influence it had once had on the Japanese political scene.
The remnants of the Japanese Red Army — a group of about 20 people — are believed to be living in Lebanon.
— Reuter
Japanese security experts say the survivors are demoralised, middle-aged revolutionaries without strong support or influence either in the Middle East or Japan.
Debendox scientist guilty of fraud
THE renowned Australian scientist who first linked the drug Thalidomide with birth deformities was found guilty yesterday of fraud in the published results of his medical research.
A medical tribunal upheld four complaints laid by local health authorities against William McBride, 65, for false and misleading statements.
Judge Brian Wall, heading the tribunal, said it had yet to rule on the authorities' submission that the obstetrician and gynaecologist was not a fit and proper person to practise medicine.
The tribunal dismissed all but one complaint relating to McBride's treatment of patients.
Its hearing was adjourned to let both sides study the lengthy judgment before making further submissions.
McBride, who was present to hear the findings, refused to talk to reporters after the judgment had been handed down.
The findings conclude a remarkable three-and-a-half year inquiry into complaints against McBride alleging misconduct in connection with a series of scientific papers involving tests of the antenatal drug Debendox.
Health officials alleged that he had fabricated test results and lied about the dosages of a Debendox ingredient in tests on rabbits.
McBride said in early 1980 that Debendox, a remedy for morning sickness, was, like Thalidomide, ‘capable of causing deformities in a small percentage of the embryos of women who took it early in pregnancy’.
The drug was withdrawn throughout the world soon after he had made his claim.
In June 1982 he published a paper about experiments at Foundation 41, a perinatal research establishment he had set up, which appeared to support his finding.
Four years later, however, a science programme on Australian radio accused McBride of scientific fraud and it was this accusation that eventually led local health authorities in New South Wales to begin the medical tribunal proceedings.
The hearing, which was originally expected to last six weeks, became one of the world's longest medical disciplinary proceedings, with McBride himself spending nearly seven weeks under cross-examination.
Included in the allegations were eight of misconduct in his practice as an obstetrician.
But the tribunal said only one of these complaints had been proved — a charge that McBride left a hospital after treating a pregnant woman without making proper arrangements for her further care.
This was a minor lapse and out of character with McBride's normal practice, according to the tribunal's findings.
However, in relation to an experiment with the Debendox-related drug, the tribunal found proved that McBride had given conflicting evidence about its details to two court cases involving claims against a drug company.
The tribunal also ruled that a 1982 McBride article in the Australian Journal of Biological Sciences was false and misleading in the details it gave about rabbits used in an experiment with another drug.
McBride won world acclaim in 1961 by first suggesting the widely-used sedative Thalidomide, marketed in the 1950s as a cure for morning sickness, was linked with horrific deformities in the babies of mothers who used it.
His claim was later proven and the drug withdrawn from the market.
REUTER REG MH MS
UN chief orders Bosnia relief to resume
THE secretary general, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, overruling the UN relief official for Bosnia, yesterday ordered that suspended humanitarian aid be resumed as soon as possible.
The Security Council, meanwhile, gave its 14,000 peacekeepers in Croatia the right to use force if necessary to defend themselves and extended their mandate until 31 March so international mediators Cyrus Vance and Lord Owen would have time to arrive at a political settlement by then.
Mr Boutros-Ghali said he had told the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, Sadako Ogata, to resume the aid she suspended in Bosnia-Herzegovina on Wednesday.
‘I already sent a message to Mrs Ogata asking her to resume the aid as soon as possible,’ the secretary general said.
Asked if she agreed, he said: ‘I am supposed to direct this operation.’
The crisis over aid to eastern Bosnia has delayed the peace negotiations taking place at the United Nations.
The Bosnian Muslims so far have not come to the UN and instead pleaded their case with US officials.
Mrs Ogata suspended the aid on grounds the warring parties were playing politics with people's lives.
She demanded guarantees before aid would be resumed following the refusal by Bosnian Serbs to allow convoys to reach isolated towns in eastern Bosnia.
In protest, the Muslim-led government refused to let food and medical supplies be distributed in Sarajevo and other places.
Before Mr Boutros-Ghali's announcement, Red Cross officials in Sarajevo said the city's soup kitchens would begin closing at the weekend because they were running out of food.
Sarajevo radio broadcast a dramatic appeal from civilians trapped in the besieged eastern Bosnian town of Cerska, which had been the destination of a UN relief convoy that was ordered back to base after the aid suspension.
‘Twenty thousand civilians, including 1,000 wounded, 2,000 invalids, about 3,000 children, 500 pregnant women have been under incessant shelling for 36 days,’ said the appeal.
‘They are also dying of hunger.’
While the convoy for Cerska turned around, a second convoy was allowed past a Serbian checkpoint some 20 miles from the encircled city of Gorazde but got stuck again soon afterwards in front of a huge hole in the road.
The Security Council vote on Croatia, a unanimous 15-0, came after a lengthy debate in which Russia called for sanctions against the former Yugoslav republic if it failed to honour a peace agreement signed a year ago.
The resolution for the first time puts the entire UN force in former Yugoslavia under Chapter 7 of the UN Charter which permits them to use military force to accomplish their mission.
But to get the vote of China, which objects to the use of force, the document stated clearly that Chapter 7 was invoked to ‘ensure the security of the UN Protection Force’, rather than permit aggressive action.
‘Our idea is not to change the nature of the force to move from peacekeeping to peacemaking,’ said Jean-Bernard Merimee, the ambassador of France, whose forces have suffered the most casualties in the Balkans.
‘We are moved solely by considerations of preventive security.’
The 7,500-strong European-led force in Bosnia-Herzegovina already has a wide mandate to use force if anyone impedes its troops from achieving their objectives.
But in practice force has been used in self-defence with commanders arguing there are too few troops to be involved in guerrilla warfare.
UN officials are also wary of endangering the lives of hundreds of relief workers.
The UN force in Croatia has been nearly paralysed since 22 January when Croatia's army began to bombard Serb-dominated areas under UN protection, blowing apart a year old ceasefire.
Powerless to stop the violation, the peacekeepers then watched Croatian Serbs break into UN-guarded storage areas to remove their heavy weapons so they could retaliate. — Reuter
UNITED STATES
$3.7m fine after mine disaster
A BRITISH-controlled coal company, Costain Coal, pleaded guilty yesterday to 29 charges stemming from the deaths of ten miners in an explosion and was fined $3.75 million — the largest penalty ever imposed for federal mine safety violations.
The 1989 methane gas explosion in western Kentucky remains the worst coal mining disaster in the United States since 1984. — AP
Word order
I must admit to being somewhat taken aback by a remark in John Stewart's letter about Gaelic ‘being almost completely unrelated to any of the main European languages’(Points of View, today).
To the best of my knowledge, Gaelic (and Irish) belong to the Goidelic branch of the sub-group Italo-Celtic of the Indo-European family.
As to its structure, it is not all that exotic.
It is largely analytical, as is English, with the adjective following the noun as in Romance.
Even if the word order is verb, subject, object, this is not unusual.
Indo-European is geographically extremely widespread and shows a variety of word orders.
While most western languages have subject, verb, object, others in the east of Europe are described as free.
Persian and the Indic language, on the other hand, have subject, object, verb.
So Gaelic isn't all that strange.
The dishonoured dead
THERE is a respectable case which can be made for John Major's unhappy decision yesterday to refuse posthumous pardons for any of the 307 British soldiers executed for military offences during the First World War.
Rather familiarly, Mr Major did not make it.
Instead, he talked somewhat mystifyingly about not re-writing history, not substituting latter-day judgment for that of contemporaries, and not finding any evidence that the men were treated unfairly at the time.
How can a soldier, haggard from the hell of the trenches, who was shot for falling asleep at his post be said now to have been treated fairly?
What Mr Major should have said, if he was intent on justifying his decision, was that many of the executions were grotesque by any civilised standards, but that they accorded with the code of discipline that was in force at the time.
Therefore, to grant pardons because of the harshness of the sentences would be no more rational than pardoning all those who, a century before, were executed for stealing goats or loaves of bread.
That way, at least, he might have discouraged the impression that the Government's abiding concern in this sorrowful matter has been to defend the actions of the state at their most indefensible.
He would have been better still, however, to have decided differently, and to have agreed to at least some of the cases being re-examined for possible pardon.
For one thing, this is not ancient history.
For some of the families of those who died, the issue remains entirely current.
Andrew MacKinlay, the Labour MP who has campaigned on the matter, has highlighted the case of one widow, now aged 98, who only recently steeled herself to admit to her family that her husband had been executed for cowardice.
If he is beyond recall, then she at least surely deserves a little compassion.
But the broader point is that history, if not open to re-writing, is certainly open to critical re-examination.
That, after all, is the purpose of studying it — to learn from the example, good and bad, of the past.
The executions in the trenches were a shameful, squalid episode, which Mr Major's decision can too easily be taken to endorse.
A pardon need not imply that a soldier did not desert, or show cowardice, or disobey orders.
It would simply mean that officialdom, and his country, had forgiven him.
It would also represent a declaration that the conditions and the justice inflicted on him were an atrocity that should never be repeated.
Appeal for calm as boys face court
POLICE last night appealed to outraged Merseyside communities to stay calm as two ten-year-old boys prepared to face a court today accused of the murder of two-year-old James Bulger.
The appeal was backed by James's parents.
Their solicitor, Sean Sexton, said after visiting them: ‘They fully endorse the appeal made by the police.
The last thing the family would want is for there to be any public disturbance.’
The boys, from Walton, Liverpool, will appear at South Sefton Magistrates Court in Bootle.
They are thought to be the youngest children in modern times to face charges of murder.
They are accused of the abduction and murder of James and the attempted abduction of a second two-year-old boy.
The attempted abduction is understood to relate to an incident in the same Bootle shopping precinct earlier on the afternoon of James's disappearance, involving another mother shopping with her two children.
Emotions have been running high in the community since James's body was found on a railway embankment.
The little boy, from Northwood, Kirkby, vanished after wandering from his mother's side while she was shopping in Bootle's Strand precinct.
The two accused boys have been held separately since their arrest on Thursday morning, but it is feared today's court appearance could provide a flashpoint.
James was remembered in prayers by Merseyside's civic leaders yesterday during the annual Civic Mass at Liver- pool's Metropolitan Cathedral.
Among hundreds of worshippers were the Lord Mayor of Liverpool, Rosemary Cooper, representatives of the judiciary and local MPs.
Meanwhile, police last night hit back at a lawyer's claim that they had mishandled the arrest of a 12-year-old boy who was released and eliminated from the inquiry last Wednesday.
The incident prompted a disturbance outside his home which led to further arrests.
The boy and his family are now living outside Liverpool under assumed names.
A police spokesman said: ‘We are not aware of any formal complaint being received by us on behalf of the family of the young boy.
If this is received it will become the subject of an investigation.’
— PA
Tories pledge curb on young crime Clarke aims to close gap in law on jail sentences for juveniles
By Chris McLaughlin Political Correspondent
TOUGH measures to allow courts to jail persistent juvenile offenders were promised yesterday in the start of a Government crusade against lawlessness.
Action against ‘really persistent, nasty little juvenile offenders’ was pledged by the Home Secretary, Kenneth Clarke, amid widening concern over young criminals.
With signs of an emerging consensus on law and order between Conservative and Labour, Mr Clarke signalled legislation to close a gap in the law which prohibits custodial prison sentences for children under 15.
Details of the proposals are to be published soon and will also target ‘bail bandits’ who commit crimes while out on bail.
‘I do think the courts should have powers to send really persistent, nasty little juvenile offenders away somewhere where they will be looked after better and where they will be educated,’ Mr Clarke said.
Mounting public concern has been fuelled recently by a series of horrifying assaults and murders, culminating in the killing of two-year-old James Bulger ten days ago.
Mr Clarke's remarks followed a call by John Major for a public campaign against lawlessness in which he said the time had come to ‘understand a little less and condemn a little more’.
In an interview with the Mail on Sunday, the Prime Minister emphasised that it was the victims of crime and not the perpetrators who should be shown the greatest sympathy, with a less conciliatory attitude from society to offenders.
‘I would like the public to have a crusade against crime and change their attitude from being forgiving of crime to being considerate of the victim,’ he said.
Figures for juvenile crime in England and Wales have in fact fallen dramatically in the past ten years, with convictions and cautions for boys aged 10-16 down by almost 50 per cent since 1981 and similarly for girls between 10 and 13.
Only among girls aged 14-16 have reported convictions and cautions risen proportionately.
However, police forces reject the Home Office figures because they do not take account of many cases in which a caution is not recorded.
Recent incidents, including the spread of ‘hotting’ or ‘joyriding’by youngsters in stolen cars, have taken juvenile crime to the top of the political agenda.
Tony Blair, the shadow home secretary, attacked the Prime Minister's approach but appeared to have common ground with Mr Clarke in a fresh approach to tackling crime.
He said the language used by Mr Major was out of date: ‘I can't believe that is the right approach, that is old thinking.
We need to condemn that and get on with what the public desperately wants to see…action to try to respond to what they see around them on the ground,’ he said on Radio 4's The World This Weekend.
However, he gave broad support to the proposal that provision should be made for secure accommodation for persistent juvenile offenders.
Whereas Mr Blair also called on the Government to be tough on the causes of crime, Mr Clarke conceded that social factors could not be ignored.
With Labour preparing to unveil specific policies today, Mr Clarke said that the acid test of Labour's new rhetoric and any new consensus on crime was whether the party would support the Government crackdown in the Commons.
In a move which marked the importance of crime on the Government's agenda, Mr Major signalled in his weekend interview that bail bandits were among the chief targets of the forthcoming legislation.
He said: ‘Crime is the sleeping giant of worries for most of the people out in the country and I share that view.’
The new law will carry a sentence which could average two years in jail, ‘designed not just to be a deterrent but to instil new respect for the rule of law’.
He urged parents and churches to join a crusade against crime.
Mass airlift as ‘flotel’ drifts in North Sea
MORE THAN 350 oil workers were airlifted ashore by a fleet of helicopters last night from an accommodation vessel adrift in the North Sea.
The six-and-a-half-hour evacuation operation, the biggest ever seen in the North Sea, involved 14 Puma helicopters making 23 flights.
The Safe Supporter ‘flotel’ was forced to ditch its anchors at around 2am yesterday when mountainous seas and 70mph winds threatened to send it crashing into the Lomond platform to which it was attached by a telescopic gangway.
Coastguards ordered a full emergency alert as the vessel drifted away from the Amoco rig 120 miles east of Aberdeen.
It moved three quarters of a mile downwind where it managed to hold station under its own power.
The coastguards then decided it was too risky to fly the men off the vessel because of the atrocious weather, saying the men were in no immediate danger.
But as the weather improved it was decided to airlift 380 men from the platform, leaving 117 on board.
The first helicopter left Safe Supporter shortly after 2pm with 19 people on board and the last touched down at Aberdeen airport just after 8.30pm.
An Amoco spokesman described the evacuation as a ‘controlled downmanning’ although it had been sparked off by the early-morning emergency.
The anchor-handling vessel Monica Viking was standing by to tow the accommodation barge to Norway, where anchor replacements are to be fitted.
Safe Supporter was accommodating 497 workers involved in construction of the new Lomond complex.
Craig Deans, 21, a rigger from Elgin, was one of the first oilmen to arrive back at Aberdeen Airport.
He said: ‘When the bridge went up [between the vessel and the rig]we knew the weather was pretty rough.
I was sitting in the TV room when I heard this bang.
‘She was bobbing about a bit.
Then we heard another bang.
There were some boys out there for the first time and they were absolutely terrified.’
It was Mr Deans's first trip to an offshore installation, although he has been a seaman for a number of years.
The Safe Supporter was the ‘flotel’ involved in the Cormorant Alpha helicopter disaster in March last year in which 11 men died when a flight between the rig and the accommodation vessel plunged into the sea in bad weather.
DEREK IRONSIDE Home and dry: oil workers arrive safely at Aberdeen Airport after being taken off the North Sea accommodation vessel by helicopter Floating free: yesterday's picture, from an RAF helicopter, of the Safe Supporter ‘flotel’
Police announced that youths posing as charity collectors have been knocking on doors in Liverpool asking for money for the James Bulger Appeal.
But there were no authorised house-to-house collections, said a spokesman.
The bogus collectors centred on Croxteth Park where Brookside is made.
— PA 
Three shot in IRA nightclub attack
A NIGHTCLUB doorman was in a critical condition in hospital yesterday after a Belfast shooting.
The IRA admitted responsibility for the attack.
Two gunmen walked into the Drury Lane nightclub in Amelia Street on Saturday night and opened fire, hitting the doorman in the head and body.
As they fled, two men were wounded as the attackers fired at bystanders.
One man was ‘seriously ill’ and the other was said to be making a satisfactory recovery.
Pensioner dies after attack
A MURDER inquiry was launched yesterday after an 82-year-old pensioner died in hospital, ten days after being brutally attacked in her home.
Doris Shelley was discovered on 11 February, lying on the floor of her bungalow in the Suffolk village of Martlesham with serious injuries to her head and face.
She was taken to the intensive care unit of Addenbrookes Hospital, Cambridge, where she died early yesterday.
— PA
Marketing code aims to protect public from abuse
A NEW code of practice is launched today to better protect consumers against ‘junk mail’ and telephone marketing abuses.
Any companies which seriously breach the code face expulsion from the Direct Marketing Association, which is behind the new guidelines.
It said the code represented a ‘foundation for good practice and ethical conduct…on which we can build the growing reputation of the industry’.
As well as covering elements of the direct marketing industry such as junk mail and telemarketing, the code also deals with incentives, free gifts and premiums, prize draws and competitions.
It says the terms under which consumers will receive a ‘free’ item or gift must be clearly stated, particularly where it is conditional upon ordering or purchasing some other item.
On telemarketing, the code insists that companies must ring up prospective clients at reasonable hours, do not use high pressure sales tactics and allow prospective purchasers a ‘cooling off’ period during which they can change their minds.
The code also covers timeshare operators — who need lists of individuals to mail or telephone — and members of the DMA should only supply these lists where the content of the timeshare advertising complies with the British Code of Advertising Practice.
The self-regulatory code will be administered by a new authority set up within the DMA under an independent chairman and independent members.
Established last year, the DMA represents most companies involved in direct marketing, whether as advertisers, agencies, list brokers or mailing suppliers.
Members cover a wide range of interests from book and music clubs to financial services and charities.
The association's director of public relations, Alison Slann, said: ‘This major industry initiative provides significant benefits for the general public by allowing recourse for consumers dissatisfied with their relationship with a direct marketing member company and to seek to conciliate in the dispute.’
Endorsed by Sir Bryan Carsberg, director-general of Fair Trading, the code is being launched today in the presence of the consumer affairs minister, Baroness Denton.
Britain's direct marketing industry employs more than 25,000 people and generates more than £9 billion in trade and revenue a year.
Direct marketing is anything that invites a direct response, either by phoning or writing.
— PA
Labour MP's work scheme for jobless
By Chris McLaughlin, Political Correspondent
A CONTROVERSIAL proposal that unemployed young people between 16 and 21 should make themselves available for full-time community service is to be discussed by the Labour Party.
The plan has been submitted by David Blunkett, the shadow health secretary, who is on the ‘soft-left’ of the party.
In a lengthy submission to the party's Commission on Social Justice — which has been charged with reviewing the whole welfare state — Mr Blunkett suggests further debate on making the community service scheme compulsory.
He rejects comparisons with American-style ‘workfare’ programmes, where the unemployed lose entitlement to state benefits if they refuse community service jobs.
But he acknowledges that the community service idea will create controversy within Labour.
It is likely to attract criticism from members on the grounds that it exploits the plight of the unemployed by using them as cheap labour at the same time as removing them from the unemployment statistics.
Mr Blunkett says: ‘A modest but proper wage would be paid and schemes would be specifically developed rather than substituting for existing work.
Social action would be linked with adult education in order to give a much wider perspective and provide a basis for life.
‘This would not be an alternative to, or instead of, full entitlement to training allowances and post-16 grants for education.’
In a debate in which the Labour leader, John Smith, has called for radical, practical and popular new ideas, Mr Blunkett also advocates a form of work vouchers which would entitle those on a new Work and Enterprise Allowance to ‘a certain amount of expenditure related to work activity and training’.
Such schemes would, says Mr Blunkett, provide an incentive for people to be in work and a disincentive to those who might refuse a place on a community programme.
The ideas are presented against a target of full employment, but he warns: ‘All of this is no substitute for a coherent industrial policy which provides sustainable growth.’
Maastricht rebels to fight on, vows Tebbit
LORD TEBBIT vowed yesterday that the ‘wretched’ Maastricht treaty could still be defeated in the Commons, despite the setback to the Euro-rebels over the social chapter.
The former Conservative Party chairman insisted that even if the treaty was ratified, it could be challenged in the courts.
He claimed that if it could be killed, the rebels would be doing the Prime Minister a favour.
‘If you are heading for a cliff at high speed in a motor car, it might be undignified to make a U-turn.
But it is a damn sight better than going straight over the cliff,’ he said.
Lord Tebbit, interviewed on ITV's Walden programme, denied that the political careers of Tory dissidents would be destroyed by their opposition to the treaty.
‘What Tory back-benchers should be thinking about is the mass retribution that will come upon the Tory Party as people discover the full impact of this treaty if it is ever brought into effect.
‘The exchange rate mechanism U-turn has been an immense success.
This would be another.
If we do not make the U-turn, that treaty requires us to be back in the ERM, or the son of ERM, before the next election.’
Lord Tebbit refused to be daunted by the new legal ruling that a defeat for the Government over Labour's amendment on the social chapter — which sets out rules on conditions and hours of work which apply throughout the rest of Europe — would not affect ratification.
‘What the treaty is about is pretending that the rest of the world does not exist.
It does not matter how high our labour costs are in Europe so long as we all get high labour costs.’
The treaty was based on fear of the ‘dark terrors’ of what might happen if it were not ratified.
He said there was a doctrine of fear in the Government about the treaty instead of what should be a doctrine of opportunity.
‘If you go through life being dominated by fear, you will finish up grovelling whenever anybody barks at you.’
The EC Commissioner, Sir Leon Brittan, warned that the UK would be damaged and isolated if it failed to participate in the treaty.
In an interview in Newsweek International, he said Tory Euro-rebels amounted only to a ‘very small number of people’ in the party.
‘If we do not participate in the treaty it would do egregious damage to Britain,’ he said.
‘Britain will suffer economically, will be isolated from Europe, and the rest of Europe will go ahead in some shape or form, taking decisions which affect us intimately and over which we have no control.
‘It would be crazy to reject a treaty which is positively beneficial — and one the rejection of which would be so damaging.’
— PA
New sex attack against horse
DETECTIVES were last night investigating an attack on a horse at a farm stables near Epping, Essex.
A police spokeswoman said the mare had been ‘subjected to an assault of a sexual nature’.
The horse was examined by a vet, who found no serious injuries.
Police added: ‘We are investigating to see if there are any similarities to other attacks over the last few months in other parts of the country.
It is the first attack of its kind in this area.’
— PA
Prison officers warn over ‘year of strife’
By Alan Hutchison Chief Reporter
SCOTTISH prison officers, highlighting a ‘serious decline’ in industrial relations, are warning that the coming year may be one of open confrontation with prison service management.
The annual report of the Scottish Prison Officers' Association — published today — attacks senior management and declares: ‘We can only assume that their tactic is to try to negate the role of trade unions within the service.’
The association also criticises the Government over plans to extend private-sector involvement in prisons.
An editorial in the February issue of its official journal, The Link accuses the Government of trying to destroy the prison service with an ‘immoral, unjust and unforgiveable’ dogma.
It says: ‘I am sure that there must be a right-wing think-tank somewhere, trying to work out the possibility of privatising air so that only those who can afford to pay can breathe.’
The SPOA's annual report claims a decline in industrial relations has been encouraged by senior management.
It says: ‘This attitude has been particularly noticeable since the appointment of two area directors.
Although the trade union side were furnished with a job description, we have been unable to ascertain the role of the area directors, particularly in relation to where they fit into the industrial relations network.
‘Obviously such a situation poses a serious problem in that we have two very senior members of management operating in the service without any constraints of consultation and negotiation at either local or national trade union level.
‘Given senior management's reluctance to identify the role of area directors, we can only assume that their tactic is to try to negate the role of trade unions within the service.
Quite clearly, such tactics cannot be tolerated by the association and unless things improve, the coming year may well be one of open confrontation.’
Commenting on the criticisms, a Scottish Prison Service spokesman said last night: ‘We do believe in good industrial relations and we certainly hope the unions will be willing to work with us to that end.’
Two arrested after Belfast shootings
TWO MEN were detained yesterday after gunmen wounded three taxi drivers in the centre of Belfast then sped off as police gave chase.
The Royal Ulster Constabulary refused to say whether the arrests were directly linked to the incident.
It is understood a number of weapons were recovered when the men were arrested in the Shankill Road area soon after the shootings.
All three victims were taken to hospital.
Two were shot in the back and one had a hand wound.
Their conditions were described as either ‘comfortable’ or ‘satisfactory’.
The shootings took place less than 24 hours after the IRA tried to kill a former UDR man in a Belfast nightspot.
He was said to be ‘critical’ yesterday after being hit in the head and body.
Two other Protestant men were shot within minutes of the attack.
One of them was seriously ill in hospital, the other was making a satisfactory recovery.
— PA
Five friends die in car crash
FIVE people died and a teenager was seriously injured yesterday when a car full of youngsters returning from a nightclub struck a tree in the Irish Republic.
An English-registered Ford Escort XR3 was involved in the accident at Ravensdale, a scenic area four miles from the Co Louth border with Ulster.
Firemen were using cutting equipment to remove the bodies from the wreckage.
The five who died were identified as Barry Dunne, 22, the driver, Anthony Ferguson and Paul O'Connor, both 20, Barry Cumiskey, 21, and Orla Reynolds, 19.
The sole survivor, Barry O'Shaughnessy, 19, was seriously ill in hospital last night.
Police said the six — all friends — were from the Dundalk area.
— PA
Hendry's heavy defeat in final
From John Dee Antwerp
WORLD champion Stephen Hendry suffered an embarrassing defeat in the final of the £150,000 Humo European Open here last night.
Hendry, without a ranking event title this season, was beaten 10-4 by former world champion Steve Davis.
In a season of so many disappointments, Hendry equalled his previous worst defeat in a ranking event final when he lost 10-4 to Jimmy White in the 1991 Mercantile Credit Classic.
‘I played some rubbish and Steve punished me,’ Hendry said afterwards.
‘My safety was pathetic and I made things too easy for him’.
Hendry, who compiled a clearance of 123 in the tenth frame, collected the consolation prize of £14,000.
Davis received £25,000 after ending a 13-month barren record in ranking tournaments.
He last tasted success as long ago as last January in the Asian Open.
But there was no doubting how delighted he was to have beaten Hendry who trailed 6-2 at one stage in the best-of-19-frames final.
‘He is my most dangerous opponent and I have beaten him in style,’ said Davis, whose top breaks were an 85 (twice), 79, 66 and 65 (twice).
Rail union to ballot over strike action
RAIL passengers could soon be hit by a series of one-day strikes after RMT, the biggest railway union, failed to get assurances over job losses, a spokesman for the union said last night.
The RMT executive committee gave its approval for 70,000 railway members to be balloted on 4 and 5 March over whether they will support strike action, the spokesman said.
The initial plan was for one 24-hour stoppage, but if management did not respond this could turn into a rolling programme of one-day strikes.
‘Our intention to ballot in this way was already known, but we hoped to get the assurances we wanted from British Rail.
We met them on Friday and we did not get the assurances,’ the spokesman added.
The union was concerned by the rate of job cuts, with 7,000 due by the end of next month and reports that another 20,000 could go in the following year.
— PA 
BT pledge to end costly bill errors
BRITISH Telecom has begun an exercise to stamp out overcharging amid reports that telephone bills may have been inflated by tens of millions of pounds a year, a company spokesman said yesterday.
The overcharging has been revealed after complaints from companies that their bills include lines, equipment and services not being used, he said.
The problem, which did not affect domestic subscribers, would be considerably reduced by the end of this year.
Money charged in error would be refunded.
The spokesman said: ‘We became aware of the problem about 18 months ago.
We held an investigation and realised that some of the records held by the accounts departments did not tally with the real situation.
‘We then started an exercise to clean up our records.
This is now going on in accounts departments throughout the country and we aim to drive the level of the problem right down.’
He could not confirm an estimate in the Observer newspaper that overcharging could have cost firms at least £40 million last year.
‘But we accept that any case of overcharging is one too many, and there has been failure on our part,’ he said.
Overcharging had typically arisen after firms had a new switchboard installed.
The new lines and equipment would be added to the bill, but charges might still be made in error for removed equipment.
Domestic customers were not affected because their installations were simple and there was no question mark over meter accuracy.
— PA
Shock as festival loses arts council grant
THE Scottish Arts Council has shocked organisers of a regional arts festival by cancelling its annual grant.
The voluntary committee which runs the Dumfries and Galloway Arts Festival expected to receive £8,340 for its 14th annual programme, which begins a ten-day run at the end of May.
It is due to be officially opened by the local MP, Sir Hector Monro, the Scottish Office minister for the arts, who, on learning of the decision, expressed his displeasure and promised to take the matter up with the SAC.
The SAC's letter to the organisers says the grant will not be paid because it classes the festival as ‘a local project’ and can support only ‘national and regional organisations and schemes’.
The festival's chairperson, Beryl Jago, said: ‘I couldn't believe it.
We have gone to great effort over the years to make the festival truly regional.
We run events from Annan to Stranraer.
We are very angry and shocked.’
The SAC grant is the largest part of the annual funding.
Last year, it amounted to £8,150 and this year the organisers had requested an additional £190.
‘We received a letter saying our request was not unreasonable,’ said Mrs Jago.
‘We got no hint that there was any intention of even cutting the grant.
‘The  decision puts us in a very difficult position.
Our programme has already gone to the printers.
If we do not get the grant, events will have to be cut.’
One possibility is that an £8,500 gala orchestral concert, featuring a commissioned work by the composer John Maxwell Geddes, will be cancelled.
Graham Berry, the SAC's director of finance, said he had not been involved in the decision.
But he explained that the SAC had learned towards the end of last year that its own grant was to be increased by only 2 per cent.
He added: ‘After we know what our own grant will be, we have to start prioritising.
When we respond to initial requests, we are not making promises and we are not in a position to give hints.
‘The combined arts committee defines events into national, regional or local significance.
Those in the last category are given least priority, though that does not mean they are never funded.’
The festival is supported by the regional and district councils, which contributed £14,700 last year.
The rest of the cash comes from sponsorship, membership fees, donations and ticket sales.
Sir Hector said last night: ‘This is the first I've heard of the Scottish Arts Council decision.
I will take this up with them very strongly on Monday.
It doesn't seem very clever of them to cut the grant for a festival in a region where the MPs are both Scottish ministers.’
He added that he was not responsible for the SAC, which is a branch of the UK body.
Labour denounces Treasury document
THE Treasury has asked Government departments, before the forthcoming spending round, to calculate the effects of both a 2.5 per cent and a 5 per cent cut in their budgets, say Whitehall sources.
Although this is claimed to be standard practice, Labour denounced the move last night as ‘the most serious breach yet of the Tories’ general election promises’.
The shadow chancellor, Gordon Brown, has demanded that the Government publish the document which he claims could involve spending cuts of up to £12 billion.
A row is certain to erupt in the Commons.
But Norman Lamont, the Chancellor, will insist this is normal procedure and any cuts are not necessarily on the scale of those mentioned in the guidelines.
Officials say that this is a sensible sort of calculation and exercise that should properly take place at this stage in the fiscal year.
The Government's detailed spending plans will be included in the first ‘unified’ budget next November, which will include both revenue and outgoings.
Mr Brown said: ‘I am demanding that the Chancellor publish the letter circulating from the Treasury which itself demands that civil servants plan for 2.5 per cent and 5 per cent cuts in their budgets.
‘I understand the letter asks Whitehall civil servants to illustrate what a 2.5 per cent cut (£6.3 billion) and a 5 per cent cut (£12 billion) would involve for the current spending round which has now started.
This letter is a direct breach of both the Government's election manifesto promises and shows that the public are being misled.
‘The Government's plan is simply sharp cuts in public services.
The letter would amount to the most serious breach yet of election promises and the precise commitment from the Prime Minister that all spending plans would be upheld.’
— PA
‘This new revelation demonstrates that the new spending review is not an objective assessment of needs but an excuse for deep cuts in public services, threatening thousands more jobs.’
— PA
Uncertain future for Leyland-DAF plant
By Alan Dron
THE future of the Leyland-DAF Albion Works in Glasgow remained uncertain last night, as a deal to save core operations of the firm in the Netherlands and Belgium omitted any rescue plan for the firm's British operations.
Louis Deterink, of the company's Dutch administrators, said: ‘In Britain we were unable to contribute to a solution, mainly because the British Government would not help.
In the Netherlands and Belgium the governments participated in rescue plans.
In Britain it was not possible.’
His comments sparked an angry response from opposition politicians.
Robin Cook, the shadow trade and industry secretary, said: ‘Last week Michael Heseltine said one of his ministers was in discussions with the Dutch government.
Now we know that the British part in the discussion was simply to say ‘no’.’
The Liberal Democrat trade spokesman, Malcolm Bruce, described the Government's performance as an absolute disgrace.
All is not lost for the Albion works, as it supplies axles to DAF's Belgian factory at Westerlo, which will continue in operation.
John Carty, Scottish officer for the Amalgamated Engineering and Electrical Union, said last night that it was a case of wait and see for the plant, which employs just under 500 staff after the 67 recently announced redundancies.
‘But Albion are the only suppliers of axles to the Dutch company and I don't know where else they could get them.
So if they are to remain in business, they will require Albion.’
The news that the company's light truck plant in Leyland, Lancashire, for which Albion also supplies components, will restart production today, was a further hopeful sign.
What was now required was a buyer to come along and recognise ‘the potential and engineering excellence’ of the plant.
The factory's acting union convener, Pat Burns, has already said that: ‘It would be very difficult for anybody [in the Netherlands]to switch to a new supplier short-term.
We have heat treatment facilities here that nobody else can replicate.
We have an expertise in axles, and we've overcome a lot of manufacturing problems.’
What remains uncertain, however, is how many axles will be required by the new, slimmed-down DAF operation.
Under the rescue plan, the Dutch and Flemish governments and financial institutions will pump in up to £186 million of capital to a new company, DAF Trucks NV.
However, the new company will be a far smaller enterprise than its 60-year old predecessor.
It will employ roughly half of DAF's 7,000 employees in the Netherlands and Belgium and will make 10,000 trucks in 1993.
DAF made 26,000 trucks and 22,000 vans in 1991.
The Dutch  administrators said the new company would concentrate on making medium and heavy trucks.
But it would consider signing a supply contract for the light 45 series truck made by Leyland DAF if production continued under new ownership.
Leyland DAF's British receivers said they were disappointed with the deal concluded by the Dutch  administrators .
‘Clearly we are disappointed,’ said a spokesman, James Worsley.
‘Obviously the inclusion of British assets in the new Dutch Trucks NV would have been a fast-track solution.’
The receivers will now try to sell the British assets either in one block or as separate units.
The British units have already shed 1,730 of the 5,500 workers that they employed before going into receivership at the start of February.
Pioneering operation gives baby new hope
By Gary Duncan
A SEVEN-month-old Scots baby is set to make medical history by undergoing Britain's first genetic transplant in a pioneering operation.
The procedure, to be carried out soon at Great Ormond Street Hospital in London, is the first of its kind.
It was given approval after careful consideration by a Government committee on the ethics of genetics which is supervising developments on what is now medicine's most controversial frontier.
Carly Todd, from Lennoxtown, Stirlingshire, is suffering from a condition called adenosine deaminase deficiency which inhibits her immune system.
A defect in the gene which produces a vital enzyme, ADA, means that any infection she contracts is likely to prove fatal.
In the transplant operation, doctors in London will extract some of her bone marrow and take it to the Netherlands.
There, the missing gene will be added to the marrow by infecting it with a genetically altered virus.
It will then be able to produce ADA and will be reinjected into her.
If the procedure succeeds, Carly will be able to lead a normal life, offering hope to thousands of sufferers with diseases like cystic fibrosis and muscular dystrophy who could be cured by similar techniques.
Carly's parents are praying that the operation will succeed.
They have been warned that the chances are only 50:50 but know it is her best hope of life.
If it succeeds, the seven-month old from Lennoxtown, Stirlingshire, could be the first baby of thousands to be saved.
Carly's mother said: ‘The fact this has never been done before in Britain doesn't worry me.
The decision was up to me.
‘I know exactly what is going to happen and there's no chance anything will happen to make her worse than now.
All that matters to me is that this technology will save Carly's life.’
So far ethics committee approval has been given only for the treatment of individual patients as a debate continues about the risks of genetic-medicine misuse.
There are fears that genetic techniques could be abused by parents looking for ‘designer babies’ with tailor-made characteristics, or by insurance companies and employers to screen out people whose genetic make-up would increase their risk of contracting disease.
Both the Government and the medical profession are monitoring developments closely.
Already huge controversy has been provoked by some researchers' attempts to claim effective ownership of human genes through patenting and by a proposal to set up a UK national database of ‘DNA fingerprints’ to enable the rapid identification and capture of violent criminals.
In Britain, gene transplants like Carly's have been limited by the ethics committee to operations which produce changes that will not be passed on to future generations — effectively allowing only treatments little different in ethical terms from ordinary organ transplants.
Treatments which would pass genetic changes to the children of patients are not so far permitted.
In the near future, however, the rapid advances being made by medical researchers are expected to produce an explosion of both knowledge and new treatments — leading to a series of tough ethical dilemmas.
In Edinburgh this week, the moral issues raised by genetic engineering — ranging from work on human genes to developing non-softening tomatoes — are to be raised at an event sponsored by the Church of Scotland.
English east coast hit by flooding
HIGH TIDES and winds combined to bring chaos to the English east coast yesterday, causing extensive flooding in many areas.
More than 600 people were evacuated from their homes in Norfolk and eight bungalows collapsed after the sea washed away their foundations.
In Gorleston, near Great Yarmouth, 400 people had to leave their homes and take refuge in a local school and there were also evacuations in the coastal villages of Walcott, Hemsby and Morston.
The problems spread inland when a tidal surge up the River Bure caused the river to break its banks at Acle, flooding the main A47 Norwich to Great Yarmouth road leaving it impassable to traffic.
Waters were also rising in the Norfolk Broads and there were reports of some minor flooding as far inland as Norwich, which is 20 miles from the coast.
There were similar conditions in Suffolk where police evacuated low-lying properties in Southwold and Aldeburgh and many coastal roads were closed by flooding.
At one stage the waters of Oulton Broad were reported to be rising at a rate of eight inches an hour.
In Kent the coastal water is up to three metres higher than it should be.
The sea had broken through in several places, and many homes are at risk from flooding.
Police in Essex and Kent issued flood warnings for yesterday afternoon's high tide and further problems were expected later.
On Humberside, birdwatchers were among the people evacuated from the Spurn Head wildlife sanctuary, at the entrance to the Humber, when the peninsular road was breached by the sea in two places.
But flooding in eastern England now appears to have abated.
In Suffolk there was still a little water on roads yesterday.
Inspector Tim Powell said the county was ‘just about out of the woods’.
At its worst, beach huts at Southwold and Felixstowe were swept away from their fixings when sea defences were breached.
Norfolk police, too, reported that the flood waters were abating and in Kent the high tide came and went with no need for evacuation.
In Essex, the sea breached the coastal defences in a number of spots, blocking roads but causing no major problems, said police.
Only two families, at Lee over Sands, were evacuated.
— PA 
PA Aftermath: a house in Hemsby, Norfolk, hangs over a cliff edge yesterday after flooding washed away its foundations
Klondyker drugs fuel fears of trafficking
By Tom Morton
CUSTOMS and Excise officers have found illegal drugs aboard an eastern European factory ship anchored off Ullapool, the first time in the 30-year history of klondyking that such an event has happened in Scottish waters.
There are growing fears that the cash-starved klondykers, no longer policed by political commissars from their own nations, could be used by international drug dealers to smuggle large consignments of illegal substances into the UK.
A senior customs officer in Stornoway, Donald Morrison, said that about 30gm of cannabis resin was found during a routine search of a Russian ship two weeks ago.
The service's Invergordon fast patrol boat crew, one of two teams used for intelligence gathering and interception in the north, had made the find.
‘The find was confiscated, but no-one was charged,’ he said.
‘No-one would admit to possessing the drugs, which because of the small quantity were clearly for personal use only.’
Mr Morrison said the independence movement had opened up the possibility of former Eastern bloc countries becoming big players in the drug trade: ‘Poland, for example, is now a major manufacturer of amphetamine.’
Scotland's remote north-west coast is a favourite of smugglers for landing consignments of heroin, cocaine, cannabis and amphetamine.
The aptly named Operation Klondike two years ago saw several Scots, including two Ullapool men, imprisoned for their part in bringing £100 million of cocaine into the country.
Iain Matheson, a Customs and Excise spokesman in Glasgow, said yesterday that the find off Ullapool represented a growing problem.
‘We do recognise that there is some indication of user quantities being found aboard klondykers — but there is no sign that the drug barons have begun using this means of bringing material into the country.
We are, however, very aware of that possibility.
It does exist.’
The lifting of customs regulations with the establishment of the single European market had left Scotland as the western frontier of Europe, Mr Matheson continued.
‘It is acknowledged that eastern Europe does represent, given its  geographical connections with Asia, a threat in terms of transporting illegal drugs to western Europe,’ he said.
‘It is something we are constantly monitoring through our intelligence gathering work, which is linked through a Paisley-based computer to a worldwide network of customs intelligence.’
Recently Stornoway customs officers warned Danish colleagues of a suspicious vessel seen west of the Hebrides.
At its home port, it was found to be carrying a large consignment of drugs.
Undercover and uniformed customs officers are involved in a constant process of intelligence gathering around Scotland's west coast, tracing suspicious vehicles, tracking vessels and simply listening.
Officers worked with the yachting, boating and fishing communities in a constant trawl for information.
Customs units throughout the north were involved all weekend in a patrol, interception and monitoring exercise called Operation Awake.
Mr Morrison admitted that there was only one significant find, again aboard a klondyker.
‘It was an African Grey parrot,’ he smiled ruefully.
‘They claimed it was a pet, so we didn't confiscate it.’
Gunmen target Belfast taxi drivers
GUNMEN wounded three Roman Catholic taxi drivers in the centre of Belfast yesterday then sped off in a car as police gave chase.
The outlawed Ulster Freedom Fighters later claimed responsibility for the shooting.
One of the taxi drivers was shot as he sat in his cab at a Castle Street taxi rank, at the spot where black taxis operate up and down Belfast's Falls Road.
The other two were targeted by a gunman who stepped from a white Peugeot car at the junction of Castle Street, Millfield.
They were standing on the footpath beside their cars.
Two of the men were shot in the back and a third in the hand.
Their conditions were described as comfortable and satisfactory.
Police intercepted the Peugeot and chased it into the lower Shankill, where the gunmen jumped out.
The RUC said its officers fired a number of shots at the gunmen.
A fourth taxi driver told the police he escaped a murder attempt in north Belfast a short time later, claiming he spotted a black Mini car carrying two men who pulled on masks and produced a gun when they approached his car on the Antrim road.
The driver said he accelerated and took refuge in the New Lodge Road area.
Claiming responsibility for the attacks, the UFF labelled Castle Street as ‘a Republican taxi rank’, and warned the black taxis there they would continue to be legitimate targets.
The latest shootings took place less than 24 hours after the IRA tried to kill a former UDR man in a central Belfast nightspot.
He was said to be in a critical condition yesterday after he was hit in the head and body.
Two other Protestant men were shot in McClintock Street within minutes of the attack on the former UDR man in Amelia Street.
One of them was ‘seriously ill’ in hospital, the third was making a satisfactory recovery.
— PA
The outlawed Ulster Freedom Fighters said it tried to kill the three Roman Catholic taxi drivers.
The men were shot as they waited to pick up fares at a Castle Street taxi rank.
One of the taxi drivers shot in Castle Street was hit as he sat in his cab.
The other two were targeted by a gunman who stepped from a white Peugeot car at the junction of Castle Street, Millfield.
They were standing on the footpath beside their cars.
Two of the men were shot in the back and a third in the hand.
Their conditions were described as comfortable and satisfactory.
Police intercepted the Peugeot and chased it into the lower Shankill, where the gunmen jumped out.
The RUC said its officers fired a number of shots at the gunmen.
The other two men were hit by the two gunmen as they stood on a nearby footpath at the spot where black taxis operate up and down Belfast's Falls Road.
DUMFRIES
Farmers warned on river pollution
FARMERS in the south-west have been told to clean up their act or face fines of up to £20,000.
The warning came from the Solway River Purification Board, which patrols waterways in the area.
The board's inspectors said that about 40 per cent of incidents of pollution recorded there are due to contamination by silage effluent or slurry.
Bill Welsh, its director, said regulations brought in in 1991 to give more powers to prevent pollution would be used.
The worst affected areas are to be targeted and farms will be inspected regularly.
PEEBLES
Youth accused of murder attempt
A YOUTH aged 19 will appear at Peebles Sheriff Court today on a charge of attempted murder.
Police were called to a house at Eddleston, near Peebles, early yesterday after an incident allegedly involving a knife.
A man was taken to Hay Lodge Hospital with stab wounds in his arm and later discharged.
PRESTWICK
Too few places at primary schools
A CLASSROOM crisis is looming in Prestwick's primary schools.
The problem has arisen because of the increasing school population in its private housing estates.
Recommendations from Strathclyde Region education department in a consultative document include rezoning three of the town's primaries and sending some pupils into Ayr by bus.
But parents have criticised the plans and are worried that rezoning could split their families to different schools.
Poll tax cited as dramatic policy failure
By David Scott Local Government Editor
THE poll tax has been one of the most dramatic policy failures of the 20th century, according to academics who studied the system that replaced rates.
Professor Arthur Midwinter, of the department of politics at Strathclyde University, and Claire Monaghan, a research fellow at Stirling University, point out in a book published today that the principles of the poll tax were defended vigorously by Scottish ministers until its sudden demise.
They add: ‘A little touch of the old Tory pragmatism would have avoided what is now regarded as a policy fiasco.’
Their hard-hitting assessment of the short-lived poll tax coincides with preparations for the introduction of its successor, the council tax, on 1 April.
The authors give warning that the Government has drawn the wrong conclusions from its experience of the poll tax.
Rather than moving back to a more conventional approach based on genuine consultation, it had opted for a system giving it greater control.
They strongly criticise ministers for turning the poll tax review into a wider ranging consideration of the scope and structure of local government.
The Scottish Office consultation document on plans to dismantle the present two-tier structure of councils makes proposals for fundamental political and administrative reform in a quite cursory way, they state.
‘There is no robust critique, no convincing body of evidence, no sign of learning from a decade of failure.
Strategy and reform remain trapped in the ideological confines of New Right political thought.’
The book, From Rates to the Poll Tax, describes the community charge system as being fraught with administrative difficulties and expensive to operate.
Rates had cost £14,093 million to collect in 1988-89 but in the following year when they were replaced, the collection of the poll tax and non-domestic rates cost Scottish taxpayers £23,735 million.
By 1990-91, the cost of collection had increased by 83.5 per cent and amounted to £43,558 million, or about £12 of the community charge payable by adults.
The authors argue that the notion that the single-tier local government solution is a painless prescription for improvement is reminiscent of the  original presentation of the case for the poll tax.
Claiming that bureaucratic costs are much lower in the regions than the smaller districts while areas of duplication or overlap are ‘marginal,’ they state: ‘The notion that financial savings will accrue from structural reform which break up large regions such as Lothian and Strathclyde does not merit serious consideration.’
EP The local government reforms, like the poll tax, are narrowly partisan and will require a costly and unnecessary upheaval in terms of the need to preserve salaries of existing officials or provide for early  retirement , the authors assert.
The authors add: ‘The lessons from our study of local financial reforms are clear enough.
If reforms are based on an  inadequate analysis of how the existing system actually works, if they ignore the advice of experienced professionals because of an ideology which dismisses them as self-interested, and if they rest on questionable economic and political assumptions, then policy messes, policy fiascos and policy failures are inevitable.’
Midwinter and  Monaghan warn that the Conservative centralising trend could be emulated in the proposals from the opposition parties for a Scottish parliament which might also take powers from local government.
Local government, they say, is not without blemish.
However, its record in the 1980s, in terms of financial performance, was ‘certainly at least comparable to that of central government and perhaps better’.
Until policy analysis in central government improved, with a clearer understanding of how the system worked and a reduction of the  ideological content of financial strategy, there would be no improvement in central-local relations, the book states.
It concludes: ‘After a decade of questionable financial reforms, a period of stability is what is required, not the introduction of even more questionable structural reforms, at yet more cost to the Scottish public.’
BOTHWELL
Two for court in sewage works case
TWO men, aged 22 and 28, are expected to appear at Hamilton Sheriff Court today after being arrested in connection with the discovery of a 35-year-old man's body in a sewage works at Bothwell.
Two other people, a man and a woman, have already been arrested by detectives investigating the case.
LOCH LOMOND
Man dies in canoe accident
A MAN died in a canoeing accident on Loch Lomond at the weekend.
The accident occurred near Sallochy Bay on the east of the loch on Saturday.
Two others managed to reach shore.
They were believed to be suffering from exhaustion and hypothermia.
Central police were not naming the dead man last night.
Tests show no health problems after Braer
HEALTH studies on people living near the Braer oilspill in Shetland have shown no significant abnormalities, according to the local director of public health, Dr Derek Cox.
Tests on families living within three miles of the tanker wreck, at Sumburgh, were compared with the results of tests carried out on people living 60 miles away in the north mainland.
The study, carried out by Shetland Health Board and the Environmental Health (Scotland) Unit, was set up to establish whether the spill could have long-term health effects.
Urine and blood samples were taken, respiratory checks were made and each person was questioned about health problems in the days after the tanker grounding.
According to the health board, significant differences were found between the two groups in some symptoms like eye, throat and skin irritation, headaches and nausea, which could be attributed to the spill.
No differences between the groups were found, however, in biological tests.
Toxicological analysis was also ‘extremely reassuring’.
Dr Cox said that conclusions could not be drawn until repeat tests had been carried out, but he was encouraged by the initial results.
‘I know from other work going on in the south of Shetland that 10 per cent of the residents there remain concerned about the possibility of major long-term health effects,’ he said.
‘I hope that they will be reassured by the results of the first phase of this study.’
Lord Donaldson, a former Master of the Rolls, who is to investigate tanker movements, will face demands for a full open inquiry into the grounding of the Braer when he arrives in Shetland on a fact-finding visit today.
He is also due in Orkney this morning to hear evidence from concerned councillors and officials as part of his inquiry.
More than a quarter of the islands' adults have signed a petition calling for a sheriff's inquiry into the incident, claiming that the Department of Transport's private marine accident investigation and Lord Donaldson's general investigation do not go far enough.
In Orkney the abandoned wreck of the Bettina Danica will be held up as proof that tough controls are needed on shipping passing through the treacherous waters of the Pentland Firth.
Councillors will tell Lord Donaldson that the grounding of the ship on Stroma nine days ago is a graphic example of a disaster waiting to happen.
Over the weekend all attempts to salvage the Danish cargo vessel were called off and the ship was declared a total loss.
A salvage team had battled for five days to refloat the ship using a tug whose crew had managed to get a line on board.
But their hopes were dashed when the rope snapped and the Bettina Danica was pushed further on to the rocks by the rising tide and the heavy swell.
‘She is now so far up the beach and has suffered so much damage that it would be physically impossible to get her off,’ said Orkney's Marine Pollution Officer, Captain Bob Sclater.
Orkney's Marine Pollution Officer, Captain Bob Sclater aid that the Department of Transport had been kept abreast of developments.
But an inquiry into how the accident happened would be carried out by the Danish Government's Marine Department.
Lord Donaldson is expected to be flown to the Flotta oil terminal in Scapa Flow where he will be shown a range of pollution fighting equipment which is kept on permanent standby.
Councillors and officials will tell him that Orkney could have faced a disaster if the Bettina Danica had been a tanker.
They plan to point out that tanker movements to and from the terminal are carefully controlled.
But they are concerned about the danger posed by tankers — and other ships carrying dangerous cargos — on transit through the Pentland Firth.
Councillors and officials will demand that such ships should have a mandatory duty to contact the Orkney Harbour's Department and that the Government should pay for a tug to escort them through the Pentland Firth.
Lord Donaldson: fact-finding trip to Orkney and Shetland
Island sold after 12 years on market
VAILA, a small Shetland island which has been on the market for more than 12 years, has been sold to a couple in London.
The 800-acre island and its historic hall, parts of which date back to 1696, were sold by Henry Anderton, whose family have owned the island for more than 100 years.
Mr Anderton said he was disappointed that he could not afford to keep Vaila, adding that various attempts had been made to interest public and environmental agencies to buy it for the enjoyment of the public.
The new owners, Richard Rowlands, a solicitor, and Derota Rees-Lik, do not intend to live on the island but have said they will spend as much time there as possible.
They said they were conscious of their extreme good fortune in becoming custodians of the island and intended to preserve its traditions and beauty.
Fears over cuts in rail services after sell-off
By Alan Forbes
COMMENTS by a Government minister have raised fears that evening and weekend rail services in Strathclyde may be cut if privatisation goes ahead, according to Brian Wilson, Labour's Scottish transport spokesman.
Mr Wilson said yesterday that comments by the rail minister, Roger Freeman, completely contradict the impression given by the Transport Secretary, John MacGregor, that private operators would be obliged to take over the existing timetable.
Mr Freeman last week told the committee of MPs considering the Railways Bill that they will not ask private operators to guarantee off-peak services in areas such as Strathclyde covered by passenger transport executives.
He told the committee: ‘The number of trains run in the off-peak must depend in the last instance on the views of the operator.’
Private operators must be offered flexibility, he added.
Challenged by Mr Wilson on whether his comments applied to the whole network, Mr Freeman replied: ‘The concept of peak and off-peak relate primarily to commuting services, including those in PTE areas…where little use is made of off-peak services, so it is not reasonable to stipulate hard and fast services.’
Mr Wilson said yesterday that Mr Freeman's comments are grim news for evening and weekend passengers: ‘The cat is out of the bag.
At present Strathclyde PTE and ScotRail cross-subsidise to maintain off-peak services but a private operator looking for maximum profit would do no such thing.
‘Mr Freeman has now made clear that the Government does not even intend to ask them to.
‘Places like Ayr, Largs and Helensburgh which currently have trains until late at night and weekends would be cut down to peak-hour commuter services because they are the only ones that make money.
‘Forget taking the train for an evening at the theatre or the weekend family excursion into the country.
‘There must be a mighty uproar from commuter areas to end this threat to off-peak rail services.’
Charles Gordon, Strathclyde's vice-chairman of roads and transportation, said Mr Freeman's comments underlined the good reasons for the regional council's refusal to invest further in rail unless it was assured the PTE was involved in franchising services.
He added that if Strathclyde PTE did not continue to have the power to assemble a package of services which involved busy services cross-subsidising off-peak ones, the council would have to spend much more money if it wanted to maintain off-peak services.
Malcolm Waugh, Strathclyde's chairman of roads and transportation, is seeking a meeting with Mr MacGregor to discuss the PTE's future role.
Brian Wilson: ‘The cat is out of the bag’
Eight men charged over brick incident
POLICE hunting the person who almost killed a policeman when a brick was thrown through his patrol car windscreen charged eight men last night.
Northumbria police said the eight will appear before magistrates in Sunderland, Tyne and Wear, this morning charged with causing criminal damage with intent to endanger life.
PC John Robinson, 37, suffered multiple skull fractures and brain damage in Wednesday's incident.
The names of the accused have not been released.
The eight men were detained along with two women after a series of dawn raids on Saturday in the Pennywell area of Sunderland.
The two women were later freed after questioning.
— PA
Kirk calls school proposals valueless
PLANS for parents to be given details of schools' truancy rates and costs and the work destinations of leavers have been condemned by the education committee of the Church of Scotland, writes Gary Duncan.
The Scottish Office proposals to publish the information as part of a policy to tell parents more about schools are at best valueless and at worst dangerous, the committee says.
In its response to draft Scottish Office regulations on information for parents, the church committee welcomes a significant improvement in schools' willingness to respond to parents' needs.
But it argues ministers should hesitate before going further with the publication of information that could be misused in the same way as it says  occurred with published exam results.
The church's response says that by its own admission the Scottish Office Education Department recognises the inadequacies of its proposals.
It says such self-confessed limitations should make the department hesitate before going further.
Salvage delay thwarts police
A POLICE force's attempt to raise a wrecked boat is being frustrated by a salvage firm's long delay in getting to work.
The delay also means increasing distress for relatives of the lost crew, Devon and Cornwall police say.
The trawler, Pescado, sank off the south Cornish coast two years ago with the loss of six lives and a coroner ordered an investigation.
Devon and Cornwall Police decided to raise the vessel and set aside £250,000 for the salvage operation, the first by a UK force.
Swan Salvage, of Peterhead, claims the weather has not been favourable to attempt to raise the 60-ton Pescado from 90ft of water.
A police spokesman, Roger Busby, said yesterday: ‘We are becoming increasingly frustrated that ideal weather conditions do not appear to ever occur.’
Swan's owner, Tom Chalmers, said: ‘I am doing it as I see fit.
When the weather is suitable I will go out.’
The trawler went down after sailing from Falmouth in February 1991.
Her owner, Alan Ayres, claimed she was hit by a submarine, but the Ministry of Defence denies this.
— PA
Tidal current turbine to undergo trials
By Auslan Cramb Environment Correspondent
A NOVEL method of capturing pollution-free energy from the sea will be tested by a consortium which includes Scottish Nuclear.
The British team aims to develop the world's first tidal current turbine, similar in principle to a windmill.
It will be driven by rising and falling tides and will be launched for sea trials this summer.
The project involves the development of a ten kilowatt turbine, with a four metre rotor, which could be the forerunner of a larger machine.
Scottish Nuclear, working with the NEL, the engineering research lab at East Kilbride, and IT Power, a renewable energy consultancy company, claims that the device could avoid the huge civil works associated with tidal barrage schemes and cause less interference in the marine environment.
Electricity would be brought ashore by marine cables.
British morale hits rock bottom
MORALE in Britain is so low that nearly half the population would emigrate if they could, according to a survey.
Researchers interviewed 1,030 adults across the country and found that 49 per cent would like to settle abroad if they were free to do so, compared with 36 per cent in 1973 and 28 per cent in 1955.
The Gallup survey, commissioned by the Daily Telegraph, also found that more than a third could not think of a single thing about Britain of which to be proud.
Just one in ten of those questioned felt that Britain today was, in the Prime Minister's words, a country ‘at ease with itself’.
There has been a marked loss in confidence in virtually all British institutions over the past decade, particularly the press, the Church, the legal system and parliament.
The press replaced trade unions as the institution in which the public had least confidence.
But the public still had a good deal of confidence in the armed forces and the police, although both were held in less regard than they were ten years ago.
— PA
KIRKCALDY
Top trophy for young pianist
ROBIN MICHAEL, 16, a pianist from Kirkcaldy, has been awarded Radio 2's John Dankworth Trophy for the most promising musician.
He played his father's composition, Soul Veronique, written for the Fife Youth Jazz Orchestra.
Illegal child labour ignored, says report
By Audrey Gillan
A BLIND eye is being turned to the number of children who are working illegally or are seriously underpaid, according to a report which is published today.
The Government has been criticised for its complacent attitude to the protection of children and young people at work in a joint report by the Children's Rights Development Unit in Scotland and the Scottish Low Pay Unit.
The report is in response to a Government consultation document on the European Commission draft directive on the protection of young people at work.
The Government claims that measures in the directive — including the protection of the health and safety of young people under 18 who are in work — are not needed because existing legislation is satisfactory.
It is argued that the measures would restrict training and job opportunities.
However, the report says that a high percentage of children are working in the UK, many illegally.
It points out that legislation designed to protect under-16s is not being monitored or enforced and argues that the draft directive presents an opportunity to carry out an urgent review of provision.
In 1991 research in Strathclyde showed that over 49 per cent of children surveyed were working illegal hours and that 26 out of 65 children were working in prohibited environments or illegal jobs.
About one third of children started work before the legal starting time of 7am, with some starting before 4am.
Milk and newspaper delivery jobs were the most common.
‘Young workers have to take most of the risks and face the unrestricted and poor employment protection of adult workers, but get few of the benefits as most have no recourse to social protection when employment or training places are not available to them,’ the report says.
‘It could be argued that this situation amounts to a cynical manipulation of a group which the Government and employers recognise are more vulnerable than most.
‘The removal of Wages Council protection for under 21s through the Wages Act 1986, combined with the [removal of]right to income support for most 16- to 17-year-olds, has contributed to the decline of young workers’ wages compared to those of adult workers.’
Alison Cleland, a development worker with the Children's Rights Development Unit, said that existing legislation had been shown to be completely ineffective in safeguarding young workers' welfare.
‘As a result they are placed at risk.
The Government's denial of the need for the draft directive is a clear breach of the welfare principle enshrined in the UN convention.’
The report recommends:
The immediate implementation of the Employment of Children Act 1973, which would standardise rules on the employment of under-16s throughout the UK.
Monitoring work patterns, pay and conditions.
The introduction of minimum pay protection for young workers and an upper limit on the number of hours that 16 to 18-year-olds can work.
Employment laws should be amended to include young workers who are barred from most employment rights for at least two years.
‘Young workers have to take most of the risks and face the unrestricted and poor employment protection of adult workers, but get few of the benefits’
Young workers and the law
Legal protection exists for working children — but employers flout it.
Audrey Gillan reports
THE law stipulates that on school days people under the age of 16 can work only a maximum of two hours.
That work should not be done before 7am or after 7pm or during school hours.
Children should also work for only one hour before they start school.
On non-school days children should not work any more than five hours if they are under 15 and on Sundays children can only work two hours.
Children under 16 are not allowed to work in mines, quarries or in manufacturing or construction industries.
Nor can they work in bars or licensed canteens.
Morag Gillespie of the Scottish Low Pay Unit argues that if the 1973 Employment of Children Act was properly implemented, it would provide uniformity throughout the UK and its results would hopefully limit the exploitation and abuse of children by their employers.
These 14-year-olds are doing just some of the variety of jobs done by teenagers that are either illegal or just terribly underpaid.
One boy on a milk round works from 5am till 7am and is paid £1.05 an hour.
A girl selling newspapers in the street until 10pm on a Friday and Saturday buys them for 17.5p and sells them for 22p (1990 figures).
To make a profit she must sell every copy — she paid the money up front so if she didn't she would incur a loss.
A young girl who works in a pet shop for 7 hours on a Saturday is paid 66p an hour.
A boy working on a market stall from 6:30am till 7pm on a Saturday and Sunday is paid £20 for the whole weekend.
This is 78 pence an hour.
Today's report is also concerned by the financial limbo to which 16 and 17-year-olds are confined by the benefits rules.
Ms Gillespie believes there is a need for extra protection for this age group at work, particularly where long hours are concerned.
She says: ‘They are absolutely ripe for exploitation and are working long hours for paltry wages.’
During research the Scottish Low Pay Unit found endless cases in which 16 to 17-year-old workers were exploited.
They include a 17-year-old shop assistant being paid £50 for a 45 hour week; an apprentice panel beater working 44 hours for £42.50 a week; and a 17-year old secretary working 45 hours a week for a plant hire firm for a gross wage of £50.
New Seacat ferry jobs go to Irish
ALL the jobs on the second hoverspeed ferry between Stranraer and Belfast are going to the Irish.
Seacat Scotland's plans were disclosed when it sent an information pack on the jobs to Barbara Fonte Garcia, of Dalbeattie, Dumfries and Galloway.
When she followed the instructions and applied for a job interview she was told: ‘Sorry, we are only recruiting staff from Ireland.’
Ms Garcia, 23, applied to Seacat for one of the 55 jobs being created with the introduction of its second ferry, following on the success of a service started last summer.
She wrote to the company at Stranraer and was sent the pack which listed 55 jobs from 34 general on-board and shore staff to three senior craftsmen, with wages ranging between £9,360 and £13,000.
‘The pack told me to apply to John Burrows, the customer services manager, to reserve an interview time, if I was still interested in a position with Seacat,’ said Ms Garcia, who has worked in the travel business since leaving school.
‘I was astonished when I was told they didn't want anyone from Scotland for they were only taking on Irish staff.
They told me I should not have got the pack in the first place.
‘I think it is discrimination against the Scots and should not be allowed in this day and age.’
She was told that more than 3,000 people had applied for the jobs.
Seacat is part of Sea Containers Ferries Scotland.
It started in competition with Sealink Scotland, operating three ships from Stranraer, and P&O European Ferries which sail from Cairnryan.
Interviews for the jobs started at a Belfast hotel last Thursday and will continue until tomorrow.
A company spokesman said: ‘There is no one available to comment on the matter.
They are all away doing the job interviews.’
Rushdie in plea for meeting with Major
SALMAN RUSHDIE made a dramatic television appeal yesterday for a meeting with the Prime Minister to fortify his campaign to end the fatwa sentence of death imposed on him by Iranian fundamentalists.
The author, who has been in hiding for over four years, said: ‘It is crucial to show Iran that we mean business.
And nothing will do that other than the head of the Government standing next to me saying: ‘We will protect our citizens’.’
Mr Rushdie said that such a meeting would be a ‘symbolic gesture’, adding that a request for a meeting had formally gone in and was on the table.
The sentence of death was imposed on him by Ayatollah Khomeini for alleged blasphemy in his book The Satanic Verses.
Mr Rushdie says the bounty on offer for his assassination was between one million and three million dollars.
On the BBC's Breakfast With Frost programme, Mr Rushdie said: ‘The people who analyse these threats tell me that the level of threat has never diminished.
It has been constant throughout four years.’
‘The threat that has obliged me to lead this rather bizarre life has been international terrorism sponsored by the Iranian Government and hit squads, using embassies here and in Europe as resources.
That is the danger.’
He said the Iranians had been carrying out assassinations, including that of his own Japanese translator.
‘The only way this is going to end is by political resolution and that is what we have been campaigning for.
‘What is very important is to turn the screw on Iran, to make it clear to Iran that if it wants to be treated as an equal member of the community of nations, it has to stop trying to murder their citizens.
That is the minimum term.’
Mr Rushdie said that leaders of Labour parties elsewhere in the world had declared overt passionate support for this issue.
‘It is bizarre that, speaking as a Labour voter, I have been having to heap praise on the Conservative Party, which I have opposed all my political life — and here is this remarkable silence from the Labour Party.’
He said that individual Labour MPs had helped him but ‘the party as a party has no position on this matter.’
Mr Rushdie added: ‘In any political issue silence is always the biggest mistake you can make because it gives the initiative to the adversary.
‘It allows your enemy to set the terms of the debate.
You find yourself in defensive postures rather than fighting back.
I have decided to fight back.’
He was asked if he wanted to embark on a new life with a different identity.
He replied: ‘No because I am an innocent man, a free citizen in a free country being attacked by a terrorist state.
‘It is not for me to make reparation.
I don't want somebody else's life.
I would stop being a writer.
I would have some idiot life in another country because some medieval cleric in Iran decided I had to be killed.’
Later, Paddy Ashdown, the Liberal Democrat leader, called on the Prime Minister to agree to a personal meeting with Mr Rushdie.
He said: ‘This would be important confirmation of British determination to see free speech upheld and our citizens protected.
‘The international  community should know that we stand firm on these principles.’
A Downing Street spokeswoman said later they had not received a formal request from Mr Rushdie for a meeting.
It was pointed out that he met the Foreign Office Minister, Douglas Hogg, earlier this month.
— PA 
Salman Rushdie: ‘Crucial to show Iran we mean business’
Prints show Dunfermline as holiday camp for pilgrims
By James Rougvie
DUNFERMLINE'S heyday as a bustling medieval holiday camp for saints and sinners — before the storm of the Reformation razed its holy places — has been recreated.
In the year of the 900th  anniversary of the death of Queen Margaret, who laid the foundations of the great abbey and raised the town's status from a crude settlement to an important station on the pilgrim map, Dunfermline District Council has commissioned two important research prints from Scotland's only historical illustrator, Jurek Putter, a St Andrews artist.
Both are drawn from archival and historical records and show the High Street as it would have been in 1540, at the close of the last independent century of Scottish culture and accomplishment when 22 kings, queens and princes lay undisturbed and revered by pilgrims in the abbey.
Less than 100 years later, zealots of the Reformation would have wrecked the abbey and plundered the Royal tombs and fire would have destroyed more than 200 of the 247 houses in the town.
Mr Putter last year completed the definitive print of St Margaret, the Hungarian princess who civilised Malcolm Canmore, brought European culture to Scotland and whose court was based at Dunfermline.
It was her canonisation that brought the town to prominence and attracted pilgrims from all over Europe to her shrine.
Visits to Dunfermline became holy days, later corrupted to holidays, and the town would have resembled a teeming holiday camp, says Mr Putter, with bed and breakfast the biggest industry.
The first print, 25 years in the planning, has a sacred theme.
Although many of the town's historical records were plundered or destroyed during the Reformation in an effort to erase Popish imagery, Dunfermline as a See of St Andrews would have followed closely that town's model.
Hence the streets are paved with deep slabbed drains, houses plastered with stencilled reliefs of the saints and the old Mercat Cross distinguished from the present day Cross by Christ crucified in place of the later unicorn at the top.
The first print will be finished next month and a secular print will take shape showing Dunfermline at Martinmas, showing the public enjoying the last feast day before winter.
Both prints will be erected in Dunfermline's pedestrianised High Street.
Anti-fur campaign uses shock tactics on fashion industry
AN assault on the fur trade starts today.
Respect for Animals, a recently formed pressure group, has chosen a hard-hitting anti-fur campaign as its first move.
A ten-minute video, called Fur: The Bloody Choice, featuring grotesque and secretly taken footage, is designed to shock people into action.
The film stars the actress, Alison Steadman, and shows the conditions for animals kept in fur farms, their slaughter and their skinning as well as the pain suffered in trapping in the wild.
It is to be sent to fashion designers, shops, writers and publications who back the trade.
Respect for Animals also calls for an immediate ban on fur farming, an end to fur sales within five years and for people to show their feelings if they see somebody wearing a pelt in the street.
At the campaign launch Carol McKenna said: ‘Eight out of ten people in this country believe the fur trade should be banned worldwide.
If so, they should show their dislike at seeing a person wearing a fur.
‘We don't want people to be abused or intimidated but just to be made aware of the fact that if they are wearing a fur coat the public have got a right to say something.’
The decision to focus on the fur trade follows the demise last month of the pressure group Lynx, which went into voluntary liquidation after losing a libel case against a mink farmer.
It became famous for its marketing campaign — including blood trailing from a fur on a catwalk — which featured work by big names such as Twiggy, David Bailey and Linda McCartney.
Respect for Animals hopes to take up where Lynx — successful in forcing half of Britain's fur farmers out of business and making fur unfashionable — left off.
The new organisation is concerned by the increase in 1992 for the first time in six years of fur imports to £22 million, the equivalent of two million animals, and a renewed popularity in fur clothing or trimmings.
A poster campaign and cinema commercials are to follow shortly.
The message will also be taken to foreign fashion capitals.
— PA 
Alison Steadman: plea against slaughter of animals
Top fashion designers basque in catwalk glory for a worthy cause
SATIN basques, biker jackets and chunky platforms meet high heels and classic cream and black numbers in a glittering charity fashion extravaganza beginning in Edinburgh's Assembly Rooms tonight, writes Alison Daniels.
Organised by Edinburgh University students, the second Student Cancer Appeal fashion show is being held to raise money for research into testicular cancer at the Royal Marsden Hospital in Sutton and the Marie Curie Cancer Centre in Edinburgh.
Pictured above are a selection of clothes from Cruise Clothes, but highlights of tonight's show include a range of items from the 1993 spring and summer collections of top designers Armani, Versace, Alberta Ferretti, Jasper Conran and Katherine Hamnett.
Brides-to-be can also catch a glimpse of a specially commissioned wedding dress.
Masterminding the event is an art history student, Daniel Marks, who successfully fought his way back to health after being diagnosed as having testicular cancer at the age of 17.
For over a year he underwent chemotherapy at the Royal Marsden Hospital before a scan revealed there was no trace of cancer left in his body.
A dedicated fashion enthusiast and would-be fashion journalist, he said the show promises to be energetic, with choreographed catwalk action, different themes and music.
Tickets for the show, priced £18 or £8, are available from Annabelle Oakley, 1 Broughton Place, Edinburgh, EH1 3RL (tel: 031-557 1718), or on the door.
Ice-fishermen follow an independent line on the Dnepr
All kinds of people enjoy the cold comforts of ice-fishing, and some may even catch a salmon, James Meek discovers in Kiev
WHAT's worse than standing on the ice in the middle of a river when the temperature is below freezing?
I'll tell you: standing on the ice in the middle of a river when the temperature is above freezing.
No point asking Anatoliy, the young ice-fisherman, by what traditional, weatherwise means he tells when it's safe to go out on to the Dnepr.
‘I know it's safe when there are lots of people on the ice already,’ he explains.
He once saw someone fall in.
A man was walking his dog across the ice from the high flats on the left bank, and crash — in he went.
The dog tried to pull him out and fell in too.
Eventually the pair managed to save themselves.
‘The weather was just like today,’ said Anatoliy cheerfully.
Sixty-six-year-old Yevgeniy, whose regular excursions on to the frozen river were interrupted only by deportation to Germany when the Nazis came swarming through Kiev, knows how to test the ice.
‘You take your fisherman's spike and drive it hard into the ice in front of you.
If the ice doesn't crack, you're safe to move forward.’
The spike is the essential tool for the ice fisherman.
It is a wooden shaft about a yard long, with a four-sided stainless steel head riveted to the end, tapering to a sharp point.
No saws are involved.
To make a hole in the ice you just drive the spike through it until water bubbles up.
The ice needs to be at least 2in thick; the hole only needs to be a couple of inches wide.
The spike is sufficient for all but the thickest ice, which requires a tool like a giant auger.
The small size of the holes can cause problems if a fat fish is hooked.
Then the fisherman finds himself desperately widening the hole with the point of the spike while trying to keep a grip on the rod with the other hand.
The rod is simple, often home-made: a handle, a reel and 8in of wood or plastic.
Nothing fancy is looked for in the way of bait and tackle: it's the basic hook, line and worm.
After that it's a question of technique — some fishermen are jigglers, others believe in stillness, patience, and resistance to cold.
Anatoliy, a carpenter, had four layers of clothing topped off with a quilted cotton work-jacket and trousers.
He had a red fox-fur hat with the ear-flaps set to the flying position, felt overboots with rubber soles, and no gloves.
The baitbox is crucial.
That's what the fisherman sits on.
It's a wooden box with a folding lid, about 6in by 12in by 18in.
Inside his, Anatoliy had his catch for the day, a couple of handfuls of little silver fish, still slithering, with red around the gills and streaks of gold abaft their fins.
They were destined to feed his cat.
Under the ice there are perch, bream, the carp-like sazan, the big sheat-fish and the occasional pike and salmon.
Pollution and radiation be damned; folk eat what they catch if it's big enough.
Anatoliy, who has lived in Kiev for only three years, claimed a 9lb salmon as his best catch.
Who knows?
Stories are part of the game.
He said a 130lb sheat-fish was hauled out of the Dnepr one time.
Yevgeniy doesn't claim ever to have hooked a whopper, but in the good old days, he said, the living was easy, the fish popped out of the ice.
‘It was enough to fish for an hour and then go home.
It wasn't that you really needed the fish.
You did it just for the delight of fishing.’
Things have changed, however.
It's not just industrial pollution and radiation from Chernobyl, 50 miles upstream.
It's the dams and hydro-electric barrages which have been built along the Dnepr, down to the Black Sea.
Ice-fishing is a solitary pastime.
Typically the fisherman is a lone black smudge hunched on his bait-box for hours at a time.
It has always been free — free of charge, free of licence, free of society, free of the state, free of relatives.
And what other sport enables you to do the miraculous, to walk on water?
ANC shifts on embargo as coloureds join cabinet
From Fred Bridgland, Johannesburg
ANTI-apartheid supporters around the world were told to prepare for the lifting of international sanctions against South Africa during an African National Congress conference yesterday.
Earlier, as the government and ANC took steps at the weekend to prepare for South Africa's first all-race elections, President FW de Klerk gave cabinet posts to non-whites for the first time in South Africa's history and got rid of white ministers said to be reluctant to back his sweeping apartheid reforms.
The two ‘coloured’ politicians and one Indian joining the cabinet are Abe Williams, as sports minister, Jac Rabie, as family planning minister, and Bhadra Ranchod, as tourism minister.
All are members of the coloured and Indian houses in the three-chambered parliament.
Mr de Klerk said he had considered appointing a black minister, but had concluded that such a step would be counter-productive at the current delicate stage of negotiations.
He added: ‘I look forward to the day when South Africa will have a fully representative government.’
Cabinet members retired in the reshuffle were the defence minister, Gene Louw, home affairs minister, Louis Pienaar, land affairs minister, Jacob de Villiers, and tourism minister, Org Marais.
‘Their decision to retire is selflessly motivated by the recognition that we are now entering a new and election-oriented phase in the political process,’ Mr de Klerk said.
The ANC move to end sanctions came at its solidarity conference in Johannesburg attended by 500 anti-apartheid activists from all over the world.
The ANC wants its foreign supporters to ensure that once sanctions are declared dead there will be a concerted campaign to make certain that they are actually lifted at all levels in all countries.
Faced with a collapsing economy and the prospect of becoming the major player in a new government next year, the ANC's national executive committee said it would call for an end to economic sanctions as soon as there was agreement with the government on dates for an all-racial election and for the establishment of an interim government of national unity.
A reconvened multi-party constitutional conference early next month is expected to leap these hurdles quickly.
The ANC believes the reform process is well-nigh irreversible and is is preparing a spectacular international campaign to harness the energy of the anti-apartheid lobby to a programme of national reconstruction.
It is keen that World Bank aid should arrive as soon as possible.
The ANC president, Nelson Mandela, who has been ordered to take two weeks of complete rest in advance of the election campaign, arrived unexpectedly at the conference.
He offered a hand of reconciliation to whites and said it was the ANC's job, as the country's biggest political force, to address national unity and nation building.
‘What we can certainly not be are black racists who turn their back on the philosophy which has inspired the ANC since its birth,’ he said.
Arabs are keen on new talks, US says
ARAB leaders are keen for Middle East talks to start again soon, the US secretary of state, Warren Christopher, said yesterday.
Mr Christopher said at a joint news conference in Damascus with Syria's foreign minister, Farouq al-Shara, after talks with President Hafez al-Assad: ‘President Assad emphasised his commitment to the process of direct negotiations that were launched in Madrid and welcomed the US role as a full partner in the process.’
On earlier stops in his Middle East tour, Mr Christopher won support from Egypt and Jordan for an early resumption of talks.
Negotiations to overcome generations of hatred and conflict between Arabs and Jews stalled in December, when Israel expelled 415 Palestinians which it said had links to militant Muslim fundamentalists.
The Arab states have made it clear to Mr Christopher that the mass deportation remains a problem.
Mr Shara said Damascus put proposals to Mr Christopher on resolving the fate of the deportees, who have spent nine weeks in a makeshift camp between Israeli and Lebanese lines, so that peace talks can be resumed as soon as possible.
He gave no details of the proposals but said: ‘The deportees issue has become like a thorn in resuming the peace talks and we have to remove this thorn.
‘We shall work together to have the peace talks resume in a convenient and admirable atmosphere,’ Mr Shara added.
Israel agreed to allow 101 of the deportees to return home immediately and reduce the expulsion terms of the rest, but Arabs said that was not enough.
Asked if the Clinton administration would put pressure on Israel to solve the deportees crisis, Mr Christopher said: ‘It would be wrong to speak of an honest broker and putting pressure on any of the parties.
We are going to try to facilitate the negotiations.’
He also said he discussed US ties with Syria but declined to give details.
Western diplomats had expected Mr Christopher to raise the issue of Syria's tiny Jewish community, which was allowed to immigrate for much of last year, until Syria stopped granting exit visas.
— Reuter
The continued presence in Damascus of organisations which Washington says are engaged in terrorism was also expected to be discussed as an obstacle to better bilateral ties.
Mr Christopher later left for Saudi Arabia.
He will also visit Kuwait and Israel.
During his talks with Mr Christopher Assad affirmed Syria's commitment to peace and called for solving the deportees crisis, Syrian presidential spokesman Joubran Kourieh said.
‘President Assad affirmed Syria's keen interest in (preserving) the peace process and the necessity of removing the obstacles from the way of the process especially the deportees issue,’ Kourieh said.
‘Agreement was reached to continue contacts between the two parties,’ he added.
Kourieh said the talks covered a number of bilateral and regional issues.
He gave no details.
Cabinet in Rome rebuilt in a day ITALY'S Prime Minister, Giuliano Amato, reshuffled three key cabinet posts yesterday as he struggled to keep his government afloat after bribery scandals that have cut a swathe through the Italian political class.
The changes, after four hours of argument among ministers on how to prop up the eight-month-old government, was a rapid response to the turmoil created by the resignation of the finance and health ministers last Friday.
Socialist Franco Reviglio, previously budget minister, was made finance minister.
A veteran Christian Democrat, Beniamino Andreatta, will assume Mr Reviglio's old job.
Liberal Raffaele Costa was promoted to the health ministry.
He had previously been a minister without portfolio responsible for regional affairs.
Mr Amato hurried from his office to the nearby Quirinale palace to present his plans to President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro, who later signed decrees approving the nominations.
Mr Amato has kept his word about having the government back to full strength before the opening of financial markets today.
Friday's resignation of the finance minister, Giovanni Goria, and the health minister, Francesco de Lorenzo, both tainted by corruption scandals, hammered the lira.
But the prime minister failed to broaden his alliance as the former Communists of the Democratic party of the Left and the small Republican Party refused to join his administration.
— Reuter
The government is Italy's 51st since the Second World War and, like most before it, is based on an uneasy alliance between Christian Democrats and Socialists.
It has a majority of just 16 in the 630-seat lower house but Mr Amato is expected to call a fresh confidence vote in the next few days to prove he still has parliamentary approval.
Amato's Socialist Party is the focus of an inquiry into the corrupt awarding of public works contracts centred on Milan, the country's financial hub.
The scandal has forced former prime minister and strong Amato backer Bettino Craxi to resign as head of the party.
It also cost Socialist Justice Minister Claudio Martelli his job less than two weeks ago.
Separate scandals brought down Goria and De Lorenzo.
De Lorenzo, a Liberal who is under investigation for vote-rigging, quit after the arrest of his father on an unrelated corruption charge.
Goria, a former prime minister, resigned over persistent rumours he played a part in the 1976 collapse of a small bank in the northern town of Asti.
The reshuffle came under almost immediate fire from former president Francesco Cossiga, who branded the new administration as a government of national hypocrisy.
‘Despite the participation of such eminent people, it is a small government of national hypocrisy…which is moving towards objectives that are ever more confused,’ he said.
—
Russia admits to air raid
ONE MAN was killed and eight people were wounded when a Russian Su-25 warplane raided Sukhumi, capital of the secessionist Georgian province of Abkhazia, Georgian officials reported yesterday.
The Georgian military command in Sukhumi said the Russian plane made seven attempts to attack the city on Saturday, but was driven away by anti-aircraft fire.
After dark, at about 11pm local time, the plane returned and fired two air-to-surface missiles at a residential area.
The report said eight people including Tengiz Pachkoria, a well-known Georgian journalist who works for Russia's Nezavisimaya Gazeta newspaper and the ITAR-Tass news agency, were wounded.
Mr Pachkoria's father was killed.
Georgian officials who protested to the Russian army headquarters in the Black Sea resort of Gudauta, claimed they were told the attack was to avenge Saturday's shelling of a Russian army unit stationed in Abkhazia.
Interfax news agency quoted the Russian defence ministry in Moscow as confirming the air strike on ‘military targets’ in Sukhumi.
It said the Georgians had denied that their forces shelled the Russian unit on Saturday.
Fighting in the former Soviet republics of Armenia and Azerbaijan has intensified meanwhile in the run-up to the latest round of peace talks over the disputed territory of Nagorno-Karabakh.
The Azeri president, Abulfaz Elchibey, accused Armenia of escalating the conflict to mask a political crisis at home, where President Levon Ter-Petrosyan is facing growing pressure from opponents to step down.
Armenian reports said forces loyal to Yerevan on Saturday dislodged Azeri defenders from Aterk, the largest village in the Mardakert region of northern Nagorno-Karabakh. — AP and Reuter
Iraq arms team to make snap inspection
THE United Nations yesterday announced a surprise weapons inspection visit to Iraq, and said experts would fly in at dawn today.
‘We have a certain operation ahead of us and we would not like to disclose it to the press,’ team leader Nikita Smidovitch said in Manama last night, hours before a UN plane was to fly to Baghdad.
Mr Smidovitch would not elaborate on the objectives of the visit or why it was mounted so suddenly.
Other UN inspectors in Baghdad have extended their stay beyond the planned departure yesterday, after saying that they had gathered fresh information on Iraq's ballistic missile programme.
The leader of that team, Frenchman Patrice Palanque, said it would depart today after a day off at the Iraqis' request on Friday, the Muslim sabbath.
But UN officials in Bahrain, the regional field headquarters for the UN Special Commission (UNSCOM) entrusted with destroying Iraq's weapons of mass destruction, said that team was now likely to stay at least until tomorrow.
Mr Smidovitch insisted that there was no connection between the two visits.
His mission, comprising 20 experts in all types of weapons banned by the UN Security Council, would be short.
A declaration by UN inspectors that Iraq is complying with Security Council Resolution 687, the ceasefire document ending the Gulf war, is necessary before sanctions, including a ban on unrestricted oil sales, can be lifted.
But Mr Smidovitch said the team could not declare that on its own.
— Reuter
Couple charged with hijacking Russian airliner
AN AZERI who hijacked a Russian plane so he could go to the United States to work was held on charges of air piracy by a Swedish court yesterday after giving himself up.
The man, 27, who carried two hand grenades and had threatened to kill himself and all 80 passengers and crew unless he, his wife and baby son reached New York, surrendered to police in Stockholm on Saturday evening after five hours of tense runway negotiations.
The man, Tamerlane Musayev, and his wife, Marina, 26, were charged with air piracy for endangering the lives of passengers, Helena Akerman, a court spokeswoman said.
The charge carries a maximum sentence of life imprisonment,
‘I would have had to use 50 to 100 months of pay cheques to buy a ticket to the United States,’ Musayev, described as shy and calm, told the court.
He said he obtained the grenades from a friend who had deserted from the war in Armenia, adding that he had no military background and was not quite sure how grenades worked.
Russian authorities are expected to file a request for his extradition, but it could take weeks before Swedish authorities decide whether the hijackers will be sent home or face trial in Sweden.
The drama began when Musayev seized control of the Aeroflot Tupolev Tu-134 jet airliner between the Siberian oil capital of Tyumen and St Peterburg on Saturday morning.
He allowed the plane to stop for refuelling in Tallinn, Estonia.
On landing there he angrily refused to negotiate and demanded to be taken to Sweden and then the United States, warning in a note: ‘We shall land in New York together, or die together.’
About 30 passengers were allowed to leave or slipped out of the back door in Tallinn, leaving some 50 passengers and crew to continue the journey to Stockholm.
‘The hijacker stood in the aisle and explained in Russian how his hand grenades worked,’ Vyacheslav Babin from Tyumen told the Swedish daily Dagens Nyheter in Tallinn.
‘He held the grenade in his hand and said all he had to do was open his hand and it would explode.’
Some of the passengers expressed sympathy for the hijacker's goal of going to America, and said they were never threatened.
‘They weren't the sort of terrorists who demanded dollars, gold or murder.
They had one goal, to get to America.
They had no money to buy tickets on their own,’ said Igor Drizhon, one of 44 passengers who arrived in St Petersburg from Stockholm after the hijacking. — Reuter and AP
‘The Russian authorities are very likely to ask that they be extradited and tried in Russia since the crime took place in Russia and on a Russian plane,’ Stockholm's police superintendent, Tore Loftheim, said.
A Foreign Ministry spokesman, Claeus Jernaeus, said Sweden had received no formal extradition request from the Russians.
No one at the Russian embassy was available for comment.
‘The most likely scenario is that the Russian embassy asks for extradition and the Swedish government would then take a decision on the request,’ said an immigration official, Erik Lempert.
In 1990, three Aeroflot planes were hijacked to Sweden and all of the Russian hijackers surrendered.
Two were sent back and the third was sentenced to four years in jail in Sweden.
War threat on nuclear site
NORTH Korea, suspected of trying to develop nuclear arms, declared yesterday that any attempt to force it to accept a United Nations inspection could lead to war.
The UN International Atomic Energy Agency requested a special inspection after it was denied access early this month to two buildings at the Yongbyon nuclear complex.
‘Should any ‘special inspection’ or ‘sanctions’be imposed on us…it would become a dangerous train plunging the whole territory, both North and South, into the scourge of war,’the official Workers Party newspaper declared in a commentary.
— AP
Poll says Danes set to accept Maastricht
AN OPINION poll published yesterday showed a widening Danish majority for a ‘yes’ to the European Community Maastricht union treaty which goes to a new vote on 18 May.
The poll by the Vilstrup institute, published in the national daily, Politiken, showed 59 per cent intended to vote ‘yes’ and 27 per cent‘no’while 14 per cent were undecided or would not vote.
The survey was made from 14 to 16 February and indicated increasing support since the previous Vilstrup poll a month ago, which showed 53 per cent for ‘yes’, 31 per cent for ‘no’ and 16 per cent undecided.
Danes voted ‘no’ by 50.7 to 49.3 per cent to the treaty on closer European political, monetary and economic union in June last year.
The result, blocking Europe-wide implementation of the pact, caused one of the biggest crises in EC history and triggered a string of European devaluations, real or effective.
The new vote will be on a revised deal agreed at the Edinburgh summit which allows Danes to opt out of the treaty's plans for a common currency, joint defence, union citizenship and supranational police co-operation.
All opinion polls taken since the Edinburgh agreement, which is backed by seven of the eight parties in the Danish parliament, have pointed towards a ‘yes’.
While some political scientists believe the ‘yes’ outcome is virtually certain, most experts had agreed the margin will tighten.
— Reuter
21 killed as bus swerves into ravine
A BUS swerved to avoid a truck and plunged into a ravine east of the Philippine capital, Manila, yesterday, killing at least 21 people.
Police said 21 bodies had been recovered as by last night and the final toll would not be clear until today.
Rescuers used ropes and grappling hooks to descend the 60ft ravine to search for survivors.
Six helicopters flew 41 injured people to hospitals and ten others were treated for minor injuries.
The bus was travelling to the coastal town of Infanta with an undetermined number of passengers when it crashed.
— AP
FRANCE
Mafia cell chief expelled to Italy
A SICILIAN accused of forming a Mafia cell in the Alpine city of Grenoble has been expelled to Italy.
Giacomo Pagano, 58, was handed over to Italian police on Saturday.
After a parliamentary investigation's report named him on 3 February, Grenoble's chief prosecutor called off an anti-Mafia investigation, saying the release of the report had wasted months of work by alerting Pagano that he was under suspicion.
— AP
ITALY
Lamborghini founder dies
FERRUCCIO Lamborghini, founder of the company making the sports cars that bear his name, has died of heart failure in hospital.
Aged 76, he took ill earlier this month.
Educated as an industrial engineer, he manufactured tractors and heating systems after the Second World War and diversified into sports cars in 1963. — AP
FRANCE
World's oldest person now 118
THE woman believed to be the world's oldest citizen celebrated her 118th birthday singing and laughing in an old folk's home at Arles, in France.
Jeanne Calment, deaf, almost blind and confined to a wheelchair, gave up smoking last year and no longer drinks her daily glass of port.
She told reporters of meeting the painter Vincent van Gogh, who lived in Arles in 1888-89 and bought canvasses at her parents' shop.
— Reuter
CHINA
Death sentence for acid attack
A MAN has been sentenced to death for throwing sulphuric acid on a girlfriend who split up with him, an official newspaper reported yesterday.
A court in the Chinese city of Shanghai sentenced Li Xinghua for disfiguring Pan Ping, 24, who was burned over 30 per cent of her body, including her face.
— AP
CUBA
Offer to treat Jackson's skin
CUBA offered yesterday to treat the pop idol Michael Jackson for a skin disease he has said afflicts him.
Dr Carlos Miyares Cao, who runs a centre on the island for treating vitiligo, a disease that causes loss of skin colour, said: ‘Cuba will be happy to do this as an international goodwill gesture’.
— Reuter
PHILIPPINES
Hair scare for air testers
POLLUTION inspectors measuring emissions from cars and trucks in the Philippine city of Davao have found their hairlines receding and some have gone bald, the Manila Times newspaper said yesterday.
Inspectors now will be assigned to testing for only six months at a time to prevent further loss.
— Reuter
New stand by Syria eases way for talks
SYRIA expressed a strong desire yesterday to resume Middle East peace negotiations as soon as possible and the United States said it would play a more active role in the talks than in the past.
After a meeting with Syria's President Hafez al-Assad in Damascus, the US secretary of state, Warren Christopher, said he was optimistic about resuming peace talks suspended since last December.
He said he still had to work out an acceptable solution to the dispute created by Israel's deportation of 415 Palestinians from the occupied territories to an icy no man's land in south Lebanon, where 396 of them remain.
However, Mr Christopher could take comfort from a statement by the Syrian foreign minister, Farouq al-Shara, at a joint news conference, in which he refused to link the return of all the deportees to a resumption of peace talks.
‘No doubt the deportees issue has become like a thorn in renewing the peace talks and we have to remove this thorn,’ Mr Shara said.
But he said peace was more important.
‘The objective of the peace process which is broader and more important because it is bound to change the region, is to implement UN Security Council resolutions 242 and 338 and land for peace.’
‘We understand the difference between the two things and we agree on the level of importance between the two issues.’
Resolutions 242 and 338 are the agreed basis for peace talks and speak of Israel giving up territory it has been occupying since 1967 in return for peace.
One US official said Mr Shara's statement showed that Syria hoped to bypass the deportee issue and return to the peace table quickly.
Mr Christopher, who flew from Damascus to Riyadh for talks with Saudi Arabia's King Fahd, has been stressing his intention of being more active in the peace process —‘a full partner’— than his predecessor, James Baker.
‘We are going to make sure…the parties have a full opportunity to address their issues, perhaps lend some ideas of our own.’
Such statements please the Arabs but worry Israel, which fears US pressure to make concessions in the negotiations, launched in Madrid 16 months ago.
— Reuter
Russia denies air raid claim
AMID a confusion of conflicting reports, Russia yesterday denied one of its planes had carried out a raid that killed one man and wounded eight people in Sukhumi, capital of the breakaway Georgian region of Abkhazia.
The Georgian military command in Sukhumi yesterday said a Russian Su-25 had attacked the city on Saturday.
Itar-Tass news agency later quoted the defence ministry in Moscow as saying the report was groundless.
Tass also quoted the Georgian embassy in Moscow as saying the plane was an Il-29 of the Confederation of Highland Nations, which groups small ethnic groups in the Caucasus and supports Abkhazia in the conflict.
The Georgian military said the Su-25 had attacked several times during Saturday but had been away by anti-aircraft fire.
It had returned at about 11pm, however, and fired two missiles at a residential area.
Eight people including Tengiz Pachkoria, a well-known Georgian journalist who works for Russia's Nezavisimaya Gazeta newspaper and Tass, were wounded.
Mr Pachkoria's father was killed.
The military report claimed that when Georgian authorities protested to the Russian army headquarters in Gudauta, they had been told the attack had been to avenge shelling on Saturday of a Russian army unit.
The Georgians deny the shelling.
Interfax news agency quoted Russia's defence ministry as confirming an air strike on ‘military targets’ in Sukhumi.
Fighting in the former Soviet republics of Armenia and Azerbaijan has intensified, meanwhile, in the run-up to the latest round of peace talks in Rome over the disputed territory of Nagorno-Karabakh.
Armenian reporters said their forces on Saturday had dislodged Azeri defenders from Aterk, the largest village in the Mardakert region of northern Nagorno-Karabakh. — AP and Reuter
Bosnia aid to resume after convoy gets through
A BOSNIAN town cut off for ten months by Serb forces was reached by a United Nations convoy yesterday after relief supplies were allowed through Serb lines.
In New York, meanwhile, the UN Security Council was expected today to pass unanimously a resolution establishing the first war crimes tribunal since 1945-49.
Serbs, Croats and Muslims have all committed crimes but UN investigators blame Serbs for the worst atrocities such as so-called ethnic cleansing, concentration camps, systematic rape and mass murder.
Food and medicine reached the eastern town of Zepa, but there was still no aid distribution in Sarajevo, despite a unilateral, nationwide cease-fire called by Bosnia's Muslim president, Alija Izetbegovic, which appeared to be holding around the capital, although fighting was reported elsewhere in the country.
In Geneva, the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, Sadako Ogata, formally ordered a full resumption of relief supplies for Bosnia, meaning aid convoys and the Sarajevo airlift could resume as early today.
The statement followed assurances from country's warring factions that they would no longer block aid convoys or distribution.
Mrs Ogata cancelled aid to most of Bosnia last week, frustrated that Serbs were blocking convoys in the east and that Sarajevo's city authorities were refusing relief unless UN convoys got past the Serbs and into the starving east of the country.
Yesterday, however, a senior adviser to Mr Izetbegovic said after a government meeting: ‘The boycott is finished as far as we are concerned.’
He said there was no reason for it to continue because the convoy had got through to Zepa.
A UNHCR spokesman said the convoy, stuck at Serb checkpoints since last Monday, had been allowed through on the orders of the Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan Karadzic.
The ten trucks, loaded with family parcels, flour and medicine, slithered down a snowy mountain track to reach Zepa, where several thousand people have been blockaded by Serb fighters since Bosnia's civil war began ten months ago.
Larry Hollingsworth, a UNHCR official with the mission, reported that the final stage of the eight-mile descent had been ‘steep and slippery and the trucks had to be backed up round each hairpin bend’.
The shipment was greeted with delight by the local community where people have died of starvation during the harsh highland winter.
The convoy originally had planned to split and take some of the aid to Gorazde, another government enclave, but after being blocked by a crater in a mined road to Gorazde, all trucks headed down the twisting, snow-covered route that UN officials feared was also mined and finally arrived in Zepa to a  tumultuous welcome.
UN engineers were still trying to repair the road to Gorazde, and there were plans to try again to get a convoy to the Cerska district as soon as possible.
Food and medical supplies are desperately needed in the whole eastern region.
Sarajevo radio reported on Friday that 157 people, 63 of them children, had died of hunger, disease and cold in the previous 48 hours in the region around Srebrenica alone.
Two UN doctors who got into the area recently reported that amputations were being carried out with a carpenter's saw and no anaesthetic or antibiotics.
— Reuter and AP
Voters killed in Senegal mine blast
TWENTY people were killed during Senegal's presidential election yesterday when a truck carrying voters of the ruling Socialist Party hit a landmine in the southern Casamance province.
The explosion came just 24 hours after six people were killed when rebels ambushed a bush taxi in the same area on Saturday.
A dozen people were seriously wounded.
Turnout was low in Casamance, where the rebel Movement of Democratic Forces of Casamance has vowed to stop all political activity.
Government officials accused the rebels of intimidating voters.
Polling was cancelled in some villages because all their inhabitants had fled the escalating violence, which has killed 140 people in five months.
— Reuter 
Great calm before a storm of pain
As John Drysdale's body was wracked by 11,000 volts in a farming accident, his unconscious mind experienced the most beautiful feeling of his life.
He talks to Colette Douglas-Home
The colour I felt was pink.
I felt warm and cosy and contented.
And there was somebody looking at me.
Everybody has read about out of body experiences and I don't know if that is what it was, but I was not frightened by the person who was looking at me and the image that I had and that I still have in my mind is that it looked like me
IT was harvest time in 1988.
Richard had just been born.
I suppose I was 32.
We were combining oil seed rape.
I radioed one of my men to bring along an extra trailer and I told him to tip it up when he brought it into the field to make sure it was clean
When he arrived, I wandered over.
I was going to jump up and look in the trailer while it was tipping.
I remember walking over.
I remember looking up.
I remember seeing a cable and I thought it was a telephone cable so I wasn't worried.
There was no fear in me whatsoever, no premonition at all.
But it wasn't a telephone cable, it was a power cable carrying 11,000 volts.
I put my left hand up on the trailer to jump on and that was it.
This unbelievable sensation hit me, like I was going to explode from the inside out.
I went completely blind.
I felt as if I was screaming and not making any noise.
I was like a Desperate Dan cartoon where you see him with his hair standing on end.
It feels just like that.
You're not frightened, there's no feeling.
You don't think, you don't feel.
First I got this incredible shock.
Then I went through a stage that was absolutely fantastic, the most beautiful, peaceful, calm feeling that I have ever had.
I mean I have been drunk, I have been stoned, I have passed out and I have been ill.
I have had operations.
I have had dreams.
This feeling I have never, ever, ever experienced before and I don't think I will again until I die.
The colour I felt was pink.
I felt warm and cosy and contented.
And there was somebody looking at me.
Everybody has read about out of body experiences and I don't know if that is what it was, but I was not frightened by the person who was looking at me and the image that I had and that I still have in my mind is that it looked like me.
Those were the exact feelings that I had.
I have no idea how long it lasted.
And then coming round was worse than the shock itself.
I didn't know what had happened.
I was lying there.
All my muscles were in trauma.
I was twitching.
My whole body had been wracked with this shock.
I felt as if every muscle had been ripped out.
I come round twitching and there was a face looking down at me.
It was the chap who was driving the combine.
I saw there was blood in his mouth.
I said: ‘Alan where did the blood come from?’
He didn't know that I was meaning the blood in his mouth and he said: ‘You have bitten half your tongue off.’
It was my blood because he had given me mouth to mouth resuscitation.
Things begin to get tricky then.
Two of my other men came running over and they had to pin me to the ground.
My muscles were in trauma and I was trying to get away.
What I was trying to get away from I don't know.
Alan was on shoulders, Bill was holding my legs.
My left arm was hurting.
I lifted the arm and saw a large hole in my left wrist and my hand was badly burned.
My feet were hurting too.
My boots had melted.
But the pain was more to do with my mouth and my muscles than with the burns.
The deeper burns are the less they hurt because all the nerve endings have been cauterised.
When you go into hospital the first thing they do is to stick a scalpel or a needle into the burns and if it hurts it's not that bad.
My burns were so deep that there wasn't any pain.
I'm sort of jumping around a bit because there was so much going on.
The funny thing was this happened yards from where I had had a very bad motorcycle crash ten years before.
At the first accident I shouted and screamed.
This time there was more resignation.
I was more depressed than upset.
The ambulance men arrived and immediately poured ice cold water over the burns.
That is the first thing you should do with any burn, put people in a cold bath, anything to keep the burns cold because otherwise they can keep burning in for something like five hours.
Then they took the boots off, very slowly.
My boots and feet were smouldering when they found me.
Of course there was nothing left of my socks.
They wrapped my feet in foam and then they carted me off.
It didn't dawn on me how seriously injured I was until I got into hospital and they sent for a cameraman to photograph me because they had never seen anyone survive injuries like mine and they wanted a record.
They reckoned that my extra weight had protected my heart, and I was also wearing heavy, rubber-soled safety boots.
I had a huge hole in my wrist, the skin taken off my hand.
I lost the tips of three toes on my left foot and the whole pad of my big toe.
On my right foot the pad of my big toe and the tips of all my other toes were four thickness burns.
The soles of both feet were burned
With any shock into the body there are only two burns, one where the shock went in and one where it left.
I thought I would have burns everywhere I had metal.
In fact when I arrived in hospital I was worried about my flies.
I thought that when they took my trousers off I would have a zip mark on the old fellow.
But I was assured by the nurses that that wouldn't be the case.
Obviously your heart has taken a hell of a pounding.
I was put on a slab and all my clothes cut off me.
It was like a re-run of the first accident.
There was a really nice nurse with me and I said: ‘Please will you not leave me.
Will you talk to me?’
And she said she wouldn't leave me.
She went to the sink and put some cold water on a facecloth and started mopping my head and I burst into tears.
They took me to Bangour burns unit the next morning.
Burns units are weird places because all the staff are in masks and visitors have to wear hats and covers on their shoes.
I was taken in there and all sorts of horrendous things happened.
I got my burns scraped and that hurts quite a lot.
The first week is terrible.
You cry a lot and wonder: ‘Why me?’ and ‘What is the point?’
None of the staff even mention the psychological after effects.
At the end of it you realise you don't need to answer these questions.
There is no logical answer.
It is just the luck of the dice.
When you come to accept that, life is a hell of a lot easier.
While all this was going on I was in the middle of trying to buy my farm back from a pension fund.
It was one of the biggest deals I had ever done and it was also harvest time.
It gave me even more of a feeling of why pick now to put me through this.
But it is a great eye opener that you are not indispensable.
Suzanne, my wife, who had just had a baby, drove three hours twice a day to see me.
Plus she ran the farm which she had no idea about.
You really appreciate your family in those situations because everybody does rally round.
It soon shows you who your friends are.
In the ward you are lying there in pain, drugged up to the eyeballs.
You are all in pain.
But there is also a lot of humour.
You need it to get by.
For example I had my bottom wiped for me for six weeks.
Now that is a humiliating experience, so you get through by turning it into a joke.
There is a lot of ragging, a lot of camaraderie.
To fix the burns you have skin stripped off your thigh, then put over all your wounds as a natural plaster and left there for ten days.
If it doesn't heal you have to have another batch taken off.
And actually the graft site is a lot sorer than the burns.
The reason they use skin is because it is off your own body and thus it is the best natural plaster you can get.
The other hospital story is the bad one.
Every two days you have the dressings changed.
You are given drugs about half an hour beforehand then you're wheeled into a big room which is all tiled.
Right in the middle is a stretcher.
In one corner is a bath and about three nurses are standing around with masks on.
All you can see are their eyes.
They wheel you over and they put you in the bath and they start stripping off your bandages which is absolute agony.
You feel totally helpless.
You can't do anything.
Then they take you out and put you back on the slab and you are lying there absolutely stark naked in a stone room with three masked people looking at you.
Your ego is completely shattered.
Everything has been stripped away.
You are just lying there with these people washing, dressing and at the same time inflicting pain on you.
It has a weird effect, so bad one day that they had to give me valium to take off my bandages because I couldn't handle it any more.
And the pain, the continual pain; the thought that every two days you are going to have to go through this.
You then get wheeled out and put back into your bed which is your home and you feel very lonely and you go to sleep and you wake up and you start all over again.
THERE was this guy in the next bed with whom I got on pretty well but we were from completely different backgrounds.
He used to niggle at me for being a capitalist farmer and I got at him for being an unemployed commie.
Anyway, one day I started to be sick in reaction to some drugs, and this guy jumped out of bed — the nurses were busy.
He ran and got a bowl.
I was sick all over him and he cleaned me up and himself up and emptied the bowl and then I did the same thing again.
And he stayed with me for about half an hour looking after me.
It was one of those gems in a terrible situation that teaches you never ever to judge anybody by the cover.
I now have a hell of a lot more time for people but at the same time I don't seem to tolerate fools as well as I used to.
I can't stand gossip, or people bitching about each other.
But if anybody has got a real problem I get more emotionally involved than I used to.
I am not upset by people dying because having been there I do not fear death.
But I do understand the real awfulness of physical and emotional pain and I have great sympathy with anyone who is going through it.
One thing I hate now is seeing telly programmes involving violence or mental pain.
I have been through so much of it myself.
The other thing I will do now is relax without feeling guilty.
I will come home and sit down and do nothing, just think.
It is not meditation, it is just a cleansing, a putting into order.
I find I can easily put things into perspective, see both sides of an issue, if I just sit around for a while and I probably do that for half an hour a day.
In hospital I never got off my bed for six weeks.
Then it took me four or five days to be able to walk with a stick.
The first day I could walk on my own I walked out.
As I was leaving one of the doctors said: ‘Don't think this is over.
It will take a good two years to get over it.
Just watch it.’
I went out thinking he was talking a load of rubbish.
Got home and got straight back into the harvest.
I always felt tired and got the odd headache.
I was taking pain killers when I woke up and again at lunch time.
By Christmas it was really getting me down but I had to keep going.
In January I ended up in bed for a month.
That was followed by glandular fever which lasted all the way through the summer.
Back to square one.
It was the next January before I felt well again.
But I don't regret this accident.
I think about it a hell of a lot you know, not with morbid fascination but because everything that I went through gave me an inner strength and I am frightened to lose it.
Running around in ever-decreasing circles
IT has to be said that there's a growing sense in which this Maastricht treaty ratification business, which we return to today in the Commons, is beginning to resemble the Schleswig-Holstein question.
You know the one — about there only being three people in the world who ever understood the damn thing in the first place?
Of them one is now mad, one is now dead and the other has since forgotten all about it.
Mr Douglas Hurd, happily, does not fall into any of the above categories.
At the moment I would describe him as a fully paid-up member of the politically embarrassed tendency.
Douglas of the FO is a toff of the old school, with an in-built aversion to the grubbier end of our trade.
As such, his face was a picture last week as he was obliged to read out his extraordinary statement about Amendment 27.
Body language can speak volumes on these occasions.
Douglas affected a dispatch box pose which enabled him to deliver the juicier bits of the legal volte- face to a point in the mid-distance somewhere above the Opposition gallery.
Kenneth Branagh would have been hard pushed to better the sheer professionalism on display.
And what a script our man on the Maastricht case came armed with…
‘However, in the light of discussion in this House and else, further careful and detailed consideration was given to the matter…
I think it right…to explain that Government's position in the light of that advice…
In summary, Madame Speaker, the Law Officers consider…
In other words, there would be no impediment to ratification…
Madame Speaker, this constitutes a different situation…
I regret that the legal advice then given to the House was not correct…
Madame Speaker, the Government's position on the substance of the matter remains unchanged’…blah, blah, blah.
The following is the key paragraph from the barrowload of civil service-drafted jargon and gobbledygook which Douglas dumped upon an unsuspecting House.
Are you ready?
Take a deep breath.
‘The Law Officers advise that, if the Amendment were carried, acts adopted under the Protocol would still not apply to the United Kingdom.
This is because it is of the very nature of the protocol that acts adopted under it should not be applicable to the United Kingdom.
It follows that no rights and obligations arise from those acts which need to be given effect in our domestic law.’
So there — geddit?
There was that unmistakable sound of the clock striking thirteen about this unexpected turn of events.
And, naturally, where there is one legal opinion another, usually, can be found.
So it has proved, with that alert enthusiast Ashdown turning to the eminently qualified Anthony Lester, QC, who has come up with a rather different interpretation of events to that brought forward by the Law Officers.
Labour too are seeking legal advice of their own and there is growing pressure for the Government to publish the advice upon which it has rested.
We shall soon be knee-deep in conflicting legal views here.
Expect several hours of points of order, disruption and bad tempers galore this afternoon and evening.
What, one wonders, must the real world outside be making of any of this?
I discovered a partial answer to that question at the end of last week, finding myself in a television reception room with Sir Teddy Taylor and Labour's Austin Mitchell.
As both are determinedly anti-Maastricht our conversation focused on the inevitable.
Inside the studio we were brought back sharply to reality by a studio audience, all of whom shared two characteristics.
They were all under 25 — and they were all unemployed.
It is an experience which should be mandatory for every MP.
Two points were the most striking.
First, these were all intelligent, articulate, well-educated, highly qualified, motivated people.
Post grad degrees and firsts seemed the order of the day.
Second, it was clear that the standard party political point-scoring would be an insult to those present.
A large proportion of those in the studio were not just anti-government: they were anti-politicians, period.
It was a depressing and dispiriting experience, exactly as life itself has been for the young unemployed, day in and day out.
There were a number of recurrent remarks.
Employees who didn't bother even to acknowledge letters, CVs and applications, were particularly wounding.
There is a fundamental contradiction between the official figures (which, as Teddy perfectly fairly pointed out, showed that 75 per cent of those who went on Government schemes did secure subsequent employment) and the common experience that such jobs tended to last only for a few months.
Many reported the impossibility of securing employment because of lack of experience — with the jobless total so high employers are making a priority of taking on people with experience who do not require subsequent training.
There is a crystal clear Catch 22 situation here.
There was a prevailing view that training schemes run by companies and firms were far better than those run by civil servants.
Norman Tebbit was on television yesterday lunchtime, warning of still further legal wrangling over Maastricht.
He made one point with which I was in complete agreement — that to date there had been no positive selling of the merits or advantages of this treaty by its principal proponents.
Because of the obvious internal party difficulties the Prime Minister and his senior colleagues were trying to coax this treaty through on a hugely negative and defensive basis.
The longer these procedural and parliamentary twists and turns persist, the greater will be the degree of disenchantment among that studio audience of the young unemployed and millions more like them.
It is difficult to resist the conclusion that it is Parliament, not the law, which is in danger of looking more and more like an ass.
In the starting blocks
THE South African president, FW de Klerk, and the ANC leadership must be pretty sure of their ground.
The outline agreement they reached recently about the country's transition to full democracy still has to be discussed at a multi-party forum to be re-convened along the lines of the previous Convention for a Democratic South Africa (CODESA); but already they are beginning to position themselves for elections which are likely to be a year away.
That shows that both the president's National Party (NP) and the ANC intend to be prepared for the first non-racial elections for a constituent assembly; it is also a clear sign that both of them are sure that they can convince the other parties that the path they have laid down is the one to follow.
The poll early next year would elect a coalition government made up of all the parties winning more than a minimum number of seats to lead the country to majority rule in the year 2000.
Both the ANC and the government are clearly trying to broaden their appeal beyond their traditional constituencies.
There is little other reason why President de Klerk should decide at this point to include two coloured politicians and an Indian in his cabinet.
The NP has been seeking to make itself acceptable to non-whites and what better way than this.
The fact that his choices have been criticised in their communities for collaborating with apartheid ever since Indians and coloureds — but not blacks — were given their own chambers in 1984 suggests that the president had difficulty finding anyone willing to join a government nearing the end of its life.
The ANC, too, is clearly trying to broaden its appeal.
Its decision last week to call for the removal of all sanctions, except the arms and oil  embargoes , from the time that an election date was announced, rather than the elections themselves, indicates a clear understanding of the country's dire economic situation.
This move is no doubt intended to show South African business, among others, that the organisation is a responsible partner.
The greatest uncertainty concerns Nelson Mandela's health.
The ANC has worthy successors to him, but he has become a symbol of the anti-apartheid struggle.
His authority in dealings with the government — and, indeed, rapport with de Klerk — is vital in guiding the country through one of its most difficult phases.
It would be sad if ill-health were to deprive him of the chance to become the first democratically-elected president of South Africa.
Law and disorder
THE pathetic picture of a trusting little boy being led away to a brutal death has stirred the nation's conscience.
That two other children have been charged with killing James Bulger is a double loss of innocence.
The recent torrent of shocking crime has inured the senses to what is happening in Britain's cities: the strongest emotion is often the most understandable — I hope it's not me next time.
The chances are that the felon who takes your car, raids your house, or robs you in the street will be no older than 15, the national peak age for Britain's criminal underclass.
In Newcastle-upon-Tyne an eight-year-old is found stealing cars, committing arson and assaulting teachers.
In Leeds a professional burglar turns out to be just 13, with a record stretching back to when he was seven.
A brain-damaged policeman fights for his life after young thugs threw a half-brick through his patrol car windscreen.
In living-rooms throughout the country, violence, gratuitous and graphic, is often the staple diet of the video generation.
Children no longer play tag.
Instead they zap, electrocute, maim, impale and cut to smithereens an endless range of human figures on their electronic games.
The inappropriately-named ‘joyriders’ kill and maim but are allowed, thanks to the media, to parade proudly across our television sets, grateful for the opportunity to stick two fingers, or a bare backside, in the face of society.
Poverty and the absence of hope are real causes for anti-social behaviour.
But given the rising tide of rape and other forms of violence, Britain appears to be rearing a new generation of what Kenneth Clarke calls ‘really persistent, nasty little juvenile offenders’.
They cannot be sent to prison — at least not yet.
The prisons are full in any case, since Britain jails a greater proportion of its population than any other European nation.
So what can be done?
The knee-jerk response is to promise ‘a crackdown’.
That, again, is what Mr Clarke is now proposing.
But what is most to be welcomed about the current spate of rhetorical outrage from politicians is the emerging consensus between Labour and the Tories on a new approach — an attempt to fill the moral vacuum, to look at society as a whole for the flaws.
Tony Blair, the shadow home secretary, has boldly set a new agenda, conceding the need for tough sentencing for  persistent offenders.
Mr Clarke, for his part, has rediscovered for his party the meaning of the word community.
Mr Blair's plea for the party-political baggage to be abandoned is a precious opportunity that must be grasped, not least by John Major, who just two weeks ago was blaming crime on ‘socialism’.
What should stop is the paternalistic and well-meaning indulgence of the sub-culture of thuggery.
But understanding the causes of the disintegration of society is vital too.
And that is not, as Mr Major carelessly implied, the same as tolerating the consequences of disorder.
The magical minister's tour of duty
Tipped for the Chancellor's job, John MacGregor is concentrating only on his next trick, says Ewen MacAskill
WHAT music would the Transport Secretary, John MacGregor, choose if he is ever invited on to Desert Island Discs?
I don't know what his tastes are in music, so it could be anything from Mahler to Charlie Parker.
But I do know at least one of his choices, the one that would top his list: something by the Shotts Pipe Band.
It might seem a strange choice for a man who gives the appearance of, and sounds very much, a Home Counties man.
But MacGregor, the only person in the Cabinet who is, or probably ever has been, a member of the Magic Circle, is not what he seems.
MacGregor was brought up in Shotts, the former mining village near Motherwell, and went to the local primary, Dykehead.
‘It was only 100 yards from my house and in the playground there the Shotts Pipe Band, who were world champions for years, played every night.
I have very clear memories of when I was about eight going to sleep every night to the pipe band practising.’
Interviewing him in his office in the Department of Transport, an ugly high-rise building that has the compensation of a superb panorama of London, dominated by Big Ben and the Houses of Parliament, it is hard to avoid the conclusion that MacGregor has moved a long way up the greasy pole.
Although he began life with a number of advantages, not least middle-class parents, his route from Shotts to the Cabinet was still a lot more difficult than most of his Government colleagues.
He could go further.
He is into his fifth Cabinet job and is a strong contender for promotion if the Prime Minister finally removes Norman Lamont from 11 Downing Street.
Other challengers are Ken Clarke, Michael Portillo and Michael Howard.
Before I had completed a question about whether he would like to be Chancellor, MacGregor broke in to say with a smile, as he had to: ‘But I am enjoying being at transport.
I have a lot of new programmes.’
No politician could say publicly he wants the job, especially when the vacancy has still to be announced.
MacGregor has the advantage of breadth of experience in Government, especially as Chief Secretary to the Treasury, a post that won him praise from the former Chancellor, Nigel Lawson, whatever that is worth these days.
Lawson, in his autobiography, wrote: ‘Quiet and undemonstrative, he is easy to underrate.
He combined a social liberalism with a Scottish determination (all too rare in today's Scottish establishment) to keep a firm rein on the public purse, assisted by shrewd political judgement.’
On the downside, MacGregor has a tendency at the despatch box to sound flustered, turn red and sound defensive, even when not under any particular pressure.
That would not help in a job in which he has to  reassure people of the credibility of Government economic policy.
The buzz among senior Conservatives is that the quiet campaign on behalf of MacGregor is not going well.
But the decision will be Major's and he may judge that MacGregor's previous experience at the Treasury combined with his education and training as a economist makes MacGregor the prime candidate.
On political grounds, Major may decide against putting in either a strong right-winger, which would rule out Portillo and Howard, or such a pronounced left-winger as Clarke.
MacGregor would be a compromise, the safe choice.
If he does not become Chancellor, he will remain in the news anyway as he attempts to push through the Government's toughest privatisation yet, British Rail.
MacGregor, representing Norfolk South, is part of what is known as the East Anglian mafia, whose most influential member is Major himself.
But a minister said that politics did not work that way, and that the influence of the East Anglian connection was greatly exaggerated.
What was much more important in the rise of MacGregor, he said, was that in private he was genial company and, more importantly, his ‘decency’.
MacGregor was born in Glasgow in 1937 and moved to Shotts when his father became a doctor there.
He remembers it as a mining village/town in decline as the coal seam was coming to an end, a depressed working-class community in which sectarianism was rife.
As a teenager, he helped set up a cricket club.
‘It was the first time I really got to know Catholic contemporaries in Shotts.
We got on very well together and suddenly began to realise how strange and curious it all was that we had gone to separate schools.’
He is not the first Cabinet minister from Shotts.
Peggy Herbison, a family friend, was a minister in Wilson's Cabinet.
She gave the young MacGregor a book on Parliament but he did not read it at the time, and he cannot trace his decision to go into politics back to that.
His parents were not affluent but they pumped what money they had into his education, sending him to a private school, Edinburgh's Merchiston.
There was no secondary school in Shotts anyway.
He remembered the emphasis at Merchiston as being more on sport than academic achievement, with pupils playing rugby every afternoon.
MacGregor, who remains passionate about sport and whose father had played football for Glasgow's Queen's Park, not only played rugby but spent his afternoon off playing soccer.
He was not good enough to make it into the rugby first XV but was among the top academically, taking lots of prizes, and becoming school captain.
From Merchiston he went to St Andrews University: ‘I largely paid my way through university through scholarships and conjuring, with a little bit of support from my father,’ he said.
As Del Genie — a name borrowed from an American theology student who was also a conjuror — he did magic tricks round the town, at rotary clubs and children's shows.
‘We ran a seaside variety show for a few seasons,’ he said.
His first experience in magic had been to give a show at the Miners Welfare hall at the age of 11.
At university, he had to do five subjects.
His main interests were history and English.
Economics was chosen almost as an afterthought.
‘It completely changed my life,’ he said.
His interest in politics came partly from it, and he was the first of a string of Thatcherite Tories to come from St Andrews.
He once described himself as the ‘grandfather’ of that generation of Tories that includes Michael Forsyth and Michael Fallon, a phrase that embarrasses him now.
WHY had the boy from working-class Shotts become a Tory?
It was not, as people might think, he said, because he had gone to Merchiston.
He said he had worked out his political philosophy while still a student: a belief in the free market, small business, and individual freedom through expansion of home ownership, and a commitment to the European Community.
In London, he had a variety of jobs, including banking and journalism, being a founding member of New Society magazine, later incorporated into the New Statesman, which ironically could be put out of business by Major, who is suing it.
He became an MP in 1974, joined the Cabinet as Chief Secretary to the Treasury in 1985, and since then has been agricultural minister (surviving the Edwina Currie salmonella in eggs scare), Education Secretary, Leader of the House and now transport.
He regarded being chief secretary, with its need to cut departmental spending throughout Government, as having been the toughest of the jobs ‘in terms of sheer workload’.
If he remains at transport, he might yet have to revise that judgment.
Even Baroness Thatcher when Prime Minister was wary about privatising British Rail because of the complexity.
ScotRail is among the first candidates for franchising.
It has been argued that it would make sense for whoever runs the train services to also take responsibility for the track.
MacGregor did not agree but he was prepared to consider ‘the possibilities of enabling franchisers to take on more’, such as maintenance depots, control of stations and some involvement in the track operation.
‘Where that can be comfortably done without infringing the other objectives then I am perfectly prepared to see how flexible we can make the franchise.’
There are fears over the future of the Highland lines, though MacGregor dismissed them.
MacGregor maintains his interest in conjuring, only this month spending a day off buying up the collection of another conjuror, mainly books.
If he becomes Chancellor, it will be a gift for cartoonists, with MacGregor trying to make the huge public deficit disappear and pulling rabbits out of hats.
And as Chancellor, if not as Transport Secretary, he might be sufficiently prominent to get that invitation to Desert Island Discs and have the Shotts Pipe Band playing over the airwaves.
John MacGregor: If he becomes Chancellor, cartoonists will have him trying to make the deficit disappear
First meeting for Clinton and Major
By James Johnston
THE FIRST meeting between President Bill Clinton of the United States and the Prime Minister, John Major, in Washington on Wednesday would probably have been a rather strained encounter a week or two ago.
It is a thinly disguised secret, if indeed a secret at all, that during the crucial last stages of the American presidential campaign, Mr Major's party was lending active support to George Bush.
When Mr Bush lost and Mr Clinton became the first Democratic president for more than a decade, the much-valued special relationship between Britain and America suddenly looked decidedly shaky.
But Mr Major, ever the pragmatist, moved swiftly to limit and even repair any damage done to the relationship.
He was among the first to offer his warmest congratulations to the victorious Mr Clinton and since then the two leaders have spoken a number of times by telephone.
They have never met — something that will be rectified on Wednesday.
A Downing Street spokesman said that Mr Major was anxious to ensure that the special relationship would continue and saw no reason why it should not.
Mr Clinton is likely to be magnanimous in his attitude to Mr Major.
He can afford to be.
The Prince of Wales will be in Edinburgh this week.
Tomorrow, in his capacity as president of the Prince's Trust and the Prince's Scottish Youth Business Trust, he will attend a reception at the Palace of Holyroodhouse at which an exhibition of his own watercolours will be previewed.
On Wednesday morning the prince, in his role as president of Scottish Business in the Community, will visit Craigmillar to see projects developed by the local community, local authority and other agencies, with help from the Friends of Craigmillar — a group of business leaders.
That evening, the prince will attend a meeting in the historic Signet Library designed to foster co-operation in Scotland between a number of his special interests.
The 7th Edinburgh Peace Festival will open on Saturday with a one-day conference organised by the United Nations Association at which the principal speakers will include George Robertson, MP, Labour's foreign affairs spokesman; Professor Paul Wilkinson, of the chair of international relations at St Andrews University, and Commander Robert Green, RN (retd), the UK chairman of the international World Court Project.
The conference, An Agenda for Peace, will be at the Royal Pharmaceutical Society Halls in York Place.
The festival will run until 14 March.
In London and Liverpool on Friday the final details of the events to be held in May to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the Battle of the Atlantic, the longest campaign of the Second World War, will be revealed.
The highlight will be a Fleet Review by the Duke of Edinburgh off Anglesey on 26 May.
It will be the largest gathering of warships since the Jubilee Review of 1977.
The Battle of the Atlantic began when the first ship was sunk within 12 hours of the declaration of war in 1939.
The last ship was sunk five years eight months and four days later.
In the intervening period 73,600 Royal Navy personnel, about 30,000 merchant seamen, and almost 6,000 members of RAF Coastal Command were to lose their lives, as did more than 29,000 crewmen from German submarines.
As part of the commemorative programme, the Queen will visit Liverpool on 28 May.
During the Second World War the headquarters of the Western Approaches Command was located on Merseyside.
Tomorrow, the Spastics Society will launch a £1 million appeal entitled My Right in England and Wales.
The society's main aim is to help the victims of cerebral palsy, and the campaign will highlight the way in which disabled people are continually denied rights which others take for granted.
Seven Scottish Churches, including the Church of Scotland, the Scottish Episcopal Church and the Roman Catholic Church, are joining together to take a stand at the Careers 2000 Exhibition which will open at the Scottish Exhibition and Conference Centre in Glasgow on Thursday.
The organisers are expecting 40,000 young people to visit it during its four-day run.
On Thursday, the editor of The Scotsman, Magnus Linklater, will name a new British Rail 225 electric locomotive The Scotsman at Waverley Station in Edinburgh.
Fifteen minutes later the locomotive will pull out of the station hauling an express for London.
In sport, India will play England in a one-day cricket international in Bangalore on Friday, while at home there are important Scottish Premier League matches involving clubs at the top and bottom of the league.
Tomorrow, Motherwell play Airdrie and on Wednesday at Pittodrie Aberdeen play Dundee United.
Prince of Wales: engagements in Edinburgh
Top Scots firms ‘more confident’
By John Hatfield
BUSINESS confidence in Scotland is returning, according to a survey of the country's top 300 companies published yesterday, which also suggests that recruitment of staff will increase.
According to the pre-Budget survey carried out by System 3 for the accountancy firm Ernst & Young, 77 per cent of companies believe they are well placed to lead the country out of recession although most do not feel that the economy has embarked on recovery.
It found that 40 per cent of companies, mainly in the retail and financial sectors, intended taking on more staff in the next six months.
However 35 per cent of respondents, primarily in the production and construction fields, expected to cut jobs.
Commenting on the findings of the report, Ian Hunter, tax partner at Ernst & Young's Edinburgh office, said: ‘Although this survey indicates business confidence is high it also demonstrates that recovery is going to be slow.’
Full report, Page 19
Excuses unseated passengers shouldn't have to stand for
By Gary Duncan
FROM the wrong kind of snow to unforeseen leaves blocking railway lines, Britain's transport firms are fast getting a reputation for original excuses.
But an explanation by Loganair to passengers waiting for a flight in Stornoway yesterday set new standards for bizarre apologies.
Frequent fliers in the islands are used to unusual problems holding up their flights.
From lashing gales to sheep on the runway, they probably feel they have heard it all.
But Loganair's excuse yesterday left 19 would-be island-hoppers heading for Benbecula and Barra not only speechless but also seatless.
‘We regret,’ squawked the public address system, ‘the delay on the 9:40am flight to Benbecula…because we have left the aircraft seats in Glasgow.’
Red-faced check-in staff were forced to explain to the frustrated passengers that engineers at Glasgow Airport had forgotten to replace the seats in the Twin Otter aircraft used for the inter-islands service.
The embarrassed staff related the sorry saga of how the seats had been removed to make way for cargo.
It seems the morning flight from Glasgow is mainly for the Royal Mail and daily newspapers and the seats are normally packed in the hold.
But when yesterday's Twin Otter arrived at Stornoway the engineers discovered the plane offered standing room only — the seats had not been packed.
The pilot, Steven Bagley, was forced to double back to Glasgow to collect them — delaying the flight from Stornoway from 9:40am until noon.
Later, as Mr Bagley, at 21 thought to be the youngest scheduled service pilot in the country, prepared finally to take off with the delayed passengers, he was playing down the incident.
‘Just a little hiccup in our usual wonderful service,’ he said.
And last night Trevor Bush, Loganair's technical chief executive, said yesterday had not been their best day.
‘Yes, you could say it has been a bit of an embarrassing muddle.
Steps have been taken to make sure it doesn't happen again,’ he said.
‘The passengers have been very good about it.’
Way open for trial of Bosnia war criminals
A FIRST step to bring perpetrators of atrocities in the former Yugoslavia to justice were taken yesterday when the UN Security Council unanimously passed a resolution to set up war crimes trials.
The UN secretary-general, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, now will draw up a detailed proposal on how an international tribunal, which will not have the power of the death sentence, should function.
Serbs have been accused of being most to blame for mass killings and rapes, torture and so-called ethnic cleansing.
Chaos after Labour's Euro-ambush
Surprise Commons debate leaves Maastricht plans in turmoil
By Joy Copley Parliamentary Correspondent
THE Government was plunged into fresh turmoil over the troubled Maastricht treaty last night after a successful parliamentary ambush by Labour ended in scenes of chaos and confusion in the House of Commons.
MPs were taken by surprise when Labour managed to secure an emergency debate yesterday on last week's announcement that a defeat on the social chapter would not prevent ratification of the treaty.
The Government was wrong-footed and the Attorney General, Sir Nicholas Lyell, was forced unprepared to the dispatch box to explain why he had given directly conflicting legal advice to Foreign Office lawyers.
Towards the end of the Attorney General's speech, George Robertson, Labour's foreign affairs spokesman, pressed for a motion which would have had the effect of delaying progress on the bill to be put to the vote.
MPs began to trudge through the lobbies but the vote was abandoned in confusing scenes after government tellers failed to stand in their places.
Gleeful opposition leaders and Tory Euro-sceptics said the Government's handling of Maastricht had descended into ‘shambles’.
Earlier Michael Morris, the deputy speaker, surprised the House when he agreed to a demand from Mr Robertson for an emergency debate on the conflicting legal advice given by  Tristan Garel-Jones, the foreign office minister on 20 January and Douglas Hurd, the Foreign Secretary, last week.
The 12th day of the committee stage of the bill was temporarily and abruptly shelved.
Tory business managers began to scurry around anxiously and Sir Nicholas Lyell was clearly taken by surprise and began scribbling notes to form the basis of his speech.
Last week Douglas Hurd made a U-turn over the Maastricht bill when he apologised to the Commons for inaccurate legal advice given previously by Mr Garel-Jones about the status of the social chapter amendment.
Mr Garel-Jones had previously told the House that a defeat on the Opposition's amendment 27 — aiming to reverse Britain's opt-out from the social chapter — would wreck the ratification process.
But Mr Hurd said that the amendment would have no effect and that the Government would ratify the treaty anyway.
The initial legal advice had come from Foreign Office lawyers but the contrary advice came from Sir Nicholas.
Sir Nicholas told the House last night that his legal advice would not be published.
He said it had differed from the Foreign Office advice because it had  subsequently been been  scrutinised in ‘greater detail’.
He echoed Mr Hurd when he said there was no constitutional impropriety in continuing with ratification of the Bill if amendment 27 on the social chapter was passed.
He said: ‘It's the best legal advice I can give and I believe it is the right advice.’
‘Parliament cannot pick and choose which treaty obligations to accept.
But it can prevent ratification of the entire treaty by refusing to pass the bill.’
Mr Robertson said there were ‘serious questions of substance’ arising from Mr Hurd's statement, which concerned not just amendment 27, but the treaty itself.
‘It would be outrageous if this House were to be by-passed in some way by a nit-picking legalistic exercise simply to get round the political difficulties facing the Government in a situation where they are likely to be defeated on amendment 27,’ he said.
He said the country had been ‘stunned’ last week by the prospect of a government which on the one hand said Parliament would make the decision on ratification, but on the other that the Government would use the Royal Prerogative ‘to avoid any voice, any vote, and decision by Parliament’.
He said that when the Government realised it faced defeat on amendment 27 it had produced a second legal opinion.
He said: ‘The Government, as they say in Glasgow, is one sandwich short of a picnic.
So clueless and incompetent, so capable of mismanagement that it has turned it into an art form.’
Mob fury as boys accused of killing James leave court
AN ENRAGED mob screamed abuse and hurled missiles during clashes with police yesterday outside the Liverpool courtroom where two 10-year-old boys were accused of murdering two-year-old James Bulger.
As two vans carrying the boys left Bootle Magistrates Court, fury erupted.
Six arrests were made as the vehicles were attacked and a cordon of 50 police struggled to keep the crowd of about 250 at bay.
The boys' appearance before South Sefton Youth Court lasted just six minutes.
Speaking only to confirm their ages and identities, they showed no sign of nervousness or distress as they were accused of the abduction and murder of James, from Northwood, Kirkby.
The two-year-old disappeared 11 days ago from Bootle's Strand shopping precinct.
His body, with multiple injuries, was found on a railway line two days later.
The boys are also accused of the attempted abduction of another youngster.
One of the two, wearing a white pullover, was with his father and a lawyer, Lawrence Lee.
The other was with a social worker and his solicitor, Dominic Lloyd.
Throughout the brief hearing, the boy in white stretched and yawned frequently, occasionally looking towards his co-accused.
Both were remanded into local authority care until 3 March, when they are to appear again.
It was revealed later that they are to be held outside Liverpool at one of Britain's four special secure units for child offenders.
Reporting restrictions were not lifted and the magistrates made an order preventing publication of the boys' names or anything which could identify them.
After the hearing, as the vans taking the boys from the court emerged the crowd exploded with anger.
One section tried to rush the vehicles, screaming ‘Bastards’.
Missiles — including an egg and a rock — were thrown at the vans and two people hammered on their sides.
The police reacted swiftly and a man who broke through their cordon was brought down by a rugby tackle and arrested.
Four other men and a 15-year-old youth were also held as the crowd continued to scream abuse.
Then they turned on the police, waving fists and chanting: ‘Let them go!
Let them go!.’
The officers withdrew and the crowd quickly dispersed.
Three men and the youth were later released without charge.
One man was charged with disorderly conduct and bailed; a sixth, arrested for disorderly behaviour and criminal damage, was released on police bail.
Last night, the homes of the two accused boys were under police guard; the whereabouts of the families unknown.
James's parents, who before yesterday's hearing had pleaded for calm, appealed to be allowed to hold his funeral as soon as possible.
A spokesman for Merseyside Coroners Office said later: ‘We are making every effort to have the body released as quickly as possible and we don't anticipate any undue delay.’
Private scheme, Page 4 JONATHAN BAINBRIDGE/REUTER MARTIN CLEAVER/AP Shared rage: the crowd screams abuse as the two boys accused of James's murder leave the Liverpool court in police vans, which were pelted with missiles while people hammered on their sides.
Six people were arrested
Christie may be new Falkirk chairman
By John Smith
CAMPBELL CHRISTIE, the general secretary of the Scottish Trades Union Congress, is understood to have accepted an invitation to become chairman of the troubled Falkirk Football Club.
Mr Christie, a Bairns supporter, who lives in Falkirk, was approached in the hope that he could bring some stability to the Premier Division side's warring board.
It is believed that Mr Christie in Edinburgh last night met the four remaining directors on the board, the former chairman, Hamish Deans, and his son George, and Jim Johnston and the Edinburgh lawyer Sandy Moffat.
Mr Christie would say only that a club statement would be issued later.
He refused to confirm whether he had been involved in any talks with directors of Falkirk FC.
The moves follow a stormy extraordinary general meeting at Brockville on Thursday night, where the Deanses, who hold 57 per cent of the club's shares, succeeded in ousting three directors — in spite of overwhelming opposition from minority shareholders.
The five other directors had called for the Deanses to leave the board.
Last week they went to the Court of Session in an  unsuccessful attempt to have Thursday's meeting blocked.
A letter sent to shareholders by the club's legal adviser, Gordon Marshall, makes it clear that during the action a number of concessions had been obtained from the Deans family.
One of those was that the Deanses would not attempt to appoint a majority of their supporters to the board, but would work together with Mr Moffat and Mr Johnston ‘and a further director of standing.’
Hamish and George Deans were removed as chairman and vice-chairman at a board meeting in May.
Also in May the police were called in to investigate the affairs of the club.
Last week Hamish and George Deans were charged  with fraud.
At the emergency meeting Hamish Deans read out a statement saying they denied the charges, which related to to payments amounting to £838 on club credit cards.
He said: ‘The directors of Falkirk Football Club were aware of and approved the application for the cards.
All payments credited were made to defray legitimate club business expenses.’
Campbell Christie: Bairns fan who lives in Falkirk
Turner sold to US for record £11m
By Gary Duncan
A TURNER painting owned by London University is to be sold to the John Paul Getty Museum in California for a record £11 million, it was disclosed last night.
The sale — for the highest amount paid for any work by a British artist — is subject to the granting of an export licence.
Van Tromp going about to please his masters, ships at sea, getting a good wetting, was painted in 1844 and belongs to the university's Royal Holloway College.
The college wants to make the sale, sanctioned by the Charity Commissioners last summer, to set up a fund for maintaining and refurbishing its Founder's Building, as well as caring for the remaining pictures.
The London move, which drew considerable opposition, parallels Edinburgh University's contentious plan to sell one of two world class artworks from its Torrie Collection to raise up to £5 million.
Edinburgh says it wants to use the proceeds to provide an endowment for the care of the remainder of the Torrie collection and for other fine art works.
However, its sale plan has been halted by a court action over the trusteeship of the collection and has already provoked the National Art Collections into stripping it of a grant.
The £11 million fetched by the Turner trumps the previous highest price for a work by British artist: in 1990 Constable's The Lock went to a Swiss collector for £10.78 million.
The Turner was given to the Royal Holloway — which occupies a 800-room Grade I listed building — in 1883 by its founder, Thomas Holloway, a Victorian philanthropist who bought it for £3,675.
The college's principal, Professor Norman Gower, said he was sad that it had to sell but added: ‘The cost of preserving Thomas Holloway's main benefaction left us with no alternative.
‘The sale means we shall be able to carry out essential work on our original buildings which form the centrepiece of the college and are part of the national heritage.’
To help with its endowment fund, the London college also plans to sell a Constable and Gainsborough from the remaining 76 works decorating its walls.
British National Collections were made aware of the plan to sell the Turner — and the Constable and Gainsborough — but no proposals to purchase were received.
Among those opposing the sale were the directors of leading museums and galleries, including the Tate and the Victoria and Albert in London.
Making a splash: a detail from the 1844 Turner painting
Why the would-be entrepreneur shouldn't talk cobblers
BUSINESSMEN who want to get ahead in the 1990s should move into the soft drinks, fruit and vegetables or household insurance markets, according to a report published today.
But cobblers and laundry owners could be in trouble, and tobacco products should be avoided altogether.
The forecasts are contained in the 1993 edition of The British Consumer: Patterns of Income and Expenditure, published by the market analysts Mintel.
The report, which in previous years was called British Lifestyles, shows the trends set over the last ten years and predicts changes in the next decade.
It produced forecasts for various markets, and said those showed some were clearly earmarked for success in the future while others should be taken on only by those with a ‘real taste for a challenge’.
‘We believe the main growth areas will be educational fees, prepared foods, household insurance, soft drinks, domestic and garden help, and fruit and vegetables,’ said a Mintel senior analyst, Bill Patterson.
Markets in long-term decline included cigars, cigarettes and tobacco products in general, cleaning and laundry, coal, shoes, clothes, furniture repair and meat and fish.
There could also be real decline in the 18 to 30 holiday market as the structure of British society changed, with an ageing population, fewer marriages, smaller families, more people living alone and a declining workforce, said Mintel.
It predicted a growth of nearly 3 per cent in the UK population by 2002, but there would be an overall decline in the numbers aged under 30 counterbalanced by ‘dramatic growth’ in the 30-59 age group.
‘These changes will have impacts on many UK markets,’ said Mr Patterson.
‘Where will all the people be to go on 18-30 holiday packages?
Can the health service cope with the growing needs of older people?
How will the state pension system cope with the increasing number of pensioners?
The examples are endless.’
Other findings in the report included:
The average size of households continued to shrink, falling from 2.7 people in 1981 to 2.4 in 1991 with a prediction of a drop to 2.3 by the year 2000.
The number of weddings was also declining while divorces increased.
There were about 350,000 marriages last year and 174,000 divorces compared with 398,000 and 156,000 respectively in 1981 and remarriages now accounted for 36 per cent of all marriages.
Average annual household disposable income now stood at £18,251 compared with £9,201 in 1982, a growth in real terms of 16 per cent.
In the report Mintel also said that consumers may soon be ready to cast their recession-related caution aside and start spending again.
Consumers were going through a period of retrenchment after the boom years of the 1980s.
The amount people were saving was slowing down, and Mr Patterson said: ‘Many consumers should soon feel they have built up their savings to an acceptable level, and may start spending again.’
— PA
Eight remanded over brick offence
A POLICEMAN, John Robinson, 37, who seriously injured when a half brick was hurled through his patrol car windscreen, will be permanently brain-damaged, a court was told yesterday.
PC John Robinson, 37, is in hospital and still unconscious with serious head injuries after last Wednesday night's attack.
But he would recover ‘albeit suffering permanent brain damage’, Mr Kingsley Hyland, prosecuting, told magistrates at Sunderland, Tyne and Wear.
Eight men were before the court charged with conspiracy to cause criminal damage with intent to endanger life arising from the injury to PC Robinson on the A183 near Sunderland's Pennywell Estate.
All were remanded in custody until 3 March.
£40m to restore Windsor Castle
RESTORING fire-damaged Windsor Castle will cost about £30 million to £40 million, the National Heritage Secretary, Peter Brooke, disclosed yesterday.
He stressed in a Commons written reply that the figures were based on ‘a very broad initial estimate’.
He said more precise figures would not be available until decisions had been taken on the form of restoration.
Ministers are still discussing with the Royal Household the style of the repair work.
A 20th century solution would be cheaper than a replication of what was there before.
2,000 mothers call AIDS helpline
MORE THAN 2,000 women have telephoned a helpline after the death of a midwife with the HIV virus.
Fewer than 20 have asked for tests and all proved negative, Bromley Health Authority in south-east London said yesterday.
The authority announced last Friday that a midwife who worked at Farnborough Hospital, Orpington, had the virus.
The woman, a 46-year-old Ugandan and mother of four, died from meningitis.
A post-mortem examination revealed she was HIV positive and health chiefs decided to alert women who had given birth at the hospital and might feel they were at risk of infection.
A spokesman for the health authority said only eight mothers were believed to be at risk of infection and not all of them had asked for an AIDS test.
‘We have had 2,200 requests from women for information.
Some wanted lengthy counselling and others did not.’
‘A team of counsellors has been on duty over the weekend between 8am and 8pm and the helpline will remain live between these hours daily until 5pm on Friday, February 26.
‘After this time any concerned women who had babies at Farnborough Hospital and ring the helpline will still be offered referral to a counselling service.’
The Helpline number is 0689 860555.
PA
Tories claim Major in the dark over US election aid
By Ewen MacAskill, Political Editor
JOHN Major attempted to distance himself yesterday from a renewed row over Tory intervention in the US election which threatens to overshadow his first meeting with President Clinton.
Senior British Government officials for the first time said yesterday that while a trip by two Tory strategists to the US during the campaign had been cleared by the Conservative Party chairman, Sir Norman Fowler, he had not told Mr Major.
The effort to put space between Mr Major and Tory Central Office reflected Downing Street's nervousness that the row should not mar the trip.
Downing Street insisted it was confident the two leaders will achieve a rapport and put that at the top of its agenda.
Mr Major leaves tonight for Washington, where he will be the first European leader to meet the president.
The two are scheduled to have six hours of talks at the White House tomorrow on agenda that include trade negotiations, Bosnia and the despatching of a US special envoy to Northern Ireland.
US sources in London insist that Mr Clinton has put behind him the resentment over Conservative involvement in the US election.
But it is known that there is still a great deal of bitterness among other members of the US administration.
A Granada TV World in Action programme screened last night quoted two senior Conservatives, the then campaign director, Sir John Lacy, and the then head of campaigning, Mark Fullbrook, who flew to America on 9 September to help George Bush.
Sir John said on the programme: ‘They rang us up and said would we go across.
We had over here the double whammy of taxation increases and price increases if Kinnock got elected.
‘Bush's campaign managers rewrote that message and put it over that Clinton would mean increases in taxation, and possibly higher prices.’
Sir John said his help to the Republican campaign was not official party business.
‘It was purely a private business, a personal visit.’
He said he cleared his visit with Sir Norman.
‘Whether the party chairman told John Major or not, I really don't know,’ he said.
Sir Norman, in a statement issued last night, said: ‘No-one was sent by the Conservative Party to influence the outcome of last year's American presidential election.
‘Two members of staff were invited by personal acquaintances in the Republican Party to visit the US for a few days to talk about the British general election.
While there, they briefly met junior officials in the Bush campaign.
They travelled in their own time and in their own personal capacities and their expenses were paid by their hosts.’
He accused Labour, which has criticised the Tory involvement, of hypocrisy, saying Labour MPs and officials had helped the Clinton camp.
Second on the agenda after establishing a good personal relationship is trade and the economy, with the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade talks still to be completed.
Also on the agenda, at the US request, will be Northern Ireland.
President Clinton made an election pledge to send a peace envoy there.
That has now been toned down to special envoy, who British officials hope will be on a fact-finding mission rather than being the mediator originally suggested.
Two injured after bombers beat security
TERRORISTS in Northern Ireland yesterday breached tight security to set off a bomb which injured two policemen, one seriously.
The blast was in one of the most heavily fortified areas of Londonderry city centre and came just over an hour after security forces with specially-trained sniffer dogs combed the area for explosives.
A major inquiry was launched immediately into how the bombers got through to plant the device in a hut used by police on security duty outside the Bishop Street courthouse.
Within yards of the security hut is the army's city-centre headquarters and the street is constantly patrolled and monitored by security cameras.
Former TV soap actor cleared of killing war hero's wife
THE former Emergency Ward Ten actor Frederick Bartman was found not guilty yesterday of battering Brenda Lady Cross to death in his antiques shop.
Judge Brian Smedley had directed an Old Bailey jury to acquit Bartman, 67, at the end of the prosecution case because the evidence showed it was inherently improbable he was the killer.
Lady Cross, 73, the wife of the war hero Air Chief Marshal Sir Kenneth Cross, was repeatedly struck with antique fire irons in the shop in Pimlico, south London, where she had worked part-time for ten years.
Bartman, who starred as Dr Simon Forrester in the 1960s hospital soap opera Emergency Ward Ten, smiled as the judge made the ruling.
The jury heard he had been a friend of Lady Cross for 12 years and had no history of violence.
As he left court, Bartman said in a statement through his solicitor that he had been horrified and shocked by the murder and had always emphatically denied the allegations against him.
‘It is of note that the judge decided the evidence was inherently weak and inconsistent,’ said the statement.
Det Supt Ken Woodward, who led the murder investigation, said outside court: ‘We are not looking for anyone else in connection with this inquiry unless anything new comes up.
It is not going to be reopened.’
Bartman, who has not been allowed to live at the house he has shared in Chelsea with his partner of 23 years, David Cohen, as a condition of bail, will now be able to return home.
Lady Cross's family was too grief-stricken to attend the trial.
David Calvert-Smith, prosecuting, had alleged that Bartman attacked Lady Cross in the basement of the Anno Domini shop, beating her repeatedly over the head with two heavy fire irons.
He then used skills honed in half a lifetime as a successful actor to feign shock and sorrow, said Mr Calvert-Smith.
Lady Cross had been planning to leave the shop but had promised to stay until a replacement was found.
The prosecution alleged that on the day of the murder in September 1991 Bartman had been in a bad mood.
He had not found a replacement for Lady Cross, he had just had to pay more than £40,000 in back rent and new lease arrangements and the business was not doing well.
However, from the outset Mr Calvert-Smith acknowledged that the case was difficult.
He told the jury he could put forward no motive for Bartman or anyone else to want to murder Lady Cross, who had no known enemies.
There was no suggestion she had been the victim of a robber or sex attacker.
The murder could have been sparked off by a minor row leading to a slap or punch.
The jury was told that although she was 73, Lady Cross, a mother of three, had the looks and agility of someone 20 years younger and had fought valiantly for her life.
She was still alive when police discovered her body but she died soon afterwards.
She had suffered severe head injuries.
Directing the jury to acquit Bartman, the judge said it was clear from the evidence of a pathologist, Dr Iain West, that whoever killed Lady Cross would have been drenched in blood from her ‘hideous’ head wounds.
Police had found Bartman's tie label on the floor of the shop but there had been no trace of blood on the tie itself or on any other clothes or in his car.
The judge said it was clear police had drawn the wrong conclusions.
— PA 
Freed: Frederick Bartman leaving the Old Bailey yesterday
Known sex offender gets two years for abduction
A CONVICTED sex attacker who kidnapped a six-year-old girl from a playground was jailed for two years yesterday after a top judge said the law forced him to disregard the man's long criminal record.
Gordon Orchard, a 61-year-old former Coldstream guardsman, who admitted abducting the child last summer, had 50 previous convictions, including indecent assault and attempted rape, but was sentenced as if they did not exist.
Southwark Crown Court's senior judge, Gerald Butler, QC, said recently enacted legislation did not allow him to take the man's 30-year-old record into account.
He told Orchard, who had tickled and spanked the girl after enticing her to his flat: ‘The prosecution accept, and I proceed on this basis, that your motive here was in no way sexual.
‘But the child you abducted was of six years of age and although the period of abduction was short and the child came to no harm, this was a crime, particularly now, of the most serious kind.’
The judge added: ‘You have been convicted of numerous offences in the past.
They included offences of violence, offences of dishonesty and sexual offences, but by the terms of the Criminal Justice Act 1991 I am directed to ignore them all.
‘I am bound to disregard them entirely.
Now it is not for me to give my opinion as to that and I do not, but I think it right that the general public should understand and be aware that this is now the law.’
Jane Davis, prosecuting, had earlier told the court that Orchard, of Farringdon, London, had been walking his dog when he saw the girl in a playground in the King's Cross area one evening last July.
The girl, who cannot be named for legal reasons, had been left alone when a friend went home.
The defendant had told her: ‘I'll walk you round the block and take you home.’
Ms Davis said the girl was later to say: ‘He lied because he didn't take me back.’
Instead, Orchard had led the girl back to his flat and persuaded her to go in.
‘The defendant started tickling her.
At this point he spanked her bottom.
She asked again to go home.
He replied: ‘No, in a minute’.’
Ms Davis said that by this time the girl's mother had learned of her disappearance and was told that the child had been sighted with the defendant, who was ‘well known in the area and well known to police’.
Less than an hour after the girl was taken, police had burst into Orchard's flat and rescued her.
‘The mother was devastated.
Of course you always fear for the worst, but she was reunited with her child,’ Ms Davis said.
Ms Davis said that Orchard had denied to officers that he had done anything ‘funny’ to the girl.
— PA
Channel 4 in late bid to host chess challenge
A LATE British bid to host the World Chess Championships was announced last night.
Channel 4 and the sports management agency International Management Group moved to put on the match between the champion, Gary Kasparov, and the British challenger, Nigel Short.
The bid was in direct competition with the offer from Manchester made last week.
The International Chess Federation (FIDE) is expected to announce the winning bid today in Lucerne, Switzerland.
FIDE was scheduled to make a decision yesterday, when only Manchester had made a suitable offer.
But the last-minute move by C4/IMG, and the possibility of some foreign bids caused FIDE to delay its decision.
C4's chief executive, Michael Grade, commented: ‘All of Britain will be backing Nigel Short and it would be wonderful to hold the championships here.
The combination of a national broadcaster and the world's leading sports management agency must give Britain the best chance of success in a difficult contest.’
He did not reveal a venue for the match, but if FIDE chooses Manchester, it would be a boost for that city's chances of staging the 2000 Olympics.
Manchester made its £1.25 million offer last week when bids from Spain and a Serbian bank were rejected.
Spain's Santiago de Compostela is believed to have resubmitted its bid and others are likely to be also on the table.
Short, 27, is the first British-born player to challenge for the world title.
Kasparov, 29, has said playing in England ‘presented no problem’.
He beat Short 4-2 in a special head-to-head speed chess challenge played in London in 1987.
The championship is scheduled to start at the end of August and run for eight weeks.
— PA.
Malawi minister says Kirk pressure has saved lives
By Sarah Wilson
A LEADING pro-democracy activist from Malawi said yesterday he owed his life to the Church of Scotland because of its continued pressure on the totalitarian regime.
The Rev Aaron Longwe, who has been detained and tortured by the regime for speaking out about corruption, told a gathering of former missionaries at the Kirk's headquarters in Edinburgh: ‘If it were not for the Church of Scotland some of us would have been dead by now.’
The relentless lobbying and visits from Church emissaries had highlighted the plight of Malawian activists and saved them from summary execution.
‘There are many who have been killed without the knowledge of the public,’ said Mr Longwe.
But he was optimistic about the future and believed that the trend towards a multi-party democracy was now irreversible.
His wife, Alice, who went to Malawi as a Church of Scotland missionary, is out on bail after being arrested and detained for distributing pro-democracy literature.
The Rev Dr Fergus Macpherson of the British Council of Churches has just returned from Malawi, where he talked to the president for life, Hastings Banda.
It was his father who originally ordained Dr Banda as a Church of Scotland elder in 1941.
He said that Dr Banda, who is no longer an elder, appeared to be losing his hold on the leadership.
When Dr Macpherson had listed a catalogue of human rights abuses in Malawi to Dr Banda, he had appeared concerned and said he knew nothing about it.
Several times, the president had said he was isolated.
But, Dr MacPherson added, when his deputy, John Tembo, returned to the room, Dr Banda denied that any abuses had taken place and accused the Kirk of bias and ‘listening to the lying propaganda of the BBC.’
Tortured for speaking out: The Rev Aaron Longwe tells of his experiences at the gathering in Edinburgh yesterday
Drifting flotel now under tow
By Frank Urquhart
THE North Sea flotel Safe Supporter was under tow to Bergen in Norway for essential repairs last night, with 97 oilmen still on board.
The anchor handling vessel Monika Viking succeeded in getting a tow line on board the accommodation platform yesterday as weather eased after the airlift of 400 non-essential personnel from it on Sunday.
The oilmen were taken off by a fleet of helicopters after the vessel lost one of its anchors and was later forced to shed its seven remaining ones.
A spokesman for the operators, Amoco, said: ‘The weather has considerably moderated, allowing the towing operation to carry on as planned.’
The Safe Supporter was being used as the accommodation platform for the construction workers hooking-up and commissioning Amoco's Lomond installation, 120 miles east of Aberdeen.
The Lomond platform is due to come on stream in April.
Amoco said that the effect on the commissioning timetable of the loss of the flotel had still to be assessed.
Scheme for Leyland buyout in Lancashire
By John Hatfield
MANAGEMENT at the Leyland DAF truck plant in Lancashire plan to buy out the truck assembly operations at the factory.
The deal, which could safeguard the future of the remaining 1,350 workforce, depends on a contract being signed with DAF Trucks NV in Holland.
According to the managing director, John Gilchrist, who is leading the three-man team, DAF Trucks has indicated its interest in buying the successful 45 series light trucks built in the Leyland assembly plant.
‘The management team at Leyland has therefore developed what we believe is a sound business plan, the approach to which has support in principle from the senior management at DAF Trucks NV.’
Jon Geldart, of the accountancy firm Coopers & Lybrand, which is advising the management team, said that the deal was at an advanced stage.
Cor Baan, chairman of DAF Trucks NV in Holland, observed that the Leyland DAF plant was one of the most modern in Europe.
‘We think that the products coming out of this factory are of such a standard and quality that there is a very good potential to sell them into the market,’ he said.
News of the possible buyout came on the day on which production restarted at Leyland after a deal between suppliers and the receiver, Arthur Andersen.
While the one assembly line is now operational, full production will not get under way until the end of the week.
While welcoming the news of the developments in Lancashire, shop stewards at the Albion axle works in Glasgow said that did not alter the position at their factory, where there was little likelihood of a similar buy-out.
The acting works convener, Tommy Gorman, said: ‘In the short term they will need the axles and components which we manufacture here but we want to find out what their long-term plans are.
‘Things are still unclear and until somebody gives us definite information we won't be drawn into speculating.
The strongest indication we have had of an MBO here has been no more than vague rumours.’
However, the Albion workforce, which has now been reduced to a strength of 480 after 67 redundancies two weeks ago, intends to maintain a high profile in its campaign to save the factory.
Today works representatives will hold talks with the STUC and tomorrow they will meet Glasgow District Council.
They will also visit Brussels next week for discussions with MEPs and the European Metalworkers' Federation.
Plea from Killin to save rescue helicopter unit
By John Smith
INJURED climbers will have less chance of survival if the Government goes ahead with its plan to close the search and rescue helicopter service at RAF Leuchars, it was claimed yesterday.
The warning came in a plea to the Ministry of Defence by the Killin mountain rescue team in Perthshire, who also predict that  axing the Leuchars facility will increased the workload and danger for mountain rescue volunteers.
Like several Scots teams, Killin has formed a close bond with airmen who crew the two Wessex helicopters at Leuchars.
It developed a special affinity after its co-ordinator, police sergeant Harry Lawrie, was killed on Ben More in 1987 when a Wessex from the base crashed on a rescue mission.
In a letter to the head of the air staff secretariat at Whitehall, the Killin team leader, Billy Stitt, said that the provision of helicopters had been based solely on the military requirement for crashed aircraft and the maritime role, with no account taken of the ever-growing number of people suffering serious injury on Scottish mountains.
Mr Stitt called for funding to be made available outwith the MoD budget to maintain the airborne SAR (search and rescue) service which the public expected.
He said that the words ‘humanitarian grounds’ had not even been mentioned in the government plan for the future of SAR.
‘The Government has done much to improve the ambulance service in recent years in striving to achieve the medical term the ‘golden hour’ for getting casualties to hospital.
In reality this can rarely be achieved on the mountains.
The helicopter evacuation is the only possibility of getting anywhere near it.’
Mr Stitt argued that Leuchars was the most suitable location for a helicopter base to cover the Central Highlands, with lower level access routes and better weather with less low cloud.
He said there had been a number of occasions in the past two years where a helicopter from Prestwick had failed to reach the area due to low cloud, while Lossiemouth helicopters frequently had to make considerable detours round the east coast.
Mr Stitt pointed out that mountain accidents tended to happen at similar times — during hard winter conditions, at weekends or in holiday periods.
He continued: ‘It is highly likely that the Lossiemouth helicopter will be engaged in work in the Cairngorms, and HMS Gannet (Prestwick) helicopters in the Ben Nevis/Glencoe area, leaving no helicopters available.’
Mr Stitt added that it was crazy to move the SAR flight away from the RAF Leuchars mountain rescue team, with which the crews spent a considerable time training.
In a letter to the Stirling Conservative MP, Michael Forsyth, a defence minister of state, Archie Hamilton, assured his ministerial colleague — who had forwarded him a letter from a constituent in the Killin team — that ability to meet the agreed civil SAR response criteria would not be significantly altered with the closure of Leuchars.
The Scottish sports minister, Sir Hector Monro, said yesterday that the number of incidents gave cause for universal concern and placed a strain on mountain rescue services.
He urged mountain users to be properly equipped, saying crampons and an ice axe were essential.
Climber loses fight for life
A FRENCHMAN injured in a climbing accident on Ben Nevis at the weekend died in a Glasgow hospital yesterday, bringing to 15 the number of people killed on Scottish mountains since the beginning of the year.
Michele Bou, 40, who moved to Sorn Green, Glenrothes, about ten years ago when he married his Fife-born wife, Theresa, was flown by RAF helicopter to the neurological unit at Glasgow's Southern General Hospital from Belford Hospital in Fort William on Sunday suffering from head injuries.
The couple have two sons.
A man who collapsed and died on Sunday while walking on a hill path at Braemore Junction, Ross-shire, was named yesterday as Bernard Hynes, 51, a builder, from Rippenden, Halifax.
Scots battle with Irish to avoid Digital jobs axe
By Alan Dron
HEADS of the US computer firm Digital yesterday heard last-minute appeals from both Scottish and Irish industry officials trying to save jobs in the company's European factories.
A final decision on whether the Ayr or Galway plant will survive Digital's planned shedding of up to 25,000 jobs worldwide is expected later this week.
A Digital spokeswoman in  Massachusetts declined to say when the decision would be made, but said in such cases, the affected employees were always the first to be notified.
With rumours flying that the Galway factory's 1,200 workers face redundancy, Ireland's industry and enterprise minister, Ruari Quinn, with the chief executive of the Irish Development Authority and the mayor of Galway, had meetings with Robert Palmer, Digital's president and chief executive officer.
An Irish Development Authority spokesman said that it was continuing the battle for a complete retention of Galway, and arguing that ‘Ireland, under any independent analysis, stands up more strongly than Scotland.’
However, he accepted that Digital also had to consider the effect on its market credibility if it pulled the plug on manufacturing operations in Britain, which accounted for a quarter of the firm's European sales.
He added that the meeting with Mr Palmer was better than expected, with the computer firm's boss promising to consider the points raised by the Irish delegation.
‘I wouldn't dare try to be optimistic in this kind of situation,’ he said.
‘I'm cautiously pleased.
It's a very difficult situation to read.’
Scottish Enterprise, which is fighting to ensure that the 1,000-strong workforce at Digital's Ayr plant does not lose out in the battle for jobs, also had senior officials in Boston yesterday for talks with the company, reiterating the case for the Ayrshire plant.
‘We've been hard at it for several weeks now, and have no intention of giving up now,’ said a spokesman, who also rebutted claims by Irish politicians that Scottish Enterprise has used a dirty tricks campaign to ensure Digital remains in Scotland.
Scots health service pioneer to head telecoms regulator
By Bryan Christie, Health Correspondent
THE first chief executive in the history of the Scottish health service, Don Cruickshank, has been appointed director-general of telecommunications.
Mr Cruickshank's appointment was announced yesterday by the President of the Board of Trade, Michael Heseltine.
He takes over his job at the telecommunications regulator on 1 April.
Mr Cruickshank has spent just over three years in charge of the Scottish health service and has helped set it on the Government's controversial road to self-governing hospitals and fund-holding family doctor practices.
Scotland's health minister, Lord Fraser, said: ‘He leaves behind a strong foundation on which his successor can build.’
Mr Heseltine commented: ‘Since the privatisation of BT in 1984, the telecommunications industry has changed substantially and since the further liberalisation set in train by the Duopoly Review in 1991, there has been an increasing number of operators entering the market in competition with BT.
‘I wished to appoint someone to this important post who had direct experience of competition as a businessman.
Mr Cruickshank fulfils that criterion admirably and will, I am sure, do a very good job.’
Born in Elgin, and educated at Aberdeen University and Manchester Business School, he began his career with Alcan Aluminium and later joined McKinsey & Co.
From 1977 to 1980 he was commercial director at Times Newspapers, becoming general manager of the Sunday Times.
From 1980 to 1984 he was a director of the information and entertainment division of Pearson and then from 1984 to 1989, managing director of Richard Branson's Virgin Group.
Gavin Anderson, director of strategic management of the NHS Management Executive, is to take over as acting chief executive until a successor to Mr Cruickshank is appointed.
Don Cruickshank: Taking over at telecoms
Report claims poverty keeps women smoking
WORKING-CLASS women living in poverty are more than twice as likely to smoke as middle-class females from professional backgrounds, according to a study published today.
They are said to regard cigarettes as a ‘necessary luxury’ to cope with the difficulties of caring for a family and managing on a low income.
Although 30 years ago smoking in Britain had no links with social class, now there is a marked  association between smoking and disadvantaged women, with poverty claimed to be at the root of the problem.
A report by the Cancer Research Campaign and Action on Smoking and Health highlights the way in which some women's smoking habits are shaped by the conditions in which they live.
Prof Hilary Graham said: ‘Our report suggests it is the experience of living in poverty that keeps women smoking.
‘This connection is particularly important at the current time when we know the numbers of women on low income has doubled in the last decade.’
She said that for mothers struggling to bring up children, smoking was seen as a way of surviving.
That occurred although it took up a large slice of their already-depleted income, and they also ran the risk of getting lung cancer and other smoking related diseases, and placed the health of their children in jeopardy.
The report also shows white women are more likely to smoke than Asian or Afro-Caribbean women.
By 1990 only 16 per cent of women in professional households smoked, compared with 38 per cent of women in unskilled manual homes.
Ms Patti White, of the Health Education Authority, said: ‘If we are to promote better health in the whole population, not merely the most fortunate, we must radically rethink our current health initiatives.
‘Clearly we cannot be concerned with women's smoking without being equally concerned with their general circumstances; their health and welfare are bound together.
We therefore need to forge new working practices with those concerned with reducing poverty in Britain.’
The report recommends:
Reducing the widening social class divide in smoking as a priority in line with Government plans in Health of the Nation White Paper.
The social class gap in cigarette smoking between women from manual and non-manual households should be narrowed by 5 per cent.
A total ban on all advertising and promotion.
More money for long-term smoking education programmes.
New laws to create a smoke-free environment at work and in public places.
The study, Her Share of Misfortune, is published by ASH Working Group on Women and Smoking and the Cancer Research Campaign.
— PA
Girl, 9, is charged with baby murder attempt
A GIRL aged nine appeared at Paisley Sheriff Court yesterday charged with attempting to murder a baby in her pram by trying to suffocate her.
The girl, accompanied by a policewoman and two social workers, was seen in private by Sheriff George Crozier.
Police and officials cordoned off corridors leading to the courtroom while she made a three-minute appearance.
The girl, who cannot be named for legal reasons, was then led out the back door of the court.
She was charged with attacking the nine-week-old baby in Well Street, Paisley, last Monday.
It is alleged that she placed her hand over the baby's mouth, compressed her nose and tried to murder her.
No plea was made and the girl was remanded for a week for further inquiries.
The sheriff made an order placing her in the care of the social work department.
A child as young as nine would normally go before the children's panel unless the reporter to the panel referred the case to the sheriff court, which is extremely rare.
The age of criminal responsibility is eight in Scotland, against ten in England.
ORKNEY
Refloating ruled out for wreck
THE Danish cargo vessel Bettina Danca, aground on Stroma in the Pentland Firth, is now so badly damaged it would be impossible to refloat her, Orkney's harbour director, Captain Bob Sclater, said yesterday.
The Danish Government has announced that it is to carry out an inquiry into the accident.
The fate of the vessel will be decided by the ship's insurers.
KILWINNING
Girl, 10, seriously ill after stoning
A 10-YEAR-OLD girl is seriously ill in hospital with a fractured skull after being hit by a stone thrown through the window of her family home.
Kerry Brown, of Garallan Square, Pennyburn, Kilwinning, was sitting with her family watching television when two large stones were thrown through the window, one hitting her on the head.
She was taken to Crosshouse Hospital in Kilmarnock, where her head injury was diagnosed as a depressed fracture to the skull.
She also needed nine stitches in the wound.
Last night her condition was described as comfortable.
Strathclyde calls for commission on local reforms
By Alan Forbes
THE Government is being urged to appoint an independent commission on the future of Scottish local government, similar to the body now looking at councils in England and Wales.
The call for a Scottish commission was made yesterday by Strathclyde Regional Council, John Major's ‘monstrosity’, which would be broken up under any of the four Scottish Office proposals for council change.
Strathclyde's convener, David Sanderson, said there was too much at stake for large and small communities if the region disappeared as a result of the ‘ill considered process’ now being undertaken by the Government.
‘Strathclyde and the people it serves deserve nothing less than a commission.
The council has shown consistently that it is an accountable and efficient local authority that should be allowed to continue and develop its services,’ added Mr Sanderson when he presented the council's response to reorganisation.
The document says that three of the four Government proposals for new councils would cost between £500 and £1,400 to introduce over a five-year period.
The cheapest proposal would still need five years to recoup its costs.
Des McNulty, who chairs Strathclyde's local government reorganisation subcommittee, said: ‘Imagine the number of additional teachers, policemen and home helps we could employ if the Government were prepared to give us even £500 million over a five-year period.
But instead of gaining, we stand to lose such workers to pay for a reorganisation that only Ian Lang (the Scottish Secretary) and a few of his supporters want.’
Of almost 10,000 people who responded to the ‘Strathclyde Works’ campaign, 88 per cent supported the council's case against local government reorganisation.
The council, which claims it is the right size to achieve economies of scale, announced it will establish a ‘Decentralisation Charter’ to increase the decision-making powers of local communities.
Mr McNulty said: ‘We have it in mind to create between 27 and 40 local committees through which elected members, in consultation with community representatives, would take the critical decisions regarding service delivery covering particular localities.’
In spite of Strathclyde's size, covering half of Scotland and serving 2.3 million people, Mr McNulty said local committees would guarantee accountability and reflect local loyalties better than the council structure proposed by the Scottish Office.
David Sanderson: ‘Strathclyde deserves nothing less’
Jail for knife man cleared of disco murder
A MAN was cleared yesterday of the murder of Michael Holmes, who was killed during a series of running fights outside a disco in Paisley town centre.
But Michael Quigg was sentenced to eight years in jail after being found guilty of stabbing and attempting to murder Angus McMaster in Paisley on May 16 last year, and carrying a knife.
Quigg, 23, of Ferguslie Park Avenue, Paisley, was found not guilty by an unanimous verdict of stabbing and murdering Mr Holmes, of Oliphant Crescent, Foxbar, Paisley, in the town's New Street on September 5 last year.
The jury found him guilty on a reduced charge of assaulting the youth by knocking him to the ground.
Lord Cameron admonished him on that charge.
Quigg, who denied all the charges, did not give evidence.
He claimed self-defence in the attempted murder charge.
Major agrees to meeting with Rushdie
JOHN MAJOR is willing to meet the author Salman Rushdie, who has spent four years under a fatwa assassination incitement by Iranian fundamentalists.
Downing Street sources made that clear yesterday after Mr Rushdie's dramatic television appeal for a meeting with the Prime Minister.
A spokesman said they saw no obstacles in principle to a meeting with Mr Major who, it was said, would be happy to see him.
The incitement to murder Mr Rushdie came from the late Ayatollah Khomeini for alleged blasphemy in his book The Satanic Verses.
Downing Street said the details of the meeting still had to be arranged, including whether the Prime Minister wanted to be filmed with Mr Rushdie.
— PA
Private scheme for young offenders
A NETWORK of privately-run detention centres for persistent child criminals is being considered by the Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke, it was revealed last night.
This is one option open to the Home Office as the Prime Minister calls for a ‘crusade against crime’, following a soaring number of crimes committed by a hard core of youthful offenders.
But officials said last night no decisions had been reached as part of Government plans to provide 200 secure places for young criminals.
The idea of private detention centres will enrage Labour, which yesterday launched its most intensive battle against crime in the party's history.
This development comes amid new fears that vigilantes will appear on the streets of Britain unless the Government takes ‘drastic action’ to crack down.
The shadow home secretary, Tony Blair, last night offered Labour's own blueprint to reduce crime, for the Government to use as a basis in the battle against youth crime in particular.
And as crime figures soar, Labour has for months poured scorn on the Tory claim to be the party of law and order.
Mr Blair took the lead, claiming: ‘Some young offenders are so out of control and such menaces to society that they are going to have to be put in some form of secure accommodation.’
But he added: ‘The best way to deal with young people is to ensure they never get to the stage where you are having to lock them up because that is an admission of failure.
‘The brutal truth, however, is that some youngsters are so out of control they have to be detained, but that should be the last resort.’
One Tory veteran, the former headmaster Sir Rhodes Boyson, warned that vigilantes could appear to take the law into their own hands unless the Government took drastic action.
Another Tory, David Evans, said parents should be punished if their children offend.
The Police Federation vice-chairman, Dick Coyles, warned that any new powers for detaining young criminals must be backed by proper resources.
Mr Blair told a Westminster news conference that the Government should start consultations on more secure units and on care and support for young offenders.
Labour believes a crackdown on youth crime, particularly burglary and car crime — which make up more than half of reported crimes in England and Wales — would free the police to tackle more serious offences, such as violence.
The document published yesterday shows that out of the 5.46 million offences reported in the 12 months until June 1992, 1.29 million were burglaries, 931,000 thefts from vehicles and 572,000 thefts of vehicles.
Mr Blair also called for earlier intervention when a police caution has failed so the youngster is subject to strict supervision.
Facilities for support and intervention were ‘patchy’ and must be made uniform, co-ordinating efforts by the police, social services, school and family, he said.
He demanded changes to the law so repeat offences could be taken into account when passing sentence.
And he urged a new emphasis on the victims, saying they were badly treated under the present system.
The Crown Prosecution Service should be obliged to inform victims when dropping or lowering charges to allow them to make representations, he said.
He also called for an attack on problems related to young offending such as truancy, drug abuse and the future of the youth service, employment and training programmes.
The Home Office should carry out in-depth research into juvenile crime and the effectiveness of various punishments because the current information base was ‘appallingly patchy’, he said.
— PA
Orkney faces median council tax of £400
By David Scott Local Government Editor
COUNCIL tax bills in Orkney will range from £267 to £800, according to proposals approved by the islands council finance committee yesterday.
The figures do not include water charges, which will add £77 and £232 to the lowest and highest figures if the recommendations are approved by the council next week.
Householders coming within the middle-range Band D face a £400 council tax plus £116 for water.
Officials had recommended £450 for the Band D rate but councillors decided that the figure should be reduced.
At present, a two-adult household in Orkney pays £360 in poll tax plus £114 for water — a total bill of £474.
Unlike the mainland authorities — where regional and district taxes have to be added before the actual bill is known — Orkney house-holders will pay the one council tax plus water.
The water charges will be up to four times higher than the existing figure of £57.
A strict comparison cannot be made since the new charges are based on two-person households whereas the existing charge is levied on individual community charge payers.
Since Orkney's £41 million proposed budget is in line with Scottish Office grant-aided expenditure figures, the islands council has avoided the risk of having its spending capped by the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang.
Dead king put plenty mussel in council's economy
By Tom Morton
A HIGHLAND council has become Britain's largest mussel producer and is making £400,000 a year from its harvest of bivalves — thanks to King James VI.
In 1612 a grateful James VI, who made regular pilgrimages to St Duthac's shrine at Tain, gifted the already ancient Dornoch Firth mussel fisheries to the town.
The resource remained largely undeveloped until the late 1980s, when Ross and Cromarty District Council, by then in control of the Royal Burgh of Tain's Common Good Fund, took over its management.
‘We have our own specialised boat, and employ a skipper who contracts his own crew,’ said John Horne, the council's fisheries manager.
‘Local packers, and indeed my own job, depend on the fishery too.’
Aggressive marketing and scientific development have brought Tain a fishy fame in specialised mussel circles.
The main supplier to Billingsgate Fish Market in London, the Dornoch Firth fishery produces 2,300 tonnes a year, of which 40 per cent is exported.
According to Mr Horne, good management is a key factor.
‘What we found initially was that individual mussel meats were small because there were so many of them in the one place.
By managing the stock and thinning them out we're getting larger and better shellfish.’
The Dornoch Firth is one of the very few areas around the British Isles given a Grade A classification for shellfish purity.
‘That means the mussels can theoretically be eaten raw,’ said Mr Horne.
‘Other mussel fisheries have to purge their fish for several days, which puts a great stress on them.
Our mussels are cleaned and are sold fresh, staying that way for at least five days — by which time they could be in the south of France.’
Over-fishing is avoided, and two men employed to keep a wary eye out for mussel rustlers.
‘The fishery has been here for over 400 years, so we want to make sure we maintain it for future generations,’ said Mr Horne.
Councillor Jamie Stone of Tain praised the venture's success.
‘It shows the district authorities are capable of combining their public service role with business acumen.
Financially it is a great asset for Tain, and with this sort of money I hope the council will take a serious look at the town's lack of leisure provision,’ he added.
All profits from the fishery must return to Tain, thanks to the foresight of James VI.
Some of 1993's mussel profits will be invested in a cause calculated to gladden the dead king's heart — the Tain Pilgrimage Centre is a tourist project celebrating the town's links with the Stuart dynasty.
ST ANDREWS
Research fellow appointed
HIGHLAND-BORN Dr Catriona Burness was named yesterday as the sixth Glenfiddich Fellow in the Department of Scottish History at St Andrews University.
Dr Burness, who gained her MA and doctorate at Dundee University, is studying Scottish women's involvement in the political parties since 1800.
Her appointment was announced yesterday at a lunch held in her honour at the university.
The fellowship was set up in 1977 and is sponsored by William Grant and Sons, distillers of Glenfiddich malt whisky.
It is the only personal fellowship in Scottish history backed by industry and provides an excellent opportunity to support research in an underfunded area.
After leaving university Dr Burness held several appointments, including working as a research assistant for Scottish MP Mrs Maria Fyfe.
It was the discovery that little had been written on the background of Scottish women MPs which prompted the research work that Dr Burness is following during her fellowship.
As well as being attached to St Andrews University, Dr Burness is a visiting research fellow at Glasgow University.
A university spokesman explained yesterday that although the key objective of Dr Burness's study is to provide an overview and a core of basic information on the experiences of women in Scottish politics, the wider Scottish dimension is also important.
Her work will also explore whether there have been significant differences between the involvement of women in Scottish party politics and that of the United Kingdom as a whole.
This will help to contribute to the ongoing debate on the question of a distinctively Scottish history, added the spokesman.
He said that given the expressed interest of all political parties in attracting more women candidates, the research might also inform party policy and practice in this area.
Yesterday's lunch was attended by Dr Sandy Grant Gordon, chairman of William Grant and Sons, along with various members of the university staff, including Professor David Stevenson, who is chairman of the Scottish History department at St Andrews.
To reflect the nature of the research work being carried out by Dr Burness, three special guests involved in Scottish politics also attended the lunch.
They were Miss Margaret (Peggy) Herbison, who is the oldest surviving Scottish woman MP, having served in the Labour Party cabinet in the 1960s; Councillor Sheila Ritchie, who has been a Liberal Democrat councillor in Gordon for a number of years and is at present a member of the party's National Executive Committee; and Miss Ann Hay, who is an influential key organiser for the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Association in Edinburgh.
The Scottish MEP Mrs Winifred Ewing and Mrs Maria Fyfe, Labour MP for Glasgow Maryhill since 1967, who is the junior shadow spokesperson for the Scottish Office, were also invited to attend but were unable to travel to St Andrews.
DUNDEE
Recruits replace sacked Timex staff
RECRUITS were bused in to the strike-hit Timex factory in Dundee yesterday, replacements for some of the 300 workers sacked during the dispute.
Three-quarters of the workforce was sacked after failing to accept a management plan which involved a wages freeze and benefit cuts.
Management moved immediately to recruit workers in almost every department of the factory.
The Scottish Trades Union Congress is to be asked to convene a special meeting to discuss the case of the Timex workers in an attempt to raise the profile of the dispute.
BR cuts threaten Glasgow-London line
By Allan McLean Transport Correspondent
THE main Glasgow-London railway faces closure for safety reasons unless millions of pounds are spent to replace life-expired equipment, according to British Rail engineers.
A leaked report detailing a crisis on the West coast main line highlights the problems faced by BR after the Government's decision to cut railway investment in 1993-94 by £700 million to £1 billion.
Half the money is for Channel Tunnel work, leaving spending on existing lines at the lowest level in years.
‘Without major renewals, especially of lineside cables and equipment, the West coast railway line will close at some stage before the end of the decade, due to safety risks,’ Ian Buchanan, infrastructure manager for the route, forecasts in the report.
The paper, described as a discussion document by BR's InterCity division, reveals that delays in investment have meant a lost opportunity to include the renewal work with a bigger project to improve services.
It was also confirmed separately that InterCity will have to buy old technology as a stop-gap in advance of a £400 million scheme for new equipment on the route, which it still hopes to start in 1995.
Like-for-like replacement will be needed in the short term instead of larger-scale installation of newer systems which would have allowed faster trains.
A related £400 million plan for new InterCity 250 trains was pigeon-holed last year.
Between £3 million and £5 million will have to be spent on safeguarding signalling and telecommunications every year from 1994 to 2000, in addition to other investment, the report states.
The report recommends the development of an augmented project engineering team ‘to maintain the safety and performance of the route pending resignalling investment’.
It also recommends that the route modernisation project team ‘keep pressing for early authority to start the resignalling work’.
Most of the urgent safety spending is required on the southern half of the line, which was relaid, resignalled and electrified in the 1960s.
Some signalling in the south is still controlled from signalboxes which were built more than 100 years ago.
Modernisation from Glasgow to Weaver junction, where the Liverpool line diverges north of Crewe, was completed in 1974 and does not need further major work until the 21st century.
However, part of the Carlisle-Gretna section was resignalled in 1961 and is in urgent need of renewal.
The report calls for continuing efforts to get early authorisation for the work at Kingmoor, north of Carlisle, in addition to other priority signalling schemes at London Euston, Birmingham and between Weaver and Liverpool.
Electric power supplies south of Liverpool and Manchester are due for modernisation this decade.
Some sections of overhead wire which provide power to trains at 25,000 volts are one third of the thickness which applied when they were new.
Track renewals are also becoming overdue, with a succession of speed restrictions because of the condition of parts of the line.
InterCity would like to see relaying take place on revised, high-speed alignments, south of Rugby and through the Trent Valley south of Crewe, co-ordinated with new signalling and power lines.
Other possible line-speed improvements, including a new curve at Carstairs, near Lanark, to speed trains from Glasgow to the East coast, are thought by railway observers to be unlikely in view of the funding shortage.
Roger Ford, technical editor of Modern Railways, said that the investment problem would be exacerbated by the Government's privatisation plans.
‘The public will get a worse railway for more money,’ he claimed.
The newly-modernised and very profitable Edinburgh-London King's Cross line would go to the private sector, leaving InterCity with the loss-making Glasgow-London Euston route.
Mr Ford also forecast that Railtrack, the proposed state-owned track authority, would be less likely to invest in improved services, because it would have no commercial incentive, and would concentrate only on safety.
DAVID MITCHELL Mystery train: as rail privatisation looms, the future of Glasgow to London expresses is unclear after revelations that the West coast main line needs huge investment to maintain safety
MP angry as knife bill is pushed to one side
By Susan Dean
PRESSURE is mounting on the Government to look at alternative means of toughening the law on Scotland's knife thugs after it emerged that urgently-awaited legislation has been edged out of the parliamentary timetable.
The Dumbarton MP, John McFall, shadow Scottish home affairs spokesman, accused the Government of failing to carry out its manifesto commitment to change the law and stated that Labour would introduce its own bill if the Government refused to make space for the legislation.
William Wilson, chief constable of Central and chairman of the Association of Chief Police Officers (Scotland), described the delay as disappointing and said he would be pressing the Scottish home affairs minister, Lord Fraser, to come up with a solution at a meeting on 1 March.
Mr McFall described as false government claims that there is not enough parliamentary time to see through the amendment, which would bring Scotland into line with English law by forcing the knife carrier to prove there is no criminal intention.
‘There is a groundswell of opinion in Scotland that urgent legislation is needed to curb the carrying of these weapons,’ Mr McFall said.
‘While the Government stubbornly refuses to meet their manifesto commitment, more and more of our youngsters face violent deaths on Scotland's streets.’
Mr Wilson said that police forces had been working with inadequate law for years and that the drafted change would, it was hoped, improve the situation.
Lord Fraser said on television that the proposed legislation, which has cross-party support, would be introduced as the programme in Parliament allowed but gave no hint about how that would be achieved.
All MPs with private members' bills  scheduled for this session have already got their bills under way following normal procedures.
There are other ways of getting non-controversial private members' bills through which may be looked at, including the Scottish Grand Committee.
As Strathclyde's Operation Blade entered its third week, the force announced that its police stations have received 3,152 bladed weapons under the month-long amnesty ending on 1 March.
However, armed violence continues in the region, with knives used in two separate raids early yesterday.
Sheriff officers duck Sheridan protest
By Joan McAlpine
ANTI-POLL TAX protesters yesterday succeeded in stopping goods being uplifted in a warrant sale in Lothian.
The firm of sheriff officers, Love & Co, said it had cancelled its visit to the home of Jim Smeddon at Bonnyrigg on the advice of the police.
‘The police said they could not guarantee the safety of our officers or ensure public order was maintained,’ said a spokesman from the firm.
About 70 protesters, including the Glasgow Militant councillor, Tommy Sheridan, leader of the Scottish Anti Poll Tax Federation, began congregating at 8:00am at Mr Smeddon's council house, where they remained until nightfall.
They were joined by the former Labour MP for Leith, Ron Brown, and the Scottish National Party district councillor for the area, Ian Smith.
A police spokesman said the demonstrators were well behaved but wet.
Sheriff officers had previously poinded the Smeddon family's television, video, hi-fi, microwave and wall unit.
Those are due to be auctioned this week in Edinburgh.
Mr Smeddon, 35, a driver, said he would continue not to pay the tax because it was unfair and he could not afford it.
‘They only succeeded in poinding us because they tricked their way into the house.
We're not just doing this to keep the TV and video, it's the principle of the thing.
Most of the poll tax which is paid is going straight into sheriff officers’ pockets.’
Speaking on Mr Smeddon's doorstep, Mr Sheridan said the federation would continue to stop warrant sales.
‘Even though the poll tax has only two months to go, we'll continue to defend anyone threatened with the brutality of the sheriff officers in keeping up our 100 per cent record on stopping warrant sales.’
A spokesman for the sheriff officers said the sale had not been cancelled.
He hinted that the sale might be delayed to allow the firm to apply for another warrant to allow the uplift of goods ‘through a different procedure’.
He refused to say what that procedure might be, but confirmed it required the permission of Lothian Regional Council.
‘We operate under their instructions on these matters,’ he said.
DUNDEE
Armed raid on head post office
ARMED robbers last night held up security guards at Dundee's head post office and got away with bags containing an unknown sum of money.
The raid happened shortly before 5pm.
Four robbers, two of whom were believed to be armed, threatened two security guards at the side entrance of the post office in Constitution Street close to the headquarters of Tayside police in Bell Street.
The raiders made off in a car which had been reported stolen earlier.
It was found  abandoned about half a mile north in Leaburn Street.
Police sealed off the area and mounted road blocks on exit roads from Dundee and on the Tay road bridge.
Edinburgh pub hours curbed to cut violence
By Sarah Wilson
LATE-NIGHT pub crawls in Edinburgh are to be curtailed after the city's licensing board voted yesterday for restrictions on opening hours.
Scotland's capital has had some of the most liberal licensing rules in Britain, but councillors fear that late-night drinking is contributing to the growing violence in the city centre.
Margaret McGregor, who chairs the licensing board at Edinburgh District Council, said the board was responding to police reports that the incidence of violent crime was greater at the weekends and in the early hours.
‘We have got to try to help the police.
It is difficult for them to have a high profile throughout the whole of the night and into the morning.’
Alcohol has been available in various pubs and discos in Edinburgh from 7am until 5am the following morning.
But the board has decided to extend licensing guidelines to cover a three-mile-square area of the city centre and set final closing times between midnight and 1:30am for pubs.
Places of entertainment, like discos, would have to close at 3am and not let anyone in after 1:30am.
Councillor John Wilson said he did not want the guidelines to be mandatory.
‘We have some very, very good licence holders who don't breach licensing conditions.
There are hundreds of people in the the city centre at weekends and very few cause problems.
I don't see why decent ordinary people having a night out should suffer for the actions of a few.’
Other councillors, however hoped the guidelines would be regarded as the norm.
The only councillor to speak — and vote — against the extension of licensing rules, Gary Coutts, said the board already had powers to restrict the operation of licensed premises where there was trouble.
Higher bands will be worse off under council tax levels
By James Rougvie and William Chisholm
HOUSEHOLDERS in the lowest council tax bands in Fife and Borders regions will pay less than they did under the poll tax, but those in higher bands will find themselves worse off.
The leader of Fife Regional Council's ruling Labour group, John MacDougall, is to present the administration's budget proposals on Thursday.
The sweetener for those who find themselves paying more is that they could qualify for transitional relief which which will cover the increase.
A sample in the middle of the house valuation banding on which the council tax is based, Band D, shows a couple would pay a combined council tax, including water rate, of £504.
A similar couple currently pay £478 poll tax.
The three district councils in Fife have still to set their rates which have to be added to the regional tax.
Fife also revealed that tax-payers would not have to pay for uncollected poll tax arrears, believed to stand at up to £35 million.
While the region has traditionally written off 5 per cent of rates or poll tax bad debts — this year it could be £15 million — the finance director, Tony Taylor, promised yesterday that the council would vigorously pursue non-payers for the rest of the cash.
Fife's total gross budget for the year will be £351.4 million, which is £13.8 million more than last year.
Mr MacDougall said the administration had shaved £4.87 million off its initial calculations in order to stay within Government capping limits.
He said there would be no enforced redundancies, but some vacant posts would remain unfilled.
There would be no cuts in major services, but there would be some reductions in the community education service and cuts in payments to outside bodies.
In the Borders, Peter Jeary, director of finance, said that more than half the 47,000 households on the council tax register would pay less than the regional community charge bills of £312 in 1992-93.
But properties in bands C-H would face higher charges.
Some 70 per cent of Borders properties can also expect reduced demands for water tax.
Only houses in the D-H bands face increases.
Borders businesses are also likely to benefit as a 17 per cent reduction in water bills is planned.
They currently pay some of the highest water charges in the country.
Details of a proposed cut in metered water charges from 64.4p per cubic metre to 53p are included in a set of council tax proposals to be considered by regional councillors today.
Wartime ordnance found on beaches
BOMB DISPOSAL specialists were yesterday called out to beaches on the south-west coast of Scotland after Second World War phosphorus canisters believed to be from an undersea dump were washed ashore.
About 15 of the canisters, which explode when they dry out, have been discovered on the coast at Mull of Kintyre and more than 50 were found on the Isle of Man, where five have spontaneously ignited.
The canisters, which may be from an officially charted dump midway between the Isle of Man and the Kintyre peninsula, floated to shore after apparently being set loose by recent storms.
Beaches in Kirkcudbright were closed and the fishery protection vessel Embarr carried out a search off the north-west coast of the Isle of Man.
Some canisters are 12 inches long while others range from six inches to 18 inches.
They are made from a semi-rigid porous material but bear no markings.
A coastguard spokesman said: ‘These cylinders appear to be World War Two ordnance which had been dumped.
Recent storms have obviously set them loose, causing them to wash up on the shoreline.
They should not be handled or taken away if found.’
Cocklers and fishing boats in the area were warned to take care and auxiliary coastguards searched the south Scotland and Cumbria coasts until dark last night as a precaution.
Thousands of tons of explosives were dumped in a deep trench between the Isle of Man and the Kintyre peninsula after the war.
A Clyde Coastguard spokesman said: ‘We had between 20 and 30 last year on Arran and we have had another 12 to l5 reported on the Kintyre coastline.
They are potentially very dangerous and what we are worried about is members of the public picking them up and taking them home as souvenirs.’
Allitt trial told of quick call for help
A NURSE yesterday told how a colleague accused of murdering four children had been quick to summon help for a sick baby.
Kayley Desmond, 14 months, had suffered three respiratory attacks where she suddenly stopped breathing over a few hours, Nurse Maxine Motley told Nottingham Crown Court.
Kayley had been under observation by Nurse Motley and Beverley Allitt, 24, who denies murdering four child patients and attempting to murder nine others, including Kayley, at Grantham and Kesteven Hospital in Lincolnshire in 1991.
Allitt, 24, from Corby Glen, near Grantham, also denies attempting to murder the 15-year-old brother of her flat- mate and a 73-year-old woman.
The prosecution alleges that Allitt injected Kayley with air and possibly another substance.
Nurse Motley said that when it appeared that Kayley was about to suffer another respiratory attack, she had administered oxygen while Allitt had opened the door and called for the cardiac arrest team.
However, Kayley had come round quickly and probably never stopped breathing.
Nurse Motley said that except for a moment when she picked up a piece of paper and threw it in the bin, she had been standing by Kayley's head the whole time.
The court heard that Timothy Hardwick, a severely disabled 11-year-old Allitt is alleged to have murdered, was not in a life-threatening condition an hour before he suffered a fatal heart attack.
Dr Siddhi Joshipura said in a statement that Timothy had been admitted after a series of epileptic fits.
She had seen him at 5pm and there had been no major problems.
‘He was not in a life-threatening condition and I was happy with him.’
At about 5:45pm, the cardiac arrest team had been called, resuscitation had failed and he was confirmed dead at 6:25pm.
Mr Justice Latham later told the jury the prosecution had received new evidence from doctors over the weekend which had to be considered and the trial would be delayed.
The judge, who was considering a timetable for the rest of the case, said he hoped to resume hearing evidence tomorrow and the trial was adjourned until then.
— PA
Half our coastline is affected by pollution, survey reports
By Auslan Cramb, Environment Correspondent
BRITISH shores are awash with rubbish from more than 32 countries, according to a survey which reveals the deteriorating state of the nation's coastline.
Almost 50 per cent of coastal areas surveyed last year in Scotland, England and Wales suffered from some form of pollution.
During a fortnight-long project, 6,000 volunteers found that 13 out of the 16 types of litter counted showed an increase on previous years.
On 2,185 kilometres of beach — about 15 per cent of the British coast — 170,000 individual pieces of litter were collected, more than 23,000 sanitary products, 38,000 cans and 57,000 plastic bottles and can carriers.
Only 10 per cent of the coast was said to be in excellent condition.
In Scotland, sanitary waste made the biggest impact — 38 individual items were found per kilometre, compared with 27 plastic bottles and the same number of cans, and five plastic six-pack holders.
The pollution was worst in Strathclyde, Lothian and Fife regions, and lowest in the islands.
Gareth Rees, co-ordinator of the Norwich Union Coastwatch programme at Farnborough College, said: ‘Despite increased government legislation and political rhetoric, we are faced with results which indicate for the fourth year running a deterioration in the state of our coastline.
‘Action must be taken by the government and regulatory authorities to ensure that this situation is addressed.
We cannot allow the state of the coastline to be increasingly compromised.’
The survey also found an increase in nitrate loads entering the sea.
Levels were above background values in 641 of the 2,446 pipes, rivers and streams surveyed.
Nitrates contribute to nutrient enrichment which encourages algal growth and blooms.
Sewage was the major cause of water pollution.
The study is supported by the Marine Conservation Society and sponsored by Norwich Union, and is part of Coastwatch Europe, a network covering 20 countries.
Next week, the Women's Environmental Network in London is expected to announce an initiative intended to stop women flushing tampons, sanitary towels and panty liners down the lavatory.
The organisation will promote a new disposal bag, and advise women to bin the products.
They also want manufacturers to change their disposal instructions.
Lecturers vote to strike in support of colleague
By Frank Urquhart
THE staff of the School of Food and Consumer Studies at Aberdeen's Robert Gordon University yesterday voted 19-2 to hold a one-day strike in support of a senior lecturer who is facing compulsory redundancy.
Conciliation talks are due to begin at RGU today between the management and the University Lecturers Association.
The union leaders, however, gave warning yesterday that the strike on Thursday would go ahead unless the decision to sack were overturned.
The ULA is already preparing plans to ballot 110 more lecturers on a possible work to rule.
The union Manufacturing Science and Finance, which has lecturer members, may also become involved.
At the centre of the row is the university's decision to force Sheena Falconer, a senior lecturer in the school, to choose between accepting compulsory redundancy and putting her sister out of a job.
Mrs Falconer, a senior lecturer in textiles, has been told there is funding for only one textile lecturer in the school, but that she could remain on the staff if she accepted demotion to ordinary lecturer — a post already held by her sister, Barbara Diack.
Dr Alastair McLeish, branch secretary of the ULA, said that if the dispute were not settled then it was quite possible that there would be strike action for three days next week.
‘We are balloting the rest of our members on a work-to-rule but will move to a strike ballot if that does not force a change of mind.
We hope now that management will try and resolve this situation either through redeployment or retraining, or further consultation.’
Dr McLeish said the decision to involve the Advisory Conciliation and Arbitration Service at today's talks would not affect the strike plan.
‘We would only call off the strike if Mrs Falconer was given assurances that her job would be saved.’
Jim Cowan, the RGU group secretary of the MSF, said his union was also looking at possible industrial action, but would await the ballot of the entire ULA membership before taking a final decision.
A spokesman for RGU said: ‘We have always been willing to negotiate.
The hope is that it could be possible to agree to look for alternative possibilities for Mrs Falconer.’
Long-term health plan criticised
Bryan Christie reports that an economic analysis of Government strategy to improve Scotland's health finds it seriously flawed
A LONG-TERM strategy drawn up by the Government for improving Scotland's health will fail, health economists claim.
In a challenging analysis of the Government's plan, they argue that it will not deliver the greatest health benefits to the greatest number of people.
Gavin Mooney and Shelly Farrar of Aberdeen University's health economics research unit believe the Government has committed a serious error by failing to take costs into account when setting out its aims in the report Scotland's Health: A challenge to us all.
‘The strategy will not provide the route to the greatest health for the people of Scotland,’ they say.
‘When the health service in Scotland needed a lead, the document has not provided it.’
The Government report identifies priority areas for action, such as smoking and diet, and sets a series of targets for improving the health of Scots.
However, the Aberdeen economists say it does not take the issue of scarce resources into account.
‘By all means let there be challenges for the promotion of better health, but let them be based on sound reasoning.
The idea of target setting based purely on ‘doing better’ without considering what the cost of that doing better is, just does not stand up to rational examination.
‘We do not, when thinking of buying a car, decide on the car and then ask about the price.
Yet that is the sort of philosophy that seems to underlie this strategy document for Scotland's health,’ they say in an article in the Scottish Medical Journal.
Although some extra money has been allocated to help with the Government programme, the economists say that, generally, the intention appears to be that the initiatives to meet targets will be funded out of existing resources.
That could mean other parts of the service suffering as money is diverted.
Instead of deciding what should be done and working out later if it can be afforded, the economists say the problem should tackled the other way round.
‘While our efficiency approach argues for looking for ‘good buys’ in terms of where the most health gains can be had per extra £1,000 spent, the strategy document tends to argue in terms of throwing most money at the biggest problems irrespective of whether there are cost-effective measures available for dealing with them.’
They say the economists' approach is winning a greater acceptance among doctors and health  service managers because they appreciate that money is limited and choices have to be made on where it should be spent.
The Government document, however, does not take that road to the problems of Scotland's health.
‘Yet that is the only way to ensure that Scotland's health is promoted as fully as possible,’ say the Aberdeen economists.
Bribe paid to get grenades on plane
AN AZERI man charged with hijacking a Russian plane to Stockholm said he paid about £35 to get hand grenades through security at a Siberian airport.
He said he and his wife paid 30,000 roubles as bribes to get a bag with the grenades in it through security at the airport at the Siberian oil capital of Tyumen.
‘You just take your bag through another entrance and no-one knows what's in it — drugs, weapons or whatever,’ Tamerlan Musajev told the Swedish news agency TT yesterday.
The hijacker threatened to use the grenades to kill himself and all 80 passengers and crew unless he was taken to New York.
After five hours of negotiations with Swedish police, he gave up himself up.
In Moscow, a senior air transport security official confirmed yesterday that a Russian airport worker had smuggled two hand grenades aboard the hijacked plane.
Yuri Moiseyev, deputy head of the air transport department's security unit, told Itar-Tass news agency that airport auxiliary staff in Russia were generally negligent about their duties.
‘They take bribes to smuggle passengers’ personal belongings to the aircraft through the security screening system.’
Musajev, 27, who along with his wife faces air piracy charges, told a court he had never held a grenade but had read how to handle one.
Musajev, from Baku, said he also paid bribes for the plane ticket to St Petersburg because they are almost impossible to buy legally.
He intended to go to New York to seek political asylum.
A plane ticket to the United States, however, would have cost too much.
‘I managed to carry through the hijacking 80 per cent.
It wasn't necessary to get to the United States.
I would have been satisfied with England, Germany, France or any democratic country,’ he said.
— Reuter
UN teams end Iraq arms raid in silence
TWO teams of UN weapons inspectors joined forces yesterday in an apparent hunt for Scud missiles which the United Nations suspects Iraq is hiding.
But an Iraqi official said they found nothing.
Nikita Smidovitch, whose team of 20 inspectors flew in from Bahrain at dawn, said the surprise inspections were specifically related to the long-range missiles.
The Russian's group arrived in Iraq about the same time as a team of 13 inspectors, which had been due to leave the country yesterday, announced it was staying on.
He said the locations might contain items prohibited by UN Security Council resolution 687, which requires Iraq to dismantle its biological, chemical, nuclear and ballistic missile programmes.
But he declined to say whether the inspectors — two teams acting together for the first time in Iraq — had found any of the Scud missiles the United Nations thinks Iraq is hiding.
He said that question should be addressed to the special commission on Iraq's weapons of mass destruction.
But Husam Mohammadamin, the Iraqi official coordinating the movements of the UN inspectors, said: ‘They visited three sites.
They found nothing.
This is great proof that we are hiding nothing.’
The UN has said it has strong evidence Iraq is hiding about 100 of the Scud missiles of the type it fired at Israel and Saudi Arabia in the Gulf war, but Iraq denies it.
— Reuter
Arafat warns of Middle East war
A WARNING of a Middle East war if a speedy solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict is not found soon was given by the Palestine Liberation Organisation chairman, Yasser Arafat, yesterday.
In words aimed at the US president, Bill Clinton, he said: ‘The Balkanisation of the region is coming if there is to be no peaceful settlement.
Speaking in Yemen's capital, Sana'a, as the US secretary of state, Warren Christopher, held talks in Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, he warned that Israel's prime minister, Yitzhak Rabin, whom Mr Christopher is scheduled to meet today, ‘will only have himself to blame for the crazy escalation of terrorism against our Palestinian people’.
Mr Christopher arrived in Israel from Cyprus last night for two days of talks to wind up his week-long Middle East peace mission.
Earlier yesterday, in the first visit by a US secretary of state to Beirut in ten years, he had 75 minutes of talks with Lebanon's president, Elias Hrawi, prime minister, Rafik al-Hariri, and foreign minister, Fares Bouez.
Asked what he had achieved during such brief talks, Mr Christopher said: ‘A commitment from the Lebanese government to resume negotiations as soon as possible.’
Mr Bouez said Lebanon still wanted to see the implementation of a UN resolution demanding Israel immediately take back nearly 400 Palestinians deported to southern Lebanon.
Mr Christopher plans to ask Israel to speed up a review of the case.
Dutch ire at Vatican on mercy killing law
THE Dutch government called in the papal envoy in the Hague yesterday to protest at remarks made by a senior Vatican official comparing a new Dutch euthanasia law to mass killings by Nazi Germany.
The papal nuncio, Henri Lemaitre, was summoned to the foreign ministry so the foreign minister, Pieter Kooijmans, could express the government's deep displeasure at remarks by Monsignor Elio Sgreccia, secretary of the Vatican Council for the Family.
‘The minister emphasised to the papal nuncio that remarks of this kind do no justice whatsoever to the content of the Dutch euthanasia legislation,’ the ministry said in a statement.
Mr Sgreccia last Thursday compared the new law to the mass killings of Hitler's Germany, drawing immediate condemnation from senior Dutch government officials.
‘Both euthanasia and Hitler's extermination projects have the same end,’ Mr Sgreccia had said in a radio interview.
The law, approved by parliament earlier this month, allows doctors to perform euthanasia at the explicit request of their patients under tightly controlled conditions.
The Dutch prime minister, Ruud Lubbers, said on Friday that Mr Sgreccia's remarks were ‘absolutely unacceptable’.
The head of the Dutch Catholic Church, Cardinal Ad Simonis, said on Sunday the comments were unfortunate and betrayed a poor understanding of the law.
‘I would have told him outright: You should not say this…you have the wrong idea,’ he told Dutch television.
The euthanasia law was a broadly backed compromise worked out after 20 years of exhaustive public debate and has given the Netherlands the world's most lenient policy on mercy killing.
— Reuter
UN vote approves Bosnia war crimes trials
A WAR CRIMES tribunal will be set up to prosecute those responsible for atrocities in former Yugoslavia, the United Nations Security Council decided unanimously yesterday.
The announcement came as food and medical supplies began flowing into the besieged Bosnian capital, Sarajevo, after the city's Muslim authorities lifted a ten-day protest boycott of UN aid.
The UN secretary-general, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, was asked to draw up detailed proposals within 60 days on how the tribunal, which will not have the power of the death sentence, should function.
Fighting in the former Yugoslavia has been accompanied by accounts of mass killings and rapes, torture, so-called ethnic cleansing or mass expulsions of rival ethnic groups, and detention centres reminiscent of Nazi concentration camps.
The international tribunal will be the first such court since the United States, Britain, Russia and France set up a military tribunal at Nuremberg in 1945 to try Nazi criminals.
The council resolution, initiated by France, ‘decides that an international tribunal shall be established for the prosecution of persons responsible for serious violations of international humanitarian law committed in the territory of the former Yugoslavia since 1991’.
Describing the alleged war crimes as ‘a threat to international peace and security’, the resolution expresses a determination to ‘put an effective end to such crimes and to take effective measures to bring to justice the persons who are responsible for them’.
Published accounts and investigative groups have blamed Serb forces and irregulars for a major share of the atrocities, but similar accusations have also been levelled at Croats and Bosnian Muslims.
A five-member UN war crimes commission that has been sifting through mountains of documents submitted by governments and non-governmental bodies is building a computerised database of reported atrocities, accompanied by names of victims, alleged perpetrators and witnesses.
In Sarajevo, UN planes had already started landing at the airport before the formal announcement by the Bosnian capital that it would accept the aid, ending a protest mounted because UN relief was not getting through to 100,000 Muslims cut off by Serbs in eastern Bosnia.
A UN convoy, due to set out yesterday from Belgrade for the Muslim-held town of Gorazde, was postponed for a day at the request of the Serbs.
They said tension was running high over the mass funeral of 38 of their soldiers whose graves were found close to the convoy's route.
Serbs said most of the soldiers had been captured alive and then killed by Muslims.
The Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan Karadzic, said at the funeral that the atrocity meant Muslims and Serbs could never live together.
He said his self-proclaimed republic would send a team to peace talks in New York but he would not be heading it.
The Bosnian Serb news agency SRNA said this was because the Serbs had been subjected to ‘restrictive US visa regulations, biased media reporting and hostile demonstrations’.
Last week, Mr Karadzic asked for the talks, co-chaired by international mediators Cyrus Vance and Lord Owen, to be moved from New York to Geneva.
On proposals for United States parachute drops of aid to the cut-off Muslims in eastern Bosnia, Mr Karadzic said: ‘There is no need…
There have been hundreds of convoys through Serb territory.
If they want to play games with their parachutes, then that is their affair.
But don't American taxpayers care what is done with their money?’
A unilateral ceasefire announced by the Muslim government to coincide with the lifting of the aid boycott appeared to have reduced shelling around Sarajevo for a third day yesterday.
— Reuter
Gunmen kill Irish nurse in Somalia
GUNMEN killed an Irish nurse yesterday when they attacked a convoy taking her to a new assignment in Baidoa, a Somali towns at the centre of the famine region.
Valerie Place, 23, of the Irish charity Concern, threw herself to the car floor when gunmen opened fire on the convoy near Afgoi, 20 miles west of the capital Mogadishu.
Also yesterday, at least seven people were killed and 21 wounded in five hours of fighting between Somali militias in the southern port of Kismayu, the US military said.
A spokesman, Col Fred Peck, said the fighting was between supporters of Omer Jess, who controls Kismayu, and about 150 infiltrators loyal to warlord Mohamed Said Hersi, known as Morgan.
Col Peck said the fighting was a serious setback to the peace process and had put back plans to hold a ceremony today to transfer command of the city to 650 Belgian troops from about 1,000 US troops.
He said Mr Morgan, contacted by radio, acknowledged the fighters belonged to him but said they acted without his orders or consent.
Concern's chief executive, Aengus Finucane, in Somalia on a visit, said: ‘Wendy Murphy, a nurse who was with Valerie, said Valerie threw herself to the floor of the car when the shooting started.
But more shots were fired on the car as they tried to escape.’
Ms Place was the second foreign aid worker shot dead since January.
Then gunmen killed Briton Sean Devereux, who worked for UNICEF in Kismayu.
An independent television producer, Paul Harrison, who was in one of the cars and filmed part of the shooting, added:
‘She was hit by several bullets.
The military passing by called up a helicopter which took her to hospital in Mogadishu but she died five minutes after her arrival.
Two other people were slightly wounded.’
Earlier yesterday Ms Place had shown the world heavyweight boxing champion, Riddick Bowe, around Mogadishu, where he was making a brief charity visit.
Bowe had left Somalia when news of her killing reached Mogadishu.
John Riehl, executive director of an aid group called AmeriCare, said Bowe paid $94,000 (£65,000) to charter a flight from New York to Nairobi which also carried $1.8 million worth of medicine.
The fighter has criticised well-to-do black Americans for not doing enough to alleviate suffering in Somalia.
Speaking to Irish state radio from Baidoa, Concern spokesman Michael O'Reilly said: ‘Unfortunately this had been on the cards for some time.
A number of people have got shot dead on that same particular road in recent weeks.
‘These are literally bandits.
There are no organised attacks.
They are maybe five or six gunmen who jump out in the road in front of the car and start firing shots.’
Asked if the UN-mandated troops could do more to protect aid workers, Mr O'Reilly said: ‘One can hardly expect a military escort can travel with every possible aid worker in Somalia…
I think they are doing everything possible to protect the workers.
‘Our team here and all the aid workers in Baidoa were absolutely devastated by the news.’
— Reuter 
A final act: Valerie Place, right, showed the US boxer, Riddick Bowe, and his wife, Judy, a Mogadishu centre hours before bandits killed her in an ambush
France pledges oilseed veto amid day of protest
FRANCE will veto a draft accord on oilseed subsidies between Europe and the United States, Prime Minister Pierre Beregovoy warned yesterday, and he asked the European Community to drop the deal from the agenda of a Council of Ministers meeting on 8 March.
As he was speaking, French trawlermen protesting against cheap fish imports forced a British ferry carrying fish-laden lorries to switch ports while angry farmers halted rail traffic with blazing barricades.
The EC Commission, however, ignored France's demands.
A spokesman yesterday said the farm commissioner, Rene Steichen, ‘intends keeping oilseeds on the agenda…
The commission wants to tie down the December deal as soon as possible.’
During an election campaign trip to the town of Montmorillon, Mr Beregovoy told reporters: ‘France will use its veto under the terms of the Luxembourg compromise.’
Under an agreement known as the Luxembourg compromise, EC states can veto decisions that would hurt their vital interests.
The oilseed agreement, which reduces the cultivated area used to produce vegetable oils, struck in Washington last December to avoid a damaging trade war, is a part of an EC-US farm trade accord that is crucial to a long-delayed world trade deal under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
In letters to the Danish foreign minister, Poul Nyrup-Rasmussen, whose country holds the EC's rotating presidency, and the EC commission president, Jacques Delors, Mr Beregovoy said he wanted the discussion of the oilseed deal put off pending completion of studies on whether the accord was compatible with EC common farm policy.
He warned that Paris would reject the accord which affected major French interests.
‘I want to inform you now that[my government]will oppose approval of the draft oilseed accord by all means agreed between member states.’
One such means is the Luxembourg compromise.
Elsewhere, during protests yesterday by farmers and fishermen, a British ferry was diverted 125 miles to Cherbourg after 500 Breton fishermen occupied the quayside railhead at Roscoff.
The protesters, also angered by cheap imports from eastern Europe and South America, ransacked sheds owned by a merchant they said dealt in British fish and hundreds of people took to the streets of Concarneau and neighbouring ports to show their support.
Farmers opposing the GATT oilseed deal blocked rail lines and the state railway said a train leaving Montargis for Paris hit a barricade, but no-one was injured.
Traffic out of Paris to the south-west was interrupted for about 90 minutes and trains in the southern Midi-Pyrenees region were at a standstill for seven hours.
— Reuter 
Beregovoy: ‘France will use its veto’ over oilseed
Iran calls on Christians to hunt Rushdie
A CALL for Christians to join Muslims in hunting down and killing the novelist Salman Rushdie was made yesterday by the speaker of Iran's parliament, Ali Akbar Nateq-Nouri.
In a meeting with the Canadian ambassador, Paul Dingledine, he criticised western governments' growing public support for Rushdie, whose death was ordered by the late Iranian leader Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini four years ago for alleged blasphemy in his book The Satanic Verses.
LEBANON
Two killed in artillery duel
AN ARTILLERY duel was fought between Israeli troops and guerrillas in southern Lebanon yesterday, killing two people and wounding two others.
Pro-Iranian Hezbollah guerrillas fired ten mortar bombs at Israel's self-styled security zone and shot anti-tank rockets at Israeli helicopters.
Israeli soldiers killed a guerrilla and wounded another in a clash.
Israeli gunners then lobbed dozens of shells towards the villages where Hezbollah is active.
A civilian man, 38, was killed and his sister, 30, wounded, witnesses said.
— Reuter
KUWAIT
Agreement to end abuse of maids
KUWAIT and the Philippines have agreed joint measures to curb beatings rapes and sexual abuse of Filipina maids by Kuwaiti employers.
The Philippines consul-general, Wenceslao Quirolgico, said yesterday Kuwait had also pledged to help the repatriation to Manila of 300 who have taken refuge at the Philippine embassy complaining of abuse by employers.
— Reuter
JORDAN
King Hussein's heir to marry
PRINCE Abdullah, eldest son of King Hussein of Jordan and his British former wife, Antoinette Gardiner, is to marry 22-year-old Rania Faisal al-Yassin, a Palestinian-Jordanian born in Kuwait.
Prince Abdullah, 31, is a British-educated colonel in the Jordanian Army.
His mother and the king married in 1961 and were divorced in 1972. — Reuter
BELGIUM
7,000 teargas cans found in car
TWO POLES have been arrested by Belgian police after 7,850 teargas canisters were found in their car during a routine check in the port of Antwerp.
— Reuter
FRANCE
Sex reputation may be over-inflated
FRENCH men, proud of their prowess as lovers, may actually be all hot air, according to a study by the National Demographic Studies Institute.
‘Maybe women are more realistic?’ said the study, based on interviews with 20,000 people.
Men claimed to have had sex 8.1 times in the last month, and each encounter had lasted 31 minutes on average.
Women, however, put the number at 7.2 times lasting only 25 minutes each time.
Men also claimed to have had four times more sexual partners in their lives than women — 12.1 versus 3.2. — Reuter
Angolan talks set as battle rages
PEACE talks between the Angolan government and the rebel Unita movement have been set for Friday and the first priority will be a ceasefire in the renewed civil war, a UN official said yesterday.
‘It is only with a ceasefire that it will be possible to save the traumatised population of Angola, and the United Nations are ready to help once the hostilities cease,’ said Joao Lins de Albuquerque, spokesman for the UN representative, Margaret Anstee.
But as the UN announced the talks, planned for the Ethiopian capital Addis Ababa, Angolan government troops fought their way towards the besieged central city of Huambo.
Military officials said a relief column heading for Huambo, where a battle has raged for six weeks, clashed with Unita forces about 60 miles from the city.
‘There were confrontations but the column is continuing to Huambo,’ one official said.
Unita said its fighters destroyed the column in a three-hour battle on Sunday, but the military official said the claim was propaganda.
Unita (National Union for the Total Independence of Angola) agreed to accept UN measures to guarantee the safety and security of its delegation to the new round of talks, the Portuguese news agency Lusa said.
Officials in Luanda confirmed the report, adding that delegations were due to fly to Addis Ababa on Thursday.
The government had already agreed to meeting Unita this week and the UN had been waiting for Unita to set the date, UN officials said.
In Johannesburg, the South African Communist Party claimed yesterday that Jonas Savimbi, the Unita leader, was being sheltered in South Africa, which supported the movement during the 1980s in its fight against the Angolan government.
The South African foreign affairs department denied the claim, which the party based on ‘well-sourced reports’ it refused to identify.
Mr Savimbi's whereabouts have been a mystery since the battle for Huambo, Unita's headquarters, began on 9 January.
He communicates with Ms Anstee and others by satellite telephone.
— Reuter
UN soldier killed in Lebanon
A UNITED Nations soldier and a civilian were killed in shelling in South Lebanon yesterday, but Israel denied its forces had been involved.
A spokesman for the UN force in Lebanon said a Nepali had been killed and another seriously wounded when two mortar bombs fired by the Israeli-allied South Lebanon Army militia hit their post in the village of Yater.
A civilian was killed and another seriously wounded in the village.
‘Mortar shells were fired towards the security zone in the central sector of south Lebanon,’ an Israeli official said.
‘SLA soldiers fired back towards the sources of fire and towards terrorist concentrations.
The Israeli army did not fire.’
— Reuter
IRAN
Call for Christians to hunt Rushdie
A CALL for Christians to join Muslims in hunting down and killing the novelist Salman Rushdie was made yesterday by the speaker of Iran's parliament, Ali Akbar Nateq-Nouri.
In a meeting with the Canadian ambassador, Paul Dingledine, he criticised western governments' growing public support for Rushdie, whose death was ordered by the late Iranian leader Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini four years ago over his book The Satanic Verses.
— Reuter
UNITED STATES
Singer in toilet video ding-a-ling
THE rock-and-roll legend Chuck Berry lost a US supreme court appeal yesterday to block lawsuits against him for allegedly secretly videotaping women in the toilet at his restaurant in Wentzville, Missouri.
The court denied without comment the appeal by Berry, who faces being sued for breach of privacy by hundreds of women.
— AP
NEW ZEALAND
Tenzing grandson to scale Everest
SHERPA Tashi Tenzing, 27, grandson of Tenzing Norgay, one of the two men who first climbed Mt Everest, yesterday told a New Zealand newspaper he planned to try to scale mountain on 29 May, the 40th anniversary of the first ascent.
Peter Hillary, grandson of the New Zealander Edmund Hillary, the other climber on the first ascent, climbed Everest last year.
— Reuter
JORDAN
King Hussein's heir to marry
PRINCE Abdullah, eldest son of King Hussein of Jordan and his British former wife, Antoinette Gardiner, is to marry 22-year-old Rania Faisal al-Yassin, a Palestinian-Jordanian born in Kuwait.
Prince Abdullah, 31, is a British-educated colonel in the Jordanian Army.
His mother and the king married in 1961 and were divorced in 1972. — Reuter
UNITED STATES
Aide charged with Tsongas fund theft
THE CHIEF fund raiser for Senator Paul Tsongas's presidential campaign last year has been charged with stealing more than $1 million in what prosecutors call the biggest case of election campaign fraud in US history.
Nicholas Rizzo, 59, a veteran election fundraiser, was charged with mail fraud, money laundering and making false statements.
— Reuter
BELGIUM
7,000 teargas cans found in car
TWO POLES have been arrested by Belgian police after 7,850 teargas canisters were found in their car during a routine check in the port of Antwerp.
— Reuter
FRANCE
Sex reputation may be over-inflated
FRENCH men, proud of their prowess as lovers, may actually be all hot air, according to a study by the National Demographic Studies Institute.
‘Maybe women are more realistic?’ said the study, based on interviews with 20,000 people.
Men claimed to have had sex 8.1 times in the last month, and each encounter had lasted 31 minutes on average.
Women, however, put the number at 7.2 times lasting only 25 minutes each time.
Men also claimed to have had four times more sexual partners in their lives than women — 12.1 versus 3.2. — Reuter 
Labour split
The dichotomy between the ‘British’ and ‘Scottish’Labour parties is becoming something of a cause celebre is it not?
Yesterday you reported the Scottish executive as having clarified the attitude of the party in Scotland to water privatisation, in the wake of John Smith's recent speech about ownership not mattering, and Tom Clarke's discomfiture at being questioned over it.
They claimed to have ‘underlined Labour's pledge to create a Scottish parliament and committed Scottish Labour MPs to returning any privatised water services to public ownership’.
One wonders how they will achieve this.
If water is privatised, franchised, or otherwise converted into a money-making scheme for a minority, it will be as a result of an act of the Westminster Parliament.
Is Labour saying that it will create a parliament in Scotland which is at liberty to repeal Westminster legislation?
If not, how will it be done?
Its proposed parliament for Scotland, whatever its structure or method of election, is bound to be a subsidiary organ to Westminster because Labour members are unionists.
What if the English Labour Party, which the Scottish executive cannot commit to it, does not wish this to happen?
How will they deal with that?
Personally I think they are window-dressing as usual for the benefit of their Scottish support.
They know as well as anyone else that Labour will have an even higher mountain to climb come the next general election as a result of Boundary Commission changes.
They can, therefore promise the moon to Scotland in the knowledge that they will never be required to deliver it.
The only Scottish parliament which will be guaranteed to be able to bring water services back into public ownership is an independent one.
Case for sense in Scots justice
Unlike John Major, Richard Kinsey advocates the need to understand more about youth crime, and says the English system could learn from Scotland's experience
OVER a weekend in which John Major said ‘society needs to condemn a little more and understand a little less’, and Kenneth Clarke let fly against social workers ‘mouthing political rhetoric about why children in their care are so delinquent’, the message which will stick in my mind was from Anfield, saying simply ‘Rest in Peace James’.
Such tragedies hurt.
The young student who died in Edinburgh; James Bulger; the girl raped in Gwent — all bring out a natural sympathy as well as a sense of our own fragility and powerlessness.
At such times, I wonder at my own job and the meaningless sterility of the statistics which are my trade.
In the face of such pain, does it really matter about crime figures in Scotland coming down?
Does it really matter what a few politicians or academics say?
Probably not.
In many ways, it would be better to show respect and let people grieve in private.
But that is not the way things work.
On Friday, I was in Manchester, taking part in a Friday night live programme for Granada TV along with the chief constable from Gwent, a right-wing Tory MP and the documentary film-maker Roger Graef.
We each said our piece, each absolutely predictable.
What was astonishing was the emotionally charged response of the audience.
The vilification of a young man — with convictions for car theft and now working with young boys making prize-winning community videos — edged on violence.
I am told it made wonderful television.
So what is happening?
What justification can there be for another academic article at such a moment?
In part, I want simply to say ‘slow down’.
Unlike John Major, I think we desperately need to understand more.
Why, for example, have Scottish cities been exempt from the urban riots which, every year since 1981, have seen parts of English towns and cities literally torn apart?
Why, during the 1980s, did juvenile offences such as vandalism and car crime fall in Scotland when in England they were rising so fast?
How is it that police forces such as Lothian and Borders are this year reporting crime rates back down to the levels of 1981?
But then maybe there is something different about Scotland which we need to cling on to.
Indeed, at times like this, may be it is useful simply to restate what, for many people, is so obvious it often goes without saying.
Let me give some examples.
We have in Scotland a unique system of juvenile justice.
It is based upon the welfare of the child rather than the criminal responsibility of ‘the delinquent’.
I think it is important to reassert the depths of support for such measures in Scotland and, more generally, for the principles of welfare which underpin them and stand in such sharp comparison to attitudes south of the Border.
On another occasion, I would want to argue that, despite the problems, comparisons with the English system can only give ground for encouragement and that we should be thinking of extending the Scottish system beyond the age of 16 to include offenders under 21.
For the moment, though,
I think it is important to reassert the depths of support for such measures in Scotland and, more generally, for the principles of welfare which underpin them and stand in such sharp comparison to attitudes south of the Border.
At the most general level, we all know about voting patterns in Scotland.
What is discussed much less frequently, however, is the extent of Scottish ‘egalitarianism’ and especially the strength of middle- class support for the welfare state.
For example, in the mid-1980s the British social attitudes survey found in the Midlands and the south of England, that 33 per cent of the middle-class ‘salariat’ was of the view that ‘unemployment benefit is too low and causes hardship’.
In Scotland, the figure was 60 per cent.
Again, in those same areas of England still fewer believed ‘income should be redistributed from the better off to the less well off’.
Yet in Scotland the majority of the ‘salariat’(58 per cent) clung on to such views.
Not surprisingly, perhaps, among traditional Labour voters they were even more widely held.
LAST year in our report on the last British crime survey for the Scottish Office, we were unaware of these findings.
Had we known about them we might have paid more attention to the findings of the crime survey which suggested a quite extraordinary level of public support for what is now dismissed as the ‘political rhetoric’ of the social worker.
Thus, far from wanting punishment for young people, between 80 per cent and 90 per cent of Scots supported measures such as‘counselling to help offenders with personal problems that may have led them to offend’, community service orders and welfare support ‘as an alternative to sending offenders to court’.
Judged simply in statistical terms these were stunning.
Rarely, if ever, do we find such a consensus across area and social class.
But they are only statistics and, of course, there are times when it is right to rethink even the most deeply held beliefs.
At the same time, in Scotland we are faced with an almost daily barrage of press and television images from English towns and cities —‘joy riding’, urban rioting, football violence, racist attacks, and so on— against which it is perhaps difficult to keep hold of the reality of our own towns and cities.
We have problems in Scotland.
‘Operation Blade’ in Strathclyde has highlighted the carrying of knives and the awful consequences — especially for young people themselves.
My own research with young people in Edinburgh and Lothian Region has placed such problems squarely in the context of adult violence to children in public places and pointed to the frequency with which young people go around in gangs or carry weapons usually as a response — however ill-judged — to crimes they suffer.
Am I alone in feeling worried about the political response to such problems?
Will it prove doubly tragic that ‘Operation Blade’ has coincided with such terrible events — in Liverpool, Gwent and Edinburgh?
While it is probably too much to expect English politicians to learn from Scotland, I would have hoped that in Scotland we will still try to understand the problems rather than take refuge in moral outrage and simply condemn.
Italy in turmoil
ITALIAN political life has recently resembled nothing so much as a scene from Goethe's poem The Sorcerer's Apprentice.
Unable to stop the spell which has made the broom fetch water, the apprentice breaks it in two only to have both halves doing the job at twice the speed.
The magistrates investigating the corruption involving all the major parties and business must feel rather like the apprentice: the arrest of the president of a Milan old people's home a year ago, charged with accepting bribes, opened the flood-gates and precipitated the most far-reaching corruption investigations leading to the highest levels of politics and business.
Only in this case Italians do not want to stop the flood — on the contrary, it is seen as the first real chance to clean out the corruption which is endemic in the system.
Yesterday, two senior executives from Fiat, Italy's largest private company, were arrested.
At the weekend the prime minister, Giuliano Amato, had to reshuffle his cabinet because of the resignation of his finance and health ministers, not the first time that cabinet members have left the government in disgrace.
Earlier this month the justice minister was forced to depart.
At the same time the Socialist Party leader and former prime minister Bettino Craxi has been forced to resign from his post, and moves are afoot to have his parliamentary immunity lifted over large sums allegedly paid into party coffers as bribes.
The irony is that despite the scandal surrounding some of his cabinet, it is the prime minister who has in fact begun to reform the system with the support of President Scalfaro after voters abandoned the traditional parties in droves in elections last April.
It was Amato who introduced the far-reaching austerity package of spending cuts and taxes to revitalise the economy and who has begun the privatisation of many state-owned businesses, a source of political patronage.
He also sees the need to reform the electoral system to clean up the political system.
Harder to stop, except through the kind of investigations now underway, is the corruption which allowed politicians to award public contracts to private companies for substantial payments.
While some in the establishment may be asking whether things are not going too far and calling for the floodgates to be closed, as the careers of powerful figures come to an end, the magistrates are determined to see the process through to its conclusion.
It is a chance not to be missed for Italian politics to make a new start.
Firms favour rise in personal tax
By John Hatfield
MANY of Scotland's leading companies want the Chancellor to reduce the tax burden on businesses while increasing income tax rates for individuals.
According to a pre-Budget survey of Scotland's top 300 companies, carried out by System 3 for the accountancy firm, Ernst & Young, 72 per cent of respondents think that a further cut in business rates would have a favourable effect on their company, though, surprisingly, 4 per cent believe it would have an adverse impact.
On the issue of business confidence, the study revealed that economic confidence was returning, with 77 per cent of companies surveyed believing that they were well placed to lead the country out of recession.
This optimism was partly reflected in the fact that 40 per cent claimed they intended to take on new employees within the next six months.
But this was tempered by the disclosure that 35 per cent of firms expect to cut jobs over the same period.
Manufacturing was the sector which appeared most likely to cut jobs.
Commenting on the findings of the report, Ian Hunter, a tax partner at Ernst & Young's Edinburgh office, said: ‘Although this survey indicates business confidence is high, it also demonstrates recovery is going to be slow.
It shows Mr Lamont needs to continue supporting industry, especially the manufacturing and construction sectors.
‘Tax changes are going to have to be carefully considered if we are to continue on the path to recovery.’
There was widespread support for an extension to the temporary 40 per cent tax allowance for investment in plant and equipment introduced last autumn, but 66 per cent of participants disapproved of any proposal to move the burden of tax on to increased National Insurance contributions.
Business leaders accepted, however, that there was scope to make changes to the income tax regime, with the most popular option proving to be an increase in the higher rate of income tax from 40 per cent.
While this option was selected by a third of those questioned, there was a mixed response, with 17 per cent preferring an increase in personal allowances and 13 per cent actually considering a cut in personal tax as the best policy.
Self-government for Scotland was given the thumbs-down by the Scottish business community, with more than 60 per cent of respondents saying that it would have a detrimental effect on business, while only 10 per cent thought there would be some advantage.
Meanwhile, Scotland is expected to remain in the slow lane of economic recovery, according to two surveys published yesterday.
Both the Confederation of British Industry/Business Strategies report into consumer confidence and the Trade Indemnity investigation into business failures show Scotland bringing up the rear if, as expected, the economy moves out of recession in 1993.
The CBI/BS report predicts that Scotland's gross domestic product will grow only 0.9 per cent this year, compared with a UK average of 1.5 per cent.
Only the North of England and the Home Counties will perform worse.
On consumer spending, Scotland's 0.7 per cent increase will be less than the UK's 0.9 per cent, but just ahead of the south-east, north-west, Wales and West Midlands.
On the brighter side, however, unemployment will grow by 11.4 per cent, compared with 15.8 per cent nationally.
In addition, the Trade Indemnity survey pinpoints Scotland as an economic laggard with the fall in company failures between the third quarter and fourth quarters of 1992 restricted to 2 per cent .
This compares with Wales and the West Midlands that scored reductions of 10 and 9 per cent respectively.
But the north of England, Yorkshire and Humberside fared significantly worse with increases in the number of business failures of over 10 per cent.
UK output on slide now for 30 months
By Clifford German CITY EDITOR
OUTPUT inched up again in the fourth quarter of 1992 for the second quarter running, which could be taken to mean the recession has formally ended.
But even the Treasury was reluctant to blow a trumpet yesterday, because the upturn came entirely from a leap of 6.3 per cent in oil and gas output.
Excluding oil and gas, ‘onshore’ output fell 0.1 per cent in the fourth quarter, extending the recession to ten quarters from the peak in the second quarter of 1990.
The service sector shrank by 0.1 per cent, and manufacturing output fell 0.2 per cent .
Only electricity and water, transport and communications, telecommunications and public  administration recorded any growth.
The Central Statistical Office has beefed up output figures for the first three quarters of 1992, as a result of revised figures showing farm production in the first three quarters averaged 5 per cent more than originally estimated.
Activity in the banking and business services sector in the third quarter is now thought to have been unchanged, compared with the small fall originally reported.
As a result, output has been revised upwards by 0.2 per cent in the first two quarters and 0.3 per cent in the third, and the trend throughout 1992 now looks even flatter than before.
But output in the whole economy in the fourth quarter was still 0.1 per cent below the fourth quarter of 1991, and excluding oil and gas it was 0.2 per cent lower.
The whole economy fell 4.0 per cent in eight quarters from the peak in the second quarter of 1990, and is still 3.7 per cent below the peak, but the onshore economy excluding oil and gas has fallen 3.9 per cent over ten quarters, and the latest figure is the lowest yet.
By contrast, the whole economy fell 5.5 per cent and non-oil output by 6.2 per cent in seven quarters in 1979-81.
The stock market showed little response and the FT-SE 100-Share Index ended a relatively quiet session 1.7 points lower at 2,838.3, with just over 550 million shares changing hands.
ICI fell 42p to 1076p ahead of Thursday's figures, accompanied by rumours of a rights issue.
Glaxo shed 11p to 655p on fears of cuts in US health spending and SmithKline Beecham ‘A’ dipped 11p to 421p, but National Westminster Bank gained 14 to 459p, both ahead of today's figures.
Union Discount gained 6p to 115p, anticipating merger plans, and its stakeholder, Cater Allen, rose 19p to 459p.
The yen continued to power ahead on currency markets, as the dollar dived to a new low of 116 yen, ahead of next weekend's meeting of the Group of Seven in London.
Sterling fell 0.2 of a cent to $1.4560, half a pfennig to Dm2.3750 and hit a new low of 169 yen.
NatWest nets buyer for Harlem ball team
By Gordon Milne
NATIONAL Westminster Bank has netted a buyer for the Harlem Globetrotters, the American basketball team.
Yesterday, Century Park Picture Corporation offered US$10 million (£6.9 million) in cash to acquire all the outstanding capital stock of International Broadcasting Corporation, the entertainment group.
The English bank's US arm unwittingly found the ball in its court last year as the primary secured creditor when IBC filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy.
IBC is expected to pass out of Chapter 11 protection in May of this year, at which time the bank will be the sole holder of all outstanding IBC shares.
NatWest has already reached a settlement with IBC's shareholders and unsecured creditors.
As well as the Globetrotters — one of America's most famous ‘novelty’ basketball teams — IBC owns the revue company Ice Capades and various other entertainment properties.
New Virgin deadline in row with BA
VIRGIN Atlantic's chief, Richard Branson, yesterday gave British Airways a 24-hour deadline to settle their ‘dirty tricks’ row.
The deadline, the latest of several threatened by Virgin, was announced by Mr Branson at the opening ceremony of a new departure lounge at Heathrow yesterday.
‘If we don't see something sensible in the next 24 hours then there is no point in carrying on,’ he said.
BA has already paid out £610,000 in libel damages and £1 million costs, but Virgin wants the new settlement to cover damage inflicted in the three years of the ‘dirty tricks’ campaign of customer poaching and publicity smears.
‘We lost a great deal of money because of their tactics and need compensation,’ said Mr Branson.
‘We don't want to see things dragged on indefinitely, but they are repeatedly delaying a solution to the problem.’
If BA fails to come up with new proposals before the deadline, the Virgin chief may pursue a settlement in the US or European courts.
The transport secretary, John MacGregor, a guest at the opening of the Virgin lounge, named the Clubhouse, refused to be drawn on the issue, telling reporters: ‘I am always pleased to see our airlines competing effectively.
‘It is good for the passengers to have a choice of airlines and it is good for the airlines themselves to have to respond and innovate.
‘Virgin's success is clear evidence that a new entrant airline with tight management and a well-targeted approach can make a substantial impact.’
He described the £1 million lounge for the airline's upper class business passengers as a ‘refreshingly different concept.’
It consists of five separate rooms around a central focus, bar at which travellers will be served snacks by model railway.
Other features include a health spa with pre-flight grooming salon offering massage and aromatherapy, a library of more than 5,000 books, a music room, a study and a games room featuring the latest computer technology.
— PA
Currency woes force £131m Shell write-off
By Frank Frazer
SHELL, which is due to report its 1992 results later this week, will be forced to write off £131 million through adverse foreign currency dealings involving a Japanese associate company in which it holds a 50 per cent stake.
The oil giant said yesterday that its directors were concerned at the situation which had led to ‘significant potential loss’ by Showa Shell Sekiyu, which has a listing on the Tokyo stock exchange.
According to analysts, unauthorised dealings had caused a total loss of £685 million by the Japanese company which was hit by adverse currency transactions.
The analysts also said that Shell might have to write off another £37 million, though the company claimed that efforts had been made to ensure the situation would not arise again.
Shell also said the foreign exchange loss would be more than offset by a tax credit of £149 million from its Japanese subsidiary.
But analysts pointed out that the credit had first been announced in the second quarter of last year.
Meanwhile, output from North Sea oilfields was only marginally affected by January gales, according to figures released last night by the Edinburgh energy consultants, Wood Mackenzie.
Though weather disrupted loading at fields which transfer supplies to tankers, the firm said that total production from UK fields was just 5 per cent down at about 1.9 million barrels per day (bpd).
As well as a build-up in output from new fields linked to pipelines, some of the platforms were able to continue normal production using in-built storage space in hollow parts of the structures to hold oil until it could be collected by tankers.
With UK production holding up, the firm predicted that total European production in the North Sea would reach a record average of nearly 4.4 million bpd in 1993.
Norway will be the leading producer with a 3 per cent rise in output to an average of 2.3 million bpd.
The smallest contribution to the total will be made by production from the Danish sector which is expected to rise by 8 per cent to an average of 169,000 bpd.
GDA chief wants jobs put first
STUART Gulliver, chairman of the Glasgow Development Agency, said yesterday that the processes of economic growth and job creation in the city had become separated and that it was essential to reestablish the ‘umbilical cord,’ writes John Hatfield.
In a speech to the Glasgow Chamber of Commerce, Mr Gulliver revealed that only three sectors in the city's economy — health, tourism and business services — were expected to increase their workforce  between now and the year 2000.
He said that the key to tackling this employment deficit lay in the bottom-up approach of working with individual, indigenous firms, rather than the old top-down formula of picking winners and targeting particular sectors.
He also disclosed that the GDA planned to turn the Garden Festival Site into a commercial area linked to the Scottish Exhibitions and Conference Centre to make it perform better: ‘Many of Glasgow's major assets aren't performing well enough in their city building role.’
According to Mr Gulliver, commercial activity in Glasgow was concentrated in the north side and at some stage, development had to move across the river.
Talks on Caithness Glass buy-out
By Magnus Grimond
DRAMBUIE, the maker of the famous liqueur, is negotiating a management buy-out of its Caithness Glass subsidiary only two years after buying the Perth-based manufacturer of up-market glassware.
Speaking from Perth yesterday, the Caithness chairman, Alistair Mair, confirmed that he was leading the talks on behalf of both employees and management.
He said the buy-out had been a possibility for some time, but the two sides had only got down to serious discussions in the past few months.
‘That is all I can say at this stage, as these things take some time to arrange,’ he said, adding: ‘There is obviously a fair lot to do and it will take a few months.’
The Edinburgh-based Drambuie yesterday refused to comment on the talks.
Ian Ross, finance director, said: ‘It is difficult to comment at this stage, because management have an interest.
Until that becomes clear, we would not want to say anything more.’
Drambuie acquired an 80 per cent stake in Caithness Glass for £3.38 million in  February 1991, when it also announced an ambitious  strategy of acquiring a clutch of high-quality Scottish brand name companies.
However, profits have crashed at the liqueur-maker, which is controlled by the wealthy Mackinnon family, and in 1991 the newly-formed holding company reported a loss of around £4 million.
The departure last year of Peter Shakeshaft and Stuart Hall, two outsiders brought in to oversee the diversification strategy, coincided with a decision by the company to return to its roots.
The next step in that process is widely expected to be the sale next week of Cockburn's of Leith, a wine merchant subsidiary.
Mr Mair said Caithness Glass had been ‘very badly hit’ by the recession and had had to make ‘a number of very serious cuts’to the business.
Last August the company announced the closure of its only factory outside Scotland, at King's Lynn in Norfolk, with the loss of 80 jobs.
Another 20 jobs have been cut from other operations.
‘With the kind of cut-backs we have been doing, we have been incurring substantial reorganisation costs and profitability has been difficult to achieve,’ Mr Mair said.
The company employs 240 people, mostly at factories in Wick and Perth, though there is also an operation in Oban.
Mr Mair led an earlier £550,000 management and employee buy-out of the company in 1984 and the workforce retained about 20 per cent of the equity after the Drambuie takeover.
Low & Bonar results hit by restructuring
By Clifford German CITY EDITOR
EXCEPTIONAL provisions on closing the loss-making non-woven factory in Dundee, restructuring the struggling North American packaging businesses and a book loss on the sale of the African interests combined to cost Low & Bonar £14 million last year, and slashed pre-tax profits by two thirds to £8.1 million.
Only £5 million of the provision was in cash and the rest could be recouped from asset sales in 1993, according to the new chief executive, James Leng, but because the tax charge is only partly affected earnings per share fell from 18.82p to 3.35p.
Group turnover was once again almost unchanged at £307 million, thanks to the inclusion of £10 million from the £18 million acquisition of Royal Tufton last May, and operational profits actually rose 3 per cent to £27.1 million, with packaging and specialist materials in the UK and Europe performing best, and making up for weaker profits from North America and from plastics.
Costs were pruned, with 10 per cent of all jobs going during the year.
In spite of the recession, reduced profits from property sales and a 50 per cent rise in interest charges to £3.5 million profit before exceptionals was down only 9 per cent to £22.1 million, of which £11.8 million came in the first half.
Closing Bonar Carelle in Dundee will save £700,000 a year, restructuring in North America should start to pay dividends, and the recession should soon be ending.
Best of all, the fall in sterling should favour profits, almost 40 per cent come from hard currencies.
Raw materials amount to almost 50 per cent of costs, but suppliers will be lucky to pass on more than 5 per cent, Jim Leng believes.
The dividend is held at 9.1p, and the shares edged 5p higher to 303p.
Optimism at Devenish
A PICK-UP in consumer spending has been detected by the brewer, JA Devenish, the chairman, Michael Cannon, told shareholders yesterday at the annual meeting.
The Dorset-based company was ‘cautiously optimistic’ for 1993, he added, and current trading was in line with budget.
‘I do believe that there are some signs that consumer spending is beginning to pick up.’
Asked about the 19.5 per cent stake held by a rival brewer, he said he thought Boddington should sell it.
Boddington ‘was the only blot on the horizon’.
— PA
Travel takeover battle ‘frozen'
THE Takeover Panel yesterday extended the timetable in Airtours’ bid battle for its rival travel company, Owners Abroad, writes Magnus Grimond.
In the absence of a ruling as to whether Airtours' offer is to be referred to the Monopolies Commission, the City watchdog said it had decided to ‘freeze’ day 39 of the bid.
The former timetable will resume the day after a decision on whether to refer the offer is announced.
Separately, Airtours published its riposte to the latest broadside from Owners, claiming to have uncovered ‘serious questions’ about Owners' 1992 accounts.
The Airtours document asks why a £6.5 million contingent liability was not disclosed at the time Owners unveiled its preliminary results, and draws attention to its rival's low distributable reserves as a possible reason.
Kohl turns pressure up over Maastricht
BRITISH officials said yesterday that the German Chancellor, Helmut Kohl, wanted to put pressure on Britain and Denmark to ratify the Maastricht treaty, but added that Britain expected the EC to press ahead with 12, members not 10.
‘We expect to go ahead as 12,’ a government official said in London.
‘We expect to ratify the treaty.
We'll do it as soon as we can.’
The official said Mr Kohl, in remarks he made in India yesterday, wanted to ‘put pressure on the two countries to go ahead and ratify’ the treaty on closer European Community political and economic union.
But he said.
‘We're fairly relaxed about it’, adding that Mr Kohl has made it clear repeatedly in previous statements that he was keen for all 12 members of the Community to proceed towards union together.
Mr Kohl told reporters during a visit to New Delhi: ‘The European Community will go ahead to pursue European unity with 10 nations.’
He added: ‘I hope and trust that ratifications will come from all countries within six months.
In case they don't, we will go ahead anyway.’
The British official said the Prime Minister, John Major, had spoken by telephone to Mr Kohl before the chancellor's trip to India and relations between them were good.
‘I don't really see any problems there,’ he added.
Another official said Mr Kohl had earlier accepted the British government's decision to take its time over ratification in a lengthy parliamentary process that will probably extend into the second half of this year.
After a meeting with Mr Major last November, Mr Kohl said: ‘What is decisive for us is that the Maastricht treaty should remain unchanged and should be ratified as such by all states within the Community so that it can come into force in 1993.’— Reuter.
Clinton in $500m boost to industry
By Frank Frazer
MORE THAN $550 million in funding is being provided to give an immediate boost to US high-tech industries under a plan outlined last night by President Bill Clinton.
He also criticised European support for the Airbus project during a West Coast tour which included areas hit by lay-offs announced by Boeing, which has been hit by fierce competition for sales in the world aircraft market.
As part of the technology initiative announced during a stop in California's Silicon Valley, President Clinton also pledged billions of dollars in additional help to high-tech enterprises over the next four years to encourage new business initiatives.
‘In order to revitalise our economy, it is time for a dramatically new approach that recognises the strength and potential of America's scientific and technological resources to change and improve the quality of our lives,’ he said.
Vice-President Al Gore, who accompanied the President on the tour, will spearhead the effort which will include:
Research and experimentation tax credits to private businesses exploring technological advances.
Supporting development of computer and communications equipment to be used in schools and business training.
Energy conservation programmes in federal buildings and low-income housing developments.
The programme, part of the larger economic plan announced last week, will redirect government technology research and development from focus on the defence sector.
Instead, priority will be given to developing and testing new products with civilian applications ranging from clean-fuel cars to fibre optics and supercomputer networks to improve communications and information access.
In an address to aircraft workers, the President hinted that the US might match subsidies given to the joint European Airbus project.
‘The last several years we've stood by while Europe spent $26 billion to develop Airbus to push Americans out of work,’ he said.
Hurd rules out role in Bosnia airlift
By Chris McLaughlin and Marcello Mega
THE Government yesterday rejected British involvement in a US-led plan to parachute vital relief supplies to Muslims facing starvation in Bosnia.
The Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, ruled out any RAF role in the proposed operation, saying that Britain was already ‘doing our bit’.
Military leaders in Serbia reacted angrily to the airdrop plan, warning that it could escalate the war.
One general spoke of ‘unforeseeable consequences’ if US war planes escorting transport aircraft were drawn into the conflict.
Veteran relief workers also expressed concern, claiming the project would be ineffective and dangerous both for aircrews and those on the ground.
Despite its own doubts about the feasibility of the plan and the risks to low-flying aircraft from Serbian missiles, Downing Street said Britain was playing a full part in flying aid into Sarajevo and in convoy escort.
However, the US initiative was welcomed as a ‘very useful complement’ to existing United Nations measures and the option of joining such an operation was left open should the UN back it.
During talks with President Clinton, starting today, Mr Major is expected to stress the effectiveness of the British effort and the comparative dangers of casualties and haphazard delivery of parachute drops.
In the Commons, Mr Hurd won the backing of Opposition parties when he said: ‘We do not have the intention of using RAF planes for this particular exercise.
We believe we are doing our bit in this respect, successfully and over a long period, by land.’
The Liberal Democrats' defence spokesman, Menzies Campbell, said later that the president's proposals were a gimmick and ‘smacked of being seen to do something without serious understanding of its effectiveness’.
He added that to be accurate, the aircraft would have to risk coming under fire.
However, George Stephanopoulos, a spokesman for the president, said that ‘exceptionally heightened risk’ was not expected.
He added: ‘There is real suffering going on right now and we have to do what we can to alleviate it…to make sure people don't starve.’
President Clinton met the UN secretary general, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, last night to discuss the plan.
He wishes the UN to oversee the airlift.
Dr Boutros-Ghali has already said he favours the idea but it appears to have divided UN peace-keepers in Bosnia and the main UN aid agency.
Journalists in Srebrenica, an area starved of aid for months, said yesterday that rumours of the drops had given new hope to those in despair.
Long-term unemployment passes million mark
By Joy Copley Parliamentary Correspondent
THE NUMBER of people unemployed for more than a year passed the one million mark yesterday.
The 1,030,000 figure — the highest for five years — came only days after total unemployment passed three million.
It sparked further clashes between the Prime Minister and the Labour leader, John Smith, who accused John Major of failing to understand the depth of nationwide concern.
The total of people out of work for a year rose by 75,000 in the three months to January and has more than doubled since it started increasing in October 1987.
In Scotland, 85,300 have been out of work for more than one year — an increase of 11,500 or 15.6 per cent in the last year.
This was the lowest rise in the UK, but the overall figure still constitutes one in three of Scotland's unemployed.
The number of Scots unemployed for more than six months is 132,900 — an increase of 10,700 or 8.8 per cent, which represents half of the nation's jobless total.
Long-term unemployment rose in all regions compared with a year ago, but the largest increases hit the south-east of England, London, the south-west of England and East Anglia.
In Scotland, there are now 76,293 young people aged between 18 and 24 out of work compared to 73,106 in January 1992.
Mr Smith said it was ‘appalling’ that many 18- to 24-year-olds had never had a job.
He urged the Prime Minister to release local authority receipts to help tackle unemployment.
Mr Major replied: ‘I entirely agree that the numbers of long-term unemployed are too high, higher than anyone would wish to see.
‘That's why we are seeking to reduce them.
That's why we have put in place the most varied, comprehensive programme ever to help people who have been unemployed for six months or more.’
Henry McLeish, the shadow Scottish employment spokesman, said: ‘Tens of thousands of Scots have been plunged into the black hole of long-term unemployment, now one of the main causes of poverty, and thousands more teeter on the brink.’
Alex Salmond, leader of the Scottish National Party, said the shocking statistics were an indictment of Westminster control of the Scottish economy.
Alex Carlile, for the Liberal Democrats, said one million long-term unemployed was the sad legacy of 14 wasted years of Conservative government.
Court told of hacker who caused chaos for kicks
AN EDINBURGH University student caused chaos on a vast scale by hacking into computers around the world from a £200 desktop machine in his bedroom, a London court was told yesterday.
He defied his mother so that he could link his parents' telephone line to his terminal after his own phone was cut off, James Richardson, prosecuting, said at Southwark Crown Court.
Paul Bedworth, 19, allegedly found a way to pay for the thousands of hours he spent connected to transatlantic computer networks.
Bedworth denies conspiracy to use telecommunications dishonestly, conspiracy to gain unauthorised access to computers and conspiracy to make unauthorised modifications to information held on computers between June 1989 and June 1991.
Mr Richardson claimed that, using a BBC microcomputer, the defendant was able to trick computer security systems into believing he was a bona fide systems analyst.
Mr Richardson said: ‘His mother tried to bar him from using the telephone but he connected himself to the line by running a piece of wire under the carpet and soldering it to the telephone terminal.’
Bedworth, of North Parade, Ilkley, West Yorkshire, was said to have hacked into databases at the European Community's offices in Luxembourg and the Financial Times in London, ‘for kicks’.
Mr Richardson told the jury that Bedworth, now studying artificial intelligence at Edinburgh University, caused chaos ‘on a scale that could not be imagined’.
Bedworth allegedly used the password of a Manchester University department and a network used by Leeds Polytechnic to get into international computer systems ‘by the back door’.
Mr Richardson explained: ‘His mother bore the cost of the local call from his home to Leeds Polytechnic but the relevant department at Manchester University bore the rest of the cost.’
However, it was alleged that Bedworth was trapped when staff at Leeds Polytechnic became suspicious and used monitoring equipment to record his activities.
A letter by Bedworth, found in his bedroom, encouraged other young computer addicts to copy him.
‘In the document he had written: ‘Yes, hacking does involve the stealing of other people's passwords, stealing money and ripping off companies.
To hack you must be willing to steal.
BT are damn stupid and charge too much for using their networks, so when you use other people's passwords you are probably going to be ripping off a company like ICI or even BT.’
The court heard that Bedworth was a 17-year-old sixth-former when he began hacking with Karl Strickland, 22, and Neil Woods, 26.
He never met them, but communicated with them electronically.
Strickland, of Liverpool, and Woods, of Oldham, admitted dishonestly obtaining information and will be sentenced later.
Bedworth's trial, expected to last three weeks, continues.
Paul Bedworth: posed as systems analyst, court told
SCOTLAND was hit by further job losses in Glasgow and Arbroath yesterday, writes Denny Macgee
In Glasgow, Grampian Holdings announced it is to close a pharmaceuticals plant, switching production and distribution to Leyland in Lancashire.
The closure of the former Young's plant in Anderston, will be phased over the next 12 months.
Yesterday David McGibbon, Grampian Holding's group finance director, said that the closure was designed to make the company more efficient in the face of European competition.
Some of the workers in Glasgow, he said, had already decided to relocate to the Midlands to take up the offer of employment there.
In Arbroath the oil-related firm Halliburton Manufacturing is to make 64 workers redundant.
The firm said the reductions were necessary because of the low work load at the plant and there was no sign of improvement in the foreseeable future.
Recently the Arbroath engineering firm Giddings and Lewis paid off 90 workers.
However, more than 700 jobs have been saved in a management buy-out of the Lilley subsidiary, Dumfries-based building firm Robison & Davidson, it was announced last night.
Negotiations, which began last year, have been continuing since the collapse of the its parent company, Lilley, seven weeks ago.
They were finally completed yesterday.
Funding for the buy-out has been provided by the Bank of Scotland, RBOS Venture Capitalists, 3i, NatWest Ventures and an internal nine-strong team.
Lilley buy-out, Page 14
550 jobs axed at Rosyth in cut-throat battle for work
By Gary Duncan and Sarah Chalmers
FIVE HUNDRED and fifty jobs were axed at Fife's Rosyth Dockyard yesterday in a move that stunned the 4,100-strong workforce.
The yard's commercial managers, Babcock Thorn, said it hoped the 200 white-collar and 350 industrial jobs could be cut through voluntary severance.
But it warned its priority was the long-term future of the business and compulsory redundancies had not been ruled out.
‘The loss of this large number of jobs is regrettable, but it is vital that action is taken to defend the majority of dockyard posts,’ it said.
Rosyth's managing director, Allan Smith, said the job cuts were needed because the Ministry of Defence had reduced its workload and London Underground had cut the number of trains it wanted refurbished.
The news is also a sign of the increasingly cut-throat competition Rosyth faces from its rival yard, Devonport at Plymouth.
Both are still locked in commercial combat over the lucrative contract to refit Britain's Trident submarine fleet.
At a series of meetings at Rosyth yesterday employees were told that although the yard had a substantial workload for the next two years, it was vital to reduce overheads and capacity to improve its competitive position.
In a development that highlighted Rosyth's struggle to survive, the MoD last night confirmed it was giving serious consideration to an attempt by Devonport to poach a £28 million ship refitting contract already awarded to the Fife yard.
The Government is already committed to retaining both Devonport and Rosyth but unions and opposition MPs have warned that the loss of the Trident work will mean Rosyth's death by ‘slow strangulation’.
While Babcock Thorn yesterday emphasised its jobs announcement had nothing to do with the Trident issue, the losses will clearly increase the pressure on ministers to award it the nuclear submarine work.
Tomorrow Gordon Brown, the Dunfermline East MP and shadow Chancellor, will meet the junior defence minister, Jonathan Aitken, for talks at which he will demand assurances on Rosyth's long-term future.
Last night Mr Brown said the job losses made it even more important that Rosyth is awarded the Trident work.
‘Rosyth has now cut 2,500 jobs since privatisation.
Jobs are now disappearing at an alarming rate.
Without submarine work, Rosyth would run at only a third of capacity for its MoD work.’
Labour's shadow Scottish Secretary, Tom Clarke, said the news emphasised Rosyth's vulnerability if it secures only surface work.
‘Only an immediate reassurance that Rosyth will be awarded the Trident refit work will safeguard thousands more jobs in Fife,’ he said.
The leader of Fife Regional Council, Councillor John MacDougall, said the case for the Trident work coming to Rosyth was now unanswerable.
‘Fife is fast becoming a jobs disaster area,’ he warned.
Workers at the yard received the news with a mixture of resignation and anger.
Union conveners will discuss the job losses today.
Last night Tom McGovern, a member the yard's industrial committee, vowed to fight any enforced redundancies.
‘We feel gutted by the news,’ he said.
‘Once again it's a feeling of disillusionment and sadness.
I wonder if we will get down to a workforce of zero if that is as competitive as we can get.’
Another worker said it was too early to say whether industrial action was likely, but added: ‘My own feeling is that we are caught between a rock and a hard place.’
IAN RUTHERFORD Looking ahead with apprehension: A dockyard worker contemplates the future after yesterday's grim news A grim-faced Allan Smith at the yard yesterday after the news was announced
James Bulger funeral date set after coroner releases body
THE funeral of James Bulger is to take place on Monday, it was announced yesterday.
The news follows a decision by the Merseyside coroner, Roy Barter, to release his body formally to the family.
Lawyers representing the two ten-year-old boys accused of murdering two-year-old James waived their right to an independent autopsy.
The Bulger family solicitor, Sean Sexton, announced yesterday afternoon that the funeral would be held on Monday at 10:30am at Sacred Heart Church, Kirkby, Merseyside.
The requiem mass will be conducted by the parish priest, Father Michael O'Connell, and will be followed by interment at Liverpool's Kirkdale Cemetery.
Speaking on behalf of James's parents, Ralph, 26, and Denise, 25, of Northwood, Kirkby, Mr Sexton said: ‘The Bulger family wish to thank the public for their tremendous support at this very difficult time but would ask that there be family flowers only at the funeral.
‘If people wish to mark their respect, the family would ask that donations be made to Alder Hey Children's Hospital in Liverpool through the funeral director, L J Clegg of 98 Liverpool Road South, Maghull, Merseyside.’
James disappeared while shopping with his mother in the New Strand Shopping Centre in Bootle, near Liverpool, on Friday, February 12.
His body was discovered two days later on a railway track in Walton, Liverpool.
Two boys were arrested last Thursday and accused on Saturday night of James's abduction and murder and the attempted abduction of a second two-year-old boy.
Both boys faced South Sefton Youth Court in Bootle on Monday and were remanded to the care of Liverpool City Council.
The Health Secretary, Virginia Bottomley, authorised their placement in special secure units for child offenders, outside Liverpool.
They are due to face the court again on Wednesday, 3 March.
— PA 
James Bulger
Reports ordered on pools forger
PSYCHIATRIC reports are to be prepared on an unemployed woodcutter, Brian McGregor, whose forged football coupon lined him up for potential winnings of £3,826.47 billion.
Magistrates at Hexham, Northumberland, where McGregor, 24, of Fisher Place, Buchlyvie, near Stirling, last month admitted forgery, yesterday adjourned the case until 23 March for reports.
— PA
Man questioned on horse attacks
AN 18-year-old Winchester man was released on police bail yesterday after questioning by detectives investigating attacks on horses across the south of England.
Hampshire police said the man, arrested earlier in the day, was not charged.
He is due to report back to police in March.
The man was questioned by officers working on Operation Mountbatten — the police hunt for the so-called Horse Ripper who has carried out almost 30 attacks over the last 18 months in Hampshire and surrounding counties.
The attacker has left many of his victims with internal injuries, mutilating sexual organs.
— PA
Two arrested over alleged fight plan
TWO men were arrested yesterday in connection with a proposed bare knuckle prize-fight in Worcestershire.
The men, aged 22 and 35, were arrested after police swooped at addresses at Kidderminster and Stourport-on-Severn.
The men have been charged with conspiracy to outrage public decency and will appear before Kidderminster magistrates today.
— PA
Paperboy murder appeal protest
JAMES Robinson, one of the men jailed for life for the 1978 murder of the newspaper boy Carl Bridgewater, began a rooftop protest yesterday over the Home Secretary's refusal to refer their case to the Court of Appeal.
Robinson painted slogans on a roof at Gartree Prison, Leicestershire, as prison officers tried to persuade him to come down.
— PA
‘Home Alone’ girl to remain in council care
GEMMA Gibson, the 11-year-old found fending for herself while her mother was on holiday in Spain, is to remain in the care of Hammersmith Council for the time being, after a High Court hearing yesterday.
In an open court statement after the private hearing, the Family Division president, Sir Stephen Brown, said Gemma would continue to be a ward of the court.
He said he had invited the Official Solicitor, David Venables, to act as the child's guardian.
Her mother, Yasmin, 31, is on police bail until the Crown Prosecution Service decides whether she should be charged with child abandonment.
Manchester to host world chess clash
MANCHESTER was yesterday celebrating clinching the battle to stage the world chess championship between the British challenger, Nigel Short, and the champion, Gary Kasparov.
The city council and sponsors, Manchester Airport, made their winning move with a £1.34 million offer which the International Chess Federation (FIDE) accepted.
It beat off a last-minute rival bid of about £30,000 more from Channel 4 and the sports promotion group IMG to win the right to stage the event over eight weeks, starting in August.
Delighted civic leaders said at a champagne celebration in the city that the decision was a vital boost to Manchester's challenge to stage the Olympic Games in the year 2000.
The Olympic choice will be announced on September 23 while 27-year-old Short, who was born in Leigh and educated in Bolton, Greater Manchester, and Kasparov, 29, are still locked in battle.
The city council leader, Graham Stringer, said: ‘This is tremendously important for the city.
‘It will bring the eyes of the world on to Manchester.
It will help the city's economy and the timing could not be better.
Members of the International Committee around the world will be reading about Manchester day by day in their papers.’
The winning consortium will now negotiate over television rights and sponsorship deals which could recover much of the cost of staging the 24-game championship.
It is understood that a key factor in the failure of the Channel 4-IMG bid was that it would have required games to be played at certain times, a condition which was unacceptable to the players and FIDE.
Nigel Short, who is taking a break in Greece, has already expressed his support for the contest's being held in Manchester.
The winner of the championship will take five-eighths of the prize money.
— PA
Hospitals to be performance rated
HOSPITALS are to be ranked in performance league tables in England and Wales from next year, it emerged yesterday.
The move, disclosed by health chiefs, is likely to create controversy after the outcry over school league tables.
The first results will be based on six key performance indicators, including waiting times, numbers of cancelled operations and ambulance response rates.
Those are likely to be extended the following year to include time waits between GP referral and an appointment with a consultant.
Eventually hospitals will be measured on cross-infection and readmission rates.
Duncan Nichol, chief executive of the NHS Management Executive, hopes the move will allow the public to judge, influence and change hospitals' performances.
Mr Nichol gave details of the plans at a conference on managing the NHS reforms organised by the National Association of Health Authorities and Trusts.
Earlier, the Health Secretary, Virginia Bottomley, had announced a ‘new era’ for health service reforms as she unveiled plans to develop market forces within the NHS.
She stopped short of giving market forces a free rein, confirming that regional health authorities would stay — in slimmed-down form — to maintain strategic oversight.
News of the initiative comes amid widespread concern that hospitals across Britain have run out of money for treating patients.
Mrs Bottomley said Britain needed to learn from the contracting problems of late last year.
‘We need to improve and update constantly the contracting system,’ she said.
Purchasers should have a real impact on the NHS.
They faced five basic tasks: assessing the population's needs; targeting resources; demanding value for money; monitoring quality; and setting standards.
— PA
BA ‘dirty tricks’ talks continue
RICHARD Branson and representatives of British Airways were still locked in talks last night over the Virgin Airlines chief's demand for compensation in their ‘dirty tricks’ row.
The talks began early yesterday morning and were continuing at an undisclosed venue.
A BA spokesman said the talks kept stopping and starting.
A Virgin spokesman said the outcome would be either ‘settle up or sue’.
Murder idea from TV, jury told
A CROWN Prosecution Service solicitor may have used an idea from an episode of the TV hospital drama Casualty to try to divert suspicion after bludgeoning his wife to death, a court was told yesterday.
Warren Green, 27, of Wigan, Greater Manchester, who denies murdering his wife Julie, 24, a student nurse, used ‘coolness, skill and considerable ingenuity’ to construct a bogus defence, Michael Kallisher, QC, prosecuting, told Liverpool Crown Court.
On 18 October, nearly two weeks before the killing, he watched and recorded an episode of the show in which a youth injects himself with the drug Temazepam and suffers an overdose.
An empty Temazepam container was found next to Mrs Green's body along with the blood-covered corner of a £10 note.
Mr Kallisher told the jury: ‘The defendant tried to raise in the minds of the police a suspicion that Julie had been dealing with drugs stolen from the hospital and perhaps her murder was connected with that, not with him.’
In the ‘particularly brutal’ murder, the victim suffered at least 16 blows to her head from a lump hammer, Mr Kallisher told the jury of seven women and five men.
Outwardly the couple appeared happy, said Mr Kallisher.
But Mrs Green had begun a ‘passionate affair’ and Green was attracted to Julie Warburton, 20, a university law student who was working during the summer vacation at the Crown Prosecution Service branch at Salford where Green worked.
Although Miss Warburton did not reciprocate Green's feelings, she did not discourage them, said Mr Kallisher.
There were signs that the marriage was breaking up, which would have caused Green serious financial problems.
Mrs Green's life was insured for £120,000, which would have allowed Green to pay off the mortgage and pursue his passion for Miss Warburton, said Mr Kallisher.
‘The Crown's case is that on the morning of 31 October, 1991, in a storeroom at the rear of their home, he clubbed his young wife to death with a lump hammer.’
Mr Kallisher said Green was assisted by his knowledge as a CPS solicitor to construct his own defence and although arrested for the murder he was released on 3 November and not rearrested until 14 November, 1991.
By then he had made a fatal slip-up, the court was told.
On two occasions during this period he told at least four people that money had been found by her body.
But that was before police announced that a £10 note had been found when they held a news conference on 11 November.
The trial continues.
— PA
Fish price move as French go on rampage
By Graeme Stewart and Joy Copley
THE European Commission yesterday promised to set minimum prices for some fish in an attempt to placate French trawlermen who went on the rampage at Paris's wholesale food market in a second day of anger at low prices and British imports.
The Prime Minister, John Major, said last night that the rioting French fishermen should be brought to book and compensation should be paid to British firms whose fish were destroyed.
He told the Commons that British officials had already lodged protests with the French authorities and that the French government would be left ‘in no doubt’ that Britain expected it to act speedily.
The issue was raised by Phil Gallie, Conservative MP for Ayr, who protested at the actions of French fishermen yesterday in destroying £10,000 worth of fish en route from Ayr to Germany.
He said that last year £30,000 worth of produce had been lost in similar incidents and urged the Prime Minister to give an assurance that he would approach the French government to ensure that the culprits were brought to justice and that compensation was paid to all the British firms which had lost cash.
Mr Major replied: ‘We will continue to leave the French government in no doubt that we expect them to act where necessary to safeguard free trade, to pay compensation when losses have occurred and to bring the perpetrators to book.’
Bob Milne, of the Scottish Fish Exporting Federation, said he had no sympathy for the French.
‘They are getting as good prices as the fishermen in this country but our fishermen, although perhaps disappointed at price levels, know how to behave and it is about time the Frenchmen took a leaf out of their book.’
Mr Milne was speaking after some 800 Breton fishermen smashed stalls and equipment at the Rungis market, emptied trucks of imports, crushed shellfish underfoot, pelted riot police with frozen fish and left hundreds of tons of seafood strewn on the ground.
The high value of the French franc has led to a flood of imports from Britain.
Now a special meeting of the EC fisheries management committee will be asked tomorrow to cut imports of cheap frozen Russian-caught cod, haddock and whiting.
Because of these cheap imports, British catches have been shipped to France where more fresh fish is sold.
The value of the French franc continues to offer British exporters high prices.
The French want to stop British imports and argue that subjecting Russian catches to a minimum import price would cut the cross-Channel trade as more British fish would sell in the UK.
The EC's minimum price would apply from Monday.
But it should not lead to a price rise in British shops, said industry leaders.
Last night Bob Allan, chairman of the Scottish Fishing Federation, said there was a real problem of Russian and Norwegian fish flooding the EC market and destabilising the market.
‘But I don't see why an EC minimum price would necessarily mean a price increase.
I can't imagine that would be the case at all.
The real problem is getting something done about the cheap imports.’
AMALVY/AFP Fisherman's fury: A French trawlerman hurls a fish towards riot police during the clashes in Paris yesterday ‘Our fishermen know how to behave and it is about time the Frenchmen took a leaf out of their book’
Injured PC: Three more arrests
POLICE investigating a brick attack in Sunderland which left an officer brain damaged said last night that three more people — all juveniles — would appear in court today.
The youngsters have been charged with conspiracy to commit criminal damage with intent to endanger life.
Eight others have been remanded in custody until 3 March on similar charges.
— PA
EC grants boost now a question of politics
By Peter Jones, Scottish Political Editor
A EUROPEAN Commission document has made it plain that politics rather than economic criteria will determine whether the Highlands and Islands win a long battle to qualify for increased cash aid from Brussels.
The nature of the political horse-trading ahead if the region is to gain a status potentially worth many millions of pounds is set out clearly in a paper to be considered by a meeting of the commission today.
The meeting will decide the commission's recommendations on which parts of Europe should have Objective 1 status, which will qualify them for access to the largest EC aid fund.
Labour Scottish affairs spokesman, Henry McLeish, who obtained the document, said it was clear that it was political will which would determine whether the Highlands and Islands are successful.
He said: ‘The EC document suggests that on technical criteria, they don't quite make it, and a political decision will have to be made.
I challenge the Prime Minister and the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, to ensure that if there is any horse-trading, they are in there to ensure the Highlands and Islands wins through.’
In 1993, the commission is planning to spend £16.5billion in its regional funds, rising to £22.8 billion by 1999, with two-thirds of the money going to regions with Objective 1 status.
Currently the Highlands and Islands get regional aid under a rural development or Objective 5b status, to which only a small proportion of community aid is devoted.
To win Objective 1 status, the regional economic output per head of population has to be less than 75 per cent of the EC average.
Presently, that applies to all of Greece, Portugal, Ireland, southern Italy and most of Spain, plus Corsica and Northern Ireland.
Highland authorities and the Scottish Office have persuaded the EC that per capita GDP in the Highlands and Islands was lower than previous estimates.
But at 79 per cent of the EC average, it is still does not automatically qualify.
The commission document records that the Edinburgh Summit agreed that consideration should be given to areas which were very close to the 75 per cent mark.
Commissioners Bruce Millan (regional affairs), Padraig Flynn (social affairs), and Rene Steichen (agriculture), state that a political decision would be needed for Corsica and Molise in Italy (both 79 per cent per capita GDP) and Abruzzi, Italy (89 per cent per capita GDP) to keep their present Objective 1 status.
They state that a political decision would also be needed to add regions — listing the candidates as Hainaut in Belgium (77 per cent), Highlands and Islands (79 per cent ), and Merseyside (79 per cent ).
The British Government has also asked that south Yorkshire, Cornwall, Devon, and Mid Wales be considered for Objective 1 status, but they are not listed in the EC document.
Mr McLeish said there was an indication in the EC document that Merseyside had slightly higher priority.
He added: ‘I would sincerely hope that both areas qualify.
‘But I shall be making it quite clear to the Government that we should not lose out in Scotland as a consequence of the possibility that only one Objective 1 area could be added from the UK.’
The Highlands Regional Council assistant chief executive, Chris Claridge, was reluctant to speculate on how much EC money the region would stand to gain.
He pointed out: ‘In this current year we are getting something like £4.5 million.
That is quite a substantial drop from what we have had in the past; in 1988/89 we get something around £17 million a year.’
The Scottish National Party deputy leader, Allan Macartney, said that Highlands and Islands needs had been accentuated by recent job losses, and forecast: ‘The UK will never press our case for regional funding as effectively as we could.
‘We can exert ourselves and win the battle for funding for the Highlands and Islands.
But we need our own voice and vote at the top table to take us to the heat of Europe, not leave us on the periphery.’
A spokesman for Mr Millan said that today's commission recommendations still have to be examined by the European Parliament before a final decision, possibly as late as June, by national government ministers in the Council of Ministers.
Henry McLeish: determined that Scotland will not lose out
Building firm jobs saved in buyout
MORE than 700 jobs have been saved in a management buyout of the Lilley  subsidiary Dumfries-based building firm Robison and Davidson, it was announced last night.
Negotiations which began last year have been continuing since the collapse of the parent company, Lilley plc, seven weeks ago.
They were completed yesterday.
Funding for the buyout has been provided by the Bank of Scotland, RBOS Venture Capitalists, 3i, Nat West Ventures and an internal nine-strong team.
Robison and Davidson was the only Lilley subsidiary not included in the receivership.
That was made possible because the management buyout was already well under way.
The firm's managing director, Bob Robison, who had headed the firm for 12 years, said: ‘We are delighted to have secured our future as a local firm.
It is good news for our workforce, clients and sub-contractors.’
He added: ‘The firm will continue to operate in its traditional successful style and our employees can consider their jobs to be as secure as any can be in the building industry at the present time.
‘But there will obviously be some slimming in certain areas.
This is regrettable but necessary.’
Robison and Davidson has an order book for seven to eight months and is building the £3.5 million regional police headquarters in Dumfries and a nursing home and £4.8 million housing development in the town.
Railway hero tells of midnight dash
By John Robertson and John Smith
GRAEME RALPH's quick thinking prevented what could have been a devastating rail crash.
The Falkirk teenager had seen a shopping trolley being thrown on to the line from a bridge and knew that a passenger train was only minutes away.
The brave 16-year-old ran along the track and removed the trolley plus another that had also been hurled from the bridge.
Yesterday, as Paul McCormack, 23, of Meeks Road, Falkirk, was jailed for a year at the High Court in Edinburgh when he admitted culpably and recklessly throwing the trolleys on to the line from the bridge in the town's Hope Street on 13 April last year, Graeme spoke of the moment he knew he had to act.
Now 17, Graeme joined ScotRail as a junior railwayman shortly after the incident.
He said that he had been alone on the platform of Grahamston station shortly after midnight waiting to meet a friend on an Edinburgh-bound train.
He sighted two supermarket trolleys lying about a hundred yards from the station on the Glasgow and north-bound track.
‘My first reaction was to get someone from the British Transport Police, but the door of their office was locked.
I then thought of running up to the local police station, but I was worried that a train might have come.’
Graeme said that he ran along the line, and pulled the trolleys off.
Police then arrived, alerted by intending passengers.
‘It was a really frightening feeling to see the trolleys on the line.
It was a mindless thing to do — it could have cost lives.’
Yesterday, the advocate-depute, Elizabeth Jarvie, said that at the time of the incident, the line would have been used by freight trains carrying petroleum products from Grangemouth as well as by the London sleeper.
Witnesses had told the Crown that the least damage that could be expected if the trolleys had been hit would be the severing of air brake pipes, immobilising a train.
However, the impact could have derailed a locomotive and Mrs Jarvie added: ‘The consequences in those circumstances could be devastating.’
When McCormack was traced by police, he said that he had been drinking and ‘carrying on’ with the shopping trolleys.
‘I just got drunk and threw them over the wall.’
The defence counsel, Robert Anthony, said that McCormack was not a drinker and had acted out of character after consuming alcohol that night.
‘He did not know that what was below the bridge was a railway line.’
Speaking at his home at James Street, Falkirk, Graeme explained that before the incident, he had worked for a short spell on a YTS course with ScotRail, before taking a job as a gardener.
After his action he had received two free tickets from ScotRail for travel anywhere in Scotland.
He had also received letters of commendation from the chief constable of Central Scotland Police, and from the assistant chief constable of the British Transport Police in Scotland.
Graeme Ralph: ‘It was really frightening to see the trolleys’
Police accused of failing to help victim
GRAMPIAN Police are investigating a road accident death after claims that officers stood taking statements as the victim lay dying.
Stephen Murphy, 23, of Alexandra Road, Glenrothes, was hit by a car as he crossed Banff High Street on Monday evening.
Witnesses say Mr Murphy was given no medical attention for half an hour while police waited for an ambulance to arrive.
One man, John Kelly, a former offshore worker and trained first-aider, claimed police told him not to interfere when he asked why they were not helping Mr Murphy.
He said: ‘No first aid was given by the police at the scene.
They took statements as opposed to trying to save a man's life.’
Mr Kelly, of High Street, Banff, said he and neighbours had tended Mr Murphy, but been unable to save him.
‘The sergeant told me he had done all that was required and then got stroppy.
But we could see the man bleeding to death.’
Mr Kelly has made a formal complaint against the police and is to lodge one against the ambulance service.
Mr Murphy died of head injuries after the accident.
Yesterday Grampian Police announced an internal investigation into the criticism of their officers.
Assistant Chief Constable David Beattie said a senior officer had already started making inquiries.
He said: ‘It has been established that a police sergeant on patrol arrived at the scene within minutes.
He immediately satisfied himself that first aid was being rendered.
‘He thereafter summoned further medical assistance, ensuring that a doctor was called, and attempted to secure the support of a helicopter to remove the casualty to hospital.’
ELGIN £1.8m nursing home to open
EIGHTY jobs are to be created with the opening of a £1.8 million private nursing home at Elgin.
The jobs will be nursing and ancillary posts.
The facility, at Spynie on the northern outskirts of the town, has been officially handed over to its operators, the Aberdeen-based Skene Enterprises Group.
It will house up to 60 residents suffering from dementia.
They are to be transferred next month from the nearby Bilbohall Hospital but will remain under the supervision of Moray health service doctors.
Private bill attempts to speed up laws on knife offences
By Joy Copley Parliamentary Correspondent
THE Government was last night presented with a challenge to act speedily on its declared intention to crack down on knife carrying in Scotland.
John McFall, MP for Dumbarton and Labour Scottish affairs spokesman on crime, presented a private member's bill yesterday to make it an offence to carry an article with a blade or point in a public place.
His Offensive Weapons (Scotland) Bill would put the onus on the person carrying a knife to prove he or she had a valid reason for doing so.
The Conservatives vowed in their election manifesto last April to legislate to bring Scots law on carrying knives into line with that in England and Wales.
The Government has been anxious to find a slot for such legislation but has not acted yet, partly because of a full parliamentary timetable and because of technical difficulties in defining which types of weapons should be outlawed.
Expectations were that it would not be possible to bring forward legislation until the next session of parliament but Mr McFall is hoping that his bill will provide the Government with an earlier opportunity to act and prove ministers are serious about their declared intention to crack down on crime.
Mr McFall is understood to have the support of the Liberal Democrats and the Scottish National Party.
Mr McFall said last night: ‘This is an extremely important measure and one I hope the Government will support.
They made a manifesto commitment in April and so far have done nothing to act on it.’
He said the issue of knife carrying was a major concern to Scottish people and the police and that recent statistics showed that half of all murders in Strathclyde had involved knives.
He hoped to get government support at the second reading of the bill on 26 March.
The bill would apply to any article which has a blade or is sharply pointed, except a folding pocketknife with a blade of less than three inches.
It would be a defence for a person charged to prove that he/she had good reason or lawful authority for having the article with him or her in a public place.
It would also be a defence for a person charged to prove that he/she had the article with him or her for use at work; for religious reasons or as part of any national costume.
This would be important in Scotland because of the carrying of the dirk or sgian dubh.
Disputes threaten Major's US visit
By Chris McLaughlin, Political Correspondent
JOHN MAJOR flew to Washington last night after a concerted effort to smooth tensions in advance of his first meeting with President Bill Clinton.
A series of potential rows threatens to cloud the special relationship between Britain and the United States in advance of the first encounter between the two leaders since President Clinton took office.
Disputes over Government subsidies for industry, trade agreements, Northern Ireland, Bosnia and the involvement of Conservative Party staff in the Republican campaign against President Clinton have all cast a shadow over Mr Major's White House visit.
Downing Street yesterday firmly rejected bitter criticism by President Clinton of ‘unfair’ subsidies towards the European Airbus which he partly blamed for the threatened loss of 28,000 Boeing jobs.
The president told aircraft workers at the company's plant in Seattle that he believed a lot of the redundancies would not have been announced ‘had it not been for the $26 billion that the US stood by and let Europe plough into Airbus over the last several years’.
But a spokesman for Mr Major said the Government was satisfied that a deal  negotiated last July between the US and the EC acting for Britain, Germany, Spain and France — the four partners in the Airbus project — was not an unfair subsidy.
He insisted that public cash was restricted to launch-aid, which has to be repaid on the sale of aircraft.
Of Britain's £700 million share, just over £140 million has been repaid from sales of the A320, with the A330 and A340 about to go into production.
‘We are confident that all this aid will be returned in the lifetime of this project,’ said the Number 10 spokesman.
During negotiations between the EC and the Bush administration, it was agreed that the EC aid was offset by US civil aviation spin-offs from development funded primarily for military and space uses by NASA.
In the Commons, Mr Major issued a lengthy rejection of Labour claims that the Tories were engaged in helping President Bush.
He was challenged by a Labour MP, Kim Howells, over ‘illegal searches’ of Home Office files by Government staff seeking information on President Clinton's stay in Britain during the Vietnam war.
Mr Major insisted that nobody was sent by the Tory Party to take part in last year's presidential campaign and that two Central Office staff whose trip was funded by the Republicans had gone in their own time and paid their own personal expenses.
‘In contrast, Labour did send people, including their deputy leader, to Democrat headquarters.
‘It is not the least of the tributes to President Clinton that he won the election despite Europe's most frequent losers giving him advice.’
Another sensitive item on the agenda for talks is the proposal, not confirmed as having President Clinton's support, that Tom Foley, the Speaker of the House of Representatives and a prominent Roman Catholic, would lead a ‘fact-finding’ trip to Northern Ireland on behalf of the administration.
The possibility has angered Ulster Unionists.
Mr Major is understood to be prepared to co-operate with a visit, but only under conditions which ensure diplomatic neutrality on the issue.
‘It is not the least of the tributes to President Clinton that he won the election despite Europe's most frequent losers giving him advice’
Male au pair toasts victory as law is changed
A SWEDISH au pair who was nearly deported last year for being a man was yesterday toasting victory after the Home Secretary, Kenneth Clarke, announced a change in the law.
The news comes the day before Johan Egelstedt, 19, leaves the family he has been staying with in Leicester to return to Sweden and resume his education.
Until now only single childless women aged 17-27 have been able to work as au pairs in Britain.
Mr Clarke wrote to the MP Greville Janner to tell him that regulations to allow men to work as au pairs would be put before the House of Commons in the next few months.
Mr Janner is MP for Leicester West, where Mr Egelstedt has been staying with Iain and Sue Baughan, who were toasting Mr Clarke.
‘I am delighted and surprised it has happened so quickly,’ Mr Janner said.
‘Johan has struck a blow for equality against an obvious and intolerable anomaly in the law.’
The Baughans recruited Johan through an advertisement in Sweden, thinking he would provide a caring male role model for their four children, aged four to 11.
Immigration officials detained him at Heathrow Airport and threatened to return him to Sweden.
Mr and Mrs Baughan contacted Mr Janner, who then contacted Mr Clarke.
He ruled that Mr Egelstedt could stay in Britain, but because of the law he became a visitor and could not be called an au pair.
The ruling meant he could not receive the £20-£30 pocket money allowed to au pairs, or officially help with the housework.
Announcing the move to extend the au pair scheme to men, Mr Clarke said: ‘Our proposed changes will end what is increasingly perceived as a sexually discriminatory scheme.’
— PA 
ADAM BUTLER/PA
Cheers: Johan Egelstedt toasts his victory with Greville Janner, the local MP who championed his fight for equal status with female au pairs 
Pledge on juvenile crime measures
THE Prime Minister yesterday promised new measures to deal with juvenile crime ‘very shortly’ and stressed the role of the family, churches and schools in combating it.
With concern about persistent young offenders on the increase, Mr Major said at Commons question time: ‘There is a responsibility that spreads far beyond any government.
‘It most expressly includes a responsibility within the family circle.
It most expressly includes the churches and it most expressly includes schools to ensure there is no truancy.
‘Those children that truant are far more likely to be involved in juvenile crime.’
The Home Secretary, Kenneth Clarke, would introduce measures to deal with the problem ‘very shortly’.
Mr Major's comments came after reports that the Government is to introduce secure units to tackle persistent offenders under the age of 15.
Mr Major was replying to the Liberal Democrat Alan Beith (Berwick-upon-Tweed) who said the Government's previous measures simply had not worked.
‘Could it be that crime has become too easy, that violence has become too much a theme of television and videos, that respect for other people has gone too much out of fashion and too many young people see no stake for themselves in this society and see more of a future in crime and the black economy?’ he asked.
‘Don't you have to reach out beyond any one party to tackle issues like that?’
Mr Major, who last weekend promised a crusade against crime, said he agreed with much of what Mr Beith had said.
Earlier he had derided Labour's commitment to combating crime after an attack by Labour's Derek Enright (Hemsworth).
Mr Enright asked: ‘If a principal duty of government is the prevention of crime, hasn't this government failed spectacularly and shouldn't the Prime Minister immediately announce he will set up a Royal Commission to make urgent proposals to prevent this?
‘Or will you just watch the downward spiral continue with the gaze of a dog that doesn't understand?’
The Prime Minister said Labour had devoted just 155 words in its last election manifesto to crime ‘illustrating the depth of concern they give it’.
The Government had increased the penalties for cruelty to children, trafficking in hard drugs, carrying firearms and insider dealing.
‘I will take the Opposition seriously on crime when they support, for example, the Prevention of Terrorism Act — and we will give them an opportunity to do that within a few days,’ he said to Tory cheers.
Government sources said later that the Commons would shortly be given a chance to debate the provisions in the act which have to be renewed annually.
Earlier, there were bitter exchanges when Labour's Alun Michael (Cardiff S and Penarth) demanded to know why the Government had not built a single one of 65 secure units for juvenile offenders which had been promised two years ago.
The junior health minister, Tim Yeo, retorted: ‘Labour always has been soft on crime and always will be soft on crime.
They are always ready to shed crocodile tears for the camera on behalf of victims, but their real and deep sympathy is always for the criminal.’
— PA
Local power struggles threat
By David Scott Local Government Editor
SCOTTISH councils are preparing to resist possible changes to their industrial development powers under plans for the reform of local government.
They fear that ministers intend to downgrade their economic role and enhance the powers of local enterprise companies.
Any erosion of councils' economic development powers will leave Scotland the poorer, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities will forecast.
Concern about Scottish Office proposals to define the powers in legislation has been expressed in a report to be discussed by COSLA's economic affairs committee in Edinburgh on Friday.
At present, councils can spend on economic development by using a section of the 1973 local government act which states that a local authority can incur expenditure which, in its opinion, is in the interests of their area or its inhabitants.
Under the old rating system, spending was limited to income from a 2p in the pound rate and an equivalent restriction was continued under the poll tax.
COSLA is expected to oppose the proposal to end the present discretionary power.
Steps limiting the involvement of councils in economic development have already been taken in England and Wales, but COSLA says the Scottish situation is different.
In a report to the committee, Roy MacIver, secretary general, suggests that the Government may use the  opportunity to delineate the respective responsibilities of councils and the local enterprise companies (LECs).
Mr MacIver states that a study of local authority economic activities carried out last year showed the role of councils was very significant.
Activities included developing economic strategies and initiatives; providing business support services; improving the environment and removing barriers to economic development.
Mr MacIver adds: ‘It is certain that any erosion of local government's role in economic development would leave Scotland very much the poorer.’
While acknowledging the argument that  defining councils' economic powers in law would give formal recognition to the importance and priority of the function, Mr MacIver claims a statutory power would not in itself result in greater recognition.
Seeking views on the future economic role of councils, the Scottish Office consultation paper on council reform suggested that a ‘better defined statutory footing would help delineate the respective responsibilities of local authorities and other publicly funded organisations which are active in this field’.
It referred particularly to the network of local enterprise companies ‘whose remit is specifically to encourage local economic development’.
Private wheel clampers may face ban
WHEEL clamping vehicles on private land may be banned as part of attempts to stop ‘cowboy’ operators, the Government said yesterday.
The option was one of six outlined in a consultation paper on how to deal with the increasing abuses suffered by motorists.
The other suggestions included statutory licensing of wheel clamp operators and statutory licensing of land on which wheel clamps may be used.
The publication of the paper comes as pressure increases to tackle the estimated 1,000 incidents a week which occur mostly on private land.
— PA 
LANARKSHIRE
Roadwork delays on motorway
DELAYS are expected for four weeks on the northbound carriageway of the M74 in Lanarkshire between junctions 7, for Larkhall, and 6, Motherwell.
Road works are due to start at 9pm on Friday.
For the first four days, the exit-ramp to Motherwell and Hamilton at junction six will be closed.
Throughout the work, the on-ramp from the A72 and Larkhall at junction seven will be closed and traffic will be diverted via Hamilton before joining the motorway.
ROCKALL
Spanish fisherman dies in accident
A SPANISH fisherman died yesterday after an accident on board the 40-metre Ormaza, 70 miles south-east of Rockall.
The man, who had head injuries, was dead before a doctor could be flown to the ship.
Drive to reinstate old drove road
By Frank Urquhart
ONE of Scotland's most ancient highways may be given a new lease of life as a commuter route for cyclists.
Grampian Regional Council is planning to join forces with Kincardine and Deeside District Council to reinstate the Causey Mounth, the road which once linked Stonehaven and Aberdeen, as a public right of way.
The Causey Mounth dates back to the 12th century, when it was first established as a drover's road.
It remained the main route from the south to Aberdeen until 1800 and Samuel Johnson, Robert Burns and Walter Scott were among the travellers who used the route.
According to a report by George Chree, Kincardine's director of planning, a third of the route near Aberdeen runs along public roads and is still in use.
Another third is still visible, though overgrown in places and in poor condition.
But the last section, between Stonehaven and Muchalls, has been largely ploughed over.
He says: ‘While there is no doubt that the Causey Mounth once was a public right of way, it is likely that some sections of the route may have fallen into disuse.’
Mr Chree is proposing that the route be safeguarded from any further developments and that access arrangements be made with landowners on sections of the route where it is not possible to assert the ancient highway as a public right of way.
He states that the Causey Mounth, isolated from heavy traffic, could be developed as a commuter route for cyclists and for other leisure and recreational uses.
The proposed scheme has been welcomed by the Scottish Rights of Way Society and Britain's national cyclists' association.
Gordon Mackay, of the Cyclists Touring Club, said: ‘The Causey Mounth route from Stonehaven to Aberdeen has great potential for both leisure and tourist activities for both cyclists and ramblers.’
BORDERS
Knitwear workers reject pay deal
MORE than 1,000 workers at the Pringle of Scotland knitwear factories have rejected a pay offer for the second time, in spite of union advice to accept.
The workers at Hawick, Galashiels, Earlston, Berwick and Arbroath voted 732 to 670 against a 4 per cent pay rise plus an extra day's holiday by 732 votes to 670.
GMB officials representing the workers at have now called a meeting of shop stewards to try to open fresh talks with the firm.
HAMILTON
Fifth person on murder charge
A FIFTH person appeared in private at Hamilton Sheriff Court yesterday accused of the murder of George Hall, whose body was found in a sewage works at Bothwell last month.
James Nicholas, 27, of Parkville Drive, Blantyre, made no plea and was remanded in custody.
Four people had appeared in court on Monday on the same charge.
Mr Hall, 35, of Craigbarnet Road in Milngavie, had been missing since October and his body was found on 5 January.
GRAMPIAN
Pensioners to get 10p bus travel
PENSIONERS in Grampian will be able to travel on all bus services in the region and on journeys to and from destinations as far away as Inverness and Dundee for only 10p, it was announced yesterday.
The concession for the elderly and disabled will take effect from next January, the region's transport and roads committee announced…
About 90,000 people in the region qualify for concessionary travel, at present a fifth of the normal fare on buses and rail services.
The new concession will apply to buses only.
Present rail fare concessions will be retained.
End of the road for home row
TIME has run out for the Angus family whose cottage stands in the way of a multi-million pound dual carriageway on the Dundee to Aberdeen road, writes James Rougvie.
Sheriff officers appointed by the Scottish Office yesterday handed Alistair Diplexcito and his wife, June, eviction papers which will be executed tomorrow morning.
Mr Diplexcito, his wife and three daughters have fought a rearguard action for the past two years to stop their cottage at Spittalburn, where they have lived for the past 17 years, being buried by earthworks.
Bulldozers are now waiting to level their home, which is surrounded by earthworks.
Although there is an outside chance of another house being found before the 11am deadline, Mr Diplexcito said yesterday: ‘It looks as though I will be here when they arrive.’
Bill Walker, MP, who has criticised the Scottish Office for what he says is their failure to help the family, said: ‘I will be here when they come to evict the family and I will stand shoulder to shoulder with them.’
A few days ago, it emerged that the Hillcrest Housing Association intended to purchase, repair and rent a house locally for the family.
Mr Walker said yesterday that he was not optimistic that the deal would be concluded in time to stop the family being thrown out of their home.
Any further hold up to the Spittalburn stretch will cost the taxpayer a six-figure sum for each week's delay.
ALAN RICHARDSON Bleak future: Alistair and June Diplexcito with the eviction notice for their home, which is about to be buried in the earthworks for the dual carriageway
Ayr workers wait as Digital decides
By Denny Macgee and Graeme Stewart
A DECISION by the US computer company Digital on the future of their plants at Ayr and Galway is imminent.
It is believed senior executives of the company in Boston are aware of the strain on Scottish and Irish employees waiting to hear which of the plants will suffer as a result of Digital's rationalisation of its European manufacturing operation, forced by world-wide recession and changes in the computer industry.
Company executives are expected to make their decision known by the end of the week.
Although senior Digital executives have never confirmed the choice is between the two plants, it is expected that the company, in the current economic climate, will opt for keeping a manufacturing facility at only one of the factories, which would have serious economic and social consequences for the plant coming off worse.
Senior executives from Scottish Enterprise and their opposite numbers in the Republic of Ireland, the Irish Development Authority, have been in Boston this week putting their respective cases.
One possible outcome of the discussions is that manufacturing will be retained at Ayr, which employs 1,000 people, with Galway having only a research and development function.
That option would leave the Irish plant with less than a third of its 1,200 workforce.
Last night, a spokesman for the IDA said that the talks with Digital's president and chief executive, Robert Palmer, had been constructive.
However, the spokesman would not indicate the likely result of the discussions.
Scottish Enterprise had no comment on the talks.
Nikki Richardson, head of Digital's information directorate, said only that discussions had been candid.
Union says Whitehall knew of DAF plight
By John Hatfield
SHOP stewards at Leyland-DAF's Albion Works revealed yesterday that the Government has known of the truckmaker's financial difficulties for a number of months.
Speaking after talks with the STUC, Tommy Gorman, acting works convener at the axle-making plant in Glasgow, claimed: ‘The DTI knew what the possibilities were in September.’
Describing the Government's response to the company's predicament as inadequate, Mr Gorman castigated the failure of Michael Heseltine, President of the Board of Trade, to intervene and drew attention to his involvement in the rescue of Rolls Royce in 1972 during the Heath  administration : ‘Heseltine was involved up to his neck in saving Rolls Royce.
If he hadn't acted then, the RB211 engine would never have happened.’
A spokesman for the DTI acknowledged that the department had been broadly aware of the situation at Leyland-DAF in September but insisted that news of the receivership had still come as a surprise.
After yesterday's discussions between Albion's shop stewards' committee and the STUC general council, a number of joint tactics have been agreed to carry forward the campaign to save the plant, whose future remains uncertain.
An appeal will be made to the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, to become involved in safeguarding the plant's future and the remaining 480 jobs.
MEPs are to be lobbied in Brussels on Friday and approaches will be made to leading shareholders in DAF, including British Aerospace, which has an 11 per cent stake in the company.
According to Mr Gorman, one of the main grievances is the minimal redundancy packages given to the 67 Albion workers who were sacked two weeks ago: ‘We will be pushing the case for adequate recompense for workers who lost their jobs.
One man with 47 years’ service got only £6,000.’
A demonstration is planned for next month in Glasgow to rally public support for the Albion workforce.
In a separate development, the  Ministry of Defence has been negotiating with the receivers at Leyland-DAF's Lancashire truck plant over the completion of a £400 million transporter contract.
Some two-thirds of the contract has been completed and the MoD is keen to see production continue.
Management from the Lancashire plant were at DAF headquarters in Eindhoven yesterday to discuss their proposed buy-out with the Dutch board.
LOCKERBIE
Date for Queen's visit announced
THE Queen is to visit Lockerbie for the first time since the air disaster there more than four years ago.
Accompanied by the Duke of Edinburgh, she will spend a short time in the town on Wednesday, 30 June.
No further details have been announced.
£50,000 paid out interim on allergy claim
By John Robertson Law Correspondent
A PATIENT who claimed she suffered severe brain damage from an allergic reaction to anaesthetic drugs was awarded interim damages of £50,000 yesterday.
It would bring to £100,000 the amount Greater Glasgow Health Board has paid Anne McWilliams since her accident almost ten years ago, a judge had been told.
Mrs McWilliams, of Inch Keith, Calder Glen, East Kilbride, had been admitted to the Royal Samaritan Hospital, Glasgow, in April 1983 after consulting her doctor about a gynaecological problem.
In a £500,000 damages action at the Court of Session, she had said that she had had a collapse after being injected with anaesthetic drugs in the operating theatre.
She had had to be taken, still in a coma, to the intensive care unit of Glasgow's Victoria Infirmary.
The court had been told that Mrs McWilliams had suffered severe brain damage which would affect her for the rest of her life.
A former executive officer with the civil service working at the National Engineering Laboratory, East Kilbride, she was now physically and mentally handicapped.
It had been claimed that Mrs McWilliams had had an allergic reaction to the drugs and she had alleged negligence by the anaesthetist.
In 1966, while undergoing a Caesarean section, she had suffered a collapse under the anaesthetic.
There had been fears for her life but she had recovered.
Mrs McWilliams had said that at the Royal Samaritan Hospital she had told the anaesthetist about her fears because of what had happened before but he had  reassured her.
Allergic reaction was a well recognised risk but, it was alleged, the anaesthetist had not carried out any tests or investigations to determine whether Mrs McWilliams would suffer a reaction to the drugs he planned to use.
Greater Glasgow Health Board denied liability and said that the anaesthetist had fulfilled all his duties.
The cause of the collapse was not known.
Yesterday, Lesley Shand, for Mrs McWilliams, asked for an interim award of £50,000 damages.
She told Lord Penrose that the action had been raised some considerable time ago but negotiations were continuing.
While no formal admission of liability had been made by the health board, it was the amount of damages that was in dispute.
Miss Shand added that there had already been a payment of £50,000 by the board, which was not opposing the move for a second payment of the same amount.
Lord Penrose awarded Mrs McWilliams interim damages of £50,000.
Private cash call to make Glasgow safer
By Susan Dean
A £1 MILLION initiative to cut crime in Glasgow's city centre through the use of closed circuit television cameras and street wardens could be up and running by the end of the year.
The Citywatch project — which its organisers say must have private as well as public cash — has met with a mixed response from the city's business community.
Officials of the Sauchiehall Street Traders' Association — whose shopping precinct will be one of the targeted areas — said high street stores were likely to look favourably on contributing to the scheme.
However, Ewan Marwick, chief executive of Glasgow Chamber of Commerce, said he was sceptical about the effectiveness of the scheme and questioned whether hard-pressed traders would respond to the cash plea.
‘The real problem to be tackled is inadequate powers for the police and the public being messed about by the court system, as well as an escalation of the number of people who think they can get away with crime,’ said Mr Marwick.
The plea for private sector cash was made yesterday at a seminar organised by Strathclyde Police as part of the Operation Blade crackdown on knife crime, started at the beginning of the month.
The camera scheme, which is being pioneered by Glasgow Development Agency, is supported by Strathclyde Police.
They are seeking public and private funding for the installation of about 30 cameras to provide 24-hour monitoring of city centre streets.
The scheme is intended to improve the city's image and deter violence, vandalism and theft It would involve 30 uniformed wardens providing a 12-hour seven-day weekly eyes-and-ears service and acting as tourist guides.
Caroline Durkan, the GDA senior projects executive handling the scheme, said yesterday: ‘It places us in an awkward position if we try to get cash from the public sector if the private sector do not see the benefits of Citywatch.’
A public survey is to be held in Paisley town centre to assess support for a closed circuit television scheme there.
Editorial, Page 10
Thistle field gas leaks start inquiry
AN investigation team flew out to BP's Thistle platform yesterday after two gas leaks on the installation.
The 151 men on the platform were called to muster stations on Monday night for almost 30 minutes after the second leak.
A BP spokesman said that there had been a minor leak in the gas lift module which had been isolated.
An hour later there was a build-up of pressure when a relief valve failed to open automatically.
A gas leak in the gas discharge cooler in the gas compression module then resulted in the general alarm sounding.
‘The plant was isolated and the gas was vented to the flare.
Oil production was unaffected,’ he said.
The spokesman added: ‘We are carrying out an investigation and the relevant authorities have been informed.’
Bridge to future for navy
By Eric McKenzie
AS Controller of the Navy, Vice-Adml Sir Kenneth Eaton is  responsible for spending some £3 billion a year on procuring ships and equipment.
In Glasgow yesterday he came face to face with a cost-saving dream.
A futuristic bridge for a warship made from hardboard.
The scene at the offices of BAeSEMA, the hi-tech computer design group, may have been more like a Blue Peter set than a serious example of the latest in navy design, but Adml Eaton appeared suitably impressed.
BAeSEMA has been contracted by the navy to come up with a new design for bridges incorporating the latest in ergonomic practice.
Casting a critical eye over the mock-up, Adml Eaton said: ‘We are always wishing to get fewer people in ships and so one of ways is to try and improve the human interface with the machinery.
‘What I do is follow the money and make sure the people who are spending it on my behalf are actually the right sort of people, and are doing the right sort of job.’
BAeSEMA's work varies from design contracts for equipment and services to support contracts for equipment the navy has had in service for many years.
ALLAN MILLIGAN Looking ahead: Vice-Adml Sir Kenneth Eaton (seated) is shown a possible design for a warship bridge by Cmdr Mark Kerr
Court hears of quarry torture
A MAN told the High Court sitting in Glasgow yesterday of an ordeal at an Argyll quarry during which he had been repeatedly beaten, burnt with a cigarette, had a car driven over his legs and almost hanged.
John O'Donnell, 25, was giving evidence at the trial of David McPherson, 30, of Halkett Crescent, Rosshead, Alexandria, who denies assault and attempted murder.
He has lodged a special defence of incrimination blaming six other men.
Mr O'Donnell said he had agreed to go with McPherson on the night of his ordeal to help him steal a van from Tarbert.
He said they had gone up the Rest and Be Thankful and he had noticed a red van parked in a lay-by which had flashed its lights as they passed.
He said McPherson had stopped a few hundred yards on, gone to the boot of his car, returned and suggested they go back to Tarbert.
As they reached the lay-by, the accused had pulled in alongside the red van and stopped.
Mr O'Donnell said he had seen other men whom he named in court.
The names cannot be published for legal reasons.
Mr O'Donnell said one of the men had squeezed in the passenger seat of the car beside him and three had got in the back.
The one beside him had accused him of ‘grassing’ and told him if he did not admit it he would have his face ripped open.
He said that, during the 20-minute journey to the quarry at Furnace on Loch Fyne, a lit cigarette had been used to burn him on the back of the neck, he had been struck constantly, and as the car travelled at speeds up to 70mph, the man beside him had opened the door and told him to take his chances and jump.
The car had stopped at the quarry in the pitch darkness, and, Mr O'Donnell said, he had been dragged out and beaten again by the men, including McPherson.
He had then been dragged behind the vehicle and held down while the man who had been sitting beside him during the journey drove the car over his legs.
Then McPherson had got rope from his car and the other man had tied it to a strap.
That had been put round his neck and he had been dragged to a pier.
The end of the rope had been tied to ladders at the edge of the pier and, Mr O'Donnell said, he had seen the man who drove the car over him raise his leg to kick him.
‘I saw his leg coming up so I pulled the rope off and I jumped,’ he added.
He said he had managed to swim under the pier and had found a ledge.
Cross-examined by William Dunlop, defending, Mr O'Donnell agreed that it was possible one of the men had not become involved in attacking him at the quarry.
He denied hearing the others say to McPherson: ‘You're next.’
The trial continues.
Wife testifies in multiple rape case
THE WIFE of a man accused of committing three sex attacks in 12 hours agreed to give evidence as a Crown witness at his trial at a Perth High Court sitting yesterday.
Told by the judge, Lord Coulsfield, that she could not be compelled to testify, Heather Hepburn, 29, of Argyll Street, Alloa, said she was willing to give evidence.
David Hepburn, 29, denies raping a 26-year-old woman in her home in Sauchie on the afternoon of Saturday, 24 October.
He also denies that on the night of the same day while posing as a taxi driver he attempted to rape a girl aged 18 and later raped a 22-year-old woman.
He has entered a special defence of alibi in respect of the alleged taxi crimes.
The 22-year-old told the jury that she had entered what she thought was a taxi at an Alloa stance about 1:45am on 26 October.
After other passengers had been dropped off, she had realised she was being driven the wrong way for her home.
She said the driver had stopped at an intersection, got into the back seat with her and assaulted and raped her.
She identified the accused as her attacker and said: ‘Afterwards he drove me to my home in Alloa.
As I thought my parents would still be up, I asked him to come in in an attempt to stop him getting away.’
She said he had agreed to do so but had driven off when she shouted for her father.
Mrs Hepburn said she had been living with her husband at the time of the alleged crimes but was now in the process of divorcing him.
She said he had left the house in the forenoon of 24 October and been covered in blood when he returned at 3am the next day.
He had said he had been fighting with another man.
She added that he had later asked her to tell detectives that he had been at home all Saturday night.
She had refused to do so.
The trial continues today.
GLASGOW
Man arrested after siege at house
A 34-YEAR-OLD man is expected to appear at Glasgow Sheriff Court today in connection with an incident in a house in Argyle Street, Glasgow, during which the police isolated the building for more than six hours.
Eventually the police got into the house and a man was arrested.
A 26-year-old woman and a seven-year-old girl were taken to the Western Infirmary, Glasgow.
GLASGOW
Transport chief to meet Reid
SIR Bob Reid, chairman of British Rail, is to meet Malcolm Waugh, transport chairman of Strathclyde Regional Council, next month to discuss the council's freeze on railway investment.
Councillor Waugh has said he does not want council money spent to benefit private-sector operators under the Government's privatisation plans.
‘Since the region is Sir Bob's best customer, I would think it makes sense for us to talk,’ he said.
Rail crash report ignored advice
IT TOOK three head-on rail collisions before safety specialists started to analyse the risk at controversial junctions, a fatal accident inquiry heard yesterday.
Until Bellgrove, where two people died in the 1989 tragedy, single-lead junctions had an enviable safety record, Robin Seymour, the then Chief Inspecting Officer of Railways, said.
Even after a similar collision at Hyde, near Manchester, no further safety checks were brought in before the £5 million Newton layout was commissioned.
Since the Newton disaster, where four people were killed and 22 injured in July 1991, risk analysis techniques have been introduced to evaluate possible danger at single-lead junctions.
Mr Seymour headed an inquiry into the Bellgrove crash but when his report was eventually published, it ignored many of the recommendations of a separate fatal accident inquiry into it.
Sheriff Archibald McKay had recommended a system of ‘double blocking’ which meant that drivers would have to pass two red lights before they could possibly collide with another train.
That, Mr Seymour told the inquiry, he rejected as a general rule because it would have placed ‘unreasonable restrictions’ on the railway.
Sheriff McKay had also suggested altering timetables to space train movements further apart, but that too had been rejected by Mr Seymour.
The sheriff had suggested that more detonators, designed to alert drivers if they passed red light, be installed.
Mr Seymour told the court that the antiquated detonators in use at the time of Bellgrove were not considered adequate for use on the modern railway.
Final submissions to the inquiry in Glasgow will now be presented to the sheriff on Monday.
Crime figure shock for Tayside
By James Rougvie
TAYSIDE has proportionately the highest recorded level of crime in Scotland, according to a report published yesterday by HM Inspector of Constabulary.
Violence, dishonesty, fire raising, indecency and drugs offences have risen 17.2 per cent since 1990, compared with an 11 per cent Scottish average, said HM Chief Inspector Colin Sampson.
Last year, serious assaults soared by 45 per cent from 1991, prompting Mr Sampson to warn the Tayside force not to be complacent in spite of a drive to target the most active criminals and make criminal intelligence more meaningful to beat bobbies.
Mr Sampson's report is the second of a new style of intermediate force inspections and falls between the biennial major inspections.
In Tayside's first interim report, he says: ‘Crime has continued to rise in Tayside, and crimes of violence against the person, indecency, dishonesty, fire raising and drugs offences show an increase of 7,376 or 17.2 per cent over the 1990 figures.’
The main increases were crimes of violence and dishonesty and in particular theft by housebreaking.
That, Mr Sampson said, gave rise for concern with a 15.7 per cent increase during the year, which compares with a 14 per cent rise for Scotland as a whole.
The force's overall detection rate had also decreased, said Mr Sampson, although it was still significantly above the national average.
During the previous years, Tayside managed to sustain an overall detection rate of 40 per cent but that dropped during 1991 to 38 per cent, which is above the Scottish average of 31 per cent .
‘However, when the Strathclyde figures (for crimes of violence, dishonesty, indecency, fire-raising and drugs) are taken out, the national average rises to 37 per cent.
Secondly, Tayside has the highest recorded level of crime per officer in Scotland and the second highest recorded level per population.’
Tayside has 4,737 reported crimes per 100 officers.
The next highest is Strathclyde, with 4,603 per 100.
The Scottish average is 4,193.
‘There is no doubting the effort and commitment of the members of the force and this is reflected in the low percentage increase in crime overall,’ said Mr Sampson.
Tayside's deputy chief constable William Spence, noting the report, said there had been various elements of improvement and said his force was still above the national average in detection.
EDINBURGH
Rise in complaints against police
COMPLAINTS against the Lothian and Borders police force were up by a quarter last year, deputy chief constable Hector Clark told councillors yesterday.
The figures, revealed at a police board meeting, showed that 325 complaints were made by members of the public compared with 257 the year before.
Although acknowledging the increase was a cause for concern, Mr Clark said the number of complaints was still below the Scottish average for other forces.
DUNFERMLINE
Youth ordered to make donation
A YOUTH who broke into two naval churches and stole the collection money from one, was ordered by a sheriff to make a donation of £100.
At Dunfermline Sheriff Court yesterday Brian Gilmartin of Cunningham Road, Rosyth, admitted breaking into the St Columba's and St Margaret's churches in Rosyth with two juveniles and stealing £150 from St Margaret's.
Sheriff Charles Palmer deferred sentence for six months for Gilmartin to make a donation of £100.
EAST LOTHIAN
Business to pay for rubbish collection
EAST Lothian District is to charge for waste collection from commercial premises from August, it was announced yesterday.
The charges, ranging from £78 to £290 a year per wheeled bin, will earn the council £280,000 next year.
Angry members of the council environment committee also agreed to call on the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, to rethink and find adequate funding for local authorities.
SMALL businesses in East Lothian face charges of up to £2,000 for waste collection later this year.
Local district councillors are furious that they are being forced by the Government to introduce fees for commercial waste collection.
The council's environment committee is to urge the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, to think again and find adequate funding for local authorities.
But yesterday they had to accept a report by officials calling for commercial waste collection charges which could result in bills of up to £2,000 a year for some users.
Charges ranging from £78 a year for a 240-litre wheeled bin to £290 for a 1,110 litre wheeled bin will start from August this year.
The move will hit a wide range of users from residential homes, schools, hospitals, hotels and licensed premises to clubs, garages, halls, theatres, offices and industrial premises.
The committee was told that the charges would save the council £280,000 next year.
It was made clear the rates would be unpopular, especially in the current recession.
Councillors were told that many businesses looked upon the refuse collection service as one of the few tangible benefits they got for payment of business rates.
First report on Braer spill will be secret
By Allan McLean
A PRELIMINARY report on the Braer oil spill has been submitted to the Government but its contents are secret.
That emerged yesterday during a visit to Shetland by Lord Donaldson, who is heading the inquiry into shipping safety set up after the disaster.
Lord Donaldson promised a public session in the islands this summer.
He was making an initial fact-finding tour.
David Deas, a spokesman for the Department of Transport, revealed that the DoT's marine accident investigation branch had submitted an initial report to John MacGregor, the Transport Secretary.
The report contained no safety recommendations, Mr Deas said.
It could not be published because of MAIB regulations.
The rules were being changed, he added.
He responded to claims that the Shetland public were being kept in the dark about the facts of the Braer grounding by saying that MAIB inquiries were held in private to allow people to speak more freely.
‘We hope that people in Shetland will realise it is the best way of doing it,’ he said.
Isobel Mitchell, one of the organisers of a petition signed by a third of the islands' adults calling for an open inquiry to be held by a sheriff, said the secrecy was astonishing.
‘The Braer disaster has affected everybody in Shetland and yet we are not involved in any of the inquiry processes.
So far the MAIB has met behind closed doors.
The preliminary findings are presumably in the hands of the Government, but we are not being given access to it.’
Ms Mitchell added that a public inquiry was important.
‘If nothing else, it would be a mark of respect for what people here are going through.
There is just so much contempt being shown.
You wonder what will have to happen to Shetland for the Government to act.’
Lord Donaldson, speaking in Lerwick, agreed to accept written submissions after the deadline on Sunday.
But he said he could not consider calls for an open sheriff's inquiry, in spite of pleas by the islands' MP, Jim Wallace, Shetland Islands Council, and the petitioners.
‘We will be back in the summer for perhaps a couple of days when we have got the bigger picture and can ask more intelligent questions,’ he said.
During a visit to Stornoway yesterday, Lord Caithness, the shipping minister, stressed the importance of Lord Donaldson's inquiry.
The minister confirmed that a ban on tankers in the Minch was being considered, and that a separation scheme was possible for the Fair Isle area.
He added: ‘I would be very sad if we could not come to an agreement with the tanker owners.
We are looking for something that will be effective and do not want to do anything hasty.
We will have to wait for the Donaldson report, which covers the whole country.’
Lord Donaldson's report would be considered carefully by the Government, which was planning submissions to the International Maritime Organisation.
Alzheimer's research to go to Dundee
DUNDEE has been chosen as the centre for a major research programme into finding an early warning clinical test for the onset of Alzheimer's Disease, writes James Rougvie.
A team from Dundee University's Department of Pharmacology has linked with the international pharmaceutical company ABS to develop a test capable of detecting altered levels of a particular protein in the blood of sufferers.
Dr Kieran Breen, who heads the research team, said it was hoped a simpler, faster test could be developed to detect the onset of Alzheimer's at an earlier age.
Currently, time-consuming psychological tests are carried out only when a patient is in an advanced state of dementia.
The new test system, he said, would help determine which therapy or arresting treatments could be used.
ABS is to fund the programme for five years.
Call for guidelines to help doctors with dilemma of treating the hopelessly ill
By Bryan Christie Health Correspondent
GUIDELINES are needed to help forge a path through the legal, moral and ethical minefield created by the increasing ability to treat hopelessly ill people, a conference in Edinburgh was told yesterday.
It heard of the dilemmas faced by families and doctors in deciding on giving or with-holding treatment from severely brain-injured babies, people dying from AIDS, accident victims and elderly people with poor long-term prospects.
Sometimes children suffering from fatal diseases will ask for their own treatment to end, said Prof Alex Campbell, formerly of Aberdeen University's department of child health.
‘They may say enough is enough to stop the endless hospital visits, the tubes, the needles and other painful indignities; to stop them lurching from one crisis to another without any real hope.’
He argued that consideration had to be given to a child's quality of life.
Decisions taken in that light to allow a child to die did not conflict with the principle of the sanctity of life.
‘In my view, allowing a child to die in these circumstances enhances the value of life as we would all live it,’ he said.
Bryan Jennett, of Glasgow University's department of neurosurgery, a specialist in brain injuries, said the advance of medical technology has meant that more and more patients can be kept alive but often only with a poor quality of life.
Surveys are now showing that many people would prefer not to be treated if continuation of their life means being strapped to a machine.
‘Some people now fear living more than dying because they dread becoming passive prisoners of technology,’ said Prof Jennett.
He recognised that doctors were taking decisions every day to limit treatment in futile cases but, equally, some doctors were continuing to treat patients in such circumstances partly because of doubts about their legal position.
Prof Jennett welcomed the recent court decision in England allowing feeding to be withdrawn from the Hillsborough football stadium disaster victim, Tony Bland, but added that further guidelines were needed.
He suggested that ethical committees could be set up across the country to provide an independent source of advice for doctors and families, taking the matter out of the hands of the courts.
Linda McCallum, who works at Milestone House, the Edinburgh AIDS hospice, said people in the latter stages of the disease could be described as hopelessly ill.
‘Are all the treatments we give them justified?
Are the costs justified?
What are we keeping them alive for?
These are just a sample of the dilemmas we face.’
Dr McCallum added that she had rarely been asked to help anyone end their life, though relatives sometimes asked, using the argument ‘you wouldn't let a dog die in this way’.
‘The ultimate aim we strive for in the care of our patients is to give good-quality life.
After all, it is their life and it should involve their decision.’
The conference examined the obligations doctors have to their patients, in what circumstances it is justifiable to withhold treatment and the legal implications of such actions.
It aims to help inform the current public debate and a series of statements is expected to be produced in an attempt to take matters forward when the conference ends today.
Strike will go ahead after talks fail at university
By Frank Urquhart
TALKS aimed at averting a strike by lecturers at Aberdeen's Robert Gordon University ended in failure after six hours of negotiations yesterday.
The strike by the staff of the School of Food and Consumer Studies will go ahead as planned tomorrow and the union, the University Lecturers' Association, is drawing up proposals to spread the industrial action throughout the university.
The strike is being staged in protest against the plan by the university authorities to dismiss Sheena Falconer, a senior textiles lecturer in the school.
Mrs Falconer is facing compulsory redundancy and has been told that she could stay on the staff if she accepts demotion to ordinary lecturer — a post already held by her sister, Barbara Diack.
The university authorities claimed after the talks that they had offered a package of generous proposals in an attempt to settle the dispute.
Union leaders, however, claimed that the management's offers fell far short of their demand that both lecturers keep their jobs.
Dr Alastair McLeish, the branch secretary of the ULA, said the one-day strike at the school would go ahead tomorrow and be escalated to a three-day strike next week.
The remaining members will be balloted on strike action within the next few days.
Staff at the university are also seeking an urgent meeting with Andrew Armstrong, chairman of the board of governors, to discuss the dispute.
Dr McLeish said: ‘There has been no progress.
It was disappointing and the industrial action at the school will go ahead.
We will ballot the rest of our members next week on the possibility of a strike, followed by a work to contract.’
A spokesman for RGU expressed disappointment at the breakdown of the talks.
He explained that a series of options had been placed on the table but all had been rejected.
These ranged from an increase in  severance compensation to almost £20,000, an offer of secondment to industry on full salary, an opportunity for a search across the university for posts at senior lecturer level, and an offer of meeting the full cost of training for an alternative career.
The spokesman said the union had demanded that Mrs Falconer be retained on her present salary for a further two and half years with early retirement on an enhanced pension at 50.
That had been rejected by RGU.
He said: ‘We consider our offers to be reasonable and generous in the circumstances and we are disappointed that none of these were taken up.’
Protection money will help crofters and corncrakes
By Auslan Cramb, Environment Correspondent
CROFTERS and corncrakes in Skye may find survival a bit easier after the introduction of special payments designed to protect one of Britain's rarest birds.
The idiosyncratic corncrake, whose remarkable rasping call used to be a familiar country sound, has suffered a collapse in numbers because of modern farming methods.
Now Scottish Natural Heritage will pay crofters in an area north of Uig — the bird's last stronghold on Skye — in an effort to re-establish traditional management of enclosed croft grasslands to provide a safe habitat for the corncrakes.
There are fewer than 500 of the shy birds left in Britain; their numbers have been hit by earlier cutting of grass and silage, which destroyed their nests and young.
The crofters, who will also be encouraged to support native grasslands which are valuable for other birds, and wildflowers, insects and mammals, will keep their livestock out of enclosed grasslands between April and the end of July.
They will agree to cut their hay or silage in August by mowing in a ‘corncrake-friendly’ pattern.
Lesley Cranna, SNH area officer for Skye and Lochalsh, said: ‘The islands offer a last refuge, although on Skye the population has dipped from about 30 pairs in 1988 to an estimated 16 pairs last year.
We hope this scheme will prevent a further population decline and, in the long term, re-establish corncrakes over a wider area.’
The ‘long-grass’ grants have been welcomed by the crofting writer, Jim Hunter, vice-chairman of SNH's north-west board.
‘This sort of initiative brings deserved recognition and financial reward to crofters for their achievements in maintaining the natural environment.’
Individuals entering the scheme — which will run initially for five years — do not have to prove there are corncrakes on their land.
They will be paid £20 a year per acre for the first 12 acres, £10 for the next 12, and £4 an acre for remaining land.
The corncrake: Scheme will make breeding easier
Rate of mental hospital closures ‘out of control'
THE Government was yesterday accused of losing touch with the rapid rate of mental hospital closures.
The chief executive of the National Schizophrenia Fellowship, Martin Ede, stated that centres were being closed in spite of the recent tragedy of Ben Silcock, a schizophrenic patient who was mauled by a lion at London Zoo.
‘The Government thinks 29 are to be shut in England by 1997.
We've discovered that over 40 are to go,’ Mr Ede said.
‘The number of closures is much greater than the Government believes it to be.
They have lost touch with what is happening and hospital beds are being closed before alternative beds and day care are set up in the community.
The situation is out of control.’
Alarm bells should be ringing all over the country, as there would not be enough beds either in hospital or in the community for people with severe mental illness in the future, he said.
‘I fear there will be hundreds more Ben Silcock type tragedies.’
The figures would be a shock to MPs and Department of Health officials — who had acknowledged that they not longer keep central statistics on closures — he added.
The NSF began to examine the rate of mental hospital closures after the junior health minister Tim Yeo told Parliament that 29 hospitals were to shut by 1997.
Researchers who spoke to hospital general managers and health authority planning departments found that 41 hospitals in England were to go by 1997, rising to 45 by the turn of the century.
The Government has set up a task force to survey mental health services over the next two years.
The NSF research and policy officer Gary Hogman said: ‘During that period the rundown will continue and hospitals will continue to close.’
— PA
Strathclyde to unveil sewage recycling proposals
By Denny Macgee
A £100 MILLION proposal to recycle millions of tons of sewage sludge into environmentally friendly products for use in agriculture, forestry and land reclamation by the end of the century will be unveiled today.
Strathclyde, Scotland's largest region, dumps 17 million tonnes a year of wet sewage in the sea.
That will be banned by the European Community by 1998.
Tom Anderson, Strathclyde Region's director of sewerage, will outline plans to the region's councillors showing how the authority can meet the requirements of the EC directive by the deadline by recycling the sludge for use in areas such as agriculture, forestry and land reclamation.
Prof Anderson yesterday confirmed to the The Scotsman that he will outline the proposals, believed to be the first of their kind on such a scale in Britain, to councillors and officials this morning at a private meeting.
The professor said that the plans, which will not involve incineration, followed the region's appointment of consultants to come up with the best environmental option for the disposal of the region's sewage sludge without excessive cost.
The investment required could be in the region of £100 million.
‘What we have at the moment is a situation where we discharge 17 million tons of wet sewage from vessels into the river each year.
The EC directive requires us to build treatment works at coastal resorts and we have estimated that will produce another 800,000 tons.
That means we are looking at having to dispose of around two and a half million tons of wet sewage every year by the end of the century, and the law says that we will not be able to dispose of it at sea.’
The capital cost of providing the treatment plants required by the EC directive, he said, would in the region of £900 million.
The proposals will go before councillors at a private meeting, and are then expected to be given the go-ahead at a full meeting of Strathclyde Region later in the morning.
Prof Anderson said they will mean the region will be able to comply with the EC directive, and use the material in an environmentally friendly way.
Details of the proposals will be contained in a brochure, A Change for the Better, which Prof Anderson said would form part of a major consultation process with the public throughout the region.
He would be holding a series of public meetings to inform people throughout the region how the proposals would affect them.
Sewerage service cost each household in Strathclyde about 12p a week.
For a very modest increase, the authority could finance the £100 million required for the strategy.
Warning to army as veterans protest
THOUSANDS of communist opponents of Russia's president, Boris Yeltsin, marched through central Moscow yesterday in a sea of red flags and nostalgia for the lost Soviet Union.
The Defenders of the Fatherland Day celebrations — known until 1992 as Soviet Armed Forces Day — brought together bemedalled Second World War veterans, hardline nationalists and communists seeking to halt the government's economic reforms.
‘Traitors out of the Kremlin,’ thundered the Communist Party leader, Gennady Zyuganov.
Other protesters accused Mr Yeltsin of being an ‘agent of America.
The defence minister, Pavel Grachev, in a television interview, warned dissident officers corps who he said were trying to drag the army into politics in an attempt to seize power.
‘These people, striving for power, should understand once and for all: any attempts to draw the armed forces into the political struggle are criminal and fraught with danger.’
Mr Grachev said 3,000 officers, including two regional commanders, had been disciplined for corruption and 46 generals and other officers were facing prosecution.
One was said to have sold dozens of military engines for personal gain.
Despite this, he said the armed forces were the only well-organised and reliable force in society.
Mr Yeltsin, in the middle of a 12-day holiday from battling to save his authority from the more conservative parliament, stayed away from the wreath-laying at the tomb of the Unknown Soldier.
‘The president…has the right to rest,’ his vice-president, Alexander Rutskoi, told reporters.
Yesterday's rally by veterans angered at the way the once mighty army has fallen from its position of esteem was the biggest seen in Moscow for several months.
Journalists put the mainly elderly crowd at 10,000 to 20,000.
Among them were three members of the State of Emergency Committee accused of staging an abortive communist coup against the former Soviet president, Mikhail Gorbachev, in August 1991. — Reuter
US threat to warlord after Somalia clash
AN ULTIMATUM was issued yesterday to a Somali warlord said to have taken control of the southern port of Kismayu after a fierce two-day battle which is reported to have left dozens dead.
United States-led forces safeguarding relief operations in the country yesterday ordered Mohamed Said Hersi, also known as Gen Morgan, to pull his militia out of the city by tomorrow or face military action.
The ultimatum also applied to all of Gen Morgan's forces outside their designated assembly point in the town of Doble, 30 miles north-west of Kismayu, a US military spokesman, Col Fred Peck, said.
‘Anything out of that cantonment by that date will be confiscated and destroyed,’ he said.
Col Peck said Lt-Gen Robert Johnston, Edinburgh-born head of US forces in Somalia, and the US special envoy, Robert Oakley, signed the ultimatum which was communicated to Gen Morgan by radio.
Col Peck denied Gen Morgan, son in law of the former Somali dictator Mohamed Siad Barre, had taken Kismayu.
He said the warlord's militia controlled less than a square mile of the city.
Earlier, a UN spokesman, Farouk Mawlawi, had told reporters Morgan's troops had taken control of Kismayu.
The UN has dispatched an official to Kismayu to investigate exactly what was happening.
US information was that about 150 of Gen Morgan's men stormed Kismayu on Monday and fought forces of a rival warlord, Omer Jess.
At least 11 people were killed and more than 21 wounded in the worst fighting in Somalia since the 33,000-strong international task force began deploying in December.
The relief group Medecins Sans Frontieres, however, said dozens of Somalis had been killed.
One of its drivers and a guard had been shot and killed by Belgian troops in a firefight.
About 60 Somali fighters shot at Belgian positions on the southern edge of Kismayu's airport on Monday evening and the Belgians fired back.
There were no reports of casualties.
Scattered gunfire was heard yesterday.
Col Peck said about 2,000 Belgian and US troops in Kismayu had intervened during the militia battles, mainly to safeguard lives of aid workers and the port and airport.
‘They didn't attempt to clear the area of fighting, particularly since it was at night…
We did intervene in securing the compounds of aid agencies…but we can't get involved in fighting with isolated groups.’
The fighting prevented US forces from handing over command on Monday to Belgian forces as planned.
Officials said the fighting between the militias, which torpedoed peace talks last month, again endangers negotiations between rival factions.
However, a preliminary meeting to set an agenda for a 15 March peace conference began yesterday and was to resume today.
— Reuter and AP
New arrests hit premier
ITALY's prime minister, Giuliano Amato, yesterday said he would call a vote of confidence as at least 26 more people were arrested in a corruption scandal that has forced a cabinet reshuffle.
Mr Amato said he would call on  parliament to ‘reaffirm the confidence’ in his eight-month-old government.
The vote is expected later this week.
Police made the arrests yesterday in the northern cities of Verona, Padua, Ferrara and Venice.
They also searched offices of Veneto regional authority and seized documents.
Most of those arrested were businessmen.
Sources said they were accused of paying kickbacks to politicians to obtain public contracts.
Two politicians were also detained.
— AP and Reuter
Israelis offer hope of end to deportee saga
A PLEA by the United States secretary of state, Warren Christopher, for Israelis and Palestinians to resume peace talks was met yesterday by assurances that Israel would speed up its review of Palestinian deportation cases.
The Jewish state also offered assurances that deporting Palestinians was not national policy.
In a concession made without fanfare, Israeli officials said, they wanted to give the Palestinians a ‘face-saving’ gesture that should enable them to agree to resume negotiations over self-rule in April.
Trying to smooth the festering controversy over Palestinians deported to Lebanon, the foreign minister, Shimon Peres, said after seeing Mr Christopher that last December's expulsions were ‘an exception’.
Mr Christopher wants Israel to expedite appeals from Palestinians deported last December on suspicion that they incited anti-Israeli violence.
He also wants the Palestinians to accept a compromise and agree to return to the talks in Washington in April.
Israeli officials, while offering a more rapid review of the deportation cases, at the same time stressed that the ultimate decision on when the Palestinians would be repatriated from Lebanon was not up to the government but to courts.
Appeals would be handled by military courts that are independent of government influence, Gad Ben-Ami, spokesman for Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, said after a Christopher-Rabin meeting.
‘We have to hope they complete their work as soon as possible,’ he said.
The decision to expedite reviews of deportation cases will be announced in a low-key way, if at all, a senior Israeli official said.
At their makeshift camp in no-man's land in southern Lebanon, however, a leader of the 396 Palestinian deportees said Israel's offer of a phased return home was not acceptable.
Abdul Aziz Rantisi said they would all leave their camp or none would.
MORE Israelis now favour ceding occupied Arab lands and the formation of an independent Palestinian state than at any other time in the past six years, according to an opinion poll published yesterday.
The survey of 1,139 Israelis by the Jaffee Centre for Strategic Studies showed 60 per cent favoured trading part of the occupied territories for peace, up from about 40 per cent in 1987, and 36 per cent of Israelis were ready to accept the establishment of an independent Palestinian state next to Israel, up from 20 per cent.
Bosnia report condemns mass rapes
BOSNIAN Serbs and their Serbian backers were yesterday condemned for war atrocities by the United Nations Human Rights Commission which singled out the systematic rape of thousands of Muslim women for particular criticism.
The commission expressed its ‘outrage’ that rape was being used as a weapon of war against Muslim women.
The 53-state commission passed two resolutions backing its special investigator, Tadeusz Mazowiecki, a former Polish prime minister, who held Serb leaders to have ‘primary responsibility’.
Although the resolutions, one of which dealt exclusively with rape, were adopted without a vote, Islamic states and Bosnia itself spent more than an hour in an unsuccessful effort amend the other resolution, which condemned ethnic cleansing, by deleting a reference to ‘violations by all sides to the conflict’.
Bosnia's delegate, Mustafa Bijedic, said Bosnians were familiar with such a move, adding: ‘It is in the Vance-Owen plan: it is the policy of appeasing the aggressor.’
European nations which sponsored the resolution refused to accept the Islamic amendment.
Britain's member, Martin Morland, said the commission needed to make clear that Muslims and Croat fighters had committed human rights violations as well as Serbs.
Ironically, at the same time as the commission was attacking the atrocities of war, fighting in Bosnia died down dramatically.
Sarajevo radio said yesterday was the quietest since the beginning of the war.
Only the government-held city of Bihac in north-western Bosnia reported some mortar shells over Monday night.
With the thud of shells absent, UN food supplies started reaching Sarajevo.
Nine relief flights were scheduled to arrive yesterday and two overland convoys were en route to the besieged towns of Gorazde and Tuzla.
A UN spokesman returning from the town of Zepa, which was reached on Sunday, said bodies he saw were all women and children, not soldiers.
He indicated they had been killed by shelling, seeming to contradict reports that many in Zepa had starved to death.
‘When you go in, they greet you with tears and joy.
The people don't want to help you unload because they don't want you to go…
As long as you are there, they know they are not going to be shelled,’ the spokesman said.
‘The morale factor is far more important than the food — the knowledge that the world has not forgotten them.’
— Reuter and AP
27,000 held to halt riot
INDIAN police have arrested more than 27,000 people to prevent them attending a banned Hindu nationalist rally, and the right-wing party that had organised it said yesterday it would sue the government for repression.
The government of Prime Minister PV Narasimha Rao fears the rally, called for tomorrow in a New Delhi park, will trigger Hindu-Muslim riots.
More than 1,800 people died in two months of riots after Hindus destroyed a mosque in northern India in December.
Police said they rounded up more than 19,000 supporters of the right-wing Bharatiya Janata Party across the country yesterday as they headed to New Delhi.
Another 8,000 had been arrested earlier.
BJP legislators yesterday walked out of parliament in protest over the arrests.
Meanwhile, the chief minister of India's western state of Maharashtra, Sudhakarrao Naik, widely criticised over his handling of riots in Bombay last month, resigned late on Monday.
‘The prime minister asked for it and I gave it,’ he said of his resignation.
— AP and Reuter
Mourners massacred by troops
ABOUT 30 people may have been massacred in Kinshasa, Zaire, on Monday, after a bar-room brawl over a woman led vengeance-seeking Zairian troops to fire indiscriminately on two funeral processions, killing the wrong targets, human rights and business sources reported by telephone yesterday from Abidjan, on the Ivory Coast.
They said the trouble began on Saturday night at a bistro in the Kinsangani district.
Soldiers of the Special Presidential Division were flirting with a barmaid and objected when a security guard, a karate instructor identified only as Ekofo, offered her a drink.
He was killed in a brawl and on Sunday people from his karate school killed an officer not involved in the fight.
Other soldiers set out to follow Ekofo's funeral, due to take place on Monday, and fired on unconnected ceremonies at two cemeteries.
State radio confirmed the second attack and said five people were killed, but Buana Kabue, president of the Zaire Human Rights League, said between 30 and 50 had died.
Business sources put the toll at about 20. — AP.
Windpipe implant saves boy's life
A TWO-YEAR-OLD boy in Cape Town, who was slowly suffocating to death, yesterday became the world's first child to have an artificial windpipe implanted, during an operation by a British surgeon.
Oslin Williams, who was severely burned last year in a fire which killed his father at their caravan home, would have died from asphyxiation due to scarring of his windpipe if he had not had the operation, surgeons said.
Stephen Westaby, a cardio-thoracic surgeon from the Oxford Heart Centre, who invented the artificial windpipe, led a team of 15 in the three-hour operation at the Red Cross Memorial Children's Hospital.
RUSSIA Archive to sell Hitler papers
RUSSIA's state archive said yesterday it would sell information contained in secret documents covering the final days of Adolf Hitler and Eva Braun in his Berlin bunker.
The archive director, Sergei Mironenko, said: ‘We have offers from publishing houses, but we have not yet made our choice.’
SOUTH AFRICA White attack puts black baby in coma
AN 11-MONTH-OLD black girl was in a coma with brain damage yesterday after she was allegedly hit by a stone flung by a white youth from the back of a moving pick-up.
Police said a 17-year-old white schoolboy will appear before magistrates in the Western Transvaal town of Swartruggens in connection with the attack.
Sidestepping the real issue
THE US plan to airlift supplies to Muslim communities in Bosnia should, in theory, be a straightforward operation.
The big C-130 and C-141 Starlifter planes would go in, high enough to avoid ground artillery, and drop food and medical aid by parachute to the areas that land convoys have been unable to reach.
Alas, things are never that simple in Bosnia.
While the UNHCR in Geneva has welcomed the move, its officials on the ground fear that it will only make things more difficult.
The Serbs would react against it, runs the argument.
The UN Protection Force, which provides escorts for the land convoys, fears the airdrops would make its lightly armed troops vulnerable to retaliation.
That the Serbs are bound to object is not, of course, a good reason for dismissing the idea.
They have a vested interest in starving Bosnian Muslims out of their remaining enclaves in the eastern part of the republic and controlling whatever comes in by road.
But there is a stronger argument against the airlifts, namely that they are simply a way of sidestepping the real issue, which is asserting the writ of the UN humanitarian and peacekeeping effort on the ground.
So far convoys of humanitarian aid have been stopped at will by the militias and held up for days, if not weeks, despite their protection by armed UN peacekeepers.
Indeed, it was just such an incident which precipitated a crisis last week when the High Commissioner for Refugees suspended UNHCR operations in frustration at Serb action.
There are practical difficulties which confront any attempt to fly in supplies to those in need.
If the planes are to avoid the danger of anti-aircraft fire or missiles, they have to fly so high that any drop would be liable to miss its target, with the danger that the supplies would fall into the wrong hands, or even injure those whom it is intended to help.
Officials suggest, however, that fighters and monitoring aircraft could be used to protect the operation.
Another option put forward is to publicise the flights and invite journalists on board to warn any potential aggressors that attacks on humanitarian flights would be seen by the world.
Whether that would act as a deterrent is, of course, another question altogether.
As John Major contemplates on the way to Washington whether he should give support to the US plan, he should bear the following in mind.
It is true, as the UNHCR representative in Sarajevo Larry Hollingworth says, that road convoys are more accurate, carry more tonnage and are far more cost-effective than air drops.
But the whole argument, as he admits, is predicated on the good will of the Serbs.
When they refuse it, the operation grinds to a halt.
That is where the real issue lies.
Until the international community faces up to that fact, the humanitarian lifeline to trapped civilians will remain precarious, whether it goes by land or by air.
Joint murder verdict by jury not irrational
24 FEBRUARY, 1993 Low v H M Advocate High Court of Justiciary Lord Justice Clerk Ross, Lords Sutherland and Kincraig 10 February 1993
IT IS not irrational for a jury to decide that the first of two co-accused acted in concert with the second but that the second co-accused did not act in concert with the first, because the case against each accused must be considered separately and there may be evidence which is admissible against one but not the other.
The High Court of Justiciary so held in refusing an appeal by Brian Low against his conviction of murder in the High Court at Forfar.
The opinion
LORD Justice Clerk Ross, delivering the opinion of the court, said that it was not disputed that there was sufficient evidence if the jury accepted it to establish that the appellant Low (the first appellant) was guilty of charge 3, the murder charge, on the basis of his own actings.
In none of the grounds of appeal was it suggested that there was an insufficiency of evidence; what was complained of was alleged misdirections.
That there was sufficient evidence to establish the guilt of the first appellant on the basis of his own actings was from his first ground of appeal where it was stated: ‘The evidence of what he himself did comes from his own statements corroborated by bloodstains found on his clothing’.
What lay behind the first three grounds of appeal was the direction which the trial judge gave to the jury on the subject of concert.
It appeared that when the advocate depute addressed the jury, he submitted that the Crown case was that both accused were acting in concert in the attack upon the deceased.
The trial judge, however, directed the jury that there was no evidence available against the first appellant that he was acting in concert, and that the only evidence that there was a concerted attack came, if the jury accepted it, from statements made by the second appellant outwith the presence of the first appellant.
The trial judge stated to the jury: ‘Accordingly the case against the first accused depends solely upon what you find it proved that he himself did.’
However, when the trial judge came to deal with the case against the second appellant, the trial judge directed the jury that it would be open to them to interpret alleged statements by the second appellant as a confession by him that he was one of a group who assaulted the deceased, and that accordingly he would be responsible for everything done by every other member of the group that he knew was being done or was likely to be done.
In other words, he made it plain that to that extent the second appellant could be guilty on the basis of concert.
Counsel submitted that two persons could not be found guilty of murdering the same person unless each was acting in concert with the other.
He described this as a bold proposition, but stated that it was soundly based.
Accordingly he submitted that if the jury accepted that the first appellant had murdered the deceased, then it necessarily followed that they should have acquitted the second appellant.
He also submitted that it was essential that a jury should reach a rational conclusion by a rational process of thought, and he further submitted that it was wholly irrational for them in effect to hold that the first appellant did not act in concert with the second appellant, but that the second appellant acted in concert with the first appellant.
That was what the jury had decided.
The advocate depute submitted that at the trial the view had been taken by the advocate depute and counsel for the defence that there was sufficient evidence to support the view that the two appellants were acting in concert.
However, he submitted that even if the trial judge had misdirected the jury when he told them that the case against the first appellant depended solely upon what it was proved that he himself had done, that misdirection was to the advantage of the first appellant.
Accordingly he submitted that there plainly had been no miscarriage of justice.
The advocate depute also stressed that the jury required to consider the case against each appellant separately, and that on any view there was sufficient evidence to entitle the jury to hold charge 3 proved against the first appellant.
In the light of the summary of evidence which the trial judge provided, it appeared to the court that there was sufficient evidence to support the view that the two appellants were acting in concert.
They were accordingly satisfied that the trial judge misdirected the jury when he stated that the case against the first appellant depended solely upon what they could find proved that he himself did.
However, even though there was a misdirection in this respect, their Lordships agreed with the advocate depute that that misdirection was plainly to the advantage of the first appellant.
The jury were directed by the trial judge that they could find him guilty only as actor, whereas the true position was that he could be found guilty either as actor or on the basis of art and part.
In any event, in the court's opinion, the submissions which counsel made in support of grounds of appeal 1, 2 and 3 were misconceived.
At first blush it might appear self-contradictory to hold that A did not act in concert with B but that B acted in concert with A, but there was no real inconsistency.
The flaw in counsel's argument was that it ignored the fact that the jury were required to consider the case against each accused separately.
They received proper instructions from the trial judge to that effect.
At the very outset of his charge to the jury, the trial judge told them that the questions for them were: ‘Firstly, have the Crown proved beyond a reasonable doubt that the first accused assaulted and murdered the deceased…?’
Subsequently the trial judge stated in respect of charge 3: ‘You must consider this charge separately against each accused on the evidence which is available against that accused, and on that evidence you must return a separate verdict for each accused.’
Later, when dealing with the case against the appellant Low, and having told the jury that they could not consider as evidence against him any statements made by the second appellant, he added: ‘Now in deciding what it was that the first accused is proved to have done, you must consider all the evidence available in the case against the first accused in coming to this decision, but only that evidence.’
In cases where there was more than one accused, it was not unusual to discover that some evidence was admissible against one accused only and not the other accused.
That being so, a situation could arise where there was evidence to establish concert in the case of one accused but not in the case of the other.
If that were so, one accused might be guilty on the basis of concert but the other could be guilty also on the basis only of his own actings.
Accordingly, their Lordships did not agree with counsel that if the jury convicted the first appellant upon the basis that he was guilty as actor, they necessarily should have acquitted the second appellant.
Nor did they consider that there was any irrationality in the verdict which the jury gave.
Counsel for appellant: Hamilton.
Solicitors: Drummond Miller (for Bruce Short, Dundee).
Counsel for respondent: Macdonald, QC, AD.
Solicitor: the Crown agent.
Walking back to happiness
A LITTLE boy has flown halfway round the world to learn to walk.
Huang Sheng faced life as an outcast in his Chinese home where children who can't walk are not allowed to go to school.
But he has travelled 5000 miles to Edinburgh for expert help and is now all set to take his first faltering steps at the age of five.
Sheng has cerebral palsy and is unable to walk.
There is no treatment available for the condition in China and Sheng seemed destined to spend the rest of his life in a wheelchair.
His parents Kang and Bi explained how little Sheng spent his days looking out the window at the other children playing, knowing he couldn't take part.
And although he is a bright boy, he faced a future without any proper education.
In desperation his devoted parents wrote pleading for help to the Scottish Council of Spastics in Edinburgh after finding their address in a book back home.
The Edinburgh specialists were so touched by their pleas they invited the family over to Edinburgh to see if they could help the boy.
And after just a few sessions of treatment his parents were overjoyed to be told their son could be walking by the time they leave the Capital in April.
His father Kang, a mechanical engineer, said: ‘My wife and I were very worried about our son's education because in China, he would be unable to attend school if he wasn't able to walk.
Now we are greatly encouraged by the work of the Scottish Council for Spastics and we have great hopes for the future of our son.
‘We are so grateful for what has been done for Sheng.’
Maureen Sanderson, head of the SCS's external therapy and advisory services, who is helping to treat Sheng, often in her spare time, said: ‘It took a year to cut through the red tape and get Sheng here but we think it will be worth it.
‘He's here for eight weeks and hopefully by the end of his stay he will be able to walk.’
Sheng is undergoing a programme of physiotherapy and play therapy to stretch his tightened leg muscles and he is having regular sessions at a local swimming pool to help his development.
So far his progress has been encouraging and he is already taking a few steps with the aid of a frame.
Sheng will now be fitted with plastic splints which will help develop his walking skills.
‘Once he's up and walking he'll stay that way,’ said Mrs Sanderson.
‘He will have to have his splints changed as he grows so we will have to work out how we do that once he is back in China.
It will probably be a matter of us posting them to him.’
Sheng's parents are being taught therapy techniques during their visit so they can continue the treatment when they return to China.
The family, from Nanjing, are staying in a flat owned by the SCS and their living expenses are being paid by Edinburgh Chinese Co-ordinating Committee.
Arrest in horse attacks
POLICE investigating horse attacks across the south of England today arrested an 18-year-old youth.
The boy, from Winchester, Hants, was being detained at Alton police station where detectives from a special squad probing the attacks were questioning him.
About 30 horses have been attacked over the last 18 months in Hampshire and surrounding counties.
The attacker, dubbed the Horse Ripper, has left many victims with internal injuries and mutilated sexual organs.
Jobless crisis
THE number of people who have been out of work for more than a year broke through the one million barrier today for the first time in five years.
The long-term unemployment total was 1,030,000 in January an increase of 75,000 over the previous quarter's figures, in October.
The total last topped a million in January, 1988.
The latest milestone comes days after unemployment topped three million.
In Scotland the rise in the number of long-term unemployed rose by less than the rest of Britain.
The figure for those out of work for more than a year rose from 73,800 at January, 1992, to 85,300 at January, 1993.
The 11,500 increase — a rise of 15.6 per cent— was the lowest for any region and below the UK average of 40.1 per cent .
— PA
Employment Secretary Gillian Shephard said today: ‘My top priority is to help those individuals without jobs into new productive employment as quickly as possible.’
The number of people out of work for more than a year has more than doubled since long-term unemployment began rising in October 1990.
The new total is up by 283,000 — 38 per cent— on the year since January 1992, and 522,000 — 103 per cent — since October 1990.
Long-term unemployment rose in all regions compared with a year ago.
The largest increases hit the south east, London, the south west and East Anglia.
Since October, long-term unemployment among 18 to 24-year-olds rose by 14,100 to 209,600, the highest level since October 1987.
Among over-25s, it increased by 61,000 to 820,500, the highest level since April 1988, according to today's Department of Employment figures.
The number of people out of work for longer than six months increased by 100,000 in the three months to January this year, to 1,621,000.
It has now doubled since January 1991 an increase of 824,000.
Six-monthly unemployment is worse in all regions than a year ago.
But again the biggest percentage rises hit the south east, London, the south west and East Anglia.
The number of those out of work for six months or more rose by 10,700 (8.8 per cent) from 122,200 to 132,900, again the  lowest in Britain.
Labour's Shadow Employment Secretary Frank Dobson said:’ These figures are a roll call of human misery and living proof of Tory economic incompetence after nearly 14 years in power.
‘The figures who the Tories have no long-term strategy to get Britain back to work and no-short term measures to ease the current crisis.
AIDS total creeping up
SEVEN new cases of AIDS were reported in Scotland last month, bringing the total to 371.
New figures show the death toll rose by six in the period, to 253.
In the UK, the number of reported cases of AIDS has risen to 7045 — up 116 from December 1992 figures.
The total number of deaths from the disease reached 4356 last month, compared with 4291 in December.
Of the 371 reported cases in Scotland, 47 per cent are related to sexual intercourse between men and 31 per cent to injecting drug use.
The comparable figures for the rest of the UK are 77 per cent and three per cent respectively.
Although fewer than 900 people died from AIDS-related diseases in 1991, teenagers and young adults fear the disease more than any other, according to a nationwide survey published today.
Heart disease is Britain's biggest killer, but it hardly features in the study of people's health worries and general knowledge.
More than 1000 men and women were interviewed across all age, social and regional divides.
The results, in a health and beauty magazine, show over-45s fear Alzheimer's Disease second only to cancer.
Although it is the most common form of senile dementia, it rarely affects people under 65 and only one in five of the over-80s. -PA
Staying in care
‘Home Alone’ girl Gemma Gibson (11) will remain in the care of Hammersmith Council, London, following a High Court hearing today at which she and her actress mother Yasmin — who is on police bail — were represented.
Family Division President Sir Stephen Brown, making an open court statement after an hour-long private hearing, said: ‘I do hope the child will be allowed to continue her life in these present circumstances in peace and without any form of harassment.’
Gemma, 11, found fending for herself in her west London home while her mother, 31, was on holiday in Spain, was taken in by Hammersmith Council on February 1 after complaints that she had been on her own for two days.
The girl has been in a council children's home and with foster parents since being made a ward of court.
Her mother is understood to be co-operating with social workers.
She is on police bail while the Crown Prosecution Service considers whether she should be charged with child abandonment.
She was arrested when she flew back to Britain in tears last week, protesting that she had made arrangements with a neighbour to look after Gemma, a pupil at a stage school.
Youth accused of micro chaos
HACKING CLAIM: City student ‘ran up a 34-page phone bill’
A SCHOOLBOY computer hacker who caused worldwide chaos was banned from using the phone by his mum after running up enormous bills, a jury heard today.
But it didn't stop Paul Bedworth, now studying artificial intelligence in Edinburgh, from continuing to tap into systems around the globe — including the EC headquarters in Luxembourg.
He simply ran a wire from his bedroom under the carpet and downstairs to his mother's phone, it was alleged.
Then he stayed awake late — sometimes all night — wiping out information on hi-tech systems, Southwark Crown Court, in London, was told.
One itemised phone bill to Bedworth's horrified mother ran to 34 pages of listed calls, the jury heard.
The longest was allegedly from just before 11pm until five in the morning.
The teenager tapped into data systems across the world, including targets at the Financial Times and universities, using a £200 home computer his mother bought him for Christmas when he was 14.
Bedworth, now 19, is facing charges under the Computer Misuse Act, 1990.
Mr James Richardson, prosecuting, said Bedworth caused havoc on a scale which couldn't be imagined.
He said: ‘He once had his own phone line but was disconnected by BT after running up huge bills.
BT didn't prosecute because of his age.
‘His mother tried to prevent him from having access to the phone but even that didn't stop him.
‘He connected a wire to his computer, ran it under the carpet downstairs and soldered it on to the line so he could still make calls.
‘If you look at the family phone bills you will see the same numbers were dialled over and over again.
They all linked up to computers in the UK and abroad.’
The youth has taken a year off from his studies at Edinburgh University to fight his trial.
Bedworth, of North Parade, Ilkley, West Yorkshire, denies three charges under the Computer Misuse Act 1990.
Two other defendants admitted the charges and will be sentenced later.
The trial, the first of its kind, is expected to last three weeks.
PAUL BEDWORTH: Now studying artificial intelligence.
A SCHOOLBOY computer hacker broke into British Telecom's networks because he felt the phone giant was ‘damn stupid’ and ‘greedy’, a court heard today.
Paul Bedworth, now studying artificial intelligence in Edinburgh, is said to have spent hours in his bedroom using a £200 terminal he received as a Christmas present to cause chaos, by breaching hi-tech systems in numerous countries.
Southwark Crown Court, in London, was told Bedworth believed what he did was fun.
James Richardson, prosecuting, said documents found at Bedworth's home in North Parade, Ilkley, West Yorkshire, when he was arrested two years ago, contained the teenager's views of his hobby — views the Crown claims left even top experts worried.
Bedworth, now 19, began hacking at 14 and quickly became obsessed, the court heard.
Mr Richardson, in the second day of his opening address to the jury, said Bedworth had written: ‘BT are damn stupid and charge too much for using their networks.
Greedy BT.
‘People must realise that to hack you must be willing to use other people's passwords, other people's money and to rip companies off.’
Earlier, the court was told Bedworth managed to tap into computers at EC buildings in Luxembourg, at the Financial Times newspaper in London and universities all over the globe.
Bedworth and two other men are charged with a number of offences under the Computer Misuse Act.
The court heard Bedworth hacked for kicks and was so advanced he was able to change computer passwords.
The three accused did not know each other until they struck up their electronic relationship.
‘There are no allegations that any of these were selling information or that there was any fraud involved but they were causing chaos on a scale that couldn't be imagined,’ Mr Richardson said earlier.
Bedworth denies conspiracy to dishonestly obtain telecommunication services between June 13, 1989 and June 27, 1991.
He also denies a further charge of conspiring to the unauthorised modification of computers and of conspiring to the unauthorised access of computer material.
The two men accused with Bedworth, who pleaded guilty to a number of charges, will be sentenced at a later date.
The trial continues.
-PA
The court heard Bedworth, now a student at Edinburgh University studying artificial intelligence, spent hours sitting in his bedroom mastering a £200 Christmas present which helped him hack into hi-tech systems.
Prosecutor James Richardson said: ‘He could get into any system and cause havoc on a vast scale.
He was tapping into offices at the EC and even the experts were worried.’
Bedworth, of North Parade, Ilkley , West Yorkshire, started hacking when he was only 14 and made ‘electronic friends’ with other hackers.
They communicated with him via messages on his computer screen.
Mr Richardson said: ‘He caused havoc at universities all round the world, so the computer systems were  inaccessible to anyone but him.
All the time he was running up huge bills and wiping out systems all over the world.’
‘Their aim was to defeat the experts and to deliberately lock out systems managers so they couldn't get into their computers,’ said Mr Richardson.
RAF may join Bosnia drop MISSION: PM likely to discuss plan in talks with Clinton
by Bill Jacobs POLITICAL CORRESPONDENT
BRITISH planes could take part in an emergency mercy mission to parachute food and supplies to besieged Bosians in the east of the war-torn country.
But General Milan Gvero, deputy commander of the Bosnian Serb forces, has attacked any plan for an airdrop warning it would lead to ‘the massive use of military force’ and escalation of war.
Downing Street today confirmed that the RAF was ready to join in the latest United States plan to airdrop supplies to  civilians surrounded by Serbs who are refusing to let ground convoys through.
The new initiative is likely to be considered in talks tomorrow  between Prime Minister John Major and US President Bill Clinton.
Mr Major had been opposed to Mr Clinton's original plan to parachute supplies into Bosnia generally instead of airlifts.
But despite the problems of trying to ensure the food goes to the right people and does not cause any injury, Mr Major believes that using parachute air drops to the most dangerous areas would have value.
A Downing Street spokesman said:’ The latest ideas sound much more sensible than the original ones.’
He  confirmed that the RAF were on standby to join in any such operation and that talks between Britain the US and the United Nations would take place on the issue.
The US plans to start airdrops towards the end of this week with about two aircraft a day dropping key food and medical supplies to small communities.
Until today's new proposals Britain had been cautioning against such an operation because of the dangers to aircrew and the risk of killing or injuring people on the ground.
The Foreign Office also said today that they warmly welcomed and supported the US move to step up their contribution.
BRITAIN CONSIDERS BOSNIA AIRDROPS REQUEST
By Charles Miller, Press Association Defence Correspondent
Britain was today considering a United States request to look at ways of joining an air operation to parachute relief supplies into Bosnia.
The US plans to start airdrops towards the end of this week with about two aircraft a day dropping key food and medical supplies to small communities cut off for 10 months.
But Britain has been cautioning against such an operation because of the dangers to aircrew and the risk of killing or injuring people on the ground.
However, the Foreign Office said it warmly welcomed and supported the US move to step up its contribution.
The Foreign Office stressed that Britain was continuing to focus its ‘substantial’ efforts to fly aid into the Bosnian capital Sarajevo and to escort convoys on the ground.
But it added: ‘The United States have asked for our support for their proposal and to consider participation.
We are discussing this with them.’
The plan is expected to involve the use of two Hercules C-130 transport aircraft parachuting supplies into beleaguered communities from heights of around 12,000ft out of range of anti-aircraft weapons.
Now ITN accuse airline
THE ‘dirty tricks’ campaign by British Airways against Virgin Atlantic is still going on, according to Independent Television News.
ITN claimed last night that an investigation had found people claiming to be BA staff were trying to persuade Virgin passengers to switch to BA in Los Angeles.
Virgin chief Richard Branson, who may take legal action in pursuit of a settlement of the original ‘dirty tricks’ row, said he was sad to hear of the new allegations.
Settlement ‘I would have thought that they would have learned from the public ridicule of the last month and made certain that they didn't get up to these things again,’ he told the Press Association.
‘It's sad that having made the assurances in court and accepted that it wasn't an acceptable way of doing business, that it turns out that they are still carrying on.’
Earlier Mr Branson had given BA a 24-hour deadline to settle the original dispute.
BA already have paid out £610,000 in libel damages and £1 million costs, but Virgin wants a settlement to cover damage inflicted in the three years of the ‘dirty tricks’ campaign of customer poaching and publicity smears.
PA.
A BA spokesman said: ‘We will look into this story and see if it warrants comment.’
New plea in Paul killing
THE man leading the hunt for the killer of student Paul Sheldon today asked Evening News readers: ‘Has anyone you know gone missing?’
Detective Chief Inspector George Brown thinks the two men being hunted in connection with the vicious murder may have fled the region until they think it is safe to return.
And he thinks the fact that they could have been away for more than two weeks now may have been noticed by neighbours, family or friends.
Paul (20), from Balerno, was knifed through the heart in the early hours of Saturday, February 6 after a night out with 18-year-old brother Peter and friend Tom Cole (20).
Two men approached them in Whitehouse Loan near Bruntsfield Links and after one stabbed Mr Cole, Paul gave chase — only to be left dying in a pool of blood on the pavement.
‘These two men could have gone away until the heat dies down a bit.
Two weeks could be a holiday but now its longer than that and someone who knows them might be wondering where they are,’ said Detective Chief Inspector Brown.
‘We would ask them to come forward and help us solve this terrible killing.’
The first man is described as 18-20-years-old, 5ft 8in-5ft 10in tall with short dark hair and of  medium build.
He was wearing a light coloured hooded top, dark blue baggy jeans and trainers.
The second man was aged 20-22, 6ft 1in-6ft 2in tall with dark hair which was long on top and short at the sides.
He had a prominent ‘Spender style’ nose and was wearing a black leather jacket.
Anyone with information is asked to contact the murder incident room on 229 2323.
Appeal to parents
PARENTS need to teach their children the difference between right and wrong if another James Bulger tragedy is to be avoided, the Archbishop of Canterbury warned today.
Dr George Carey called on parents to accept responsibility for the way their children grow up and give them moral guidance.
‘Our problems begin and largely end in the home,’ he said in a newspaper interview.
‘If we let our children go when they are young, they are gone from us forever, and it is therefore not surprising when youngsters turn to childish misdemeanours and graduate to serious crime.’
The Government and Labour have both urged a tougher approach to juvenile crime, but Dr Carey asked: ‘Should we be tougher on children?
Should we beat them or lock them up until they learn their lessons?
He added: ‘Although parents cannot be blamed totally for the way children end up, we are able to shape their behaviour and offer them moral guidance.
‘Are parents doing that these days?
Do you spend quality time with your youngsters at teatime, read to them, play with them?
Do you rebuke them when they do something naughty?
‘Becoming a parent is the easiest thing in the world.
Being a good parent is very hard indeed.’
Home Secretary Kenneth Clarke is expected to make a Commons statement on soaring juvenile crime within the next week or so.
He seems to be moving towards dropping plans for a White Paper setting out various proposals, followed at a later stage by legislation.
Instead, he believes he can begin drafting new laws to put his ideas into practice.
It was confirmed last night that the idea of privately-run detention centres was being pursued within the Home Office.
Ministers are said to have been impressed by what they regard as the success of privately-run prisons and want to extend the scheme to other parts of the criminal justice system.
Meanwhile, Tory backbenchers voiced their concern that speedy action should be taken over juvenile crime when about 25 MPs met Mr Clarke for more than an hour at a private meeting at the Commons.
PM flies to meet President Clinton
THE Prime Minister was flying to Washington tonight for his first White House meeting with President Clinton — amid claims that the traditional special relationship between Britain and the US may be cooling.
Officials in London and Washington have insisted the relationship is as strong as ever despite the transmission last night of a TV programme highlighting the help given to George Bush's presidential campaign by Tory Party workers.
Mr Clinton is apparently determined that this will have no effect on what looks like being a cordial relationship between two leaders who have much in common, especially as Mr Major says he had no knowledge of it.
Nor will he make an issue of the incident in which the Home Office combed its files to discover whether the President, when an Oxford student, applied for British citizenship to avoid a military draft.
It is pointed out in Washington that the President made a special point of ensuring that Mr Major was the first European leader to meet him in the White House.
The two will be spend six hours together tomorrow, including a private supper, for talks in which trade will be high on the agenda.
There will also be in-depth discussion on Northern Ireland and the Mr Clinton's plan to send a fact-finding mission.
But there is still no suggestion it will be led by Tom Foley, the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Some Ulster Unionists have already declared they would boycott him if he were chosen.
The new President's foreign policy is very similar to that of his predecessor, so Mr Major is likely to find himself in accord with the White House on practically every external policy.
The Middle East, Bosnia, the EC including the presence of US troops in Europe will be the main issues discussed under this heading.
Meanwhile, before his meeting with Mr Clinton, the Prime Minister will have talks with senior members of the new administration.
He will also give coast-to-coast interviews on at least four American TV channels during a visit which will last only about 36 hours — PA.
Call for fish boycott
A SCOTTISH fishing boss has called for a Europe-wide boycott of cheap fish to stop non-EC states destroying the fishing industry.
The managing director of Noble Bros in Fraserburgh, Ian Smith, was today closely monitoring the situation in Roscoff, where his firm sends up to two tons of fish daily, but which is at the heart of violent French protests.
Mr Smith, who is also chairman of Fraserburgh Fish Merchants' Association, said it was not just the French who were suffering from cheap fish imports — catches could be bought from eastern European boats in the North-east at prices which local fishermen say would put them out of business.
He claimed foreign crews were paid a pittance and the EC must take a stand by refusing to do business until minimum standards were met.
The French — themselves victims of a blockade at Lochinver by Scottish fishermen last year — refused to allow a UK fish cargo ship to dock at Roscoff in protest at cheap imports from South America, eastern Europe and Britain.
UK exports have been boosted by the falling value of the pound, although the fisheries ministry claims fish prices are depressed throughout the EC.
Mr Smith, said the latest problems affecting the industry were similar to those hitting the UK coal industry, which had suffered from cheap imports from eastern Europe.
‘The EC should have controls by which it does not to business with countries which do not keep people to a minimum standard, he said.
‘We are supposed to be a caring nation and the EC is supposed to be caring.
But he had little confidence of backing from a UK government which seemed to have no idea about the fishing industry.
Meanwhile unrest in Franch has spread to Paris’ main wholesale food market, where more than 800 French fishermen went on the rampage, smashing stalls and weighing scales and leaving hundreds of pounds of fish strews over the ground before clashing with riot police today.
UK fisheries officials have lodged protests with the French over the Roscoff incident and UK fisheries minister, David Curry, said the French action was entirely unacceptable.
Executive director of the Scottish Fish Merchants' Federation, Robert Milne, accused the French of taking the law into their own hands.
Kirk move out old folk
by Ian Swanson NEWS REPORTER
ALMOST half the number of residents at a Kirk old people's home have been moved out to make more room for offices.
Of the 59 people who were living there, 29 have had to go into alternative accommodation.
Although there is a waiting list, some had to be put up in other Church of Scotland homes in Edinburgh.
More than £650,000 has been spent converting part of Queen's Bay Lodge in Milton Road East, into new headquarters for the Church's board of social responsibility.
The Kirk say some of the residents who moved out were in need of hospital care and a few went to homes in other parts of the country to be nearer relatives.
Kirk social work director, Ian Baillie, said the reduction in numbers had been carried out gradually over 18 months.
And there had been careful consultation with residents and their families.
The residents themselves recognised the move for some of the older, frailer people would be more difficult and those who had been there for the least time had agreed to go, he said.
The board run 37 old people's homes in Scotland; average age of residents is 83.
Mr Baillie said the part of the building which had been converted to offices was no longer suitable for care of the elderly and could not have been adapted economically.
It was on several different levels and had large rooms which could not easily be split.
The board were currently negotiating to build a new home in the Edinburgh area, he added.
A dedication service for the new headquarters — named Charis House after the Greek word for grace — took place yesterday.
The move brings together the board's 61 admin staff, who have been scattered in three different premises — Kirk headquarters at 121 George Street, Wallace House in Granton and the Tom Allan Centre in Glasgow.
Queen's Bay Lodge, once known as Easter Duddingston Lodge, was the home of the Jenner family, who later used it as a staff hostel.
The Church of Scotland bought it in 1960 for £27,500 and opened it as an eventide home two years later.
Drinks zones ahead
THOUSANDS of people who use Edinburgh's 500 city centre pubs were today waiting to discover how late the bars can remain open.
A council decision to crackdown on late-night drinking means that some will remain open later than others, depending on their zone.
Some landlords are content with 11pm closing but others who want to serve drinks beyond then will find the licensing board have imposed strict deadlines after midnight.
The bars will be zoned according to their area, likely to be known by May.
On a busy main road with plenty of people walking around, the curfew will be extended to 1.30am.
In a main road, where there are some houses, doors will have to close by 1am.
And in quieter side streets, where there is a potential disturbance of local residents, customers will have to drink up by 12.30am.
Any licence holder wanting to open beyond those guideline hours will have to appear personally before the board to argue special circumstances.
SALE MOVE: Shopping centre to change hands
Take-over at Cameron Toll
by Barbie Dutter NEWS REPORTER
A MYSTERY buyer is to take over one of Edinburgh's leading shopping centres.
The Cameron Toll centre, which attracts 200,000 shoppers per week, is expected to change hands for more than £30 million.
The deal is expected to go through in March after structural checks are complete.
Centre manager Susan Nicol said the management team would remain the same and there would be no noticeable difference to shoppers or tenants in the way Cameron Toll was run — although it was hoped the new owners would invest in a facelift for the centre.
‘It's a nice shopping centre but now we feel that money could be spent on a refurbishment programme,’ she said.
‘As a management team we are all excited by the buy-out and we hope the new owners will take on some of our ideas and extend the services that we provide.’
She added: ‘Cameron Toll is a very busy centre and I think we can progress into the 90s with no problems whatsoever.’
The centre was put on the market in November by current owners the Civil Aviation Authority Superannuation Scheme.
Cameron Toll's anchor tenant, Savacentre, will be excluded from the sale as they own their premises along with the petrol station.
The remainder of the centre has 38 other tenants, including a Safeway supermarket, TSB, Boots the Chemist and an upstairs food court.
There are also 1000 parking spaces.
The centre was opened in October 1984 and was named European Shopping Centre of the Year the following year.
A spokesman for the Civil Aviation Authority said: ‘We can confirm the centre is under offer, but that's as much as we can say at this stage.’
CAMERON TOLL: Opened in 1984 and named European Shopping Centre of the Year in 1985.
Teenage train hero Youngster may have averted rail disaster by Sandy Braid NEWS REPORTER
A TEENAGER may have saved passengers on a sleeper train when he cleared two shopping trolleys from the line minutes before the train arrived.
The High Court in Edinburgh heard today that Graeme Ralph (16) was waiting for the Inverness-London sleeper at Falkirk Grahamston station when he saw a man throwing a trolley from a bridge.
Advocate Depute Elizabeth Jarvie said that Graeme immediately went along the track where he found two trolleys on the line and pulled them off before the sleeper arrived.
Paul McCormack (23) was jailed for a year when he admitted culpably and recklessly throwing two trolleys on to the line from a railway bridge at Hope Street in Falkirk on April 13 last year.
Lord Weir told McCormack: ‘It is only due to the fact a young boy saw what you did and, with some little risk to himself, removed the trolleys that an accident which might or might not have been serious, was avoided.’
Lord Weir added that there had been too many incidents of vandalism to the danger of people on the railways.
Mrs Jarvie said that apart from the sleeper, freight trains carrying petroleum products from Grangemouth used the line at that time of night, after midnight.
She said an expert believed the trolleys could have cut the brake pipes on the train or even have caused a derailment.
Defence counsel Robert Anthony said McCormack of Meeks Road, Falkirk, had been drinking and larking about with two other men.
He had foolishly picked up the trolleys from a nearby supermarket and threw them.
Mr Anthony said: ‘He really did not appreciate what was down below the bridge.’
McCormack was shocked when he realised what he had done.
LORD WEIR: The judge said there were too many incidents of vandalism to the danger of people travelling on the railways.
Homes market on the move
THE green shoots of recovery have begun to sprout in Edinburgh's billion-pound-a-year property market.
Solicitors and estate agents today reported a firm increase in interest — and more importantly in sales — since the start of the year.
They put the greater activity in the market down to renewed confidence and the very low interest rates on offer, especially to first-time buyers.
The Edinburgh Solicitors' Property Centre, which handles 85 per cent of second-hand home sales in Edinburgh and the Lothians, said they had experienced a steady growth in the first two months of the year.
More than 680 homes were sold in January, rising to 750 for the first three weeks of this month.
The total value of sales is £80 million so far.
Property centre chairman George Clark said: ‘The majority of the properties being sold are priced at £80,000 or less, in other words, appealing most to the first or second-time buyer.
This is where the market is most active.
‘But it has yet to filter through to the more expensive properties.’
His view was echoed by David Alves, chairman of umbrella-organisation Registered Estate Agents Ltd (REAL), whose membership includes the area's leading agencies.
He said: ‘The market is definitely thawing out from the big freeze we experienced last year, and it is thawing out from the bottom up.
‘We have to be grateful to first-time buyers.
The big renewal in interest in this sector of the market will have a knock-on effect, freeing people to move up the property ladder.
‘Low mortgage rates — a £30,000 flat can be bought for about 30 per cent less than it can be rented — has undoubtedly triggered off a renewal in confidence.’
GEORGE CLARK: Market is most active with the first and second-time buyers.
Right to die dilemma is on agenda
MORE than 120 eminent doctors, lawyers and philosophers from all over the world were gathering in Edinburgh today to discuss whether or not to treat hopelessly-ill patients.
The recent case of Hillsborough victim Tony Bland, whose parents appealed successfully in court for him to be allowed to die, has put the subject high on the political agenda.
Today's conference, organised by the Scottish Office, has been set up to encourage informed debate about the whole issue of the hopelessly ill.
Professor Colin Bell, of Edinburgh University's sociology department, said: ‘The conference represents a unique opportunity for the doctors and nurses who care for people who are generally regarded as being ‘hopelessly ill’ to get together with lawyers, philosophers and sociologists to discuss the very real dilemmas — social, legal and medical — posed by such people.
‘We hope that by the end of the conference we will be able to suggest some acceptable ways forward for the future, as well as having aired the problems.’
Student style show raises charity cash
by Stephen Rafferty NEWS REPORTER
MORE than 50 students turned on the style to raise thousands of pounds for a cancer charity.
Proceeds from the second Student Cancer Appeal Fashion Show will be shared between Fairmile Marie Curie Centre, Edinburgh, and the Royal Marsden Hospital, Surrey.
The entire show, including modelling, stage management, music and choreography, was put together by third-year Edinburgh University students.
Held at the Assembly Rooms, George Street, the event is expected to raise about £10,000.
Art history student Daniel Marks was the inspiration behind the show, but he paid tribute to hard-working committee members Rachel Beaugie, Miles Buesst, Janet Fisher, Annabel Oakley and Victoria Watson.
As a 17-year-old, Daniel was diagnosed as suffering from testicular cancer and was treated at the Royal Marsden.
To show their gratitude his parents founded a fellowship in his name.
The fashion show was founded by Daniel and university friends to support the fellowship and help a local cancer charity.
Most of the clothes, which featured items by Jasper Conran, Alberta Ferretti, Moschino, and Armani were supplied by Cruise of St Mary's Street.
Hairdressing for the show was carried out by stylists from Charles Kivlin, and Clarins from Jenners provided the make-up expertise.
IN THE FASHION: Students model clothes by top designers at a show in the Assembly Rooms to raise money for a cancer research charity.
John may be set to move on
PRESENTING the top children's show on BBC TV is still a thrill for Edinburgh-born John Leslie.
But after four years on Blue Peter, it could be time for a move.
The 28-year-old has made his first shift from children's telly with the Friday evening showbiz slot ‘Entertainment Express’ where he works alongside Selina Scott — and he is loving it.
‘We're more than half way through the first series and I've managed to keep both jobs going.
‘It is great working with Selina Scott and the programme is a change from anything else I have done.
I was brought up with music, I love films and I love showbusiness — it's great to be involved in it.
‘Hopefully, it will be back for a second series in September.
A lot of people in the business are watching it and the ratings have gone up although it is opposite Coronation Street.
‘My contract with Blue Peter comes up in June, so we'll see what happens.’
The 6ft 5in children's presenter featured in the gossip columns when he started dating Welsh beauty Catherine Zeta Jones, star of The Darling Buds of May.
The relationship is still going strong despite a heavy workload which takes them both all over the world.
‘We've been together for more than 18 months and we see one another when we can.
It is going well, but we've no plans to settle down and marry.’
ON AIR: John Leslie gives a few TV tips to Colin at the Blue Peter Studio.
Colin's TV topper
THE Evening News was inundated with entries for a Thunderbirds competition to build the best Tracy Island after it was shown on Blue Peter.
Our prizewinner, Colin Fraser, travelled to London to watch the show.
Prizewinner visits Blue Peter base
JACQUI BROWN reports.
YOUNG Colin Fraser usually has to go out of his way to see his favourite children's programme.
His family have never owned a television and he usually watches it at his gran's house.
But the starry-eyed youngster and his mother, Fawns, got a real taste of the big time when they saw last night's programme going out live from the control room of Studio One at Television Centre.
They had lunch with Edinburgh-born presenter John Leslie and spent the afternoon watching rehearsals for the live show.
It may have been John's 28th birthday, but it was still a long day's work with fellow presenters Anthea Turner and Diane-Louise Jordan.
The trio had to pack features about Roy of the Rovers, fly ball racing for dogs and their ‘i-care’ appeal hitting the £1 million mark into 25 minutes.
But the most onerous task fell to Anthea — trying to toss pancakes for Pancake Tuesday.
She fluffed it in rehearsal, but pulled it off for the cameras.
After seeing the professionals at work, Colin (7) from Duke Street, Leith, doesn't see himself as a presenter — because of the lights.
‘It's far too hot.
I was roasting,’ said the youngster, who preferred being on the other side of the camera.
‘It was good to see the studio.
It was a lot smaller than I thought.’
Fawns (34) has spent time on the East Enders and Blind Date sets as part of an interior and television set design course at Telford College, but she was impressed after seeing a programme going out live.
‘The presenters appeared so relaxed,’ she said.
‘They were very professional.
They just got on with the job.
I really liked the sets as well.
They were great.’
Programme editor Lewis Bronze was pleased with the day's work.
‘I thought it was a good show.
Working for Blue Peter has got to be the best job in television.
It is one of the nicest shows anyone could do because of the response you get from the viewers.’
FUN DAY: Pancake tasting for Evening News prizewinner Colin Fraser and the Blue Peter trio of, from left, Anthea Turner, Diane-Louise Jordan and John Leslie.
Bid to cut car numbers
TRANSPORT links in Livingston are to come under scrutiny in a bid to cut down the number of cars on the roads.
Poor bus services have already been identified by new town bosses who want to carry out a full traffic survey with interested bodies, including Lothian Regional Council.
It is one of the proposals in Livingston Development Corporation's bid to become ‘environmentally friendly’ before the new town is wound up.
A wide ranging environmental strategy, which has been supported by LDC board members, has implications for corporation staff, local residents and firms.
The main priorities are:
A comprehensive transportation study with a view to reducing the level of dependence on private cars.
A guide prepared by LDC for environmentally responsible practice in site planning and construction for all developments.
It is proposed the corporation should introduce a ‘green’ award for good practice.
Extending the Countryside Rangers' education programmes to encourage local groups and community councils and residents to take a more active interest in their surroundings.
Implementing a series of recycling procedures in corporation offices and preparing information leaflets for local firms about similar initiatives.
Board members also agreed that an environmental action programme and a charter for the environment should be prepared by June.
Housing cards on the table
TAKE-OVER: Associations issue guarantees
by Ian Kyle NEWS REPORTER
TWO housing associations at the centre of a take-over battle have laid their cards on the table.
Edinvar and Link, who have made a joint bid for all the Scottish Homes houses in West Lothian, are issuing a package of guarantees to all families involved.
The six-point deal pledges that, if tenants choose Edinvar and Link as their new landlords, they will get:
A real say in how their houses are managed.
A secure future in their home from an established landlord.
A standard of service that is second to none, with a speed and quality guarantee for all repairs.
A guaranteed investment of over £14 million in their homes over the next 10 years.
A local office staffed by local people, including Scottish Homes staff, who will be trained to deliver the personal service housing associations are noted for.
A guarantee that all rents raised in West Lothian will be spent in West Lothian and a rent guarantee that is linked to inflation.
‘We appreciate that tenants are facing a major decision on who their new landlord will be,’ said Edinvar director Robin Burley.
‘That is why we felt it was important to talk to each Scottish Homes tenant face-to-face in their own home to explain our promise to them.’
‘We understand that this must be an anxious time for many tenants, who may be feeling uncertain about the future, and that's why we decided to publish our doorstep pledge as an extra reassurance.’
Link chief executive Craig Sanderson said: ‘Tenants in West Lothian will receive a landlord service that is second to none if they choose Link or Edinvar as their new landlord.
‘Both associations have, on record, tenant satisfaction figures that speak for themselves.’
Our existing tenants are more than happy with the service they receive and we are confident that new tenants will be just as pleased.
‘Edinvar has been serving tenants for 20 years and Link has been a landlord for nearly 30 years, so we both have a long history of putting tenants first.’
Edinvar have 106 houses in West Lothian and Link have 126 houses in the district.
Weslo Housing Management — a new organisation set up by local Scottish Homes management and staff — have lodged a rival bid to take over all the housing stock in the district.
Scottish Homes want to transfer ownership of their West Lothian properties to another landlord and an extensive consultation programme is being carried out before a final decision is taken.
Painters face ban
COUNCILLORS have decided a city painting firm should be banned from working for the district for two years because their work has not come up to scratch.
The council's technical services committee agreed to recommend that the company, W.H.Spence, be removed from the list of approved contractors for the authority.
The firm are in the last two months of a three-year maintenance contract for work in the Capital's central area, including the repainting of the Ross Fountain in Princes Street Gardens.
In a report to the committee, technical services director Stewart Henderson said that, because of the unsatisfactory nature of work carried out on public buildings, other contractors had to be called in.
After yesterday's meeting, committee chairman Councillor Charles Booth said a recommendation for removal of W.H.Spence from the list of approved contractors would now be made to the council's general-purposes committee.
Mr Spence was unavailable for comment.
If the ban is approved, the contractor would have the chance to reapply in two years to be put back on the list.
Mr Henderson claimed faulty work had not been rectified, accounts had to be queried and an acceptable quality of workmanship had been difficult to achieve.
The report stated the firm had refused to take and act on instructions given by the council on timing or specification.
Fire stunt to spell alert
A BREATHTAKING warning about the dangers of smoking at home has been handed out by health watchdogs and firemen.
The Tobacco Issues Group (TIG) and Lothian and Borders Fire Brigade staged a graphic demonstration of the problems caused by people dropping cigarettes that are still alight.
The rescue stunt at the fire training school at Bangour Village Hospital was organised to hammer home ‘Breathtaking’— the theme of National No Smoking Day, Wednesday March 10.
Bob Burnett, spokesman for Livingston-based TIG, said: ‘Research at Edinburgh University showed that during the last decade careless handling of smokers’ materials played a part in 44 per cent of household fires which resulted in death.’
In 1991-92 there were 32 house fires in West Lothian caused by smoking materials.
‘Fatalities are usually caused by smoke inhalation,’ said Mr Burnett.
‘Alcohol also plays a part.
People are more likely to come home after a few drinks, light a cigarette and then fall asleep, often with tragic consequences.
‘Apart from trying to get people to stop smoking, we are urging them to take care.’
Station Officer Steven Sansbury said unattended pans of food on cookers were also a major cause of fire deaths and smoke detectors would lead to more safety in the home.
BREATHTAKING: A fireman drags a ‘victim’ to safety during the simulated rescue at Bangour Hospital.
Bretons go on rampage
MORE than 800 French fishermen smashed up a section of Paris's main wholesale food market and fought with riot police today in an explosion of anger at low producer prices and competition from imports.
The fishermen, mostly from Brittany, smashed stalls and weighing scales, crushed shells underfoot and left hundreds of pounds of fish strewn on the ground.
It followed a day of incidents yesterday when people in the Breton ports of Concarneau and Roscoff staged protest marches, attacked warehouses and forced a British cargo ferry carrying lorries loaded with fish to switch ports.
Britain's shadow food minister, Elliot Morley, called on the government to take firm action to protect UK food exporters from ‘intolerable’ obstruction and intimidation from French fisherman.
He said: ‘It is the case that landings of fish have been good recently and that has depressed the price of fish at the market.
‘There is no justification, however, for action of this kind.’
-PA.
ROYAL VIEW: Prince Charles to see how Urban Aid is working
PUPILS at an Edinburgh school once threatened with closure, are to meet Prince Charles.
The Prince of Wales visits Castlebrae High tomorrow to see how more than £1.2 million of Urban Aid cash is being used to create a World of Work complex to give pupils a taste of what ‘real’ jobs are like.
He will tour the school's car maintenance department where pupils learn basic mechanics.
Neil Campbell, principal craft and design teacher, said: ‘We managed to run several SCOTVEC modules and now some of our former pupils are working in the field of mechanics.’
Much of the equipment, including engines and industrial tools, was donated by car repair giants Kwik-Fit.
Castlebrae was threatened with closure two years ago because of falling school rolls but the local community fought to achieve a stay of execution.
Now, through the Friends of Craigmillar organisation, the school has been able to tap business expertise in the city to help it towards a new future.
TOP CLASS: Down to basics with 14-year-olds James McCallum and Steven Sneddon in the car workshop to be visited by Prince Charles.
Knife threat worry
Police fear Capital growth in weapons
by Nick Gates NEWS REPORTER
POLICE chiefs are worried that the brutal murder of Paul Sheldon has led to more young people going into Edinburgh city centre armed with knives.
As the hunt for the 20-year-old's killer stretches into its second week, Lothian and Borders Assistant Chief Constable Tom Wood appealed for calm on the streets.
He is concerned that publicity over Paul's death has made the Capital seem unsafe — when in fact the chances of being attacked and hurt are small.
‘A high degree of awareness can make the problem worse because some young people are persuaded to carry a knife or weapon to defend themselves with,’ he said.
‘That's the dangerous part because there's no such thing as a defensive weapon.’
Although it was not the case when Paul was stabbed, those carrying knives often have the blade turned back on them, and Mr Wood is anxious that no more young people end up injured or worse.
While police in Strathclyde push on with their high-profile weapons amnesty, Operation Blade, the Lothian force has adopted a lower key approach in keeping with the scale of the problem.
‘What we have been doing over the last few weekends is exercising our right to search someone if we have a reasonable belief that they are carrying a weapon,’ said Mr Wood.
‘All officers are paying attention to this as a matter of priority and divisional commanders are carrying out their own projects in the areas they know are vulnerable.’
Special attention is being paid to flashpoints such as bus and taxi queues and take-aways.
‘My message to young people is do not be persuaded to carry a weapon.
‘You may end up being injured and, if you are caught, you will be charged,’ said Mr Wood.
TOM WOOD: If police catch you with a weapon, you'll be charged.
Big cash boost for homes
by Lana Montgomery NEWS REPORTER
MORE than 2000 houses will be provided in Lothian over the next year in the largest investment programme yet undertaken by Scottish Homes.
They have announced plans to invest more than £38 million in the area and to attract a further £23 million from the private sector.
Coinneach Maclean, Scottish Homes' district manager, said: ‘This is our most ambitious programme for the city and the Lothians.
‘For every £2 we invest, we will attract more than £1 of private finance which will enable substantially more homes to be provided.’
In Edinburgh, the agency plan to continue the regeneration of communities such as West Granton and Muirhouse, Niddrie , Craigmillar and Wester Hailes.
A focus will also be given to parts of the Old Town, particularly South Bridge, to provide more homes at affordable rent through housing associations and private sector landlords.
Scottish Homes plan to continue to invest in developments for both rent and low-cost home ownership in small urban communities including Dalkeith, Gorebridge, Rosewell, Whitburn, Armadale, Musselburgh and Prestonpans.
The programme also intends to address housing needs in small rural communities and developments are planned for the villages of Gullane, Athelstaneford, Innerwick and Pencaitland.
The Edinburgh and Lothians programme of developments is part of the agency's total investment programme for Scotland of £372 million for the financial year April 1993 to March 1994.
Liability limited with a call
Q. I've lost my credit card.
Will I have to pay up if someone uses it?
A. Before doing anything else, let the credit card company know that your card has been lost or stolen.
Until you do this, you are liable for up to £50 of fraudulent use (though some card issuers set a lower limit).
After that time, you have no liability — provided you have not been grossly negligent with your card.
It makes sense to keep a note of the phone numbers you should ring if you lose any of your cards, separate from the cards, of course.
Alternatively, you could join a card protection scheme.
For less than £10 a year, the firm running the scheme will contact all the relevant card companies for you should your cards be lost or stolen.
Protest petition
CIVIL servants are to hand a 3500-signature petition to their employers when they stage an anti-privatisation protest at the Scottish Office tomorrow.
The ‘Declaration to Maintain Quality’ being handed in to St Andrew's House spells out opposition to possible privatisation of thousands of civil service jobs.
It says that plans to turn public services over to organisations motivated by profit is against the interests of the Scottish people.
Afterwards a rally is being staged at the Assembly Rooms against Government policy on public sector pay.
Spot checks on pollution
HEALTH officials are to check traffic pollution levels at homes in ‘hot-spot’ areas of Edinburgh.
The aim is to get more detailed information about levels of car fumes as part of the next phase of the district council's monitoring programme.
Environmental health director Dick Carson said a mild winter was the main reason for improved nitrogen dioxide readings last year.
Only four areas were above the EC recommended limit compared with ten the year before.
Only one — West Maitland Street — was above the EC legal maximum, compared to three in 1991.
‘Records will show very shortly that we have not had a typical winter for this part of the country and that seems to be the main reason,’ he told the environmental health committee yesterday.
The next stage of testing would include monitoring pollution levels along the proposed routes of Lothian Region's Greenways project, which will create an extra 20 miles of bus lanes.
The aim is to relate pollution levels before and after the changes to health statistics.
‘We are also intending to go out this summer to hot spots and find out just how hot they are,’ said Mr Carson.
That would mean taking readings in homes and in streets in parts of the city worst hit by the car.
Meantime the Government's 24-hour monitoring station in Princes Street Gardens would help give the city centre background level.
Poll tax rebels claim victory
ANTI-POLL tax activists have claimed a victory after sheriff officers were forced to call off their visit to a house in Bonnyrigg.
Officers from Love and Co. were due to pick up goods belonging to Jim Sneddon and his wife in preparation for a warrant sale following the couple's refusal to pay the tax.
But they were advised by the police not to proceed after a crowd of demonstrators gathered outside the house in Cockpen Drive.
Among the protestors were former Leith MP Ron Brown and leading poll tax rebel Tommy Sheridan.
Mr Sheridan's mother Alice said: ‘This is a tremendous victory for the Anti-Poll Tax Federation.
‘The poll tax is almost finished and yet you have Labour councillors still hounding working class people.
‘But we said there would be no warrant sales and there have been none to our knowledge.’
Demonstrators were stationed outside the house from 7.30am until about 8pm.
Mrs Sheridan said the average number was about 120, but at times there were more than 200.
Police estimated the maximum at 70 and described the protest as quiet and said there had been no trouble.
A spokesman for Love and Co. said: ‘We are simply rearranging the uplift.’
‘There was a particular case where we were in the process of doing an uplift, but our officers did not call at the address at the request of the police.
Refuges pushed to limit
EIGHTY-FOUR women — more than two a day — sought refuge or help with Edinburgh Women's Aid last month.
The total was more than the combined figures for the previous two months.
While refuge spaces were provided for 19 women and children, four had to be turned away because of lack of space.
Carolann Cunningham, of Edinburgh Women's Aid, said: ‘It is difficult to say why this is the case.
But a lot of women tend to see Christmas through because there is pressure on them to keep the family together.
‘With Christmas out of the way, January is the time when some women will leave violent situations.’
Figures for January this year were 11 up on the same month last year, when 73 women contacted Edinburgh Women's Aid.
In December, 33 sought help, while in November, the figure was 41.
Sarah Abbott, also from Edinburgh Women's Aid, added: ‘These figures highlight not only the amount of women and children who come to us but also the amount who unfortunately we have to turn away because of lack of space, facilities and funding.’
When women are turned away, they are usually referred to homelessness organisations or other groups.
Margaret McGregor, convener of the district council's women's committee, said: ‘The women's committee has been aware for some time that there are a lack of resources and refuge spaces for women fleeing violent situations.’
If you think more should be done to protect women and children  contact Jean Wes on 031 243 3457.
Clinton's special pledge to Major
From Ewen MacAskill Political Editor, Washington
PRESIDENT Bill Clinton last night pledged to maintain the special relationship between Britain and the United States before he began his first meeting with John Major.
During the talks the Prime Minister pushed for an end to trans-Atlantic trade wars.
Mr Major also offered limited support for US airdrops in Bosnia.
Among problems raising doubts over the ‘special relationship’ before Mr Major's arrival was a claim that Airbus Industrie, the consortium which includes British Aerospace, had received unfair subsidies to help it compete with American aircraft builders.
This was expected to be one of the issues to be raised during the meeting.
The two leaders were also discussing the American plans to deliver humanitarian aid by air to Bosnia, which Britain has welcomed but declined to join.
There had been fears that allegations of British Conservative support for ‘dirty tricks’ against Mr Clinton during the American election campaign last year may also cast a cloud over the Prime Minister's visit.
However, in spite of possible disagreement on these issues, Mr Clinton commented warmly on the special relationship when asked whether it had been harmed.
Mr Clinton said: ‘It's special to me personally, it's special to the United States.
It will be so long as I am sitting in this office.’
At an Oval Office photo session at the start of the six-hour White House visit, Mr Major said of the airdrop plan: ‘I think as a humanitarian mission, it is very welcome and it will have our support.’
Mr Major said he was ‘not remotely concerned’ that the air drops would endanger British troops in Bosnia.
In London, David Howell, the chairman of the House of Commons foreign affairs committee, called the plan ‘very dangerous,’ adding that it was a step toward military intervention.
Earlier, the Prime Minister was lobbied by congressmen, including the two Kennedys, Edward and Joseph, over alleged human rights abuses by British soldiers in Northern Ireland.
The congressmen, who are determined to force Mr Clinton to fulfil his election promise to send a peace envoy to Northern Ireland, sent various letters to both the president and the Prime Minister.
One letter from 12 senators, including Edward Kennedy, spoke of the ‘continuing human rights abuses of British security forces’.
They raised an Amnesty International report on Northern Ireland and allegations of a shoot-to-kill policy by troops.
Another letter from 34 congressmen asked Mr Clinton to make ‘the issue of ending strife in Northern Ireland a top priority in their relations with the United Kingdom’ and called for a relaxation of US visa restrictions on ‘political refugees’from Ireland.
Although most of those named in the letters are well-known for their persistent campaigning over Northern Ireland, there are still more than usual and the timing created maximum embarrassment for the Government.
In a series of private discussions with congressmen on Capitol Hill, Mr Major was asked only once directly about Ulster and replied that progress was being made in getting people round the table for negotiations.
Mr Major met the US House of Representatives Speaker, Tom Foley, an Irish-American who has been mentioned as the possible special envoy.
But Mr Foley said afterwards that he had had several discussions over the last few weeks with Mr Clinton and he had not been asked if he wanted such an appointment.
Although British Government officials are hopeful that the threat of Mr Clinton setting up substantial trade barriers is receding, there is still no progress on the GATT trade agreement that could establish a sound basis for international commerce for the remainder of the century.
There are fears in the British camp that the UK and the rest of the European community could be the victims of a trade war between the US and Japan.
US regulations on the import of four-wheel drive vehicles are aimed at Japan, for instance, but Britain's Land-Rover could be a casualty.
Army reacts, Page 9
Housing estate planners leave Charles ‘deeply depressed’
By Alan Hutchison, Chief Reporter
THE PRINCE of Wales admitted yesterday that the designers of modern housing estates had driven him ‘nearly bonkers’ in the past 14 years.
Speaking in Edinburgh to a gathering of chairmen from his various trust organisations in Scotland, he said that he had tried very hard to persuade architects and planners that there was another way.
He added: ‘If only we could roll back the frontiers of the 1960s.’
The prince said: ‘Frequently I find it deeply depressing.
I find I leave these places even more frustrated than I was when I arrived.’
The prince, who had earlier visited the Craigmillar estate in the city, said: ‘I find it deeply frustrating when it comes to the whole question of the design of that particular environment.
It is a town with no heart and no proper facilities.’
The prince said there was a lack of strategic thinking to tackle the problems and he added: ‘I think what we are doing is tinkering with the problem, which is a structural one.
Thinking about it has driven me nearly bonkers in the last 14 years.’
Tom Farmer, chairman of Scottish Business in the Community, who chaired the meeting, promised that all the organisations of which Prince Charles was patron would now quickly get together and work out a strategic plan.
Mr Farmer said: ‘You have got down to the core of the problem.
You have definitely stirred us to action.’
Prince's visit, Page 5
Prince Charles touring the estate by coach yesterday
Car thief cut up bodies, court told
A PENNILESS van driver's master plan for murder ended in the slaughter and dismemberment of a retired bank official and his daughter — for the sake of stealing a car, an Old Bailey jury heard yesterday.
Benjamin Laing's actions had involved the destruction of a family, said Michael Stuart-Moore, QC, prosecuting.
Laing, of Manor Way, East Ham, has denied murdering Matthew and Alison Manwaring in April last year.
The father was shot at point blank range through the heart and the daughter, who turned up later, was tortured, sexually abused and strangled, it was alleged.
The killings came after Laing duped his way into the home of Matthew Manwaring, 62, pretending he wanted to buy a car the family had advertised., Mr Stuart Moore said.
‘The motive — unbelievable as it may seem — was robbery.’
As the former bank messenger sat in the sitting room, he was blasted through the heart at point blank range with a sawn-off shotgun by Laing, said Mr Stuart-Moore.
Mr Manwaring would have been no match for the fit 25-year-old van driver, who boxed and played badminton, said prosecution.
Soon afterwards, Laing confronted Mr Manwaring's daughter, Alison, 24, as she returned from an evening out with her fiance.
He strangled her — after first manacling her with handcuffs, torturing her and sexually assaulting her, the prosecution alleged.
Afterwards he dismembered both bodies in the bathroom upstairs.
‘Each body was cut into seven pieces, the head decapitated and the arms and legs amputated.
Each torso was cut in half,’ said Mr Stuart-Moore.
Laing used a Stanley knife, a hacksaw blade and possibly a bread knife for his task, he alleged.
The pieces were put into ten different bags and driven away by Laing after he meticulously cleaned up the Manwarings' house in Aldersley Gardens, Barking, east London, the jury was told.
He had forced Alison to sign blank cheques and had taken her cash card and other bank books during her ordeal, said the prosecution.
The killer wanted time to sell the Escort and use the bank books ‘before the balloon went up’.
Six days after the killings, Laing was seen digging a deep grave for the bodies in his girlfriend's garden in the pouring rain, using a pickaxe and shovel, said Mr Stuart Moore.
The Manwarings' family notified the police days after the murders, fearing at first that father and daughter might have been kidnapped.
After media publicity, Laing decided to go to the police on a damage limitation exercise, it was alleged.
He told them he had bought the car but had left the Manwarings in good health.
Police later found a notebook at Laing's home.
It held what was in essence a master plan for murder, said Mr Stuart-Moore.
Mr Stuart-Moore said the notebook containing the master plan had been written some time before and some details had been altered.
The trial continues today.
— PA
Miss Whiplash to have crack at poll
MISS Whiplash yesterday announced in a letter she was returning to Britain to stand as Corrective Party candidate in the Newbury by-election.
Lindi St Clair, the prostitutes' rights campaigner, who surfaced in Florida after her disappearance last month started a major police hunt, is on a luxury cruise to Australia.
— PA
Compensation talks still going on
THE Virgin Atlantic tycoon, Richard Branson, faced another agonising wait last night in his attempt to obtain compensation from British Airways for ‘dirty tricks’ against his airline.
Lawyers for Virgin and BA were working into the night, going over the small print of an agreement which could cost BA up to £10 million.
Mr Branson's chief negotiator, the Virgin group managing director, Trevor Abbott, said: ‘It would be very sad if we don't settle this.
It takes two to tango, however, and I suspect we'll still be here tomorrow discussing it.’
— PA
‘We would expect to complete things tonight but there are a lot of points to be discussed and a number of outstanding issues.
Mr Abbott said: ‘A deal is never a deal until it is signed.’
The long-running row has already cost BA £610,000 in damages and £1 million costs.
Mr Branson demanded his rival came up with a large compensation settlement for its three years of customer poaching and publicity smears.
Without a deal, he threatened to take BA to courts in the US and and the EC.
He had been prepared to cancel an engagement at London's Victoria and Albert Museum if a satisfactory outcome was reached.
But by 6pm it was clear the final clauses still had to be agreed.
Mr Abbott arrived to brief Mr Branson on the talks, which went on all day at BA's offices in St James's Square, central London.
Mr Abbott said he was extremely tired and negotiations were very tough.
The compensation demanded would cover claims by Virgin that it lost revenue from passengers ‘poached’ by BA after gaining access to its computer records.
Still at issue is whether BA can approach customers of Virgin without the computer data.
Law clerk accused of aiding escapers
A WOMAN law clerk was remanded in custody yesterday at Manchester magistrates' court, accused of helping two prisoners escape from the court where they were on trial over the Strangeways jail riot.
Patricia Marsh, 23, of Ivyleigh, Liverpool, faces six charges and was remanded in custody until tomorrow.
One of the escaper, Barry Morton, was recaptured yesterday in Liverpool.
He was last night charged with being unlawfully at large.
Two people have been charged with harbouring him.
— PA
Unlawful killing verdict on baby Kim
KIM GRIFFIN, the eight-week-old whose parents refused to answer police questions about her death, was unlawfully killed, according to an inquest verdict yesterday.
She died in September, three days after being rushed to hospital with multiple injuries which, doctors said at her inquest, could not have been caused accidentally.
Last month, the Crown Prosecution Service dropped charges of cruelty to Kim against her parents, Ann Griffin, 35, of Stewart Street, Limehouse, east London, and George Hadjouannou, 40, of Barchester Street, Limehouse, because they refused to make statements to police and there was insufficient evidence.
The couple were ordered to attend the inquest but refused to answer any questions on the advice of their solicitors.
The coroner, Harold Price, heard at Walthamstow Coroner's Court in north-east London that baby Kim's GP and health visitor referred her to the social services on the day she died, said it was vital that such referrals should be made as soon as possible.
Peter Vanezis, a pathologist, told the hearing that the fatal injury was brain haemorrhaging caused by a 15-centimetre skull fracture.
Every rib in Kim's back rib-cage, was fractured, as were some in front, and she had a broken collarbone and upper arm.
Dr Vanezis he estimated that these injuries were between two and four weeks old.
The inquest heard that Ms Griffin was visited six times by health visitor, Deborah Sherr, who first felt real concern during her visit on 4 September.
After a discussion she and Kim's GP decided to refer Kim's to the social services on 7 September.
Det Insp Anthony Caddy told the inquest that the police had been unable to find any independent witnesses who had seen any act of cruelty on Kim by her parents.
One neighbour said in a written statement that she often heard a baby ‘crying for help’ which went on for hours and hours though she did not contact the police.
Whitehall bomb accused freed
AN IRISHMAN accused of taking part in the Downing Street mini-cab bombing was freed yesterday after the charges against him were dropped.
Patrick Murphy said last night he was angry about his treatment by police but was delighted to be free.
At his son's home in Hayes, Middlesex, Mr Murphy, 52, said he was contemplating action for damages over his treatment.
‘I feel so angry about the whole thing.
Because the police couldn't get the right person, the next best was going to have to do.
The prosecution was so adamant they were going to get a conviction.’
Mr Murphy had faced charges of causing an explosion and abduction, in connection with the mini-cab bombing in Whitehall last October when terrorists forced a cab driver to drive to Whitehall with a bomb on the back seat.
The bomb exploded near the entrance to Downing Street.
Mr Murphy was released yesterday after statements were produced in court from witnesses who said he had been at an Alcoholics Anonymous meeting in Uxbridge, west London, at the time of the bombing.
Mr Murphy was celebrating last night with his family — with non-alcoholic drinks — and said that he would be returning to Alcoholics Anonymous meetings.
If it were not for them he would not be free, he said.
Mr Murphy said of his time in the Belmarsh top security prison: ‘The experience was devastating.’
Mr Murphy was celebrating with his son Martin, 27, daughter Breda, and grandchildren Samantha, 15 months, Kathleen, four, Gina, 10, and Anna, 11.
Earlier yesterday, Mr Murphy was discharged by Arbour Square magistrates in east London.
At his solicitor's office in Camden, north London, he told how he had been arrested when about 15 police officers came to his rented flat at 6am one morning in January, nearly three months after the bombing.
He said: ‘They informed me I was under arrest and took me to Paddington Green police station.
I was there for four days, about four or five interviews, then I was taken to Kilburn for an identification parade.
I hoped that would clear the whole thing up, so it was unbelievable when the cab driver picked me out.’
His daughter-in-law, Lily, 29, said: ‘It has been a nightmare.
Mentally it has done him a lot of damage.’
Neither Mr Murphy nor his family were given any advance warning about yesterday's decision.
His solicitors were only told at 9am he was being brought back to court.
His solicitor, Gareth Peirce, said after the hearing: ‘This is a major situation that has gone badly wrong.
It would be equally grave if it had been a burglary charge but he was facing one of the most serious allegations you could make.
‘Effectively Mr Murphy had to prove his innocence.
If he hadn't been able to, it doesn't bear thinking about.’
After the hearing a Scotland Yard spokesman said: ‘We are aware the CPS has offered no evidence against Patrick Oliver Murphy.
Inquiries which have been conducted since the Downing Street incident will continue.’
Mr Murphy has lived in England for eight years, mainly in the Hayes area.
His former wife lives in Northern Ireland.
— PA 
Pure relief: Patrick Murphy is hugged by his son, Martin, after being freed by magistrates in east London yesterday
‘Missing’ aerobics teacher for court
AN aerobics teacher who turned up safe after a major search is to be prosecuted for wasting police time, a police spokesman said yesterday.
Joanna Grenside, 25, of Harpenden, Hertfordshire, who disappeared just before Christmas last year, is to appear at St Albans magistrates' court on March 10
Services' honours for Gulf War
BATTLE honours are to be awarded to ships, regiments and squadrons of the three services which took part in the Gulf War, the Defence Secretary, Malcolm Rifkind, announced yesterday.
Army regiments and Army Air Corps units which took part in the campaign will be able to claim the general theatre honour Gulf 1991 together with battle honours ‘Wadi Al Batin’ and ‘Western Iraq’.
The battle honour Gulf 1991 has been approved for the RAF.
The Army Board will consider the claims and recommendations will be submitted to the Queen for approval, said Mr Rifkind.
Squadrons which took part in the conflict will be selected by the Air Force Board for recommendation to the Queen.
— PA
Exhibition aimed at obscenity law change
POLICE and politicians joined forces yesterday to hold a two-day exhibition of ‘gruesome’ pornography designed to change the law on obscenity.
They argue new laws are needed as modern technology has made a mockery of the 1959 Obscene Publications Act with violent pornography easily ordered by telephone or beamed in by satellite, making enforcement of the law almost impossible.
Ann Winterton, Tory MP for Congleton, called for a full legal review and a policy decision by the Home Secretary, Kenneth Clarke, to examine the options and bring forward a new law.
The exhibition at the Houses of Parliament is intended to show MPs just how violent pornography has become.
Supt Michael Hames of the Obscene Publications Squad said some of the most shocking material showed the exploitation of children on videos and magazines.
One collection of child pornography had been taken from a headmaster.
Mrs Winterton told a Westminster news conference: ‘This material is not mild erotica.
It is not titillating, and it is definitely not the kind of material which you would find on the top shelf of your local newsagent.
It is explicit, depraved and violent.’
She added: ‘I am no prude, but I was deeply shocked that such material is now widely available largely because of the lack of political will to tackle the weakness of the Obscene Publications Act.’
Having met the Prime Minister to discuss the matter, she said he had been sympathetic, but she dismissed moves by the Home Office as a cosmetic exercise.
Michael Alison, Tory MP for Selby, said that under the act a jury has to decide whether the material has a tendency to deprave or corrupt.
He suggested a better test would be whether the material would be judged as grossly offensive to an ordinary citizen.
— PA
Colour and Beatle music in farewell to Paul Sheldon
Audrey Gillan witnesses the celebration of a life cruelly cut short by knife violence
THE colours were bright as the mourners filed into the church yesterday to celebrate the life of the murdered art student Paul Sheldon.
There were primary reds, bright blues and multi-coloured patchworks — a paint palette of colour that Paul would have wanted and his family requested.
Glennis Sheldon, Paul's mother, wore a  fuchsia -pink jacket as she clutched three single-stemmed red roses and walked into Balerno Parish Church, a mile from the family home.
Other members of the family clutched photographs of the young man.
The colours were bright, but the mood was sombre.
The mourners lamented a life taken so quickly in a violent and senseless manner.
Paul Sheldon, 20, was out with his 18-year-old brother, Peter, and a friend, Tom Cole, when he was stabbed to death in a quiet residential street in Edinburgh.
The local minister, the Rev Roy Manson, told the gathering of family and friends that he hoped that a positive message might emerge from their grief.
‘We hope and pray that young men will take very seriously the police campaign with the media for an end to the knife-carrying cult.
‘As it is with guns so it is with any lethal weapon.
If you carry them you are likely to use them,’ he said.
‘You cannot always guarantee that you will always be in control of what you are doing as we live in a culture that is soaked in violence, and so it seems to think that violence is acceptable, even normal.’
Mr Manson added that society did not seem to realise that alcohol and drugs caused the brain to malfunction and permit ‘those who take them to do acts, even murder, which in their sane moments they would be horrified even to contemplate’.
The congregation was told that Paul, who was on a weekend visit home from Newcastle, where he was studying industrial and architectural design, was a young man mature beyond his years.
Friends and neighbours, gathered outside the church, heard over loudspeakers how Paul was anti-violence, an idealist with a strong sense of conscience, a young man who regularly ‘questioned the stereotypes of our day’.
He was a ‘normal human being with his faults like the rest of us’.
Paul's older brother, John, read from Henry Scott Holland, saying: ‘Death is nothing at all.
I have only slipped away into the next room.
I am I, and you are you.
Whatever we were to each other, that we still are…
We all love you Paul.’
The mourners left the church to the sounds they heard when they entered.
A medley of Beatles music that included Yesterday and The Long and Winding Road.
As Paul's brother John had said: ‘He hated tradition and didn't like to conform.’
After the service, Paul's coffin was buried at Currie Kirk.
Parents seek right to sue over injury to foetus
By John Robertson Law Correspondent
THREE appeal court judges were asked to rule for the first time yesterday that parents could sue doctors for negligence over the loss of a child though the fatal injuries had been suffered before birth.
The status of a foetus in Scots damages law has been the subject of conflicting judgments and yesterday's hearing at the Court of Session is seen as a prelude to having the controversy resolved by the House of Lords, the country's highest civil court.
Audrey Hamilton, 35, of Barnett Crescent, Kirkcaldy, and John Watson, of Simpson Court, Crail, each sued Fife Health Board for £20,000 over the death of their son, David, in 1976.
He had survived for only three days at Craigtoun Maternity Hospital, St Andrews, and the parents maintained that his death resulted from damage done by forceps before the birth.
Under the 1976 Damages (Scotland) Act, relatives have a claim when a ‘person’ dies from injuries caused by someone else's negligence.
In November, 1991, Lord Prosser dismissed the actions raised by Mrs Hamilton and Mr Watson after holding that ‘person’ did not cover an unborn child.
He was satisfied that what parliament had in mind when passing the act was that there must be a person in life when the injuries were sustained.
‘The words used do not cover the situation where injury is sustained by a foetus rather than a person,’ added Lord Prosser.
His decision is now being appealed and Mrs Hamilton was in court yesterday when it was contended that Lord Prosser had been wrong to interpret the 1976 act in such a way as to exclude any case where a claim was made in respect of a person who was born alive but who died from ante-natal injury.
Anne Smith, counsel for the parents, referred Lords McCluskey, Caplan and Wylie to the situation before the 1976 act was passed.
She submitted that the law built up through custom and practice appeared to have had no difficulty in affording to a child born after the death of its parent a right of action over the death.
It had been decided in a case following the 1976 act that that right still existed.
Equally, Mrs Smith argued, the common law would have had no difficulty in affording a right of action to parents in a case such as the present one.
What changes had been made by the act?
Mrs Smith said that there was a presumption that parliament, when legislating, did not intend to depart from the existing common law unless it expressly said so.
The 1976 act had been designed not to diminish existing rights but to expand them.
Referring to Lord Prosser's judgment and what it would mean, Mrs Smith gave an example of two women in labour at the same time.
‘One produces a child who dies four days later due to negligent forceps delivery.
She would not have a claim for the loss of her child.
The other woman produces a child who dies four days later because of the negligence of the paediatrician who attended the child on day one of its life.
She would have a claim.’
Mrs Smith told the appeal judges that last July, in a ruling in a similar case, Lord Morton awarded £17,000 to a couple whose baby died from brain damage suffered before birth.
He said that on the issue of whether parents in such circumstances could claim damages, he had reached a different conclusion from Lord Prosser.
‘I consider that in enacting the Damages (Scotland) Act, parliament did not consider that it was making any change to the right of parents to sue for damages for the death of a child who had sustained injuries prior to birth, had been born alive and had subsequently died in consequence of these pre-natal injuries.’
Lord Morton added that under criminal law, a driver who caused injury to a foetus could be convicted of causing death by reckless driving if the child were born alive but then died of his or her injuries.
However, under Lord Prosser's ruling, the parents of that same child would be unable to sue over the death because the child was not a person when the injuries were sustained.
The hearing continues.
Audrey Hamilton: Suing for ante-natal injury to child
Christie complains to Europe over action by GCHQ
By Gary Duncan
THE SECRET government monitoring agency, GCHQ, is to face a legal challenge over allegations it has carried out systematic spying operations against the general secretary of the Scottish Trades Union Congress, Campbell Christie.
Mr Christie, backed by the campaigning organisation Liberty, yesterday announced he was making a formal complaint to the European Commission on Human Rights over the routine interception of telexes sent to him at the STUC's Glasgow headquarters by a special unit within GCHQ.
Mr Christie's complaint to the commission, the first of its kind over GCHQ's activities, is the initial stage in a process that could lead to a full hearing by the European Court of Human Rights.
It follows a 1991 World in Action programme in which a former GCHQ official revealed how Mr Christie's telexes were being intercepted.
The legal challenge to GCHQ's activities is certain to cause concern among ministers and intelligence officials.
The Government was severely embarrassed by a similar action brought in 1988 by Harriet Harman, now a front-bench Labour MP, and Patricia Hewitt, formerly press secretary to Neil Kinnock, over covert surveillance of them by the security service, MI5.
Britain was later found guilty of breaching the European Convention on Human Rights and the ruling played a key role in forcing the Government to put MI5 on a statutory footing and create two tribunals to deal with complaints.
Last year, Campbell Christie became the first person to take complaints over GCHQ to the tribunals, naming a section at the communications centre, K24e, as being responsible for intercepting telexes sent by trade unionists in Eastern Europe.
After the rejection of those complaints, he has decided to apply to the European Commission alleging breaches of privacy under article 8 of the human rights convention.
It could take up to four years before a full hearing in the European Court, but Liberty's legal officer, John Wadham, suggested yesterday that the action might prompt the Government to include a mechanism for complaints over GCHQ in its forthcoming bill to put the Secret Intelligence Service, MI6, on a statutory footing.
He was sceptical, however, about whether such a move would provide a  satisfactory redress for complaints such as Mr Christie's.
3,000 carry protest to Strathclyde councillors
By Eric McKenzie
STRATHCLYDE councillors yesterday ran the gauntlet of 3,000 angry local government workers protesting at budget cuts and the stalemate in a three-month-long pay dispute in the region's finance department.
The demonstrators hurled abuse at councillors as they entered the region's headquarters in Glasgow for the council's monthly meeting.
A heavy police presence, including mounted policemen, had been drafted in to control the protesters, members of the National and Local Government Officers' Association.
The demonstration had been organised by NALGO in protest against council cuts of more than £21 million in this year's budget, and the deadlock in the pay dispute involving 450 staff in the finance department.
Mairi Miller, NALGO delegate to the Strathclyde Joint Trade Union Council, said the implications of budget cuts were job losses and severely reduced services.
Public sector workers were also facing a 1.5 per cent pay rise imposed by central government.
In real terms that represented a pay cut for everyone.
Union members had turned out in such numbers because they were angry at the way in which they had to deliver services to the public without adequate resources.
‘They are saying to the council that they've got to listen to how their employees and the public feel, and not to impose the cuts of central government on their workers and expect them to carry the consequences.’
The strike by finance staff is over a demand for a regrading of pay levels to take into account work involved with the council tax.
Gerry Crawley, a NALGO finance spokesman, said the council was prepared to sit out the strike, but that stance was creating a nightmare scenario for the tax which would take years to clear up.
The leader of the council, Robert Gould, said later he accepted that the 1.5 per cent pay increase was totally unrealistic, but said the unions should be directing their anger at the Conservative Government, which was to blame for the situation.
MOTHERWELL
£20m development wins approval
STRATHCLYDE Regional Council yesterday gave the go-ahead to a £20 million development at the Cleland Estate, Motherwell, which will mean upgrading sports facilities, and the creation of an 18-hole golf course and 175 house plots on land belonging to Dalziel High School Memorial Trust.
ABERDEEN
Factory accident claims man's life
A MAN was killed in an accident in a factory on the Kirkhill industrial estate at Howe Moss Drive, Dyce, Aberdeen, yesterday.
No details were released by police.
The dead man's identity was not given.
GLASGOW
Nursing research professor named
SCOTLAND'S first professor of community nursing research has been appointed at the country's newest university.
Glasgow Caledonian University has appointed Dr Jean McIntosh, currently a reader in community nursing research, to the post, which is sponsored by the Queen's Nursing Institute, Scotland.
GLASGOW
Road fatality witness plea
POLICE in Glasgow are appealing for witnesses to a road accident soon after noon yesterday when a pedestrian, William Wetherall, 80, of Dumbarton Road, Glasgow, died after being hit by an articulated lorry in Dumbarton Road.
ARGYLL and BUTE
Tax total to top £1,200 for some
DISTRICT council tax in Argyll and Bute will range from £113 and £340, in addition to Strathclyde Regional tax and water rates which, combined, are expected to be between £297 and £892.
Council house rents in the district are to be increased by an average of £3.50 from April.
George McMillan, chairman of the district council, said that the budget would produce ‘a measure of growth for next year while keeping the council within the Secretary of State's capping limits.’
DUMFRIES
Grant reprieve for arts festival
FINANCIAL help for the Dumfries and Galloway Arts Festival has been allocated by the Scottish Arts Council after all.
The event will receive £1,500 plus value-added tax, though the festival's organisers remain disappointed after the withdrawal of a separate annual grant, previously £8,340.
It had been thought no money would be forthcoming, but the new grant will be from a different department within the SAC, it emerged yesterday.
INVERNESS
Study of bypass plan's impact
CONSULTANTS will be appointed by the Scottish Office to undertake a study involving traffic, engineering and environmental aspects of a proposed bypass to take the A96 Aberdeen-Inverness road past Fochabers and Mosstodloch, Moray, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, Scotland's roads minister, said yesterday.
Several bypasses were being considered for the road, he added.
Good progress was being made in planning details.
Crematorium to offer guided tours
By Frank Urquhart
ABERDEEN District Council is to host to a bizarre open day for the curious this weekend — by throwing open the doors to the city's crematorium.
Experienced crematorium attendants are to lead a series of guided tours around the two chapels and the garden of remembrance at Hazlehead on Sunday.
George Duffus, the council's environmental development officer, said the aim of the open day — the first of its kind in Scotland — was to dispel the many myths and misunderstandings surrounding the crematorium service.
Some people, he explained, still wrongly believed that bodies were removed from coffins before being cremated and that ashes were eventually taken from a communal pile.
‘We are anxious to put people's minds at rest.
We are proud of the top quality and caring service that we offer here,’ Mr Duffus said.
‘Aberdeen crematorium is well run and efficient and it  seemed natural to open our doors and explain to the public exactly what goes on during this most important ceremony.’
He added: ‘I have been pleasantly surprised by the number of people who have expressed an interest, without being morbidly curious, shall we say.
We are certainly not looking for new customers.’
GLASGOW
Police oppose wardens plan
PLANS to create a 30-strong force of wardens to help combat petty crime in Glasgow city centre have run into opposition from the Scottish Police Federation.
The federation described the scheme, part of the proposed Citywatch initiative, as a move towards the privatisation of the police force.
Finance boss's legal move to clear name
THE FORMER Western Isles depute finance director has  started a court action to challenge a recommendation that he should personally pay over cash lost following the collapse of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
Brian Lawrie is also contesting a finding that he was negligent over the loss of more than £18 million by the local authority in the affair.
Mr Lawrie, who now lives at Dunshalt in Fife, has gone to the Court of Session in Edinburgh to clear his name following allegations levelled at him after the bank's crash.
He wants the findings and recommendations of the Commission for Local Authority Accounts in Scotland over a special report on the Western Isles Council and BCCI set aside in an action for judicial review that went before Lord Prosser yesterday.
The hearing continues.
Mr Lawrie was the depute finance director for the Western Isles Islands Council from June 1984 until September 1991.
The Controller of Audit made a special report to the commission in October 1991 on deposits the local authority made with BCCI.
The commission sent the report to the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, along with its own findings in July last year.
It found that at 5 July, 1991, the Western Isles authority had suffered a total loss of more than £24 million because of the fall of the bank.
This included £11.5 million as a result of unlawful borrowings by the council and £6.6 million placed on deposit with the bank without regard to limitations placed on sums lent to any single institution.
The commission found that the losses, totalling £18.1 million, were attributable to the negligence of Mr Lawrie and the council's finance director Donald G Macleod.
It said that Mr Lawrie had failed in his duty, in the  absence of Mr Macleod, to provide proper guidance and instruction on treasury management to the finance department over the investment of the sums.
The commission's recommendations to Mr Lang included that he require the two officials to pay a sum he considered appropriate to the council.
Mr Lang is currently considering the commission's findings and recommendations, the court heard.
Mr Lawrie claims that the commission failed to give ‘proper and adequate’ reasons for their conclusions.
He contends that the finding over the £6.6 million was unjustified as it was made in the absence of detailed analysis or evidence on the way a council should spread an investment of this kind among institutions.
He also claims that negligence finding was made without evidence being led demonstrating the manner in which he did not reach the professionally required standard of care.
Mr Lawrie said the recommendation that he should pay a sum to the council to be fixed by the Scottish Secretary is unreasonable.
The commission is challenging Mr Lawrie's action and said its members, who have experience in finance and administration, are entitled to apply their expertise to the evidence which they gave careful and detailed consideration to.
It said there was sufficient material to entitle them to hold that the £18.1 million losses were attributable to the negligence of senior members of staff in the council's finance department, including Mr Lawrie.
Youths ‘pushed car that fell on mother'
JOYRIDING youths were seen pushing a stolen car to the top of a pedestrian stairway seconds before a mother on the steps was killed, a court heard yesterday.
Grace Bonar, 23, mother of a four-year-old girl, was crushed to death when the car went over her as she climbed the stairs.
Her life-long friend, Catherine Quinn, 23, escaped serious injury because she had bent down to pick up a 20p piece, and she was flung over hand railings.
The High Court in Glasgow heard that as the car started to go over the top of the steps, one of the youths pushing it shouted: ‘There's somebody down there.’
A schoolgirl, Donna Chatteron, 15, told the jury that the four youths pushing the car then ran away.
She was giving evidence at the trial of Daniel McKinnon, 17, of Ashgill Road, Milton, Andrew Walker, 16, Finlas Street, Possilpark, both Glasgow, and a 14-year-old boy who cannot be named for legal reasons.
They deny recklessly pushing a car down the stairway off Byshot Path, Possilpark, on 17 May last while acting with another person.
The charge alleges the car struck Miss Bonar, of Finlas Street, and killed her, and struck and injured Miss Quinn, of Stonyhurst Street, Possilpark.
Walker and McKinnon also deny stealing the car that night and Walker denies driving it recklessly and causing it to brake at speed.
A fourth accused, Paul Brazier, 21, of Burmola Street, Hamiltonhill, Glasgow, changed his plea yesterday and pled guilty to stealing the car and a breach of the Bail Act.
He was released and will be sentenced by Lord Cowie at the end of the trial.
His bail was continued.
The trial continues.
Fish firm wants French to pay for ruined cargo
By Denny Macgee
THE MANAGER of a Scottish fish processing and distribution company which lost £10,000 worth of produce to rampaging French fishermen called yesterday for compensation from France.
The incident in which boxes of fish were smashed and contaminated with diesel yesterday was the second in which fish being exported to Europe by the Ayr-based Scotprime, has been damaged by angry French workers.
Last year the company lost £30,000 worth of fish bound for the Spanish market when the consignment was blocked for three days outside Toulouse by French lorry drivers protesting about restrictions on the hours they could drive.
This week a consignment of langoustines, scallop meat and monk fish for Germany was intercepted at Boulogne by French fishermen protesting at cheap imports.
In a separate incident, part of a shipment of salmon sent by the Orkney Salmon Company in Kirkwall was also damaged.
The company, which can send up to 15 tonnes of salmon and 500kgs of scallop meat a week to France, has now halted exports after its French haulier said it was no longer possible to insure the cargo.
As a result the company has stopped accepting fresh landings of scallops
Scotprime, which also has plants at Aberdeen, Milford Haven and Grimsby, exports about 97 per cent of its production to the Continent, with around 40 per cent to France.
Yesterday David Robertson, manager of its Ayr factory, said it received no compensation for last year's loss.
‘The Prime Minister wrote back to our local MP, Phil Gallie, saying that the French government would not compensate us because there had been no attack on our lorry or the load.
But we still lost the consignment because it was perishable and missed the Spanish markets because of the delays caused by the roadblocks.’
This time, Mr Robertson said, it was possible that the French haulage company's insurance might cover the loss.
However, he added: ‘We think it is high time the French government took responsibility for their citizens and should pay for this kind of damage.’
David Robertson: high time the French took  responsibility 
Housing survey finds dampness widespread
By David Scott Local Government Editor
MORE than 420,000 houses — 20 per cent of the total housing stock in Scotland — suffer from damp, serious condensation or mould, according to the preliminary results of a national survey.
Undertaken by the Scottish Homes agency on behalf of the Scottish Office, the survey provides the first comprehensive analysis of the condition of both public and private sector housing in Scotland.
It shows that 94,000 occupied houses are below tolerable standard (BTS), the official measure of housing quality and one that is seen as an essential trigger for repair, improvement, closure or demolition.
The BTS figure is equivalent to 4.6 per cent of Scotland's two million houses.
It is the scale of the damp and condensation problem, however, that is likely to prove to be the most controversial finding.
A Scottish Homes report on the preliminary findings says the survey found that 20.8 per cent of Scotland's houses, or 423,000, showed evidence of damp, serious condensation or mould either singly or in any combination.
When houses suffering from condensation of any degree (slight as well as serious) are included, the figures rise to 584,000 houses, or 28.7 per cent.
Both damp and condensation were more prevalent among public, as opposed to private, houses.
Peter McKinlay, chief executive of Scottish Homes, acknowledged at a press conference yesterday that damp and condensation were a serious problem.
But he did not believe the survey results called for an immediate, vast increase in funding.
Other factors, like the economic standards of communities, the design, quality, management and maintenance of houses had to be examined.
The preliminary results reinforced what many people had suspected about the state of private and public sector housing.
Long-term decisions would need to await publication of the more detailed findings in the summer.
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, the Scottish housing minister, said the preliminary findings contained no major surprises.
He noted that virtually all houses were found to have standard amenities.
Defects in Scottish housing were already being tackled vigorously by local housing authorities, Scottish Homes, the new town development corporations and housing associations.
Lord James added: ‘These efforts must now be redoubled and focused increasingly on the most pressing problems.’
The survey, which was carried out in 1991, involved a sampling system covering 24,000 occupied homes across Scotland and included physical surveys and interviews with householders.
According to Scottish Homes, the final report, which will focus on tenure and geographical areas, will then provide the most complete national picture of housing, and of people's aspirations, so far available in Scotland.
The survey has produced the first national estimate of below tolerable standard houses derived from consistently applied methods.
The 94,000 houses identified as failing to meet the nine-point BTS criteria compares with a higher estimate from the National Audit Office and an estimate of 101,557 by the Scottish Office.
The survey report points out that both of these estimates included vacant houses and are not comparable with the latest figure.
BTS houses were found predominantly among the oldest houses.
The majority were in the private sector.
In rural areas, the number of private BTS houses was twice that in the public sector.
But dampness — defined as rising or penetrating damp in at least one room — affected more public (16 per cent) than private houses (11.2 per cent ) and it was found more often in flats than houses.
Similarly, both serious and slight condensation were markedly greater problems among public sector houses.
Houses showing signs of serious condensation totalled 37,000 (1.8 per cent) while 357,000 (17.6 per cent ) were affected by slight condensation.
Knife killer is jailed for ten years
A GLASGOW man was jailed for ten years yesterday for stabbing a man to death during a struggle.
The judge, Lord Abernethy, said that courts were dealing severely with people who carried knives and used them.
Neil Cardow, 25, had knifed John Kerr, 24, nine times after he got the better of Cardow in a fight.
The High Court in Glasgow heard that the men had struggled after Mr Kerr's girlfriend had attacked Cardow, accusing him of damaging her mother's car.
Mr Kerr had stepped in and overpowered the accused, who then had pulled a knife and stabbed him repeatedly.
Cardow, of Woodlands Crescent, Cambuslang, had denied stabbing and murdering Mr Kerr, of Auld Kirk Road, Cambuslang, on 24 October in the girlfriend's house at Auld Kirk Road.
Yesterday, the Crown accepted a guilty plea to the reduced charge of culpable homicide.
Andrew Lamb, prosecuting, said that was because Cardow had been provoked.
Sentencing Cardow, Lord Abernethy said the accused had not started the trouble and had himself been injured.
But he said Cardow ‘had come armed with a lethal weapon and used it to penetrate the deceased's body nine times.’
Gordon Jackson, QC, defending, said that the accused had not plunged the knife directly into Mr Kerr nine times, but had stabbed him in the course of the struggle.
Mr Jackson said Cardow had been injured and later his face had been slashed by friends of the dead man.
Rape trial told of father's shock
THE father of an alleged rape victim told a jury yesterday of the shock he experienced when his 22-year-old daughter roused him in the middle of the night.
The 49-year-old Alloa man said: ‘I was awakened by knocking on the bedroom window and my daughter shouting: ‘Dad, dad’.
‘When I opened the door she was in such a terrible condition I couldn't believe it.
She said she had been assaulted by a taxi driver and told me: ‘It wasn't my fault’.
She was hysterical and distraught and I took her through for my wife to comfort her before telephoning the police.’
The father was giving evidence at a Perth High Court sitting on the third day of the trial of an Alloa man, David Hepburn, 29, who is accused of carrying out three sex attacks in 12 hours.
He denies raping a 26-year-old woman in her home at Sauchie on the afternoon of 24 October.
He also denies that on the Saturday night, while posing as a taxi driver, he attacked girls aged 18 and 22, attempted to rape the first and raped the second.
The father of the 22-year-old said his daughter had left the house about 9pm for a Saturday night out with her friends.
He described how he was shocked when she returned home with a gash above her eye and ‘blood all over her face and clothes.’
The trial continues today.
New law ‘best solution to euthanasia dilemma’
By Bryan Christie, Health Correspondent
THE LAW in Britain should be changed to allow doctors to terminate the lives of their patients in exceptional circumstances, a Scots professor said yesterday.
The legalisation of euthanasia offered the best solution to the dilemmas posed by the ability to keep alive people regarded as hopelessly ill, according to Prof Sheila McLean of Glasgow University's institute of law and ethics in medicine.
She told a conference organised by the Royal Society of Edinburgh that such a conclusion would not win universal acclaim and would be seen by some as lowering the moral tone of the country.
But she added that legislation offered a better chance of producing an acceptable framework than other suggested options.
Health staff who took steps to end the life of a patient could face criminal charges at the moment and legal doubts surrounded other assistance such as withdrawing or withholding treatments.
The courts were the only place at the moment where such uncertainties could be cleared up, but Prof McLean argued that they were not the place to decide such matters.
Court action was expensive, time consuming and might be psychologically damaging for the families of the patients involved.
In addition, courts had been inconsistent and arrived at verdicts which were in conflict with the law.
‘The courts in the UK appear to be reluctant to make an active statement one way or the other in this debate,’ said Prof McLean.
Hospital ethical committees have been suggested as an independent source of advice to doctors and families to the most appropriate decision, but Prof McLean said their conclusions would have no legal standing and could be challenged.
Possible legislation could enshrine the principle that it is always wrong to kill but establish a set of circumstances under which a suitable qualified person would be exempt from prosecution for agreeing to a patient's request to help end his or her life, Prof McLean went on.
She said the experience of the Netherlands would suggest such a move would not diminish the value of human life.
Euthanasia had been openly practised in the Netherlands for a number of years since a legal ruling that doctors would not be prosecuted provided an established set of guidelines were adhered to.
Earlier this month, a law confirming the practice was passed by the Dutch parliament.
Els Borst-Eilers, of the Health Council of the Netherlands, told the conference that doctors assist in the deaths of around 2,700 people a year.
They decline such help in more than 6,000 cases.
‘Euthanasia is seen as part of good terminal care, practised in only a few cases, the less the better,’ said Prof Borst-Eilers.
‘It does not lead to loss of respect for human life.’
The two-day conference was organised in an attempt to inform the current public debate and arrive at conclusions about the best way forward.
Its main conclusions are expected to be published later.
Replica-gun robber gets seven years
By John Robertson, Law Correspondent
A BANK robber who claimed his £2,600 haul had been stolen from woods where he had hidden the money was jailed for seven years yesterday.
Kevin Forman, 25, of Bairds Buildings, East High Street, Crieff, Perthshire, admitted pointing a replica pistol at a female employee in the Clydesdale Bank, Auchterarder, on 24 November last year and robbing her of the cash.
The advocate-depute, Roderick Macdonald, QC, told the High Court in Edinburgh that Forman, wearing a crash helmet and scarf, had been chased from the scene by another bank worker, Robin Young, and a motorist, Christopher Smith, but escaped.
The defence counsel, Mark Stewart, said that Forman, a self-employed painter and decorator, had borrowed money from Glasgow loan-sharks to set up in business.
He had fallen behind with repayments.
‘He was told that unless he repaid the outstanding balance in a couple of days, he would be crippled.’
In desperation, Forman had hatched the scheme to rob the bank.
During the getaway, he had hidden the money in undergrowth in woods near Auchterarder.
After his arrest, he had taken police to the spot, only to find that the cash had gone.
‘It is his position that the money was left there,’ Mr Stewart added.
Mr Macdonald praised Mr Young and Mr Smith for chasing Forman, saying that they had started the trail which led to his arrest, though the money had not been recovered.
Lord Ross, the Lord Justice-Clerk, said that the two men deserved every commendation for their action in pursuing Forman.
They would not have known that it was a replica pistol.
Forestry go-ahead prompts fears for hill farms
By William Chisholm
SHEEP farming in two Borders valleys could be wiped out by the end of the decade, with holdings covered in commercial forestry, a group campaigning to protect the open hills forecast yesterday.
A decision yesterday by regional councillors not to object to 500 acres of tree planting at Burnfoot farm, between Selkirk and Hawick, was described as extraordinary by the campaigners.
Toby Tennant, the campaign chairman, claimed that every hill farm in the Borthwick and Ale valleys was now under threat from timber growing as one forestry scheme followed another.
Opponents of the Burnfoot scheme had demanded an environmental assessment by the Forestry Authority because the 500,000 trees to be planted there will extend a block of forestry to almost 1,500 acres.
A recent study by the National Farmers' Union of Scotland concluded: ‘Major problems in the hill farming business could consign the valleys to excessive tree planting with the danger that uneconomic holdings would be left.
This scenario would be disastrous for the valleys.
‘The landscape would change out of all recognition and as farmers leave, the social lifeblood of the area would also drain away, leaving the afforested valleys even more sparsely populated.’
In a submission which was read to yesterday's meeting of the planning committee, Borders NFU said it was active in the drive to keep viable communities in the remoter parts of the region.
Councillors commended the scheme put forward by Tilhill Economic Forestry for its design and consideration for sites of archaeological and scientific interest.
But Councillor Andrew Tulley, the committee chairman, said there was considerable concern about the potential development of widespread forestry in the Borders hills.
Mr Tennant said: ‘In the case of Burnfoot 100 per cent of hill land will be given over to forestry.
That does not represent a sensible integration with agricultural production.
It is the disastrous pattern of development which took place in other parts of the Border country during the 1970s.
‘Unless Borders councillors start resisting blanket forestry it is no exaggeration to suggest the Borders hills will disappear under a new wave of tree planting before very long.’
Several farms are expected to be offered for sale this year and they will be prime targets for afforestation too, according to Andrew Hepburne-Scott.
His farm lies next to Burnfoot and he fears approval for further planting there will start a domino effect throughout the valley.
Warning on Robert Gordon strike plan
By Frank Urquhart
THE PRINCIPAL of Aberdeen's Robert Gordon University last night delivered a stark warning to academic staff planning a day of action in support of the lecturer whose job is threatened, Sheena Falconer.
David Kennedy issued a statement to the lecturers at the School of Food and Consumer Studies, claiming that the dispute could put the school's future in jeopardy.
He alleged that Mrs Falconer's rejection of a series of ‘reasonable and generous’ offers, aimed at settling the escalating row, could mean the closure of the school with the direct loss of 50 jobs.
The careers of more than 450 students would also be jeopardised.
Union leaders accused the principal of scaremongering in an attempt to wreck today's strike.
Earlier this week the members of the University Lecturers' Association at the school, where Mrs Falconer's post as a senior textiles lecturer is being made compulsorily redundant, voted 19-2 for the one-day strike, with the threat of escalating their action next week.
Alastair McLeish, secretary of the ULA branch, said: ‘The principal is trying to pressurise staff into backing out of the strike.
But our members will still be coming out.’
In his statement Dr Kennedy said RGU could no longer afford to fund the £32,000 a year cost of Mrs Falconer's post, which was no longer needed.
Hacker crippled cancer computer, trial told
A TEENAGE computer hacker knocked out a vital cancer treatment database when he keyed into a computer at a world famous centre for medical research, a court heard yesterday.
Paul Bedworth, 19, now studying artificial intelligence at Edinburgh University, allegedly brought the Brussels computer system to a halt after commanding it to make 50,000 phone calls.
The cancer research computer system crashed, halting vital research and ran up a bill of £10,000 making the calls.
Southwark Crown Court was told that between 13 and 17 June 1991, Bedworth electronically intruded to the computers of the European Organisation for the Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) on no fewer than 25 occasions.
Vincent Piedboeuf, computer systems project leader for the international organisation, revealed that vital research into the disease had been halted when the computer became overloaded and crashed and said EORTC had been saddled with a gigantic phone bill.
He told the jury that his computers were normally used only by doctors around the world.
The triple computer system contained confidential clinical data including details of how long patients had to live.
Mr Piedboeuf said: ‘The worst damage was that our computers broke down because of the heavy load.
We must have permanent service, surgeons must be able to register patients at any time even during the night, our system must be running 24 hours a day, seven days a week.’
He said: ‘It was the worst system breakdown we had ever had.
One programmer spent a week trying to find out what damage had been done and then putting it right.’
Mr Piedboeuf said he received an even greater shock when the EORTC's telephone bill — for phone lines connected to the computers — arrived.
Asked by the prosecutor, James Richardson, whether he had any idea of the number of calls hackers had made, Mr Piedboeuf told the jury: ‘Yes, the answer was on our telephone bill.
There were roughly 50,000 calls.
‘The bill was 980 pages thick.
Our telephone company was kind enough to bill us only one Belgian franc per call: we had a special arrangements because it was so much.
We only had to pay 150,000 Belgian francs, £3,000.
We could have had to pay as much as £10,000.’
Earlier, the court had heard how Bedworth had run the rogue programme which generated the phone calls from his bedroom in North Parade, Ilkley, West Yorkshire.
Using a £200 BBC microcomputer and a modem to transfer programmes down the phone, the fresh-faced defendant allegedly tapped into Leeds Polytechnic's more powerful machines.
From the polytechnic, the court was told, Bedworth had been able to hack into computer systems all around the world using his microcomputer — a type found in many schools — as a master terminal.
Bedworth has pled not guilty to three hacking offences.
He denies conspiracy to use  telecommunications dishonestly, conspiracy to gain unauthorised access to computers and conspiracy to make unauthorised modification to information held on computer.
Two other hackers, Karl Strickland, 22, of Childhall Road, Liverpool, and Neil Woods, 26, of Broadway, Chadderton, Oldham, have already pled guilty to dishonestly obtaining information and will be sentenced later.
The trial, expected to last three weeks, continues.
Labour presses Lang to support knives bill
IAN LANG, the Scottish Secretary, was urged by Labour yesterday to grasp the opportunity to fulfil a Tory pledge on the carrying of knives, writes Chris McLaughlin.
Amid opposition by Government whips to a private member's bill tabled by John McFall (Lab, Dumbarton), Tom Clarke, the shadow Scottish secretary, called on Mr Lang to put his weight behind the measure.
The bill has cross-party support and provides the Government with the means to put early legislation on to a crowded timetable.
Labour whips have been told that the offer of opposition co-operation has met with suspicion in the Government whips' office.
Fears have been expressed that MPs supporting Scotland United would use the bill as a vehicle for protests on home rule for Scotland.
The party leadership in Scotland has dismissed that on the grounds that those MPs who are associated with Scotland United represent constituencies where action against the carrying of knives would have the greatest effect.
Mr Clarke said last night: ‘I have written to Mr Lang urging him to take up this opportunity as a matter of urgency.
If he does he will have cross-party support for a measure that the Tories said they were keen to implement.’
Officers in Bosnia may be paid off
By Our Parliamentary Correspondent
ARMY officers serving in Bosnia could be handed redundancy notices today, the armed forces minister, Archie Hamilton, disclosed yesterday.
MPs on both sides of the House responded angrily to the announcement.
John Reid, a Labour defence spokesman, denounced it as disgusting.
Mr Hamilton also took a swipe at the defence select committee's report which had called for all infantry battalion amalgamations, including merger of four Scottish regiments, to be cancelled.
He said it would have cost £200 million a year.
He criticised the committee for failing to say where the extra money needed to come from in the defence budget.
Winston Churchill, a Conservative member of the committee, protested that redundancy and unemployment would cost £350 million a year.
Mr Hamilton said that 1,308 officers and 5,152 soldiers were being made redundant under the second phase of cuts in the armed forces agreed under the Government's Options for Change programme.
All but 628 officers were volunteers and those selected would be individually informed tonight.
He said that a small number of serving officers in Bosnia and Ulster may be made redundant.
Dr Reid said it was disgusting that ministers had refused to give an assurance that no soldier would receive a redundancy notice while on active service in Bosnia or Northern Ireland.
The prospect of a soldier ‘literally dying with a redundancy notice in his hand is not a prospect that any decent MP should contemplate’.
Malcolm Rifkind, the Defence Secretary, intervened to say the army believed it would be ‘grossly invidious for the choice of soldiers for redundancy to depend on whether at any given moment they happened to be serving in Northern Ireland, Bosnia, the UK or elsewhere’.
For the Liberal Democrats, Menzies Campbell welcomed the Government's recent U-turn on army manpower.
But he urged a review of Britain's commitments abroad.
Refusals by unemployed may cost them benefits
By Joy Copley Parliamentary Correspondent
UNEMPLOYED people aged 18-24 could have benefits withdrawn if they refuse schemes in plans being studied by Gillian Shephard, the Employment Secretary.
Mrs Shephard hinted strongly yesterday at an element of compulsion in some of the schemes being considered to help those out of work for more than one year.
She refused to give details of the package, to be announced to complement the Budget on 16 March, to the employment select committee yesterday.
She ruled out the idea of workfare, where claimants are forced to work for benefits or have them withdrawn, for all three million unemployed.
With one monolithic scheme of working for benefits, there would be a problem of job displacement, she told the committee.
Sweden had recently had to abandon workfare because, as unemployment had risen, it had become too costly to administer.
However, she did not rule out some compulsion in some schemes.
It is understood that the target groups for an extension of compulsion could be 18-24- year-olds and single people who would have benefits withdrawn if they refused a range of options of schemes offered to those out of work.
She said there was already an element of compulsion in the benefit system.
For example, in April people who refuse to attend a job plan workshop after one year, rather than the current two years, stand to be excluded from benefit.
Asked what was in the fresh package, she said repeatedly: ‘We are looking at a whole range of options which will help unemployed people, in particular long-term unemployed, to keep in touch with the workplace, keep their skills updated and use their time more productively than some of the rules and regulations currently allow.’
She also hinted that the package may include a loosening of the benefit rules so that the long-term unemployed may take education or training courses to prepare for new jobs without being deemed to have made themselves unavailable for work.
Many unemployed people found the fact that they were expected to do nothing when unemployed or risk losing benefit ‘extremely difficult’.
Gillian Shephard: hinted at compulsion in job schemes
Maastricht threatened by another ambush
By Our Political Correspondent
THE Government faces another ambush over the Maastricht bill after a Labour attempt to resurrect the controversial debate on the social chapter.
Calum MacDonald, the Western Isles MP, has tabled an amendment to the bill which the Government has conceded would wreck the treaty.
A decision on the knife-edge procedural wrangling is expected today when the committee stage of the European Communities (Amendment) Bill resumes in the Commons.
The new amendment relates to the bill's effect on the legislation covering elections to the European Parliament and technically has the same effect as the Labour amendment 27, which the Government belatedly said would not prevent ratification.
The Attorney-General, Sir Nicholas Lyell, told Mr MacDonald in Monday's debate on contradictory legal advice that a new amendment of the form now tabled ‘would render it impossible for the Government to ratify the treaty’.
The question now is whether the deputy Speaker, Michael Morrison, rules the amendment in order since the substance of the debate has already been dealt with.
However, he has indicated that, because the last debate was taken against the background of legal advice since renounced by the Government, there could be a rerun on the fresh amendment.
Maastricht was the most divisive event in EC history, but Britain should ratify the treaty then work to improve it, Lord Lawson said yesterday.
He said Britain's withdrawal from the exchange rate mechanism last September was caused partly by Government failure to agree Britain's level of entry in advance with the German central bank.
When as Chancellor he was preparing to enter in 1985, he said, tacit agreement had been reached with the Bundesbank.
When Britain joined under John Major as Chancellor, the Bundesbank thought the level was too high and was not prepared to support sterling when it came under pressure from speculators, he added.
Smith backs loosened links with trade unions
By Chris McLaughlin, Political Correspondent
THE LABOUR leader, John Smith, pointed the way yesterday to a historic loosening of the party's ties with the unions.
At a meeting of the party's national executive committee which prepared for a radical shake-up in Labour's constitution, Mr Smith backed the sweeping away of union involvement in choosing the leader and MPs.
Measures to end the party conference block vote, with millions of votes cast by trade union leaders on the show of a single card, are also being pressed.
Proposals are that a union vote should be broken down to reflect the divergent views in a union's membership and apportioned accordingly.
The reforms met with a mixed reception from unions, which see a register of individual members as a vehicle for democratic involvement of union members.
Under rule changes which Mr Smith wants implemented as early as the annual conference in October this year, future contests for the leadership and deputy will be decided in a 50:50 division between constituency members and MPs, including members of the European Parliament.
Unions will be able to nominate potential candidates for Westminster and Europe but will be prohibited from taking part in the final vote, which traditionally has led to big unions swamping the choice of MP.
The leadership wants to see the proportion of union voting strength at party conferences reduced from the current 70 per cent— down for the first time this year from the traditional 90 per cent — to an eventual 50 per cent .
Mr Smith, who now has to persuade the unions to fall in line, threw his weight behind the reforms after criticism for being too cautious.
He explained that he wanted to stay silent until the special trade union review group had reported on the options available.
Pressure to act decisively came, among others, from Mr Smith's predecessor, Neil Kinnock.
Mr Smith described the reforms, which will be put out to the party membership in a consultation process lasting until July, as among the most far-reaching and democratic advances in the history of the party.
They come amid mounting pressure for the leadership formally to renounce the symbolic Clause 4 of the party's constitution, which promises the ‘common ownership of the means of production, distribution and exchange’.
Mr Smith said: ‘I strongly support the proposal that delegates from trade unions should cast their votes on an individual basis, thus bringing the block vote to an end.
‘This process is in no sense a divorce between the Labour Party and the trade union movement.
It is a modernising and strengthening of the links between the Labour Party and the trade union movement and should be understood as that.’
Unions have a 40 per cent say in elections for the leader and deputy leader, and a stake of up to 40 per cent in the ballots for parliamentary candidates.
The reforms will be in place for the next round of reselections, which begin early next year.
A compromise was put forward by the General, Municipal and Boilermakers union which would have created a register of individual union supporters.
Although Mr Smith welcomed the ‘considerable potential’ of the register, he ruled it out as an alternative to removing the unions' constitutional influence outright.
They will retain a significant role through the party machinery in policy formation.
RUSSELL BOYCE/Reuter John Prescott, Labour's transport spokesman, talks to reporters after the party paved the way for reforms in its constitution
The mountains take their toll
No-one disputes that it has been a particularly bad winter for accidents on Scotland's mountains.
But what are the reasons behind the grim statistics?
Graeme Wilson investigates
LAST weekend's deaths of three family members in the freezing wind and snow of the Cairngorms has focused attention once more on the dangers of Scotland's mountains.
The recovery of the Mayo family's bodies — 15-year-old Matthew, his father Dr Christopher and uncle Michael — brought the year's death toll on the slopes to 14.
On Monday the figure rose once more when Frenchman Michel Bou passed away surrounded by the hi-tech machinery of Glasgow Southern General hospital's neurological unit.
Twenty-four hours earlier he was seriously injured in a fall on Ben Nevis.
No-one pretends that preventing further tragedies will be an easy matter, least of all the mountain rescue teams whose job it frequently is to haul the body-bags from the hills.
The mountains can be a dangerous place — weather changes rapidly leaving climbers and walkers ‘blind’ while hands and feet can easily lose their grip on the slopes covered with neve or tightly packed snow.
This winter these perils have led to 12 of the main teams mounting more than 90 rescues, mainly since the start of the year, of which one-third were judged as serious incidents.
In contrast there were 40 deaths and 211 injuries throughout Scotland during the whole of 1991, of which roughly 25 per cent occurred in winter conditions.
In explaining this winter's figures, team members from throughout Scotland point to the particularly high spread of neve as a central cause.
Bill Rose of Killin mountain rescue explained: ‘The crux of the situation is the sudden thaw which has meant the snow has started to melt before refreezing.
‘It has now refrozen several times and become very hard.
If you slip on it you are not going to stop unless you have a lot of experience and practice using an ice pick.’
Even if the walker or climber has an ice axe they only have two or three seconds to stop themselves before their bodies, often clad in slippy waterproofs, pick up speed.
‘Some people have suggested that people end up going as fast as 70mph,’ said Mr Rose.
‘I'm not sure if it is that fast but you can reach horrific speeds.’
Without the proper equipment — stiff-soled boots, crampons and ice axes — and the experience in using them, it is virtually impossible to cope with neve.
This is not snow of the fluffy, snowballing variety.
In the words of Glencoe rescue team's Ronald Rodger, this is more akin to ‘brick’.
He adds: ‘It has been a good few years since the snow has been this hard which means a lot of walkers aren't used to it.
There's no doubt it has been the major factor in walkers having accidents.’
But not all the blame can be attributed to the high degree of neve.
Rather it stands as a nasty addition this winter to the equation which leads to accidents year in, year out.
Chief among these other factors is navigation, or more accurately the lack of it.
Walkers and climbers who get into trouble are often found later to have strayed off their intended course.
Precisely this is believed to have happened in the case of the Mayo family group.
In many cases people with equipment and experience suitable for gentler slopes lose their way and find themselves in areas with gradients and conditions which they are unable to handle.
John Hinde, the accident recorder for the mountain rescue committee of Scotland, to which all the teams are affiliated, argues that navigation problems contribute to around 50 per cent of all accidents on Scotland's mountains.
‘It's hard to generalise but almost half of the accidents, particularly in poor weather, are caused by bad navigation,’ he said.
‘If you do not know where you are then you're quite likely to wander on to something you cannot cope with.’
Another of the perennial problems Mr Hinde mentions is inferior equipment.
This is a theme echoed by John Allen, leader of the Cairngorms mountain rescue team.
He insists that boots with reinforced soles and crampons are as essential on steeper icy slopes as is an ice axe.
‘When you go on to a slope with hard snow and ice which is relatively steep then you need stiff sole boots which have an iron bar under the rubber,’ he said.
‘This lets you kick into the snow and get a grip unlike summer boots or bendy-sole boots.’
He added that two of the Mayo family which his team found were wearing ‘bendy boots’ and there was only one ice axe between them, even though they had strayed on to a climbing route.
Yet donning even the best equipment will be of little use without the training to use it properly.
Even climbers with experience admit it takes time to become accustomed to new crampons, for instance.
Beyond the basics of walking and climbing, lessons are now also available on how to use an ice axe to halt a slide on ice and snow — a skill which has saved many lives in the past.
Difficulties with navigation and equipment tend to affect walkers more than climbers, largely because there are so many more weekend ‘Munro-baggers’.
John Allen said: ‘There is a very definite distinction between those who go climbing and those who go walking.
In my experience climbers seldom have accidents because they are very aware of the equipment needed and the dangers, not only in the climb but in the walk to it.
‘Undoubtedly there are some very good hill-walkers but because of their numbers it means there are also many who are relatively inexperienced.’
And the numbers, both of hill-walkers and climbers, seems to keep on rising.
Car parks in accessible areas like Glencoe have been full to capacity according to the area's rescue team, which has recorded as many as 150 people going up Stob Coire nan Lochan in one morning.
The team secretary, Paul Williams, said: ‘We have had phenomenal numbers on the hills this winter and obviously the number up there is related to the number of accidents.’
Mountain rescue teams and other emergency services will continue to stress the skills and equipment essential for survival.
But as the mountains grow more popular it is clear there will be ever more people neither well enough versed in the use of map and compass nor properly equipped to deal with every situation.
In this case it is perhaps best if hill-walkers and climbers took John Allen's advice on approaching the sport with the right attitude.
‘If people are in any doubt then they should retreat, just turn around,’ he said.
‘The mountains will be there next week, next year but if you press on you may not be.
‘Some climbers and walkers used to feel there was something shameful about retreating but that's just not true — it is often the sensible thing to do.’
‘Nine dead’ as US troops fire on rioters
AMERICAN troops shot dead at least nine people during a second day of riots in Mogadishu on Wednesday, according to witnesses.
The rioters, followers of the warlord, Mohamed Farah Aideed, blockaded streets with barricades of blazing tyres, fought running battles with the troops and tried to storm the US, French and Egyptian embassies.
Hundreds of screaming youths hurled stones and scrap metal at allied tanks, armoured personnel carriers and jeeps that rolled through a part of central Mogadishu thick with smoke from burning tyres.
Witnesses said some of those killed had apparently blockaded the US embassy and were trying to storm it using their bare hands, stones and knives.
Aideed's supporters, angered by what they saw as US support for a rival warlord, Mohamed Said Hersi, stoned and shouted at the US forces, chanting at them: ‘Go Home Americans’ and ‘Down With America.’
It was the worst violence since a 23-nation task force, headed by the United States, moved into Somalia in December under a United Nations mandate to end gun law and the looting of food aid for an estimated two million starving Somalis.
A Reuter photographer, Corinne Dufka, who came face-to-face with the marauding crowds, heard a man armed with a US-made M-16 rifle yelling: ‘All white people deserve to die.’
In Paris, the foreign ministry said the French embassy was attacked by about 200 armed men who opened fire on the building after surrounding it.
No-one was hurt inside, and French troops guarding the embassy chased away the attackers by firing shots in the air.
Demonstrators broke into the Egyptian Embassy at one point and carried out looted items.
Troops later drove them out and regained control of the compound.
American troops appeared to restore order by nightfall.
A US official said troops opened fire several times, but he did not confirm that there had been casualties.
A Reuter television cameraman, Mohamed Shaffi, said: ‘I counted three bodies, including a teenager killed in morning clashes in the city.’
Abdi Aden Ibrahim, a Somali driver, said rioters near the US embassy told him that troops there had gunned down at least six people.
‘Most of the people I spoke to said they saw six people being shot dead near the US embassy compounds,’ he said.
Corinne Dufka said: ‘At Dikfer hospital I was told by an official there that they had admitted 25 wounded people, most of them with gunshot wounds.’
There was no independent confirmation of the reported deaths, as the violence kept foreign reporters off the streets.
The latest riots erupted after armed battles in the southern city of Kismayu on Monday between a local warlord, Omer Jess, an Aideed backer, and his rival, Hersi, known as Morgan.
At least 11 people were killed as Jess's followers were expelled from the city.
In Nairobi, Cynthia Osterman, of Care, said that she had heard by satellite telephone that four US vehicles were burned but no-one was injured.
She said the fighting had halted virtually all relief work in Mogadishu.
The rioting underlined continuing political and security problems facing the allies, who arrived ten weeks ago to end devastating clan warfare so that relief agencies could help ease a famine that threatened millions of lives.
— Reuter and AP 
PETER DEJONG/AP
Unequal struggle: a Somali boy throws a stone at a US Marine assault vehicle in Mogadishu during fierce rioting in the Somali capital yesterday.
No date to reconvene peace talks
THE US Secretary of State, Warren M Christopher, has concluded week-long talks in the Middle East without setting a date for resuming Arab-Israeli negotiations.
‘There was a strong desire throughout the region to reconvene,’ he said after final, separate meetings with the Palestinian delegation and with the Israeli Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin.
The chief hurdle is the controversy over Israeli's deportation of some 400 Palestinians.
After the talks, Hanan Ashrawi, the Palestinian spokeswoman, said there had been discussion of undisclosed new proposals, but the Palestinians could not make any final decisions without further consultations among themselves and with the Palestine Liberation Organisation in Tunis.
She said there were several proposals made that were worth thinking about and pursuing, ‘but right now, everything is still pending.’
Mr Christopher's trip took him to six Arab countries, Jordan, Egypt, Syria, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Lebanon, and Israel.
Everywhere, he said, he found ‘a real sense all the parties want the negotiations to succeed and to resume at an early date.’
— AP
Reform bill threat increases pressure on Beijing to talk
HONG KONG has stepped up the pressure on China, promising to publish democratic reform legislation soon unless Beijing agrees to come to the negotiating table.
The Secretary for Constitutional Affairs, Michael Sze, said yesterday that he hoped Sino-British talks could start soon to end a long-running row over Hong Kong's future which has shaken the colony.
But he told the Legislative Council: ‘We do recognise that the current uncertain situation cannot be allowed to continue for much longer and that we will need to gazette the bill if a decision on talks can't be reached imminently.’
Radio Television Hong Kong reported that a bill based on proposals from the Governor, Chris Patten, would appear in the official gazette tomorrow if China still refused to talk by then.
A government spokesman refused to comment on the report, but Mr Patten denied that he had presented Beijing with an ultimatum.
There had been speculation that Mr Patten would miss a self-imposed deadline and postpone publication of the legislation to allow negotiations with Beijing.
But he told reporters that the arrangements for local elections in 1994 and legislative elections a year later, at the centre of the dispute with Beijing, had to be agreed this year.
‘The fact that we have all along tried to ensure that we could resolve these sensitive issues as soon as possible isn't a political tactic,’ he said on a visit to the New Territories.
Referring to Mr Sze's statement, he said: ‘That's not an ultimatum.
What it is is a statement of what is an administrative imperative.’
Beijing is opposed to Mr Patten's plans, under which Hong Kong people would elect the majority of their legislature in 1995, just two years before the British colony returns to China.
China denounced the plan when it was announced last October, and threatened dire consequences if Mr Patten refused to back down.
But, last week, news broke that contacts were under way to break the deadlock.
Hong Kong seems reluctant to take the pressure off China by letting the deadline slip unless it agrees to talks.
Beijing, on the other hand, has failed to make clear whether it is really willing to negotiate and may be waiting for the deadline to be dropped before making a move.
Sze made clear that Hong Kong would not drop the February deadline lightly, and he held open the possibility that the bill would be published and tabled in the legislature even if talks with China began.
— Reuter
Bormann ‘died of cancer'
MARTIN Bormann, one of Adolf Hitler's top aides who dropped from sight after the Second World War, died of stomach cancer in Paraguay in 1959, according to a confidential police report published in Asuncion yesterday.
The newspaper Noticias-El Diario printed photocopies of what it claimed was a 1961 report by Paraguayan police agent Pedro Prokopchuk to Antonio Campos Alum, the chief of political police.
Prokopchuk wrote that Bormann lived in Paraguay for three years.
He died in Asuncion on 15 February, 1959, and was buried two days later in the town of Ita, 25 miles to the south.
According to Prokopchuk, West German intelligence knew exactly where Bormann was living in Paraguay.
Bormann was treated by another notorious Nazi fugitive, medical doctor and Auschwitz concentration camp official Josef Mengele, at the end of 1958, he wrote.
The burial was attended only by the cemetery administrator, the lorry driver who brought the coffin from Asuncion, and two other people.
Refugees flee fighting in north Rwanda
UP TO a million people have fled from northern Rwanda to escape fresh fighting between rebels and government forces, relief workers said yesterday.
Walter Stocker, the head of the Red Cross team trying to deal with the refugee crisis in the central African state, said hordes of peasants had been trekking south since guerrillas of the Rwanda Patriotic Front broke a seven-month ceasefire and attacked army positions on 8 February.
Relief sources said government forces had set up roadblocks to prevent refugees from flooding into the capital, Kigali. — Reuter
IRAN
Flooding destroys 130,000 homes
RECENT floods in southern Iran have caused at least $300 million of damage, destroying more than 130,000 houses, Tehran Radio has reported.
The floods started in the first week of February, killing at least 230 people and sweeping away farmland, roads, irrigation networks and power lines.
Hundreds of villages are still cut off.
— Reuter
CZECH REPUBLIC
Police seize 2,500 Kalashnikovs
TWO Czech businessmen have been charged with illegal arms dealing after police seized 2,500 Kalashnikov assault rifles worth about £600,000 on their premises, the daily, Mlada Fronta Dnes, reported yesterday.
The rifles came from a disbanded communist paramilitary unit.
— Reuter
TRANSVAAL
Woman is killed by angry hippo
AN angry hippo has attacked and killed a woman in South Africa's northern Transvaal province, after it smashed its way through an electric fence in the Mabelingwe nature reserve, police said yesterday.
She was trampled and bitten by the hippo, which was later shot.
It had already attacked two people who escaped serious injury.
— Reuter
Keating launches campaign with call for republic
THE Australian Prime Minister has tried to revive his party's support ahead of next month's general election by calling for the replacement of the Queen as head of state.
The plan for a ‘Federal Republic of Australia’ was the highlight of an otherwise low-key election campaign launch by Labor's Paul Keating.
The Labor Party is in danger of losing office after 10 years of high unemployment and a lingering recession.
The polls show the party trailing the opposition Liberal-National Party coalition, led by the former economics professor, John Hewson, which supports the monarchy.
Mr Keating said a committee would be asked to work out how an Australian head of state could be chosen without changing the country's parliamentary system.
A referendum on the issue would be held before Australia celebrates 100 years of the federation of its six states in 2001.
‘Many Australians…believe that we will be better able to succeed in the world with the unique and unambiguous identity which an Australian head of state, chosen by the Australian people, could provide,’ the Prime Minister said to loud cheers from about 500 party members.
Mr Keating first raised the idea of severing ties with the Crown soon after he became Prime Minister in late 1991.
He has also repeatedly called for the Union Jack to be removed from Australia's flag, but this is the first time that he has outlined a timetable for change.
Although he admitted that the issue is ‘far from the most pressing matter facing the nation’, its inclusion in the campaign speech appeared to be designed to draw public attention away from Australia's economic problems.
In London, the Foreign Office declined to comment on Mr Keating's speech, saying it did not get involved in elections in other countries.
The Queen's staff at Buckingham Palace also declined to comment.
However, Harry Greenway, the Conservative MP for Ealing North, said: ‘I think it's rubbish.’
Commenting on Mr Keating's argument that his country needed ‘the unique and  unambiguous identity’ that an Australian head of state could provide, Mr Greenway said: ‘That is a pathetic argument.
Uniqueness lies in having the Queen as sovereign.’
Over the last 20 years, various referenda have rejected constitutional change, but an opinion poll last March found that 57 per cent of Australians wanted a republic.
Paul Keating: speech outlined a timetable for change
Canada's embattled Mulroney to step down
CANADIAN Prime Minister Brian Mulroney resigned as Conservative Party leader yesterday and will step down as prime minister when his successor is picked in June to lead the party into autumn elections.
‘After almost ten years as party leader and eight and a half as prime minister, the time has come for me to step aside,’ he told a news conference in Ottawa after announcing his decision to his party.
Mr Mulroney said the leadership convention will take place in mid-June and he would hand over soon after.
He expected his successor to call elections in the autumn.
A Quebecker of Irish descent, Mr Mulroney swept to power in 1984 in a landslide victory.
But unpopular economic policies, such as free trade with the United States, and failure to resolve a dispute with French-speaking Quebec undermined his support.
His departure was recognition that his unpopularity had become a liability for the Conservatives in an election year.
Recent opinion polls show that, while Mr Mulroney remained one of Canada's most unpopular leaders to date, his party had recovered ground and moved ahead of the New Democrats into second place behind the Liberals.
‘It is a Margaret Thatcher situation…
The polls show the party up and Mulroney down,’ said Maude Barlow, chairwoman of the Council of Canadians, a longtime opponent of Mr Mulroney's trade policies.
‘I think the party forced him out.’
The main contenders to succeed Mr Mulroney are the defence minister, Kim Campbell; the trade minister, Michael Wilson; the communications minister, Perrin Beatty, and the environment minister, Jean Charest.
Mr Mulroney, 53, took office with an unprecedented majority in 1984 vowing to overhaul the world's seventh largest economy and build closer ties with the United States.
But prolonged recession undermined his support and Canadians blamed widespread unemployment on the loss of jobs to the United States through a free-trade agreement Mr Mulroney signed in 1988.
A hated general sales tax also contributed to making him one of Canada's most unpopular leaders ever.
Uncertainty over Mr Mulroney's future has existed since the defeat in a referendum last October of his government's proposals for constitutional reform aimed at solving the separatist dispute in French-speaking Quebec.
The Canadian dollar fell by nearly a cent against the US dollar in nervous overnight trading once media reports of his imminent resignation circulated on world financial markets.
Recent opinion polls show Mr Mulroney's support hovering at 17 per cent, while the opposition Liberals have a comfortable lead with the backing of about 46 per cent of Canadians.
Mr Mulroney said he took unpopular steps for the country's good, privatising state companies and lowering inflation and fiscal deficits.
‘We have made the tough decisions that now are strengthening Canada's competitive position, boosting our exports and ensuring our future prosperity.’
His opponents accused him of selling out to the United States on North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) with the United States and Mexico and leaving Canada with more unemployed and a bigger public debt than ever.
Opposition leaders increased pressure in recent weeks for an election and demanded that the government hold up until then ratification of NAFTA.
‘I think a lot of Canadians have been waiting with baited breath for several months wondering whether he will stay or go and I think the fact he's leaving is going to be good for the country,’ the deputy Liberal leader, Sheila Copps, said.
‘Here is a prime minister who is going to leave the country with the highest number of unemployed, a record number of bankruptcies and the highest debt ever…and a bad trade deal,’ New Democrat leader Audrey McLaughlin said.
— Reuter and AP 
Brian Mulroney: unpopularity had become a liability for Conservatives
US denies troops killed Somali rioters
THE United States has denied that American troops or their allies had killed anyone during rioting in the Somali capital, Mogadishu, after reports said up to nine Somalis died.
A State Department spokesman said that according to the US-led task force, coalition forces had not been responsible for any of the deaths.
He said the US had received reports of only three Somalis killed and an ‘undetermined’ number of wounded.
The rioters, followers of the warlord, Mohamed Farah Aideed, blockaded streets with barricades of blazing tyres, fought running battles with the troops and tried to storm the US, French and Egyptian embassies.
Witnesses said some of those killed had blockaded the US embassy and were trying to storm it using their bare hands, stones and knives.
Aideed's supporters, angered by what they saw as US support for a rival warlord, Mohamed Said Hersi, stoned and shouted at the US forces: ‘Go Home Americans’ and ‘Down With America.’
It was the worst violence since a 23-nation task force, headed by the US, moved into Somalia in December under a UN mandate to end gun law and the looting of food aid for an estimated two million starving Somalis.
A Reuter photographer, Corinne Dufka, who came face-to-face with the marauding rioters, heard a man armed with a US-made M-16 rifle yelling: ‘All white people deserve to die.’
In Paris, the foreign ministry said the French embassy was attacked by about 200 armed men who opened fire on the building after surrounding it.
No-one was hurt inside, and French troops guarding the embassy chased away the attackers by firing shots in the air.
Demonstrators broke into the Egyptian Embassy at one point and carried out looted items.
Troops later drove them out and regained control of the compound.
American troops appeared to restore order by nightfall.
A US official said troops opened fire several times, but he did not confirm that there had been casualties.
A Reuter television cameraman, Mohamed Shaffi, said: ‘I counted three bodies, including a teenager killed in morning clashes in the city.’
Abdi Aden Ibrahim, a Somali driver, said rioters near the US embassy told him that troops there had gunned down at least six people.
‘Most of the people I spoke to said they saw six people being shot dead near the US embassy compounds,’ he said.
Corinne Dufka said: ‘At Dikfer hospital I was told by an official there that they had admitted 25 wounded people, most of them with gunshot wounds.’
There was no independent confirmation of the reported deaths, as the violence kept foreign reporters off the streets.
The latest riots erupted after armed battles in the southern city of Kismayu on Monday between a local warlord, Omer Jess, an Aideed backer, and his rival, Hersi, known as Morgan.
At least 11 people were killed as Jess's followers were expelled from the city.
In Nairobi, Cynthia Osterman, of Care, said that she had heard by satellite telephone that four US vehicles were burned but no-one was injured.
She said the fighting had halted virtually all relief work in Mogadishu.
The rioting underlined continuing political and security problems facing the allies, who arrived ten weeks ago to end devastating clan warfare so that relief agencies could help ease a famine that threatened millions of lives.
— Reuter and AP 
PETER DEJONG/AP
Unequal struggle: a Somali boy throws a stone at a US Marine assault vehicle in Mogadishu during fierce rioting in the Somali capital yesterday.
Yeltsin fiddles while his economy burns
IT IS a Muscovite stand-off.
I do not have five roubles, therefore I cannot go to the loo.
I have, as it happens, a 1,000 rouble note, worth around a quid at yesterday's prices.
The woman guarding the entrance way does not wish to know this.
She will take a fiver, a tenner, a 25 rouble note if pushed.
But a 1,000?
Do I think she's the central bank or what?
This, my dears, is a minor crisis.
It has taken some 30 minutes to locate the toilet facilities within the multi-store, multi-tiered, many stairwayed emporium which is GUM.
The bladder is now in the market for fairly prompt relief.
The woman is not in the market for swift compromise.
But finally she is apparently moved by the piteous sight of the distressed supplicant and laboriously counts out 995 roubles change.
In fivers and tenners.
I enter the revamped, retiled portals clutching an embarrassing bank roll.
Gee, there must be enough here to buy say, a cup of tea…or insulate the loft.
I repair to the bank with the intention of changing some more dollars and wave the wad of readies at the teller as well.
Perhaps he could exchange it for something more portable.
No chance.
What do I think he is?
The central bank or what?
Well, actually, yes.
He definitely doesn't want my roubles.
Which is a minor irritation for the itinerant tourist…a daily nightmare for the local residents.
The only meaningful economy here now operates in US dollars.
With them you can buy just about whatever your little capitalist heart desires.
Without, with a rouble paycheck or, worse still, a rouble pension, life is slipping inexorably down the tubes.
The signs that it is doing so are around you in ways which were unimaginable before prices were ‘liberalised’ two years ago.
Little urchins tugging on our coat tails, miming eating, asking for money like some white-skinned version of a miniature beggar in a Calcutta slum.
Women, wholly respectable women, lining the streets selling a bizarre array of consumer purchases from single skirts, to bottles of perfume and packets of sweets.
For in the topsy turvy pecking order which is the current Russian economy, the middle class academics, civil servants and doctors have wound up at the bottom of the wages spiral, their savings largely, meaningless.
Highly qualified medical men, now earning significantly less than their ambulance drivers, are leaving the much vaunted health care system in droves, looking for jobs (sometimes two or three) which offer a passport to at least temporary insolvency.
Any society embarked on wholesale transition might expect its progress to be punctuated by intermittent chaos.
Here, such is the pace of change, it seems rather that wholesale chaos occasionally results in selective progress.
Those who have made it, flaunt it.
Fur and cashmere clad women stride past their street vending fellows hurrying to the seductive warmth of the elegant Estee Lauder store, or to browse perhaps in Galerie Lafayette and Benetton.
Their partners are making dollars faster than either of them can count, some of it in black market trading.
Others' gains are less ill-gotten, depending on how you view the morality of currency speculation.
And still others have had the good fortune to find a role in those sectors of the joint venture free market which are not stuttering as a result of the policy paralysis.
A poll of new business wealth found former Mayor Popov of Moscow the richest man in town.
He did not make his pile opening bazaars you feel sure.
It is a mark of these half-crazed times that my programme of meetings, which once would have been dominated by political and scientific academy briefings, now includes something calling itself the Academy of Entrepreneurship, and an appointment with accountants advising more inward investors.
It is not the least of Russia's current ironies that, just as the West is re-assessing the value of a market-led economy, belatedly suspecting it to be the partial cause rather than wholesale cure of economic ills, the arch reformers are adamant that salvation lies in a western role model.
Regrettably it is not just in matters financial that Russia has donned its new occidental clothes.
Murders in Moscow have doubled in the last year, still modest totals by US standards, but appalling in a city once acknowledged as the safest capital in the world.
The spacious boulevards, lined with commercial kiosks, now boast Pizza Hut as well as McDonalds, gastronomic evidence of man's inhumanity to overseas man.
Meanwhile, as Russia's economy burns, inflation now a hairsbreadth from the banana republic variety, its leaders fiddle with its future — locked in a political power struggle which would now seem to have taken the place of anything resembling coherent government.
Until Mr Yeltsin and his parliament speaker Ruslan Khasbulatov end their duel to the political death, their hapless electorate see nothing filling a policy vacuum which makes John Major's legislative cupboard appear positively overflowing.
Whether or not this constitutional tug of war is resolved by the proposed referendum on presidential powers in April — indeed whether anyone will get around to formulating questions for it, or persuading the battle scarred citizenry to turn up at the ballot box — are still matters of obsessive speculation.
In the interim, this fascinating, beleaguered country celebrates its membership of the brave new world order by preparing to pass its first law dealing with bankruptcies in the entrepreneurial private sector.
If they have the money, contacts, and confidence, Russians are now, technically, free to travel and emigrate as they please.
There is but one small snag.
New, visa and bureaucracy-free passports, are not yet freely available.
The politicians, it seems, are still haggling over the emblem on the cover.
Should it be the proud Russian eagle, or the old hammer and sickle?
And, if an eagle, should its wings go up or stay horizontal?
In the land of dramatic changes, some things stay depressingly the same.
The men's club which is a law unto itself
Women lawyers are challenging the chauvinism which bans them from the higher echelons, reports Fiona Sutherland Omitted from the useful introductions to clients, business lunches, meetings and golfing sessions, women solicitors fail to acquire the vital ‘client base.’
And when delegation of prestigious work is restricted, partnership prospects dwindle
POSSESSION is nine points of the law.
And the predominantly male legal establishment is naturally reluctant to be dispossessed.
Yet the traditional male monopoly of senior legal posts is now to be challenged.
Active measures have begun to tackle persisting sex discrimination, following extensive surveys and research by the English Law Society and Bar Council.
All English law firms may shortly be obliged to adopt an Equal Opportunities policy, in line with a package of stipulations by their Law Society.
Meanwhile, the conspicuous lack of support for equal opportunities from the Scottish Law Society is galvanising the Glasgow-based Association of Women Solicitors (SAWS).
A sex discrimination committee and working party have been formed.
‘Scottish lawyers should not have to lag behind their southern counterparts,’ says Doreen Collins, association chairman.
Underlying her concern is the widely differing approach to discrimination north and south of the border.
Where the English Law Society is introducing measures to ‘alert the profession to the gravity with which it considers matters of discrimination,’ its Scottish counterpart recently observed that ‘guidance or rules (on discrimination) for the legal profession are not necessary.’
Meanwhile, a working party report urging positive action on equal opportunities by the Scottish Law Society has been gathering dust for more than a year.
Paradoxically, what is evidently a fringe issue for the Scottish Law Society is becoming quite fraught within the profession.
So says Dorothy Dalton, convener of a Law Society working party responsible for an extensive survey of solicitors two years ago.
The growing bottleneck of senior women lawyers excluded from partnership means the issue of discrimination is beginning to bite.
In place of the privileges and profits of partnership, ‘associate partner’ status is the recognised consolation prize.
For many, partnership remains cloaked in a monastic exclusivity, as accessible as the holy orders.
Yet confrontation is difficult when discrimination is invariably subtle and discreet.
Particularly insidious is the unobtrusive process of grooming for partnership, as revealed in the survey.
Omitted from the meaningful introductions to clients, business lunches, meetings and golfing sessions, women solicitors fail to acquire the vital ‘client base.’
And when delegation of prestigious work is restricted, partnership prospects dwindle.
It is a setting where the old boy network may prove more potent than talent or single-minded devotion to work.
The SAWS points to cases where outstanding women associates are passed over by younger, less experienced men sharing the same school tie.
Partnership itself is not always immune from male chauvinism.
‘Dead-end’ partnerships evidently bring little reward to women who miss out on the normal progression from junior to senior status and the accompanying benefits.
No golf on the Friday afternoon for them.
At the opposite end of the scale, women law graduates continue to have greater problems obtaining traineeships, according to Doreen Collins.
Happily, solicitor/client relations are unaffected by such entrenched conservatism.
Clients' broad support for capable women lawyers emerged in the Dalton survey.
In one case, the sudden death of a commercial lawyer prompted the abrupt replacement of his experienced, female assistant by a young, inexperienced man.
Unimpressed, the client requested her reinstatement.
Now the pervasive influence of irrational forces, incongruous in a profession which prizes objective judgment, is to undergo scientific scrutiny.
The SAWS is to undertake a statistical analysis of women lawyers' career development, modelled ones similar English initiative in 1987 which revealed widespread discrimination.
This is the first priority of a new working party on discrimination, founded by solicitors Eva Mozolowski and Elizabeth Coyle.
Facts and figures, they argue, should replace the soothing refrain that ‘it is only a matter of time’ before women lawyers make up on their male counterparts.
Commenting publicly after the recent appointment of a part-time woman and two men to a partnership comprising one woman and 30 men, the senior partner professed the firm ‘comfortable’ with the ‘entirely natural progression of women.’
A reference to the healthy numbers of women in the lower reaches of the hierarchy.
Yet it is precisely the persisting contrast between the male/female ratio at partnership level and below that concerns the English Law Society.
The latest statistical analysis, published in December 1992, shows that ‘higher proportions of men achieve partnership than women, even among those recently admitted.’
In an increasingly competitive environment, the problem is accentuated.
Family commitments now tend to be dwarfed by pressures of work, often long into the ‘twilight shift.’
So much so, the erosion of family life is an emotive issue even among male solicitors, according to the Dalton survey.
‘Any suggestion that your wife expects you home for the evening meal at a reasonable hour’ is met with ‘howls of derision’from older colleagues.
The general lack of compromise or provision for flexible or part-time work effectively chokes off the careers of many promising lawyers.
The Dalton report makes poignant reference to the ‘wealth of professional talent’ lost as, discouraged and unappreciated, many women leave the profession to have a family, never to return.
Guidelines on flexible and part-time work by the Law Society were urged, although the society recently observed that it ‘cannot legislate for social benefits.’
Yet, a positive impact was made by the publication of such guidelines by the English Law Society in 1989.
In a forthright publication ‘Equal Opportunities in Solicitors’ Firms’, firms were urged to reassess their treatment of employees.
The message was blunt: ‘Be fair and business-like!
Solicitors’ firms are no different from other employers.’
Besides promoting flexible working conditions, the guidelines underline the need for stringent regulation of these to achieve genuine benefits for women.
In sardonic undertones, the guide- lines suggest ‘the part-timer is unlikely to be happy given just the undesirable work that no one else wants to do’ and ‘should not be made to feel obliged to work extra hours.’
Maternity provision is another controversial area, prompting a recent survey of more than 5,000 solicitors in England.
‘This is a very unhappy area.
Law firms have not come to grips with the issues,’ says Geraldine Cotton, chair of the 5,500-strong English Association of Women Solicitors.
‘Firms look on maternity leave just as they would a skiing holiday.
In fact, maternity isn't really recognised to exist in many practices.
If, back at work, some crisis requires a mother's prompt return home, it's ‘because the car needs fixed.’
PROBLEMS include pressurisation to curtail maternity leave, failing which a dramatic loss of work and status occur on return.
A significant number in the survey had been so badly penalised they had left to form their own practices.
Against this background, probing questions on marriage and reproductive intentions remain a prominent, if manifestly illegal, feature of legal recruitment interviews.
This is one of the abuses targeted in the English Law Society's current ‘Anti-Discrimination’ paper.
It is proposing stringent measures, underlining the urgent need for a change of attitude among lawyers.
Confident that the ‘big stick’ approach will hasten this change, Geraldine Cotton predicts a significant impact on the working lives of women solicitors.
South of the border, that is.
Although the superiority of the Scottish legal system over its southerly counterpart is a familiar, and often justified refrain, equal opportunities for lawyers seems a notable exception.
As Doreen Collins observes: ‘England is preparing to move forward into the 21st century.
Where does this leave us?’
Strike action
NOW that Falkirk Football Club has confirmed the surprising choice of Campbell Christie, General Secretary of the Scottish Trades Union Congress, as its new chairman, we can presumably look forward to a radical change of tactics on the field.
Well, not too radical actually, since trades unionists are not noted for their enthusiasm for rapid change.
Looking after the status quo is rather more their tendency, so we can perhaps expect a greater emphasis on defence with rather less activity from the operatives up front— the strikers.
On second thoughts, perhaps that was loosely phrased.
In fact it is the hard men up front who are likely to be given their head, and any idea of a no-strike deal will be ruthlessly opposed.
Of course play may well be slowed down if the new rules are imposed and there has to be a ballot before every strike, but while that is being negotiated Mr Christie may well resort to the block vote at the back to defend his resolutions.
So long as he remembers that, when mounting a picket in his opponents' penalty area, he is only allowed a maximum of six operatives on the line, he should be able to enjoy free and frank access to the other side's position.
Knowing him, he will stand four-square behind his principled actions and will not allow a coach and horses to be driven through his substantive motions.
We can expect him to be resolutely against any erosion of goal-differentials, and right-wingers are likely to find themselves distinctly out of favour.
If at the same time he can affiliate his mid-field to the aspirations of his grass-root defenders, then Falkirk can indeed become a powerful team.
But if by any chance the Bairns' fortunes begin to falter under his chairmanship, and their stalwart position as second-bottom in the league is challenged, then he should not be  surprised to hear from the terraces the menacing sound of the fans as they give tongue: ‘Christie, Christie, Christie — out, out, out!’
Mulroney bows out
BRIAN MULRONEY has turned out to be one of the most unloved prime ministers in recent Canadian history — his popularity had plummeted by the time he decided to resign.
Yet future historians are likely to look more kindly on his achievements for his country than the present generation.
Canadian prime ministers can be divided into two traditions, the one encouraging the people to move forward from within, while the other represents those who lead from the front.
While Mulroney appeared to represent the former when he was elected, he has in fact turned out to be of the latter kind, and that exposed position may also have contributed to his loss of support.
His government overhauled the world's seventh largest economy by privatising state firms, launching a hated value-added tax and signing a pioneering free trade agreement with the US.
But prolonged recession and high  unemployment knocked his popularity down to rock-bottom.
One of his main political objectives was to negotiate a constitutional settlement which would satisfy both the people of the French-speaking province of Quebec and the rest of Canada.
At the second attempt he presented voters with a painstakingly worked out proposal which included among its measures the recognition of Quebec as a distinct society, the right of natives to govern themselves and reform of the senate.
The fact that it was rejected in a referendum last year does not mean that it was a bad reform package.
On the contrary, Mulroney, himself a bilingual Quebecker, although of Irish stock, worked constructively with the province's premier Robert Bourassa.
With the latter suffering from cancer and also therefore thought likely to resign soon, a new generation will have to guide Canada through the constitutional minefield of the next few years.
Whether that will mean more or less acrimony between Quebec and the federal government remains to be seen.
Perversely, a settlement which is seen as having been the subject of more bitter dispute may persuade voters that nothing was given away too lightly.
The Conservative Party will have to choose its new leader in time for elections later this year.
There are some promising candidates like the defence minister Kim Campbell.
Indeed, the party might well stay in power unless the Liberals win outright since it has much the better chance of putting together a coalition with other parties.
Mulroney is going, but he has left a solid legacy for his successor.
House sales
With reference to your editorial today, ‘Shelter from the storm’, and with particular reference to the sale of council houses, part of the problem was created by the Government's policy of the ‘right to buy’.
No-one had the ‘right to sell’.
Council houses were built to fulfil a social need for those people who could not, or for some reason did not wish to buy a house, and for generations to come.
Amato survives vote as scandal spreads
ITALIAN Prime Minister Giuliano Amato won a vital confidence vote yesterday after seeing one of his severest critics become the latest victim of the country's growing bribery scandal.
Mr Amato won the vote 310-265 with nine abstentions.
It was the 11th time his four-party coalition had survived such a vote in eight months but the news had little impact on markets which had already discounted a win.
The lira ended the day up around 965 to the German mark from the 976 opening and well clear of the record 980 lows it had touched earlier in the week when the vote was announced.
Closing speeches in the confidence debate had earlier been interrupted as MPs reacted in disbelief to the news that Giorgio La Malfa, leader of the small but influential Republican Party, had resigned in the scandal.
Mr La Malfa, who quit after being officially warned he is suspected of breaking party financing laws, is the second party leader to resign under a cloud this month after the Socialist leader, Bettino Craxi.
Three ministers have also been forced out over the past two weeks, an unprecedented exodus which prompted Mr Amato to call for the vote.
Mr La Malfa's fall left the opposition Republicans in disarray and strengthened Mr Amato's hand by making the chances of finding a realistic alternative even more remote.
The prospect of the political chaos which would have followed had Mr Amato lost was certain to have been uppermost in MPs' minds.
Now they are likely to concentrate on April's electoral reform referendum and the prospect of general elections under new rules in October.
Mr La Malfa's resignation was the biggest surprise of all, given his long crusade for moral reform.
One quarter of the chamber is under suspicion of involvement, local government has ground to a halt in many parts of the country and public works contracts have all but dried up.
MPs were quick to grumble privately that Mr La Malfa is not under suspicion of being involved in million-dollar bribery networks allegedly run by the main parties for years.
He is merely suspected of not having told the authorities of a 50 million lire (£21,000) contribution to the costs of having election posters printed in last April's general election.
— Reuter
It was enough, however, for his position as a reform crusader to become untenable.
‘The bigger the political responsibility, the greater the duty of honesty one owes to the people,’ he wrote in a resignation letter to party vice-secretary Giorgio Bogi.
The dapper, 52-year-old economist with his trademark owlish glasses had set himself up as a beacon of the reform movement as long ago as April 1991 when he led his party out of government.
‘I don't want to be a part of this,’ he declared at the time.
‘I want nothing to do with people who are trying to destroy the image, wealth and morality of Italy.’
But in the general election a year later the Republicans lost ground to more radical reform movements.
The big winner then and since was Umberto Bossi, leader of the separatist Northern Leagues.
‘La Malfa's resignation just shows that anyone who has been involved in government for so long can be involved (in corruption), however pure he may claim to be,’ he said.
Irish call for EC inquiry over ‘inducements’ for Digital
By Alan Dron and Denny Macgee
MORE than 1,000 Scottish jobs were secured yesterday with the confirmation that the US computer company Digital is to retain its Ayr plant.
However, Ayr's survival as the company's major European manufacturing unit means the demise of Digital's plant at Galway, in Ireland, where almost 800 jobs will go over the next year.
The US company will retain its European software headquarters in Galway, employing only 350 of the current workforce of almost 1,200.
It is understood that only a few specialist posts are likely to be be transferred.
The Irish government reaffirmed that it was seeking a European Community investigation into the British Government's part in the negotiations with Digital to save the Ayr plant.
A letter alleging offers of preferential inducements has been handed to the EC's competition commissioner, Karl Van Miert.
Its request for an investigation was reaffirmed by the Irish minister for commerce and technology, Seamus Brennan.
Dublin sources last night told The Scotsman that Mr Van Meirt had undertaken to look into the matter, and said he would be asking the UK Government for details of what had been offered to the American company.
Both the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, and the director of Locate in Scotland, Robert Crawford, said no exceptional financial inducements had been offered.
Mr Crawford said financial assistance was well within EC limits.
‘To its credit, the company did not try to engage ourselves or the Irish in an auction.’
He did not believe money had been decisive in the company's final decision.
The good communications between the firm's Queensferry and Ayr plants had been more important.
Mr Lang took a strong personal interest in the moves to retain the Ayr plant.
He visited Digital's president and chief executive, Robert Palmer, in the US last September.
Late last month, Mr Lang telephoned Mr Palmer in Massachusetts to argue the case for Digital's South Queensferry and Ayr plants.
The chief executive of Scottish Enterprise, Crawford Beveridge and Robert Crawford, director of Locate in Scotland, went to the US as the battle between the Irish and Scottish plants intensified.
Digital's vice-president for manufacturing and logistics, Edward McDonough, said changes in the world computer market and the need for Digital to be close to its major customers — Britain is its largest single market in Europe — were the reason for cutting the Irish plant.
Countess cleared of false rape claim
By Gillian Harris
DAWN KENNEDY was yesterday cleared of falsely accusing three men of raping her.
Now, the former wife of the Earl of Cassillis is considering bringing a private civil prosecution against the men at the centre of case.
The countess, 32, of Jodrell Road, Bow, east London, had claimed that David Thorburn and Craig Cowen raped her at knifepoint while watching a pornographic video.
She said a third man, Lee Thompson, had pinned her to the ground during the alleged incident at Mr Cowen's flat in east London on 31 May, 1991.
However, the countess was later charged with perverting the course of justice after police became convinced she had made up the story.
During the trial at the Old Bailey in London 15 witnesses testified that Mr Thorburn, a general manager of an electronics company, had been practising for the Tam o' Shanter golf tournament near his mother's home in Ayr at the time he was alleged to have raped her.
It took the jury almost five hours to reach a majority verdict and acquit her on all three charges.
Outside the court, the countess said: ‘I am considering taking civil action.
My name has been cleared of telling lies.
I am very, very relieved and obviously taking advice on the next steps because naturally I am not going to leave it at this.’
Hugging her barrister, Stephen Kamlish, she added: ‘I just feel great relief.
I have been vindicated.
It has been a tremendous strain.
I have had to live in a bail hostel.
I have had to spend three-and-a-half weeks in prison.
‘I am a prostitute and a drug addict and not many people believe people like me.
It shows the truth does shine through sometimes.’
Countess Cassillis said she believed that the jury may have been influenced by a crucial piece of evidence which was submitted only yesterday morning after the judge had completed his summing up.
A notebook in which Mr Thompson had listed the titles of about 90 pornographic videos was presented to the court.
The prosecution accepted that the notebook proved Mr Thompson had been involved in the distribution of obscene material, a charge the countess had levelled at him earlier in the trial but that he had denied.
‘I think the book was probably a critical bit of evidence,’ the countess said.
‘It clarified one of the things I had said from the start.
These people, due to my being a prostitute, wanted me to distribute these disgusting videos and by finding this booklet which gave details and prices it pinpointed the fact that I was telling the truth.
‘It didn't come to light until after the judge's summing up.
It literally came to light by accident when it fell out of a bag — it was God's will, I suppose.’
Scotsman launched on a fast track
By Graeme Wilson
ONE OF Britain's most powerful and modern locomotives was named The Scotsman yesterday at a ceremony in Edinburgh's Waverley Station.
Watched by an enthusiastic crowd of train-buffs and possibly even some Scotsman fans, the editor, Magnus Linklater, unveiled the nameplate carrying the paper's titlepiece, with its bristling thistle picked out in silver against a background of deep red.
The Scotsman — a £1 million Class 91 electric locomotive — will now hurtle at speeds of up to 125 mph on the Waverley-Kings Cross run, completing the journey in four hours, just about time enough to allow the leisurely reader to absorb the contents of the paper from cover to cover.
The lunchtime ceremony was introduced by Chris Green, InterCity's managing director, who recalled the backing that The Scotsman had given the railways in their early days, and pointed out the multi-million pound contribution they make today to Anglo-Scottish business.
‘From today the title and emblem of The Scotsman will be carried by this locomotive as it carries thousands of Scots, English and other nationalities on their leisure and business journeys between the great cities of Scotland and England,’ he said.
Earlier Pipe Major Iain Grant had entertained passengers and onlookers with a rousing rendition of Scotland the Brave.
Mr Linklater said: ‘It is a tremendous honour for The Scotsman to have this train named after it.
‘The great expansions of our paper have in the past been directly linked to the growth of the rail network in Scotland.
We will continue to give enthusiastic support to the development of the railways in the future.’
The Scotsman is one of 30 such locomotives providing the InterCity 225 service on the East coast.
Each train can carry more than 500 passengers.
The Editor, Magnus Linklater, unveils the nameplate on The Scotsman loco as InterCity's Chris Green, left, looks on
Euro aid tonic for Highland health
By Tom Morton
EUROPEAN funding for the Highlands worth £20 million a year could cover health initiatives — the first time that spending on health has been considered for such grant aid.
The Highlands and Islands' possible eligibility for European Community Objective 1 funding status has raised hopes that the mooted Highland University could be one of the first projects to benefit.
However, Highland Regional Council's deputy chief executive, Chris Claridge, said yesterday that he was awaiting clarification on the health issue.
‘For the first time, in Objective 1 areas, measures are being talked about in relation to health and education,’ he said.
‘We don't know in detail what these would involve.
These are aspects we will be exploring precisely over the next few weeks and months.’
Bob Shorter, the contracts director for Highland Health Board, said the news was encouraging, but stressed that money to cover running costs would be just as important as money which might pay for a new hospital.
The Highlands has one of the highest suicide rates in the country and is plagued by huge numbers of fatal accidents.
Alcoholism and heart disease are also serious problems.
By Allan McLean and Frank Frazer
MORE than 13,000 British jobs were axed yesterday amid gloomy predictions that there could be worse to come.
The losses came as two of the country's biggest companies announced surprising cuts.
The biggest shock came from ICI, a company long regarded as a gauge of Britain's industrial well-being.
The chemical giant said 4,500 people — one in ten of its British workforce — would be redundant by 1995.
British Gas reported that 2,400 jobs will go over the next two years, in addition to 800 redundancies last year and 1,200 job losses from its London headquarters announced last month.
Almost 6,500 army personnel — including 97 serving in Bosnia — were also made redundant.
John Major, the Prime Minister, insisted in Washington that Britain was moving out of recession.
He blamed what he called the painful kick-back of recent economic problems for the latest spate of job losses.
Sir John Harvey-Jones, ICI chairman from 1982 to 1987 and a widely-respected management consultant, said it was debatable whether Britain was coming out of recession — and the worst job losses were yet to come.
Gordon Brown, the shadow chancellor, called last night for emergency measures to bring  unemployment down.
He was inaugurating Labour's national crusade on jobs, which will be concentrated on marginal Tory constituencies.
Mr Brown said that in some areas 1,000 people were chasing every vacancy —‘the real national lottery’.
ICI, which is cutting 9,000 jobs worldwide over the next two years, announced that its annual pre-tax profits for 1992 were down to £565 million from £789 million.
The firm, which described the cuts as a painful decision, has reduced its workforce by more than 21,000 in the past two years.
British Gas reported reduced profits of £1.054 billion for 1992.
Cedric Brown, its chief executive, said the jobs would go over the next 18 months.
He would not rule out the possibility of more redundancies after the Mergers and Monopolies Commission publishes its report on competition in the gas market in two months.
‘We will have to look further at our organisational structure.
Clearly the MMC recommendations may have a significant impact,’ he said.
It could be several months before it is known how many Scottish jobs will be lost, the company said.
In the army, a total of 1,308 officers and 5,152 nco's received their redundancy notices under the second phase of the Options for Change plan to cut army numbers by almost 40,000 to 119,000 by 1995.
Eighty soldiers and 17 officers serving in Bosnia learned that they were losing their jobs.
Some 628 officers were made compulsorily redundant — many had been deterred from volunteering because of the recession.
The deputy Labour leader, Margaret Beckett, told Tony Newton, the leader of the Commons, who was standing in for Mr Major at Question Time: ‘How would you feel if you were serving in the British Army under fire in Bosnia and were handed a P45?’
She accused ministers of gratuitously undermining the morale of British troops in one of the most dangerous theatres of operations.
ICI plunges into red; British Gas profits plummet, Page 17
Boy, 13, in biting battle with dog
A 13-YEAR-OLD boy was recovering in hospital in Cheltenham yesterday after biting his pet dog, which was attacking one of his friends.
Jimmy Johnson sank his teeth into the family's bull terrier as it had the arm of an 11-year-old boy locked in its jaws.
He bit the dog's ear until it let go but the terrier, called Dylan, then turned on Jimmy, causing arm and leg wounds.
The dog, normally kept in a cage, was destroyed.
Talks fail to settle dirty tricks claim
TALKS between British Airways and Virgin Atlantic aimed at settling the so-called dirty tricks affair last night looked likely to continue into a fourth day.
Lawyers for the two sides were continuing negotiations late into the night and a settlement was not expected to be announced until today.
BA is reported to have offered £10 million to £15 million in compensation for the damage its campaign caused to Richard Branson's Virgin group.
If a settlement is not reached this week, Virgin has said it will sue BA through courts in the United States where damages could run into tens of millions of dollars.
The row has already cost BA £610,000 in damages and £1 million in costs.
— PA
New fears over ‘supergun’ as RUC officer is shot dead
A ROYAL Ulster Constabulary officer killed by a single shot yesterday is believed to be the third victim of an IRA sniper using a fearsome long-range rifle.
PC John Reid, 30, from Belfast, who was on patrol with troops near the Irish border just outside Crossmaglen, south Armagh, was struck in the chest.
Security chiefs are now desperate to trace the weapon before the sniper strikes again.
The rifle is capable of bringing down a helicopter, and has a killing range of more than a mile.
The officer was the second policeman murdered by terrorists in just over 12 hours.
Earlier, PC Reggie Williamson, 46, was blown up in front of his girlfriend as they returned home from a night out near Moy, Co Tyrone.
Police and soldiers in the border regions are under new pressure to find the IRA rifle — a US-made Barrett (Light Fifty) which is 5ft long, weighs 28lb, fires half-inch rounds and has a killing range of up to 1,800 metres.
PC Reid, a second RUC officer and a group of soldiers had just emerged from a field and were about to set up a roadblock on the Castleblaney Road on the outskirts of the town, when the shot rang out.
It has been used twice before to kill, and each time a single shot was fired.
Last August, a soldier was shot in the centre of Crossmaglen and then last November, a policeman on traffic duty in the village of Belcoo, Co Fermanagh, was hit in the head.
Detectives believe the same gunman may have been involved in all three killings, firing one shot before disappearing, and then leaving other terrorists to dismantle the rifle.
A senior security source last night admitted that the gun's recovery was now an even greater priority.
He said: ‘It's probably the most worrying threat of all at the minute and we have to find it.
Body armour is absolutely no protection.’
Meanwhile, the girlfriend of PC Williamson has spoken of her hate for the killers.
She was following behind in her car on her way home when a booby trap exploded, hurling the RUC man's car into a ditch.
He died later in hospital.
Police believe the bomb may have been planted under the Nissan Datsun outside a pub where he met his girlfriend, Jenny Hill, a Catholic.
PC Williamson, from Portadown, Co Armagh, who was separated from his wife, was due to attend his niece's wedding tomorrow.
A brother Freddie, 33, a soldier in the Ulster Defence Regiment, was killed just over ten years ago after he was fired on by INLA gunmen.
Jenny said: ‘We just turned the corner.
I thought it was a dream.
There was this bang.
I got out and held his head until the ambulance arrived.
I just hope the people who did this rot in hell.
This life is too good for them.
‘I hope something equally horrible happens to them.
They are nothing but animals.
This doesn't prove anything.
It makes people hate them even more.’
The RUC Chief Constable Sir Hugh Annesley who met the families of the murdered officers said their deaths tragically illustrated the continuing sacrifice of the RUC in the service of the community.
But he pledged the killers would be brought to justice.
He said: ‘These murders are base acts of criminality which are repulsive to, and will be condemned by, decent people everywhere.
‘The RUC and the community has lost two good men.
Their contribution to the well being of society is in stark contract to the actions of those evil people who kill and destroy and have nothing else to offer.’
— PA 
PC Reggie Williamson: died after car blast
Prisoners convicted on riot charges
FIVE former Strangeways prisoners were yesterday convicted of plotting to cause grievous bodily harm to prison officers and police during Britain's worst jail riot.
The jury at Manchester Crown Court took 23 hours to bring in their verdicts on four of the defendants, Glynn Williams, 29, Mark Williams, 24, Anthony Bush, 27, and David Bowen, 29.
Earlier in the day they returned a similar verdict on Kevin Gee, 27.
But they were sent to spend their fourth night in a hotel after failing to agree verdicts on the seven other accused at the end of a trial which has lasted nearly five months.
All the defendants denied conspiracy to cause grievous bodily harm and conspiracy to riot during the disturbances at the Manchester jail in April 1990.
Bush, Bowen and Mark Williams were not in the dock to hear the verdicts returned against them.
Bowen staged an escape while being brought to court in December last year, Mark Williams is in hospital after becoming ill during the trial and Bush is still being sought after breaking out of the court last week with four of the other accused.
A 23-year-old woman law clerk has appeared in court charged with helping him escape and harbouring him.
One of those in the escape, Barry Morton, 24, was recaptured in Liverpool on Wednesday and was yesterday remanded for a week by magistrates in Manchester charged with escaping from custody and being at large.
The jury will resume considering their verdicts today on Alan Lord, 31, Mark Azzopardi, 23, John Murray, 24 — who are all still being sought after last week's break-out — Andrew Nelson, 22, Nathan Gaynor, 22, Darren Jones, 20, and Morton.
— PA
Court told letter was to hide murder
A FORGED letter supposedly from a dead bank clerk was written by the man who murdered both her and her father in order to convince relatives that she was still alive, a court heard yesterday.
Michael Stuart-Moore, QC, prosecuting, told the Old Bailey in London that Alison Manwaring had probably been naked when she was strangled at her home in Aldersley Gardens, Barking, London.
She may have been sexually assaulted.
Her father, a retired bank official, Matthew Manwaring was shot.
Days later, an elderly widow watched while a man she identified as 25-year-old Benjamin Laing, on trial for the double killing, dug a deep grave in pouring rain for the remains of Mr Manwaring, 62, and 24-year-old Alison.
Mr Stuart-Moore alleged Laing wrote the letter because ‘he was trying to make all look well, so people would think they had gone away together’.
However, the letter contained information that only the killer could have known, he said.
Typewritten, it was intercepted by police a week after the killings and ‘came from the murderer beyond a question of doubt’.
It was sent to Alison's brother, Mark, and implied that she and their father had gone away for a break as both were suffering from depression.
It referred to her earlier pregnancy termination as a reason for her wanting to go away — yet Mark would have known nothing about it, said the prosecution.
Mr Stuart-Moore alleged that Alison's murderer had forced her to tell him this personal detail after handcuffing her, torturing and assaulting her before killing her.
The letter contrasted with a genuine letter Alison had written to Mark the day before she died.
‘In it she was not at all depressed,’ said the prosecution.
The bogus letter was dated 28 April, the jury heard — the same day the prosecution said Benjamin Laing buried their dismembered bodies in the back garden of his girlfriend's house in Abbey Wood, south London.
Each body had been cut into seven pieces and the parts put into ten bags.
Laing used a pickaxe and shovel to make the grave in the secluded garden, said Mr Stuart-Moore.
Laing, of Manor Way, East Ham, has denied murdering father and daughter on 23 April last year.
The prosecution alleges Laing killed them both for the sake of stealing a car the family had advertised.
His ‘tool kit’ for the murder was hidden in his guitar case, Mr Stuart-Moore told the jury.
It contained a 12-bore self-loading shotgun, gloves, handcuffs, cutting instruments and black bags, he added.
The trial continues.
Further radiation leak announced
ANOTHER leak of radiation at Sellafield was reported by British Nuclear Fuels yesterday.
The company said filters measuring discharges from a ventilation stack showed an above normal amount of radiation was released.
BNFL said there was no danger to the health of workers or people living nearby.
It is understood samples taken for analysis showed three times more iodine 129 than permitted was released into the atmosphere.
BNFL said the leak happened during the week ending 13 February.
A leak of plutonium at the plant earlier this month led to the incident being raised in the House of Commons.
— PA
The Labour MP Dr Jack Cunningham was touring the complex during the nuclear spillage, but the nuclear company failed to notify him of the incident.
Diner praised for tackling gunman
JOHN WOODCOCK, a Daily Mail reporter, was praised by police yesterday for tackling a shotgun raider single-handed.
He had been in the Little Chef restaurant in Bramley, near Rotherham, south Yorkshire, on Wednesday night, when a man suddenly pulled out a double-  barrelled shotgun.
Mr Woodcock, 47, of Holgate, York, grabbed the weapon with one hand and it went off, blasting a wall with pellets, but he hung on, dragging the raider into the car park outside the restaurant, where he pinned him to the ground until armed police arrived.
BCCI inquiry condemns Bank of England
By David Scott Local Government Editor
GOVERNMENT compensation for victims of the BCCI scandal was virtually ruled out yesterday in spite of a highly critical report by MPs on the role of the Bank of England.
According to the Treasury and Civil Service Select Committee, the Bank of England failed to discharge its supervisory duties before it shut down the Bank of Credit and Commerce International in July, 1991.
The Commons leader, Tony Newton, said that, while the Government would study carefully the committee's report, he did not anticipate the Chancellor's changing his previous conclusion that no extra compensation should be offered beyond that already available by law.
Councils and opposition MPs pledged to put pressure on ministers to reconsider the compensation issue.
Calum Macdonald, the Labour MP for the Western Isles — which lost £24 million as a result of the BCCI affair — said the committee had stated in the clearest and strongest terms that the Bank of England was negligent and had failed in its supervisory duties.
Saying he would be writing again to the Prime Minister on the matter, Mr Macdonald claimed the moral case for compensation was now overwhelming.
In its second report on the BCCI affair, the select committee makes no recommendations on compensation but says it believes the report of the inquiry held by Sir Thomas Bingham demonstrates conclusively that the Bank of England failed to discharge its supervisory duties in respect of BCCI.
The bank had told the MPs in written evidence that it had not failed to carry out these duties.
The committee states bluntly: ‘We disagree.
It is, in our view, impossible to conclude from the Bingham Report that the Bank's role and duty as supervisor was discharged ‘properly and competently’.’
Criticism is also made of the Bank of England's failure to discipline staff.
The committee says the absence of disciplinary action had undermined the future effectiveness of the bank.
It might lead staff to conclude that failure to carry out their responsibilities effectively ‘carries no adverse consequences for them as individuals’.
The Bank of England yesterday rejected the committee's conclusions.
It also said it did not believe there was a case for giving additional compensation to UK depositors beyond the statutory deposit protection scheme.
In its first report, the select committee suggested that compensation should be considered if the Bank of England was shown to have failed to discharge its supervisory duties.
Opposition MPs, including Labour's City spokesman, Alistair Darling, MP for Edinburgh Central, accused the Government of pressing Tory members of the committee into deleting the compensation recommendation.
Mr Darling said depositors were bound to feel bitter at their treatment.
There were also signs of division and recriminations among the committee members.
A Conservative member, Quentin Davies, the MP for Stamford and Spalding, described suggestions of political pressure as pure fantasy and eyewash.
The ‘substantial case’ for compensation was underlined yesterday by the local authority co-ordinating committee set up to represent the interest of councils which lost money.
Its spokesman, Rory Mair, who is also chief executive of Ross and Cromarty District Council, said that if the Government wished to retain any credibility over the matter it had no option but to accept the logical consequences of the select committee report and enter discussions with the local authorities on compensation.
The Western Isles convener, Councillor Donald Macleod, said that the select committee's findings confirmed the long-held opinion of the council and other depositors.
‘In my view, the case for compensation is now overwhelming,’ he added.
He said that the campaign would continue at all levels.
Scientists barking up the right tree
By Bryan Christie
THE LAST thing likely to cross the mind of someone woken by a yapping dog in the middle of the night is the question why do dogs bark when wolves rarely do.
Throttling the yapping beast is likely to be the more ready response but that would show a shocking lack of sympathy for man's best friend.
After all, man may well be to blame for the barking.
A report in New Scientist magazine suggests that dogs bark because they never grow up.
They have been trapped in adolescence ever since being tamed.
That explanation throws some light on a phenomenon which has always puzzled behavioural biologists.
The domestic dog is thought to have evolved from the wolf, yet wolves and other wild dogs bark about as often as they appear at Crufts.
By comparison, a sheepdog has been recorded barking for seven hours non-stop and a cocker spaniel is capable of cramming over 900 yelps into a ten-minute period.
Scientists have analysed barking sounds and have found that they fall somewhere between a puppy's distress call and an aggressive growl — producing a mixed message akin to ‘come here, go away’.
Mark Feinstein, an American researching the problem, writes in New Scientist: ‘Why would an animal spend such an extraordinary amount of energy letting the entire world know it's indecisive?’
The answer is thought to lie in the development of the domestic dog.
A Russian scientist has attempted to mimic that development by starting with wild foxes and breeding the most timid ones.
After 20 generations they were tame and had ‘dog-like’ traits such as upturned tails and floppy ears.
They also started to sound like dogs.
But what does tameness have to do with barking?
The scientists suggest that the domestic dog is an immature version of its wild ancestors.
Wild wolf cubs beg for food from their mothers and also bark but they grow out of such grovelling behaviour.
The domesticated dog, by contrast, is stuck in its juvenile phase, anchored to the fireside rug, reliant on its regular meals, begging for scraps — and barking at the moon.
Decision later in ante-natal injury case
By John Robertson Law Correspondent
THREE appeal judges yesterday reserved their decision in a ‘difficult and sad’ case where the parents of a baby boy lost damages claims over his death from injuries suffered before birth.
After hearing two days of legal argument at the Court of Session on whether relatives could sue for damage caused to a foetus, the judges said they wanted time to prepare a ruling.
Lord McCluskey, sitting with Lords Caplan and Wylie, added: ‘It is a difficult and sad case and it will need careful consideration.’
Audrey Hamilton, 35, of Barnett Crescent, Kirkcaldy, and John Watson, of Simpson Court, Crail, each sued Fife Health Board for £20,000 over the death of their son, David, in 1976.
He had survived for only three days at Craigtoun Maternity Hospital, St Andrews, and the parents alleged negligence by medical staff, claiming that the baby's death had resulted from damage done by forceps before birth.
The health board denied liability and in November, 1991, before any evidence was heard on the issue of negligence, Lord Prosser dismissed the actions.
Under the 1976 Damages (Scotland) Act, relatives have a claim when a person dies from injuries sustained through someone else's negligence.
Lord Prosser decided that ‘person’ did not cover an unborn child.
There had to be a person in life when the injuries were sustained.
‘The words used [in the act]do not cover the situation where injury is sustained by a foetus rather than a person,’ added Lord Prosser.
His decision was appealed and the parents claimed that he had been wrong to interpret the 1976 act in such a way as to exclude any case where a claim was made in respect of a person who was born alive but who died from ante-natal injury.
Yesterday, however, Arthur Hamilton, QC, for the health board, argued that Lord Prosser's judgment was correct and should be upheld.
He said that at the end of the day the appeal court was concerned with the proper interpretation of the act and the issue turned on the words used in it.
The statute referred to relatives having a claim for damages when a person died from injuries sustained because of a negligent act.
Mr Hamilton said that it was accepted by both sides in the case that in law a foetus did not become a person until birth.
When passing the 1976 act, it might have been that no particular attention had been paid to a situation in which injuries were sustained before birth, but parliament had clearly stated that a person had to sustain injuries and die from them before relatives could claim damages.
‘Unless one can say that injuries were sustained by a person in life, the consequence is that the statutory provision is not met,’ said Mr Hamilton.
He added that there had also to be analysis of what was meant by ‘sustained’.
The parents contended that though the injuries were sustained before birth, the child continued to suffer them on birth and up to his death.
Mr Hamilton submitted that there were situations where injuries could continue to be sustained, such as damage to hearing from excessive noise levels over a lengthy period.
However, in the circumstances of this case, the proper interpretation was that the sustaining of the injuries occurred at the point when they were inflicted.
That was before birth when there was no person.
Anti-knife law to be in force by summer
By Chris McLaughlin Political Correspondent
A FAST-TRACK law to clamp down on the carrying of knives in Scotland is to be backed by the Government.
Under legislation to be unveiled next week, it will be an offence carrying a fine of up to £1,000 to carry a bladed or sharp, pointed article in public without good reason.
It will bring the law into line with England and Wales, where the onus is on the knife- carrier to justify possession of an offensive weapon.
Exceptions will include implements connected with work, religion or national dress, such as a sgian dubh.
Folded pocket knives with blades less than three inches long will also be exempt.
The move by the Scottish Office follows widespread and mounting concern over the use of knives in attacks.
More than half of almost 100 recent murders in Strathclyde have involved knives.
Because of a logjam in Government legislation, the bill will be set up through the private member's procedure by the Conservative MP for Ayr, Phil Gallie.
It means that legislation tabled by John McFall, Labour MP for Dumbarton, with support from the Liberal Democrats and Scottish National Party, will fail for lack of parliamentary time.
The Government is hoping cross-party support will ensure a speedy passage for the law.
It is likely to be introduced next Tuesday with a second reading pencilled in for 22 March.
It is hoped that the measure will be on the statute book by summer.
Under present laws, police do not have the power to stop and search on suspicion that a person may be carrying an offensive weapon since knives are not legally defined as such.
The Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, welcomed the proposed change, which he said commanded widespread support and hoped it would ‘help curb the scourge of knife violence which disfigures Scotland’.
A SHOP assistant was threatened by a youth wielding a six-inch knife during a hold-up in at MacLean's in Anniesland Road, Glasgow, yesterday.
A three-figure sum of cash was taken.
A 46-year-old man is to appear at Glasgow Sheriff Court today in connection with an incident in Hope Street yesterday during which a 21-year-old man was stabbed.
Operator reveals Rosyth site for ro-ro ferry plan
By John Smith
AN ENGLISH-based ports authority is poised to begin talks with the Ministry of Defence over buying a large area at Rosyth Dockyard for a combined passenger and freight service to Europe.
The chief executive of Medway Ports, Peter Vincent, said yesterday the area involved centred on the open sea wall used by Royal Fleet Auxiliary tankers, and not the adjacent nuclear submarine refitting facility.
The Scotsman has also established that consultants helping put the finishing touches to a  feasibility study on Rosyth for Medway Ports have also been acting for Scottish Enterprise.
MDS Transmodal of Chester have been involved in part of an SE-financed study of opportunities for roll-on roll-off facilities on the East coast — while at the same time conducting a trawl of potential customers for a Medway base at Rosyth.
A map of the naval dockyard used by the company — bearing the names of Scottish Enterprise and Locate in Scotland, the Government's inward investment arm — includes a key showing the proposed location of a passenger terminal, car park and customs inspection building.
The Labour MP for Falkirk East, Michael Connarty, accused both SE and LiS of ‘abusing their roles by pushing Rosyth at the expense of existing East coast ports, including Grangemouth in my constituency’.
In a letter to Scottish Enterprise, the chief executive of Forth Ports Authority, Hugh Thompson, claimed the London office of Locate in Scotland is marketing potential facilities at Rosyth in preference to facilities available at Forth ports.
After citing one example, he added: ‘Local enterprise companies are marketing Rosyth and showing our potential customers round.’
A letter from MDS Transmodal to a Finnish company, also passed to The Scotsman confirms ‘we are currently working with Scottish Enterprise…to assess the commercial potential for the former naval dockyard at Rosyth, on the Forth.’
It continues: ‘We have a large port operator who is prepared to invest in (and operate) the port, and the development will also attract a substantial grant from the UK government.’
The letter, which names Medway, adds: ‘If you would like to discuss the idea in more detail, we would be very pleased to visit you in Finland with representatives of Scottish Enterprise.’
Mr Vincent said that Medway Ports were interested only in new freight customers, now using English ports, for Rosyth.
‘We have been fairly firm with those who see it as a stick to beat the FPA or Dundee with — that is not our intention.’
He added that if Medway's almost completed study on Rosyth dockyard were favourable, it was planned to have the combined passenger/freight roll-on roll-off facility in place by Spring 1994.
Last night a spokesman for Scottish Enterprise denied there was any question of either its or LiS's abusing power and insisted that they were not actively marketing Rosyth and it had been the market that has sought out the opportunities.
Decision delayed, Page 8
Acquittal reverses downward spiral
Gillian Harris reports on the fall from grace of the Countess of Cassillis from aristocrat by marriage to prostitute and drug addict
DAWN KENNEDY bowed her head and wept as she left the dock of Court 18 at the Old Bailey yesterday.
Her initial surge of relief at being acquitted on all three charges of perverting the course of justice had given way to sheer exhaustion.
Few people watching the tearful, scruffily-dressed woman burst through the court doors to freedom would have recognised her as a countess.
Only a black quilted hairband pushing back her blonde hair hinted at an aristocratic connection.
The strains of a two-week court ordeal showed in her face and in her shaking hands but when she spoke of her determination to fight on her voice was steady.
In the years since her acrimonious divorce from the Earl of Cassillis, the Countess, 32, has suffered a much-publicised fall from grace.
She now lives in a flat on the 19th floor of a tower block in London's east end, a self-confessed prostitute and drug addict.
American-born Dawn Leslie Anne Keen married Lord Archibald Angus Charles Kennedy, Earl of Cassillis and heir of the seventh Marquess of Ailsa, when she was 19.
Cassillis House above the River Doon near Maybole in Ayrshire became the family home.
It has been owned by the Kennedy family since 1373.
The couple had two children, Lady Rosemary, now 13, and Lady Alicia-Jane, now 11.
When the marriage disintegrated, amid allegations in the tabloid press that Lady Kennedy was having an affair with a milkman, divorce proceedings were long and bitter.
Eventually, in January 1989, she was awarded custody of their daughters and the earl was granted access.
Several months later, Ms Kennedy was banned from driving after pleading guilty to a drink-drive charge.
At her next court appearance in the Court of Session in July 1989, Ms Kennedy conducted her own case, urging the judge to stop her former husband sending their children to Oxenfoord Castle School in Midlothian while both parents were living in London.
When Ms Kennedy took a job as a barmaid in London, stories began circulating about her madcap lifestyle.
Her former in-laws, the Marquess and Marchioness of Ailsa, concerned about their grandchildren, won a court order to keep the girls in their temporary care.
There followed allegations that Ms Kennedy became addicted to heroin while visiting New Zealand and then worked as a prostitute in Australia, where her father David Keen lives, to feed her drug habit.
She has not seen her children for two years.
Now one of her priorities is to get to know them again.
‘I miss them very much,’ she said.
Few people watching the tearful, scruffily dressed woman burst through the court doors to freedom would have recognised her as a countess.
Only a black quilted hairband pushing back her blonde hair hinted at an aristocratic connection.
Relief: Dawn Kennedy after her acquittal, with her boyfriend, Joseph ‘Chappie’ Durandelle
Family evicted as last-minute plea turned down
By James Rougvie
WITH TEARS and bitter accusations of government insensitivity, an Angus family were yesterday thrown out of their home to make way for a new road.
A last-minute plea to the Scottish Office by the North Tayside MP, Bill Walker, for a few more days' grace to allow the Diplexcito family to ‘depart with dignity’ from their home of 17 years fell on deaf ears.
For Alistair Diplexcito and his family, the arrival of sheriff officers yesterday marked the end of a three-year battle with the Scottish Office.
Their cottage at Spittalburn, midway between Forfar and Dundee, stands squarely in the path of a new section of dual carriageway and although the Scottish Office held up work on the section for a year, it was decided further delays could cost more than £100,000 a week.
On Tuesday evening, the family heard that a housing association had struck a deal with a local farmer to buy a house which will be refurbished, extended and rented to the family, but a last minute call yesterday morning to the Scottish Office for more time to allow the family to move was turned down.
At 10:58am, two minutes before the deadline set by the Scottish Office, which bought the house from Tayside Regional Council under compulsory purchase to clear the way for the road, sheriff officers arrived to execute the eviction warrant.
Mr Walker, who had vowed he would have to be evicted with the family, said: ‘We had hoped for a stay of execution to allow the family to depart with dignity, but the Scottish Office handled the request in the same way as they have handled the whole affair — with massive insensitivity.
I never believed as a Tory MP to be in a situation where I would condemn the actions of a Tory Government in a matter of this kind.’
As the sheriff officers supervised the house clearance, construction officials measured the family pigeon lofts and dog runs for removal and the ferrets were packed away under the eyes of an animal welfare officer.
Mr Diplexcito's wife June and three daughters Debbie, 14, Diane, 12, and Theresa, 10, wept.
Mr Diplexcito, who has fought for three years to get a suitable house for his family — he has been offered several by the district and regional authorities — said: ‘My wife and daughters will be staying with relatives, but I only have the car as a roof over my head.
‘I am very bitter about the whole affair.
The house was identified and purchased, and I don't see any reason why we couldn't have a stay of two or three days or a week to get time to move things properly.’
Making way: the family's home surrounded by roadworks
Six Grammy awards music to Eric Clapton's ears
ERIC Clapton, the British rock legend once ignored by the Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences, swept the Grammy Awards last night with a bittersweet song dedicated to his dead son.
Clapton, 47, won six Grammys, including the music industry's three major awards — Record of the Year, Album of the Year and Song of the Year.
The album, Unplugged, which contains the song, Tears in Heaven, was almost not released, Clapton said.
‘I was convinced that this wasn't worth releasing,’ he said after accepting the Album of the Year award.
‘I finally agreed to it coming out in a limited edition.
And then it sold a few, and a few more, and I thought ‘Well why not give it a try?’…and it blows my mind.’
The album has sold five million copies.
Record of the Year and Song of the Year were awarded for Tears in Heaven, which Clapton wrote as a tribute to his young son, Conor, who died two years ago when he fell out of a window of the singer's 53rd-floor Manhattan apartment.
Gary Shandling, host of the ceremony in Los Angeles, warned the audience after Clapton had picked up the Best Album Grammy: ‘If you are up in any other categories against Eric Clapton, I would go home now.’
It was good advice.
The final and most important award of the night, Best Record, went to Clapton.
The two surprises of the night were the soundtrack from the Walt Disney animated movie, Beauty and the Beast and the country music sensation, Billy Ray Cyrus, whose Achy Breaky Heart caused a dance craze.
Cyrus, nominated in four major categories, including Best New Artist, came away empty handed, while Beauty took four minor awards.
Other awards went to Arrested Development, a five-man, two-woman rap group; k d lang; Red Hot Chili Peppers; Boyz II Men; Vince Gill; U2; Daniel Lanois and Brian Eno; Linda Ronstadt; the late Stevie Ray Vaughan and his band Double Trouble; and the Chieftains.
Rewarding work: Eric Clapton with his Grammy awards
DUNNOTTAR CASTLE
Man found dead at foot of cliffs
THE BODY of a man was recovered by a Royal Air Force helicopter yesterday from the foot of the cliffs at Dunnottar Castle, near Stonehaven.
The body was sighted as police and coastguards were searching the coastline for a man, understood to come from Edinburgh, who had been reported missing from his home earlier this week.
The name of the dead man is being withheld by police until relatives have been informed.
ERSKINE
Threat to homes from gas escape
METHANE gas escaping from a refuse site in Renfrewshire could threaten hundreds of homes, Renfrew District Council was told yesterday.
Strathclyde University consultants say urgent action is needed to prevent seepage to housing estates lying to the west and north west of the site at East Craigend, Erskine.
The council has agreed to order the £55,000 excavation of a trench to form a barrier and protect residents.
ABERDEEN
Oil worker killed in accident named
THE OIL worker who died in an accident involving a fork lift truck at Dolphin Engineering on Kirkhill industrial estate, Aberdeen, was named yesterday as Martin Reid, 18, of Newmachar.
ABERDEEN
Buyout firm wins first contract
BRITISH International Helicopters yesterday announced the company had secured a North Sea contract with Ranger Oil — the first to be awarded to the company since last month's management buyout.
The contract is for the supply of a Super Puma, based at Aberdeen, in connection with an oil exploration programme due to start in May.
The former Maxwell company was taken over by the management in a £32.5 million deal, agreed with the administrators, Arthur Andersen.
BIH has a fleet of 21 helicopters with bases in Aberdeen, Sumburgh, Humberside, Beccles and Penzance.
Man jailed for stealing from neighbours
A FAMILY returned home from a holiday weekend last April to find their home ransacked and goods valued over £5,600 stolen.
Inverness Sheriff Court was told yesterday that one of the culprits, 29-year-old Joseph Shields, was their neighbour.
Shields, of Carnac Crescent, Inverness, was said to have felt so guilty that he gave himself up to police after selling some of the haul to pay for drink.
He then helped police recover about half the stolen items.
However, jailing Shields for three months, Sheriff William Fulton told him: ‘It is not so much a case of stealing from this house as plundering it, ransacking it and leaving it in an awful mess.
‘Housebreaking on this scale merits nothing else than a custodial sentence.
Three months is the maximum I can impose as you have never been in jail before, but if I could give you more, I would without hesitation.’
Shields's alleged accomplices have not yet been dealt with.
GLASGOW
Police assured on crime wardens
POLICE union fears over the role of the proposed 30-strong city crime prevention wardens for Glasgow city centre have been allayed after talks yesterday with the Strathclyde Chief Constable, Leslie Sharp.
Tom Rowatt, secretary elect of Strathclyde Police Federation, said that Mr Sharp had given assurances that the role of the city wardens would not cut across traditional police duties.
Federation officials had been concerned that the scheme, part of the proposed £1 million Citywatch crime prevention campaign for the city, would cut across traditional police duties and set a precedent for a privatised police force.
Around 30 street surveillance cameras will be installed in the heart of the city as part of the Citywatch project, which aims to deter and detect violence, vandalism and theft.
Court told of suicide threat by distraught husband
By Frank Urquhart
A DISTRAUGHT oil worker wrapped a cartridge belt around his waist and placed the barrels of a loaded shotgun in his mouth during a three-day police siege at a remote country cottage.
Brian Say repeatedly threatened to take his own life because his wife had left him, Aberdeen Sheriff Court was told yesterday.
His solicitor, Mike Allan, told Sheriff Alexander Jessop that Say had been completely devastated when he arrived home to find a note from his wife, telling him their marriage was over.
‘It completely tripped him over the edge,’ said Mr Allan.
‘He felt his whole world had collapsed and there was no point in carrying on.’
Say, 44, of Craigmuir Croft, Ythanbank, near Ellon, appeared from custody and admitted conducting himself in a disorderly manner at his home while  in possession of a loaded shotgun between 15 and 17 February, repeatedly threatening to shoot himself and committing a breach of the peace.
Sheriff Jessop deferred sentence for background reports until 18 March and released Say on bail.
He said it was a case where Say needed help rather than punishment.
The depute procurator-fiscal, Sandra McRobert, told the court that the major police operation began after Say phoned a relative and a neighbour, telling them his wife had left him and that he intended to commit suicide.
Police officers called at his home but were forced to withdraw when Say picked up a shotgun and placed the barrels in his mouth.
He was later seen with a cartridge belt, filled with cartridges, around his waist and with the barrels of the gun close to his head.
Mrs McRobert said that Say continued to threaten to take his own life, blaming his wife's decision to leave him for his predicament.
He made it clear he had no intention of harming anyone else.
She said the siege ended after 43 hours of negotiations when Say left his home without the shotgun and was arrested.
Mr Allan told the court Say had spent a normal and happy weekend with his wife before the incident and had been given no indication she was leaving him.
He now accepted his marriage was over.
He had made considerable progress during his week in Aberdeen's Royal Cornhill Hospital and was anxious to get back to his job and re-establish his life.
Election cancelled after ballot theft
By Frank Urquhart
THE Students' Representative Council at Aberdeen University was yesterday forced to cancel elections for two senior officials after ballot papers were stolen from one of the main polling places.
About 300 ballot papers and an official stamp were stolen from an unlocked cloakroom at the Johnston Hall while the polling place was unmanned.
The SRC immediately cancelled the elections for a president and a vote which would confirm the appointment of the only candidate for senior vice-president and ordered an investigation.
Stephen Reid, SRC president, condemned the theft and said: ‘We have no idea who it was, how many were involved, and what happened.
It is very unlikely we will ever get to the bottom of it.’
A total of 3,000 ballot papers had been distributed to ten polling places throughout the campus.
The official stamp, he said, was used to validate the voting papers and was also used to stamp student identity cards to prevent students voting more than once.
The SRC is to seek legal advice before deciding how to proceed with an election.
Mr Reid said: ‘We will also be reviewing our procedures and make sure they are improved before we launch into another election.’
The candidates for president were Kate Jones, the present SRC secretary, and John Stewart, a former council member.
Also on the ballot paper was the one candidate, Lucy Courtney, for the post of senior vice-president.
Women to the fore on trusts
By Bryan Christie, Health Correspondent
WOMEN feature strongly in the appointments to the 15 self-governing hospital trusts which will start operating in Scotland from April.
Just under half of the places on trust boards have gone to women — a development which was welcomed yesterday by the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang.
‘I am particularly pleased at the number of able women who offered themselves for appointment,’ he said.
‘Forty-four per cent of the appointees are women — a very high figure for such posts — and their success should encourage even more to come forward for future appointments.’
Mr Lang said he was encouraged by the interest in helping to run trusts which had allowed the base of selection to be broadened.
Trust board members come from a variety of backgrounds and include a former train driver, a master baker, local health council members, former health service employees, housewives, trades unionists, businessmen, accountants and solicitors.
Mr Lang was speaking after announcing the membership of the last of the 15 boards — the Yorkhill trust in Glasgow.
It is to be chaired by Mrs Joan Cameron, whose appointment was announced previously.
The other members are Gwendoline Garner, Sally Kuenssberg, Margaret Hall, Ronald Cleland and Dr John Davidson.
Shetland one-way route proposed for tankers
By Joy Copley Parliamentary Correspondent
OIL TANKERS may have to follow a one-way system where the tanker, Braer, went out of control off Shetland, under plans drawn up by the Department of Transport.
The proposal is one of a number of voluntary interim measures to protect the UK coast line from accidental pollution from laden tankers which the Government has submitted to the International Maritime Organisation.
The voluntary code, which the industry has agreed to introduce by mid-March, would also extend the existing areas to be avoided around Shetland and impose a new area on the east coast and in the approaches to Lerwick.
Earlier this month, an agreement was reached in principle between the Government and representatives of international oil companies and tanker operators on a voluntary scheme under which tankers would avoid a number of sensitive areas.
The details of the restrictions were announced yesterday and included the traffic  separation scheme around Fair Isle.
West-bound traffic will be routed north of Fair Isle and east-bound traffic south of Fair Isle.
Captain George Sutherland, director of marine operations for Shetland Island Council, said: ‘The proposals for traffic separation should go a long way to providing protection for the adjacent coastline and we are content with the measures.’
The other recommendations on navigation include restrictions on laden tankers in the Pentland Firth not bound to or from Flotta and Scapa Flow.
No laden tanker over 10,000 gross tonnes should pass through the Minch except due to stress of weather.
Laden tankers should avoid the area between Bass Rock and the coast in the Firth of Forth.
John MacGregor, the Secretary of State for Transport, said that the code would stress the importance of testing essential systems and of advising coastal states if a vessel is experiencing difficulties which could lead to pollution.
Sheep grazing on oil-contaminated grass in Shetland have eaten as much grass as normal, with most of the oil passing through them undigested, according to the latest test results.
Sheep bought by the Scottish Office for testing will be slaughtered in two weeks after having eaten the contaminated vegetation for around eight weeks, to give a clearer picture of the likelihood of contamination passing further through the food chain.
ASHGILL
Raider holds up sub-post office
A MASKED armed raider held up a sub-post office in Main Street, Ashgill, Lanarkshire, yesterday with a wooden baton.
He threatened a sub-postmistress, Margaret Glen, and her assistant, Marion Gardiner, and forced them to hand over £1,000 in takings.
All-out strike looms over university sacking row
By Frank Urquhart
UNIVERSITY and union officials clashed in a bitter war of words yesterday as lecturers in Aberdeen staged a one-day strike in protest against the imminent possible dismissal of a senior textiles lecturer, Sheena Falconer.
Nineteen members of the University Lecturers Association picketed the School of Food and Consumer Studies at Robert Gordon University, where Mrs Falconer has been subjected to a redundancy dilemma.
Two union members who had voted against the industrial action, reported for work.
The dispute was likely to escalate last night after the principal, Dr David Kennedy, accused the union of operating hidden agenda and Jack Dale, lecturers' union leader, accused the principal of irresponsible scaremongering.
Mr Dale, further and higher education secretary of the Educational Institute of Scotland, of which the ULA is part, declared: ‘The principal has now seen fit to circulate our members with three publications, impugning my personal conduct and integrity, falsely representing the views of our association and grossly exaggerating the consequences of our action.
‘I appeal to Dr Kennedy to begin open-minded consultations which he should have initiated last December.’
Dr Kennedy, however, countered by accusing the union of placing the staff under individual pressure to support the strike call.
He claimed: ‘It concerns us that they have been enticed to take this step.’
Particularly as by taking it they have broken the conditions of their own contracts of service.’
The union, he alleged, had made a clear threat to close down the school.
That, said the principal, indicated ‘aims beyond the settlement of this particular dispute’.
Dr Kennedy added: ‘We consider that today's industrial action is unnecessary as a number of reasonable and generous offers have been made to the individual at the centre of this case.’
The principal, who has already forecast that the dispute could place the future of the school and 50 jobs in jeopardy, said he was anxious to have talks with the strikers ‘to explore what they hope to gain through possible further strike action and for how long they are likely to continue.’
He added: ‘The results of these discussions will dictate what further actions the university management may have to take to safeguard the studies and the future careers of 450 affected students.’
Mrs Falconer has been told that her post as senior lecturer can no longer be funded by the new university.
She has, however, been informed that she could remain on the RGU staff if she accepted a demotion to ordinary lecturer — the post held by her sister, Mrs Barbara Diack, who, in turn, would lose her job.
The ULA is to ballot its entire membership at RGU next week on further action.
The EIS-ULA executive has agreed to authorise an all-out strike in the school if necessary.
Other unions are also being asked to black all teaching posts at RGU.
DEREK IRONSIDE Jobs on the line: sisters Barbara Diack, left, and Sheena Falconer on the yesterday's picket of Robert Gordon University's Kepplestone complex in Aberdeen.
Man who lured victim to torture is jailed
A MAN was jailed for six years at the High Court in Glasgow yesterday for his part in attempting to murder a man after luring him into a night of torture.
David McPherson had deceived John O'Donnell, 25, into going to Argyll with him then delivered him into the hands of several other men.
Mr O'Donnell was then repeatedly beaten, burned with a cigarette, and had a car driven over his legs before the men attempted to hang him at an Argyll quarry, the court heard.
McPherson, of Halkett Crescent, Rosshead, Alexandria, denied taking part in attempting to murder Mr O'Donnell on February 25 last, lodging a special defence of incrimination naming six men.
A jury took an hour and a half to find McPherson guilty by a majority verdict.
Sentencing McPherson, the judge, Lord Cameron, said he accepted that McPherson had been in some part less responsible for the violence to Mr O'Donnell that evening, but added: ‘Nevertheless you played a full part in luring him into the hands of those who were responsible for repeated acts of a bizarre and terrible character upon him.’
During the trial Mr O'Donnell told how he had agreed to go with McPherson, who had driven him to a lay-by at the Rest and Be Thankful on the A83 road, where men he recognised had been waiting in a van.
Some of the men had got into the car and he had been accused of ‘grassing’.
He had been beaten, threatened with knee-capping, burned on the neck with a cigarette and invited to jump from the open door of the speeding vehicle during the journey to the quarry at Furnace on Loch Fyne.
There, he had been dragged from the car in the pitch dark, and held down as a man drove the vehicle over his legs and back again.
Mr O'Donnell said McPherson had got a rope out of the car boot and that had been attached to a strap round his neck.
He had managed to dislodge the noose from his neck and save himself by jumping into the freezing water below.
McPherson told the court he had been forced to lure Mr O'Donnell to the men.
He said the men had threatened his life, and even as he drove the victim to the beauty spot where the gang waited, one had been hiding in the boot of his car with a shotgun.
He also claimed he had taken no part in the actual assaults on the victim.
Civilian training plan for services
By Alan Dron
FUTURE Royal Air Force and Royal Navy pilots will receive their initial flying training not from their services but from civilians, under the latest government attempts to cut costs.
Firms in the defence support field have been briefed by the Ministry of Defence that up to £1.2 billion of contracts for jobs currently run by the armed forces will be offered to civilian firms from April.
In the latest award, the MoD has given a five-year contract (possibly doubled if options are exercised), worth up to £20 million to Hunting Aircraft to conduct initial flying training at RAF Topcliffe, in north Yorkshire.
Hunting's present business is based around a variety of aircraft maintenance and support services.
The new Joint Elementary Flying Training Squadron at Topcliffe will train up to 60 RAF and RN trainees at any one time, with Hunting buying 20 Cumbria-built Slingsby Firefly light training aircraft for the task.
Students who pass that initial stage will pass on to RAF or RN units for advanced training.
Company staff will begin moving into Topcliffe in April, assuming full responsibility for the operation from July.
Estimates of the amount of money saved by the taxpayer over the five-year period vary widely.
Region opts to convert sewage into fertiliser
By Alan Forbes
STRATHCLYDE has rejected building six incinerators to dispose of the 1.8 million tonnes a year of wet sludge dumped in the Firth of Clyde.
The sludge from the Glasgow conurbation will be used instead for land reclamation and as fertiliser.
The Strathclyde decision, predicted by The Scotsman last October, sidesteps a potentially bitter confrontation with local communities and was welcomed yesterday by the environmental group Friends of the Earth.
Kevin Dunion, FoE's Scottish director, said he was delighted that Strathclyde had accepted that it could win no exemption from the European directive that bans sea dumping from the start of 1999.
He added: ‘The region has looked at what we argued for: the uses to which sludge could be put.
I am sure Strathclyde's decision will embarrass Lothian, which is choosing incinerators which create toxic ash and contribute to greenhouse emissions.’
Strathclyde believes it could developed environmentally safe sea dumping.
The method is cheap, at £1 per wet tonne, and after almost a century of dumping, only slightly elevated levels of chlorines have been detected.
Incinerating sludge costs £9 a tonne and land disposal £3 a tonne.
The choice of land disposal marks a change of heart for Strathclyde's sewerage director, Prof Tom Anderson.
Almost a year ago he told an environmental conference in Glasgow that land equal to half the area of Glasgow would be needed to dispose of the region's sludge.
He said yesterday that he had changed his mind after the region's consultants, Watson Hawksley and Environmental Management, produced a study which showed that land disposal was viable.
The site of a former steelworks near Blantyre in Lanarkshire has already been earmarked for land reclamation using sludge.
Ravenscraig may follow soon after.
Prof Anderson said: ‘We believe that initially about 90 per cent of sewage will be used for landfill and the rest for fertiliser, but these figures will be reversed as more farmers and forestry organisations make use of sludge.’
Hospital accused by father over son's death
A MAN died in hospital a week after taken a knock on the head while playing football, a fatal accident inquiry heard yesterday.
A leading surgeon told the inquiry that Martin Robinson, 25, could have been saved if he had been rushed to a neurosurgical hospital after complaining of severe headaches.
Instead, his GP had sent him to Crosshouse Hospital near Kilmarnock, where he died from a colloid cyst in the brain.
Sheriff Robert Hay declared a formal verdict at Kilmarnock Sheriff Court when he said that Mr Robinson suffered brain stem death at hospital caused by the cyst.
His father, Robert Robinson, 58, of Sidney Street, Saltcoats, claimed that an injection given to his son in hospital by a senior doctor killed him and if he had been sent to the neurosurgery unit at the Southern General in Glasgow he would have still been alive.
He told how, after his condition deteriorated badly, his son had been taken into the intensive care unit where he had been put on a life support machine.
It had been switched off after two senior doctors had twice run tests on the patient before declaring him dead.
His fiancee, Julie Craig, 26, who lived with him at 34 Churchill Drive, Ardrossan, said that her boyfriend had gone wild in hospital when she visited him.
When given the injection, he had calmed down.
Jennifer Briggs, a GP at Saltcoats, said that Mr Robinson had hurt his head playing football a week before she had examined him.
She had sent him in an ambulance to Crosshouse Hospital.
David O'Neill, a consultant physician, said that Mr Robinson had been in an agitated and delirious state.
He had given the patient an intravenous injection of diazepam to calm him down.
It had the effect of stabilising the brain but there had been a risk that it would suppress functions such as respiration.
Philip Barlow, consultant neurosurgeon at the Southern General, said that the cyst was not inevitably fatal.
It could have been removed.
He doubted that the injection had made a significant difference in the patient's condition.
It was probably the straw that broke the camel's back.
A solicitor for the Robinson family said that the staff at the hospital should have made a call to the Southern General.
Then he may have survived.
But a solicitor for Ayrshire and Arran Health Board told the inquiry that in the balance of probabilities it would have been too late.
Flood damage compensation is increased
THE GOVERNMENT has bowed to pressure from farmers to increase compensation for damage caused by the recent flooding of the Rivers Tay and Spey.
Sir Hector Monro announced yesterday that farmers in Less Favoured Areas would be paid 75 per cent of the cost of repairing flood defences damaged by the storms.
Farmers outwith those areas will receive 60 per cent of costs.
Previously the Government was prepared to pay only 50 per cent in Less Favoured Areas and 40 per cent outwith them.
Seven lose jobs at law firm
By Gary Duncan
A PROMINENT law firm has made seven staff redundant in the latest of a wave of job cuts sweeping the legal profession.
Pagan Osborne Grace & Calders, Fife's biggest firm of solicitors, has paid off the staff, including four part-timers, because of the impact of the recession on its conveyancing work combined with the introduction of new technology.
Neil Anderson, a partner in the firm, said it had made the cuts only with great reluctance and after great consideration.
‘The recession is going on and on,’ Mr Anderson said, ‘particularly in the housing market.’
Pagan Osborne Grace & Calders is the latest in a series forced to make staff redundant as the recession continues to take its toll on solicitors' business, particularly conveyancing and commercial work.
Last month the Law Society of Scotland made six staff redundant and yesterday its secretary, Ken Pritchard, said that it was concerned about the impact of the economic slump on the profession.
Mr Pritchard expressed particular concern about the likely plight of hundreds of legal graduates about to complete the diploma they require to go into practice.
About 480 newly qualified lawyers are expected to be awarded the diploma this year.
‘This year there are a lot of students who have not yet got training places — significantly more than at a similar time in previous years,’ Mr Pritchard said, adding that the Law Society was considering various ways of helping those unable to find a training places with a law firm.
£3m St Andrews golf course plan
PROPOSALS for a £3 million golf course on the western outskirts of St Andrews have been announced.
An outline application for the development of the course centred on farmland around the former Craigtoun Hospital has been lodged with North East Fife District Council.
Behind the project is HSI, the management company of the St Andrews Old Course Hotel.
The course is to be designed by the five times winner of the Open Championship, Peter Thomson.
The company bought the former geriatric hospital from Fife Health Board last December as part of a plan to develop a world-class golf facility on around 300 acres of surrounding land.
It is intended to restore the former baronial mansion to its original internal splendour as a clubhouse for the proposed 18-hole golf course.
The construction of the course is the first stage in the £5.18 million project.
It is to be developed on land at Lumbo Farm, adjacent to the former hospital.
Jonathan Thornton, managing director of HSI, said yesterday: ‘It will clearly be a very different course to the others in St Andrews.
It will be a parkland course and we believe it will enhance the variety of golf experiences available at St Andrews.’
Mr Thornton said the development has the backing of the Royal and Ancient Golf Club.
Discussions have also been held with St Andrews Links Trust.
If outline permission for the course is given, detailed plans will follow in the hope that work can get under way this summer.
Mr Thornton said: ‘Our aim is to have something for the golfing world to see in July 1995 when the Open Championship is staged at St Andrews.’
EDINBURGH
Dangerous laser unit stolen
A SCIENTIFIC laser unit has been stolen from Telford College in Edinburgh and police have given warning the equipment could be dangerous if mishandled.
The unit, made by Griffin, is oblong, measures 1ft 2in by 2in by 2in and has an orange and white casing.
It was taken on Wednesday and police have appealed to anyone who knows of its whereabouts to come forward.
Royal Bank staff agree pay deal
STAFF at the Royal Bank of Scotland yesterday secured a pay deal which included a top-up for the lowest paid.
The settlement will affect 20,000 staff and will mean a 2.51 per cent rise for the low paid.
The Banking Insurance and Finance Union negotiated 1.8 per cent on salaries for clerical staff plus an underpinning £150 per annum for the lowest paid.
Managerial staff will get 3.5 per cent, plus a bonus of up to 10 per cent depending on performance.
Sandy Boyle, BIFU's deputy general secretary (Scotland) said: ‘This is a significant breakthrough in that the bank have recognised the need for underpinning the pay of their lowest-paid staff.
‘The settlement is the result of two days intensive negotiations and we believe it is the best obtainable in the Royal Bank in the present climate.’
FIFE
Bunker museum hopes dashed
HOPES of converting an unused 23,000 sq ft former civil defence underground bunker complex in Fife into a Scottish military museum have been dashed.
Deborah Pender, the head of a distribution company, lodged one of several bids for the complex to save it as a major tourist attraction.
A spokesman for the Scottish Home and Health Department confirmed that the facility had been sold to the highest bidder, but declined to reveal the purchase price.
Relief as Ayr plant is spared from closure
By Denny Macgee and Eric McKenzie
THE OBVIOUS delight on the faces of Digital's Ayrshire workforce at the news that their jobs had been secured was tempered yesterday by the knowledge that their good fortune meant dismay for their fellow workers in Galway.
Many simply went in and out of the factory without showing any emotion at all, relieved that weeks of uncertainty had at last come to an end.
Others  smiled , or gave the thumbs-up sign as they drove away.
A few were willing to speak.
Sadie Murray, of Irvine, who has worked at Digital for more than five years, said: ‘It's been a great worry over the last few weeks.
I'm just relieved.
Most of my workmates are very happy but it's a pity about the plant closing in Galway.’
Local politicians greeted the news with the same mixture of relief and delight for the local workforce and concern for those in Galway.
Provost Gibson McDonald, of Kyle and Carrick District Council, said he was very pleased that Digital was to remain at Ayr.
However, they were deeply sorry for the people of Galway.
‘We appreciate just what a disaster this decision must be for them…
We have been living on the edge for a number of weeks waiting for this decision to be made known.’
The district council had offered to go to Boston to discuss the situation with Digital executives but they had been told there was little they could do.
Digital, he said, was the second largest employer in the area after British Aerospace, and on average, provided the highest paid jobs.
The loss of the plant would have been a major blow to the local economy.
The Digital decision comes on top of recent job announcements in the area.
Provost McDonald said last year BAe had moved the headquarters of its regional jet operation to Prestwick.
Now Digital had effectively made Ayr its main European manufacturing unit.
The local Labour MP, George Foulkes, whose constituency of Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley contains the Digital plant, said: ‘This is good news for the Ayr workforce and I congratulate the management there and the Scottish Office for the work they did to achieve this successful outcome.
‘However, I have every sympathy for the people of Galway.’
Court told of chaos caused by hacker
A COMPUTER hacker caused ‘considerable disruption’ after keying into a vital database at one of Britain's newspapers which held the FTSE 100 share index, a court heard yesterday.
Paul Bedworth, 19, an Edinburgh University student, was said to have used a £200 micro computer at his home in Ilkley, West Yorkshire, to dial up the Financial Times network and introduce a rogue programme to the high-technology system, Southwark Crown Court was told.
In the process he allegedly deleted an important file, landed the organisation with a multi-thousand pound bill and forced computer managers to take a crucial system out of service while the damage was repaired.
Tony Johnson, the Financial Times head of computers, said he had discovered the electronic intrusion in May 1991.
Bedworth was a schoolboy at the time.
Mr Johnson had found that the system, which held highly important statistics including the FTSE 100 share index, and was essential to the paper's daily production, had been tampered with.
A continual dialling programme which scanned computer networks had been introduced.
‘There was an outgoing call dialling every second — there were thousands of calls made,’ he said.
In addition a password file had been deleted.
Mr Johnson told the court it landed the Financial Times with a phone bill of £705.
But the total cost to the FT had been much higher — £24,871.
‘We had to take out the affected computer and rent another.
It caused considerable disruption,’ he said.
Ian Macdonald, QC, defending, asked Mr Johnson: ‘It is probably easier to get into Buckingham Palace than into the Financial Times.
There is a very high level of security at the physical building.
You need special cards to get in even if you are a visitor but so far as the computer is concerned that did not have the same security?’
Mr Johnson replied: ‘It had a level of security where people could access only to deliver information to the computer.’
Mr Macdonald then suggested: ‘The physical security simply was not matched (by the computer)?’
Mr Johnson disagreed.
Bedworth, now studying artificial intelligence at Edinburgh University, denies three conspiracy charges under the Computer Misuse Act 1990 alleging unauthorised modification of computer information, securing unauthorised access to computer information and obtaining telegraphic services unlawfully.
The Crown has claimed that by the time he was arrested in the summer of 1991 his alleged computer forays had breached security surrounding a number of systems including one at EC headquarters, another at a world famous centre for cancer research and treatment and others at various universities.
James Richardson, prosecuting, said Bedworth had caused chaos on a vast scale and worried the experts.
The trial continues.
Pollution agency to go ahead as planned
By Auslan Cramb Environment Correspondent
THE Government has ruled out any major changes in its controversial plans for a pollution agency for Scotland.
Scottish Office officials said yesterday that a Scottish Environmental Protection Agency (SEPA) could be operational by 1996, although its creation has been opposed by 40 local authorities and six of the seven river purification boards.
During the consultation period, the Government received 82 favourable responses on SEPA, including ten from environment groups, 61 against and 22 which were neutral.
Numerous calls for increased powers for the independent agency will not be taken up.
The Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, in reply to a Commons question, acknowledged that concerns had been expressed about the advisory committee structure originally proposed.
As a result, further work would be done on the issue before legislation was introduced.
He said it should be possible to provide delegation of responsibility to regional staff, without prejudicing overall control.
River boards had expressed concern that their powers would be centralised.
Forth River Purification Board reacted positively yesterday to the reconsideration of the regional role.
The Scottish River Purification Boards' Association suggested there should be a main board and area or regional boards in the agency.
After the Tay floods, calls were made for SEPA to be given responsibility for flood prevention schemes — at present a discretionary duty of regional councils.
Other demands included the provision of powers to prosecute, in an attempt to increase the number and severity of convictions of polluters in Scotland.
Both calls have been ruled inappropriate to the regulatory agency.
SEPA is intended to implement the requirements of the 1990 Environmental Protection Act and will assume responsibility for pollution of water, land and air — now the duties of river boards, local authorities and Her Majesty's Industrial Pollution Inspectorate.
The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities remains opposed to removal of its powers.
Its president, Charles Gray, said there was no justification for removing regulatory functions from district and island councils which were  committed to tightening-up the control regime.
Funding for ex-service job search halted
By Graeme Wilson
FUNDING for an innovative scheme to help ex-servicemen find jobs in the civilian world will be withdrawn next month, it was revealed yesterday.
Deeside Training Enterprise was given £100,000 by Grampian Enterprise in 1991 to show ex-servicemen and women how best to sell their skills to civilian employers.
Over the last year it has dealt with enquiries from about 450 former service personnel.
On the day on which 6,500 redundancy notices were delivered to army personnel, Grampian Enterprise confirmed it would not be renewing the grant when the 18-month contract runs out in March.
Doug Wilkie, managing director of the Aboyne-based Deeside Training Enterprise, acknowledged he was disappointed that the grant would not be renewed.
Mr Wilkie, who worked in the Royal Army Educational Corps for 17 years, said: ‘In some ways I can understand what Grampian Enterprise is doing because these days everything seems to be down to numbers.
‘But we were good at putting round pegs into round holes and putting ex-service personnel in touch with companies.
‘Quite a few employers are biased against ex-service people because they have misconceptions that they are either robots who only take orders, or that they will run around handing orders out.
‘Some were even intimidated by the idea of interviewing a former sergeant-major because they seemed to think they were all Windsor Davies figures.’
He said that his company, which also provides needs-analysis for companies, taught ex-service personnel skills such as not using military terms in their curricula vitarum and interviews.
Grampian Enterprise defended the decision not to renew funding, insisting the help and advice on offer to ex-servicemen would not be undermined.
Bruce Armitage, Grampian Enterprise's director of training, stressed that the £100,000 grant had been designed to set up a framework in which other agencies could work.
He said: ‘I do not regard the non-renewal as representing any reduction in our commitment to ex-servicemen.
‘We have received a lot of information from this contract but we are looking now at how we can make the best input possible.
‘We do not want to just duplicate the work of other organisations, such as the Regular Forces Employment Agency, which has started to operate in the area.’
In spite of those reassurances the end of the contract was still greeted with sadness by the army in Scotland.
A spokesman for Army HQ, Scotland said: ‘We are sorry that funding has been withdrawn, as it was a facility which was successful for soldiers.’
James Bulger fund planned
A JAMES Bulger Memorial Appeal will be opened today by the mayor of Knowsley.
The fund is expected to be used to help the family of the murdered Merseyside toddler and for community projects.
The appeal will be officially promoted at a press conference in Kirkby, James's home town.
Lack of funding holds up railway upgrading
By Allan McLean Transport Correspondent
INVESTMENT will go ahead to improve the Glasgow-London railway although the work may take longer than previously planned because of limited funds, Chris Green, managing director of InterCity, forecast yesterday.
Asked about reports this week that the line was faced with closure before the end of the decade if money were not spent on resignalling, he said that he was confident the finance would be found.
‘There is strong support in the Department of Transport to get the West coast main line investment going,’ Mr Green added.
He confirmed that the East coast main line from Edinburgh to London King's Cross — which the Government has selected as one of the first to be privatised — was very profitable.
Mr Green said he was sure the Glasgow-Euston route would also be successful after investment.
The West coast route, however, could not be profitable, with 1960s-vintage equipment which cost more to maintain, and it was less reliable than on the East-coast line.
Interviewed in Edinburgh after a Class 91 electric locomotive had been named The Scotsman by the paper's editor, Magnus Linklater, Mr Green stressed his belief that the Glasgow-London Euston route had a good future.
It needed £400 million investment to replace signalling, track and electricity supplies installed 30 years ago and a similar sum for new trains.
He believed that work would go ahead, although it would be delayed and might take until 2004 to complete.
He would prefer to see the work completed more quickly, otherwise whoever was responsible for operating services after privatisation ‘is going to be running over a building site 400 miles long’ for up to a decade.
The bulk of the work would be south of Rugby, on tracks shared by trains linking Glasgow, Birmingham, Manchester and Liverpool with London.
That 83-mile southern stretch was Europe's third busiest trunk railway after French high-speed services and Germany's Rhine Valley lines.
Mr Green declined to answer questions on political and privatisation issues, but it is known that he hopes to keep the InterCity brand as a marketing concept to compete with coach companies and airlines, although the Government wants to break up InterCity into separate operators.
Minister urged to quit over 999 failure
THE HEALTH minister Tom Sackville last night faced calls to quit after publication of a damning report into the crash of the London Ambulance Service's 999 calls system.
Labour demanded his resignation after the LAS Board chairman, Jim Harris, announced he was stepping down as an inquiry blamed management failures over the £1.5 million computer-aided despatch system (CAD).
The Health Secretary, Virginia Bottomley, who condemned the LAS's ‘failure on all sides’, has given South West Thames Regional Health Authority a month to come up with plans for strengthening the lines of management accountability.
However, a Health Department spokesman last night said there was no question of Mr Sackville's resigning.
David Blunkett, shadow health secretary, said the report was a damning indictment of LAS management and highlighted fundamental questions about a lack of accountability.
Behind it was an untold story of incredible complacency by Government ministers who failed to act to prevent the system failure, alleged by ambulance workers to have led to patient deaths.
Mr Blunkett said Mr Sackville, who is responsible for the capital's ambulance service, wrote to the Labour MP Glenda Jackson on October 21 last year, claiming the CAD system was functioning correctly at a technical level.
Yet yesterday's report, which highlighted fatal flaws in the system, showed that was clearly not the case.
Mr Blunkett said: ‘The buck must stop somewhere.
For once a Government minister should accept that ethics and accountability do still have some meaning in British democracy.’
The independent inquiry was set up into the LAS after the system broke down twice within 10 days.
It was then abandoned.
London Ambulance Service workers claimed the system crash last October led to people's deaths, but yesterday's document said an examination of 26 cases considered by coroners' courts showed the LAS had not been blamed for a single death.
Two other cases are outstanding.
Mr Harris, who has chaired the board since 1990 and is a non-executive member of the South West Thames Regional Health Authority, said he was stepping down to allow a review of the accountability of the service.
Asked whether the former LAS chief executive, John Wilby, who resigned after London was left without emergency cover, should take the whole blame, Mr Harris, 64, said: ‘He was the chief executive at the time.
He endorsed the system, it is not part of a non-statutory body to overrule that decision.’
The National Union of Public Employees said the way in which the board had acted was disgraceful and called for the resignation of all the members.
Prof Marian Hicks, chairman of South West Thames Regional Health Authority, expressed regret at the distress caused from the failure of the computer system.
She said action had already been taken under the new chief executive, Martin Gorham, which had dramatically improved call ringing times and led to a steady improvement in ambulance response times.
— PA
Court told man admitted rape
A MAN accused of attacking two girls while posing as a taxi driver had confessed to the crimes during a tape-recorded interview, it was claimed yesterday.
Det Constable Robert Kerr, 46, told the High Court sitting at Perth that he had questioned David Hepburn twice soon after detaining him.
He said that during the first interview Hepburn had denied any involvement, but when seen again 40 minutes later ‘frankly said that he was responsible for the assaults on both girls’.
The detective was giving evidence on the fourth day of a trial in which Hepburn, 29, of Alloa, denies that on a Saturday night last October he twice lured young women into his car by pretending he was a taxi driver.
He is alleged to have tried to rape the first, aged 18, and to have raped the second, aged 22.
He also denies raping a 26-year-old woman in her home earlier the same day.
The jury heard recordings of both interviews DC Kerr said he conducted with Hepburn.
During the second tape the accused was alleged to have said that when he demanded sex with the 18-year-old girl, she struggled, got out of the car and bolted.
Then, according to the transcript, he remembered having another ‘lassie’ in the car, getting into the back seat with her and grabbing her.
Cross-examined by the defence counsel, Edward Targowski, QC, DC Kerr agreed that a detective inspector had spoken to Hepburn between his initial denial of guilt and the subsequent admission of involvement.
That had followed a request by the accused to see a senior officer.
The witness said that he had not been present at the meeting and had agreed that what was said then would not be recorded.
The trial continues today.
Canadian guest pupil's dexterity overcomes disability
William Chisholm meets a model student who's 6,000 miles from home — and physically handicapped
NADIA KARMALI, a 12-year-old exchange student from British Columbia, has not taken long to impress her teachers and fellow pupils at St Mary's School, Melrose.
She has already won a painting competition run by the town's operatic society, produces immaculate handwriting, embroiders intricate designs for cushions, and fills a midfield role in the school hockey team
Even that incomplete list of achievements takes on special significance when people encounter Nadia for the first time and learn how a genetic abnormality meant she was born with only one finger on each hand.
Coping with life 6,000 miles from home and family in Vancouver would be daunting enough for any girl of Nadia's age.
Now, with her colleague, Lynlea Longworth, also 12, Nadia is planning for a week of rugged, demanding adventure at an outdoor training centre in the west of Scotland.
There she will put her courage and dexterity to the test rock climbing, abseiling, sea kayaking, and canoeing.
A survival course is built into the programme.
The headmaster of St Mary's, Robert Common, an exiled Canadian, describes Nadia's outlook on life as an inspiration to anyone with a handicap who would like to get involved in ‘normal’ activities.
‘It is quite incredible how Nadia copes with even the most difficult manoeuvres, and her talent for art and embroidery is remarkable,’ said Mr Common yesterday.
The fact that Nadia has only the little finger on each hand has not produced one incident of teasing from the 90 pupils at the Borders preparatory school.
‘I haven't been homesick either, and get regular telephone calls from my parents back home’, she explained.
‘Our mothers and fathers will be coming over at the end of the summer for the presentation of prizes.’
The art competition, to illustrate the local operatic society's production of Yeomen of the Guard, attracted an entry of 200 from several Borders schools.
Nadia's winning work in her age-group showed a prison cell with doors thrown open, depicting freedom.
Nadia has already seen a good deal of Scotland, and also went on a school trip to France and Belgium when pupils of St Mary's accompanied members of a pensioners' lunch club to find out about the European Community and the European Parliament.
Mr Common has organised the pupil exchange programme with Collingwood School, a 400-pupil establishment in Vancouver founded by DD Mackenzie, a former Scotland rugby player and Olympic sprinter.
Nadia, Lynlea, and three other Canadian pupils formed the first group of exchangers, and three St Mary's pupils are expected to board and study at Collingwood School later this year.
For Nadia and Lynlea, the remainder of the stay will include more sports, among them netball and rounders.
Nadia says she does not find her lack of fingers to be a serious drawback when tackling any task, apart from cutting food and using scissors.
She would like to qualify as a lawyer, while Lynlea has her eyes on a medical career.
All-rounder: Nadia Karmali, the Canadian crafts and sports star of St Mary's School, Melrose
Major rejects claims of a country in decline
From Ewen MacAskill Political Editor in Washington
THE PRIME Minister was forced yesterday to counter a widespread United States view that Britain is in decline, with a troubled monarchy, recession and a breakdown of society.
John Major, speaking before he flew back to London, dismissed that as an inaccurate picture of Britain.
In four coast-to-coast US television interviews, Mr Major was repeatedly pressed over recent incidents in Britain such as the murder of James Bulger in Liverpool, which more than one interviewer saw as a sign of malaise in Britain.
‘I have to say that in terms of violent crime generally the amount of it in the United Kingdom is small compared with that in other countries and, if I may say so, here in Washington.’
He insisted that there was no fundamental change in the view the British public took of the monarchy and that the Queen had not been put under pressure by the Government to pay taxes but had volunteered.
Mr Major, who had more than four hours of talks with President Clinton at the White House on Wednesday, expressed his delight at the way in which the discussions had gone.
In contrast to earlier fears that the ‘special relationship’ might have been in jeopardy, he said he had no doubt that the president would remain a friend of Britain and that the relationship between the pair could not be more easy.
He described Mr Clinton as a man with whom it was very easy to do business.
‘He is clearly a man who thrives on detail as well as the broad picture.
He has a very clear perception of his domestic priorities and of the international troublespots which as the most powerful nation in the world he must have an interest in.’
The one serious rift in the trip had been over Northern Ireland.
Mr Major refused to be drawn on what the two men had agreed but the US is expected to announce soon that a special envoy rather than a ‘peace’ envoy will be sent to Ulster.
Although Britain would have preferred no envoy at all, seeing that as an unnecessary intrusion to internal affairs, the appointment of a fact-finding mission is regarded as an improvement on a peace envoy.
Mr Major appeared to be paving the way yesterday when he said: ‘Many people in the United States have long historic connections with Ireland.
What do they see when they get there?
They see a completely different Northern Ireland from, say, ten years ago and they come back enthusiastic about what they have seen.’
He repeated his belief that Mr Clinton was committed to an early settlement of the crucial GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) talks which have stalled in Geneva.
Asked about Bosnia, Mr Major said he did not regard the US airdrops as presenting any danger of retaliation against British troops on the ground in the former Yugoslavia.
He said that British planes would not be involved in the airdrops but Britain might help the US with the logistics, presumably supplying some humanitarian aid for the airdrops.
DOUG MILLS/AP John Major looks on as Bill Clinton answers a reporter's question at the White House
More delay on ‘taking stock’ proposals
By Joanne Robertson Scottish Political Correspondent
THE OUTCOME of the Government's ‘taking stock’ exercise will not be announced until mid-March because of delays caused by the Prime Minister's visit to Washington.
Although most of the Cabinet discussed the proposals at a 90-minute session of a key subcommittee, formal clearance by the Cabinet has not been given.
John Major's meeting with President Clinton prevented a full meeting of ministers taking place this week.
That has further delayed the report by the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, to the Commons.
One source said: ‘There was a remarkably free-flowing and open discussion at the Cabinet subcommittee as the majority of ministers did not go to the meeting with a departmental brief.
‘It was a very political and quite a philosophical discussion, than these occasions usually are.
However, the Prime Minister's visit has caused a two-week gap between Cabinet meetings which is simply a logistical difficulty.
It is just about ready to roll, we've only get a few minor drafting amendments to complete.’
The stock-taking announcement, which was initially expected last year, has been put back several times.
The prospect of another delay prompted the shadow Scottish secretary, Tom Clarke, to write to Mr Lang expressing his disappointment at the postponement.
In his letter, Mr Clarke states: ‘I can think of no justification for the continued delay in announcing the results of the ‘taking stock’ exercise.
The voice of the Scottish people was made clear on April, when 75 per cent of the electorate voted for a Scottish parliament in some form.’
He attacked the Government for its complacency over the issue and compared the time taken over the taking stock package with the quick unveiling of the Conservative proposals on the future of water and local government.
Euro rebels caught in backlash
By Chris McLaughlin Political Correspondent
CONSERVATIVE rebels faced a backlash from senior back-bench colleagues last night during a furious row over Maastricht.
At a private meeting in Westminster five officers of the 1922 back-bench committee were warned that they faced being voted out of office as punishment for persistent opposition to the Government on the bill to implement the Maastricht treaty.
With the Government facing a fresh possibility of defeat over the controversial social chapter, tensions erupted as loyal heavyweights turned on the rebels during a heated half-hour clash.
It came as the Labour leadership put its weight behind a tactical Commons move which threatens to wreck the Maastricht bill or force the Government to accept the social chapter.
The Government also faced a potential knife-edge vote on the treaty proposal for a committee of the regions amid demands for strong, directly elected Scottish representation on the new body.
With the European Communities (Amendment) Bill still bogged down in its 13th day in committee, the back-bench loyalists vented their anger on the Tory rebels.
The five 1922 executive members — George Gardiner, Sir Rhodes Boyson, Michael Lord, Ivan Lawrence, James Pawsey and John Townend — were attacked for delaying Government business through procedural points.
Among the critics were the former ministers Michael Jopling, Peter Bottomley, Michael Spicer and Tom King, as well as Winston Churchill.
The officers were reminded that during the party split over common market membership in 1971 an executive member who opposed the Government line took the ‘honourable course’ and resigned.
Earlier George Robertson, Labour's front-bench spokesman on European affairs, announced that the Opposition would officially support an amendment tabled by the Western Isles MP, Calum MacDonald.
The amendment seeks to delete the protocol that exempts Britain from the social chapter and, if selected for debate, could muster sufficient support from Tory rebels to blow a hole in the legislation.
During the debate on the committee of the regions last night, Margaret Ewing (SNP, Moray) said the body would have great potential for involving people in the EC.
She demanded strong representation for Scotland, suggesting that 24 seats for the entire UK were insufficient.
A Foreign Office minister, Tristan Garel-Jones, said he firmly rejected Mrs Ewing's fears that the Government would appoint an unrepresentative number of Tories for Scotland.
Rivals vie for control of home rule campaign
By Joanne Robertson and Peter Jones
A FIERCE battle over the direction and leadership of the home rule campaign is being fought between Labour and the Scottish National Party, with the Liberal Democrats emerging as pivotal to the outcome.
The shadow Scottish secretary, Tom Clarke, aims to set out Labour's stall by outlining proposals for a revamped Scottish Constitutional Convention in a speech tomorrow.
The convention has been largely moribund since the general election, but Labour is insistent that it is the only cross-party forum in which it will take part.
The SNP equally insistently rejects it.
Mr Clarke is expected to propose substantial changes in its composition and working methods to overcome SNP claims that the convention is Labour-dominated and bent on excluding nationalist arguments for independence.
The Labour agenda will contrast with the proposal by the Scottish Trades Union Congress general secretary, Campbell Christie, for a Scottish parliamentary council, which is supported by the SNP and the Liberal Democrats.
The Labour leader, John Smith, is believed to have told the Scottish leadership not to support any efforts to set up a Scottish parliamentary council and Mr Clarke's proposals are intended to maintain Lib Dem support for the convention.
Pressure on Labour increased yesterday with the Lib Dems and the SNP jointly signing a Commons motion calling for an immediate meeting of opposition leaders to discuss Mr Christie's scheme.
The parliamentary council plan is supported in a confidential SNP document calling for a demonstration — larger than the European summit protest by 25,000 people — in April as a forerunner to the first sitting of a ‘recalled’ Scottish parliament.
The proposal is contained in a SNP leadership paper marked ‘private & confidential’ which has been the basis of the party's discussion with key home rule groups.
The paper details SNP ideas for a recalled parliament involving 150 members sitting on a Friday to discuss issues previously agreed by consensus.
It states: ‘In the run-up to the first meeting, a supporting demonstration should be held which should aim to mobilise more than the 25,000 gathered on December 12.
On a timetable tentatively discussed, that might place the demonstration on Saturday 17 April and the first recall date Friday 23.
‘The political parties and the supporting civic organisations should agree further initiatives in the run-up to the first session to provide domestic and international publicity for the event.’
The SNP suggests that membership should be divided proportionally among the political parties according to the 1992 election result.
All sitting Scottish MPs would be part of each group, with additional members decided by each party.
Labour would have 49 MPs plus ten others; the Conservatives 11 MPs plus 28 others; the SNP would have three MPs plus 29 others while the Lib Dems would have nine MPs plus 11 others.
The tabling of the Commons motion was a clear response to Labour's rejection this week of the Scottish parliamentary council proposal.
The Liberal Democrat MP for Argyll and Bute, Ray Michie, said: ‘The question for Labour leaders is now a simple one of good faith.
When they endorsed the democracy declaration did they do so in good faith or not?’
Mr Salmond added: ‘We have spent more than two months at Labour's behest going through a process of consultation with the STUC only to be told at the end of it that Labour want to junk his key proposal before we get to a meeting.’
Muddle may cost areas aid
By Our Political Correspondent
SEVERAL areas expecting a share of a £100 million EC aid package may be excluded because of what MPs claim is a bureaucratic muddle, the Government conceded yesterday.
Protests were made in the Commons over the exclusion of Argyll and Bute and western parts of Moray from the regional grant earmarked by the European Commission for the Highlands and Islands.
EC officials said that the areas, which are regarded as among those most in need of aid, had been omitted because they fell outside the administrative boundary of the Highland and Island region.
The reason for the muddle appears to be a simple agreement between government and commission officials over the UK map of political and administrative boundaries, which correctly puts Argyll and Bute in Strathclyde Region and the western part of Moray in Grampian.
But the bid for aid was submitted by a consortium of all three regional authorities and intended to cover the area administered under the Highland and Islands Development Board.
Margaret Ewing (SNP, Moray) challenged the Leader of the Commons, Tony Newton, who was standing in at Prime Minister's question time, to clear up the confusion after giving advance notice that she planned to raise the issue.
Mr Newton, choosing his words carefully, said the Government would ‘certainly ensure the needs and interests of western Grampian and Argyll and Bute are taken fully into account at the same time as seeking to achieve the best outcome for the Highlands and Islands’.
Ray Michie (Lib Dem, Argyll & Bute) said: ‘The decision is a bureaucratic muddle.
When the decision is finally made by the council of ministers it is essential that the whole area be granted the structural funding that we need.’
Violent crime: don't throw reason out of window
I share AA Miller's sense of outrage at the crimes he lists (Points of View, today), but I do not thereupon throw reason out of the window.
Is it not likely that, were Mr Miller's suggestions enacted, a man who has committed any of those crimes would have an incentive to kill the victim and any witnesses within reach?
To do so would not, on Mr Miller's terms, increase the penalty; it would merely mean that the criminal could escape the more easily for want of key witnesses.
The rates of rape, armed robbery, etc would probably not fall very much.
The murder rate would undoubtedly rise.
Exclusion zone for Bonham-Carter fan
HELENA Bonham-Carter, the actress, was yesterday granted a High Court injunction in London against a fan who has pestered her for several years.
The injunction, which also applies to the actress's parents, prevents Andrew Farquharson from entering a ‘defined area’ around their north London home or telephoning them.
Miss Bonham-Carter, whose great-grandfather was the Liberal premier, Lord Asquith, has claimed that Mr  Farquharson , 27, has pestered her for several years.
He is said to have sent her letters which have become ‘increasingly sexual in tone’, and to have phoned and visited the family's Golders Green house.
Neither Miss Bonham-Carter, 26, a star of the films A Room with a View and Howard's End, nor her parents, Elena and Raymond, were at court for the half-hour private hearing before Mr Justice Sedley.
A lawyer for the family said afterwards: ‘The Bonham-Carters are sad that they have been compelled to take proceedings and they very much hope that Mr Farquharson will abide by the court order.’
The actress lives with her mother, a psychotherapist, and her father, a retired banker who is paralysed and partially blind.
Mr Farquharson, who is unemployed, is believed to have moved from Scotland to Peckham, south-east London, to be closer to Miss Bonham-Carter.
Details of yesterday's court order were not made public, but it has been reported that Miss Bonham-Carter has provided the court with a map with a red line marking an area of several hundred yards around her house which she did not want Mr Farquharson to enter.
Mr Farquharson claimed in a recent interview in the Sun that Miss Bonham-Carter had replied four times to his letters and sent him a signed photo with a kiss.
He said he had given her mother one of his running tops as a present for Miss Bonham-Carter but demanded it back after he and the actress had a ‘blazing row’.
Last year, Mr Farquharson, a fitness enthusiast, was arrested on the actress's doorstep and bound over to keep the peace.
If he breaks yesterday's court order, he could be jailed for up to two years for contempt of court.
— PA
Skirting the issues
AT THEIR first meeting, Bill Clinton and John Major were clearly at pains to avoid a row.
After all the speculation about the possible disagreements between them, their encounter has been little short of anodyne.
Clinton, for what is is worth, was content to reaffirm his commitment to the so-called special relationship between Britain and the US.
Whether this amounts to more than a row of beans these days is questionable.
The US is surely keener to deal with the EC as a bloc and with those countries, like Germany, which are seen as key players within it.
But it takes little to say, and doubtless contributes to the ‘feel-good’ factor all round.
Major, for his part, praised Clinton's initiative to airlift humanitarian aid to Bosnia.
This was in striking contrast to the sceptical line of the Foreign Office, but cost him relatively little.
Both called for the speedy conclusion of the GATT trade talks.
The only slightly sour note entered the proceedings with the president's plan to send a special envoy to Northern Ireland.
Although he did not reject a fact-finding mission outright, Major was clearly less than enthusiastic about the idea.
With so much good will in the air one might have been forgiven for thinking that there were no differences worth talking about.
But there are and they are serious.
Since Major is the first government leader from an EC country to have visited Clinton in the White House he might just have considered tackling them head on.
Issues like subsidies for the Airbus consortium, conditions governing the award of public procurement contracts, EC support for the steel industry, the pricing of agricultural products, these are just some of the subjects of bitter dispute between Washington and the Europeans.
They should perhaps have been higher on the agenda than appears to have been the case.
One should of course record one's satisfaction that the two leaders got on well together, and that they smoothed over certain niggling differences.
But it is usually the mark of a serious and deep-seated friendship that differences can be discussed and dealt with face to face.
Whether anything has changed in the issues which divide the US and its European partners is no clearer after this encounter, and we are left with only the haziest idea of whether the mutual admiration is any more than skin deep.
A little more confidence and openness on both sides would inspire a little more confidence in those who want to see the differences met and resolved rather than quietly avoided.
Murder trial is told of obsession with student
A LAW student yesterday told a court that Warren Green, the solicitor accused of murdering his wife, was obsessed with her.
Julie Warburton, 21, said Green had her he was in love with her, and added: ‘He also said he wanted to divorce his wife and wanted to leave her for me.’
Green has pled not guilty at Liverpool Crown Court to murdering his wife, Julie, 24, by clubbing her to death with a lump hammer in a storeroom at the rear of their home in Gidlow Lane, Wigan, in October 1991.
Michael Kallisher, QC, prosecuting, asked Miss Warburton: ‘Did you have any strong feelings for him?’
She said: ‘No, not at all.
I just didn't want to hurt his feelings.’
The court has heard that the couple met in June 1991, while Miss Warburton was on work experience at the Crown Prosecution Office in Salford, where Green worked.
He sometimes had given her a lift to Atherton, Manchester, where she had been staying.
In late July, she said, Green's attitude towards her had changed.
‘When we stopped at traffic lights, Warren took hold of my hand and said that he was becoming more attached to me and asked me if I would like to go out for dinner the next day.’
Miss Warburton, who lives in London, said she had not done so, adding: ‘I did not go out with him at all on my own.
‘Later in the week he said he was falling in love with me and kissed me just before I got out of the car.
It was just an affectionate kiss.’
When Green and his wife went on holiday to Corfu, he had sent Miss Warburton two love letters, in one of which he spoke about his ‘current other half’.
On his return, he had given her a gold-coloured owl and told her he was in love with her.
Miss Warburton said she had not told him how she felt, but once he had asked her if she loved him.
‘I felt very pressurised and didn't know what to say, so I just said: ‘Yes’.’
She added: ‘He seemed obsessed with me and wanted to move to London and divorce his wife.’
Miss Warburton said she had never had a sexual relationship with Green.
After she finished her work experience, she had returned to London without giving him her address and had seen him only once, by chance, after that.
The prosecution alleges that by killing his wife, Green would have benefited by her £120,000 insurance policies, his £80,000 mortgage would have been paid off and he would have been free to pursue Miss Warburton.
Stewart Skett, 21, who had been having an affair with Mrs Green, a student nurse, yesterday denied having anything to do with her death.
Cross-examined by Anthony Morris, QC, defending, he said they had become close friends through their shared interest in scouting and had become lovers about three months before her death.
She sometimes had given him the spare front door key but he denied having had the key on the day of her death.
The case continues today.
— PA
Asbestos claim settled
By John Robertson Law Correspondent
A WOMAN who worked at Rosyth Royal Dockyard during the Second World War yesterday settled a £200,000 damages action over an asbestos-related illness.
Magdalene Rutherford, 66, first suffered bouts of breathlessness in the mid-Seventies but it was only four years ago that she was told her condition had been caused by exposure to asbestos at the dockyard, a judge heard.
She sued the Ministry of Defence at the Court of Session and the agreement was announced shortly before evidence had been due to start before Lord Prosser yesterday.
The terms were not disclosed.
In her action, Mrs Rutherford, of Wallace Street, Brucefield, Dunfermline, said that from 1942-45 she had been employed as an insulator in Rosyth's lagging department.
In 1975 she had had to give up her job as a council clerkess as she had contracted asbestos-related pleurisy and pleural thickening.
The MoD denied liability.
UK offers to train S African police
From Fred Bridgland Johannesburg
BRITAIN has offered to train a future South African police force, Baroness Chalker, the overseas development minister, said yesterday.
Speaking to the South African Institute of International Affairs, the baroness applauded efforts by the South African police to create a community police division.
‘This is an area in which we have considerable experience in the UK.
I hope that it may be possible some time in the future to share our experience in this area with the SAP.’
A senior British official later said Britain had formally offered to assist in police training.
‘But let me make it clear we're not prepared to train the current SAP.’
The official said that the training, conducted in Britain or South Africa, would emphasise community policing.
Baroness Chalker, who later held talks with the African National Congress director of foreign affairs, Thabo Mbeki, also stressed Britain's ‘enormous interest’ in South Africa's transition to a stable, democratic and non-racial society.
‘We have strong historical and cultural ties.
We have substantial investments in South Africa.
And we are a major trading partner.
We are also concerned because peaceful transition to democracy in South Africa is essential to all in the region and not just South Africans.’
Four senior British policemen are already serving in South Africa in peace-keeping and observer roles.
Commander Tom Laidlaw of Scotland Yard is attached to Judge Richard Goldstone's commission investigating political violence, and three officers are attached to the new European Task Force in South Africa and the commonwealth team.
Legislation on Hong Kong polls delayed
THE Governor, Chris Patten, postponed publishing his democratic reform bill yesterday, but the key question of whether China would accept talks to solve the dispute over Hong Kong's future went unanswered.
Mr Patten's spokesman, Mike Hanson, said the legislation, based on electoral reforms which have provoked furious opposition from Beijing, would not appear in today's official gazette.
Hong Kong has been hanging in suspense for almost a fortnight over if Mr Patten would drop a self-imposed deadline for publication at the end of February so that talks with China could resume.
Mr Hanson said the Executive Council, Hong Kong's colonial cabinet, decided yesterday not to push ahead with the bill to cover local elections in 1994 and legislative elections a year later.
Analysts say Mr Patten has been fighting a war of nerves with China over the proposals, with neither wanting to go into any negotiations from a position of weakness.
The British Foreign Office said in London yesterday that the government remained keen to hold talks with China without preconditions over the plans for democracy.
The Chinese foreign ministry said yesterday that a resumption of Sino-British dialogue depended on Mr Patten abandoning the proposals, which would allow Hong Kong people to elect a majority of their legislature for the first time in 1995. — Reuter
Mr Patten seems unwilling to postpone the bill's publication until China agrees to talks, while China appears reluctant to agree to talks until a delay has been announced.
US forces use heavy weapons on Somalis
US-LED forces rolled out tanks and used heavy weapons on Somali gunmen during eight hours of battles in Mogadishu yesterday.
It was the worst fighting since the multinational force landed in December to end anarchy.
The United Nations said it was considering evacuating foreign aid workers.
Rapid gunfire, accompanied by frequent booms of rocket-propelled grenades, echoed across the Somali capital.
The US military spokesman, Colonel Fred Peck, giving the first account of the fighting that started shortly after 9am, said he had no figures of casualties among ‘a large number’ of gunmen who appeared to have put up strong resistance.
US, Nigerian and Botswana troops launched a three-pronged assault on gunmen concentrated around the city's so-called KM-4 and KM-5 areas, frequently troubled by snipers in the past two months.
Three US marines and two Nigerian troops were slightly wounded, he said, while a third Nigerian was hit in the chest by a bullet.
‘His condition is stable,’ Col Peck said.
Asked whether US forces had fired their tank guns, he said: ‘Not as far as I am aware.’
US Cobra helicopter gunships swooped on one area, apparently to confine the gunmen.
The UN spokesman, Farouk Mawlawi, said: ‘The evacuation is being considered if this situation (the fighting) goes on.
Unitaf — the US-led forces — would have to evacuate relief staff.’
UN and other aid workers, backed by the 33,00-strong force, have been trying to move food aid to an estimated two million starving people.
Mr Mawlawi added: ‘The relief effort has come to a standstill.
Most humanitarian relief officials remain in their compounds (because of the fighting).’
In the gunbattles yesterday, Col Peck said a number of relief agency offices and residences in central Mogadishu had been hit by bullets and what he called ‘ballistic fallout’.
He gave no details of any damage or injuries.
There were unconfirmed reports that offices of the International Committee of the Red Cross had been shelled.
Turning to the protests, he accused General Mohamed Aideed of ‘choreographing’ the disturbances which he said were political theatre meant to show his muscle.
Gen Aideed is perhaps Somalia's most powerful warlord and has generally co-operated with the US-led forces trying to restore order so relief can get to Somalia's starving millions.
But many of his supporters have been angered by the military coalition's confiscations of weapons and by diminished opportunities to loot and extort since the first marines came ashore on 9 December.
The United States decided this week to delay a planned withdrawal of up to 3,000 of the 18,000 US troops in Somalia.
Pentagon officials had hoped to have the bulk of their troops out of the country by the end of March.
In Brussels, Belgium's army chief said the fighting clearly showed it would be premature for US troops to quit Somalia.
— Reuter and AP
In Belgrade, the rump state of Yugoslavia denied US charges that a cargo of Serbian arms could be on its way to Somalia on a Greek-registered ship.
— Reuter
The US State Department said on Tuesday it suspected Serbian arms destined for Somalia were on the ship which was apparently heading for Kenya.
It said it had contacted Greece and Kenya.
A foreign ministry spokesman in Athens said Greece had launched an investigation.
— Reuter
Hindu leader hurt as police halt rally
INDIAN police gassed crowds and arrested leaders of the main Hindu nationalist party yesterday, knocking one unconscious with a water cannon in an attempt to thwart a banned rally in New Delhi.
Witnesses said Murli Manohar Joshi, president of the opposition Bharatiya Janata Party, was knocked unconscious by a police water cannon's jet as he led 300 supporters towards parliament.
A hospital statement said Mr Joshi was ‘in serious but stable condition’, with injuries to his head and thigh, and was being given oxygen.
Police confirmed he was under arrest.
At least 54 other party supporters, including several members of parliament, were injured, but it was a far less bloody day than authorities had feared it might be.
Police estimated no more than 30,000 party supporters turned out on the heavily barricaded streets, eager to be arrested by the 75,000-strong security forces.
Delhi resembled an armed camp as the government pulled out all the stops to prevent a rally called to demand early elections.
Demonstrators also pressed the nationalist campaign for a temple on the site of a mosque demolished by a Hindu mob in December.
The government banned the rally, fearing it would foment more Hindu-Muslim violence in a country still reeling from bloodshed ignited by the demolition.
The government's chief spokesman said 1,000 people were detained, including 110 BJP members of parliament.
Some 60,000 people across the country were also held, he added.
— Reuter
Police said two city sports stadiums used to house detainees over the past few days were filled and a third had to be used.
Knockout punch: Bharatiya Janata Party members attend to their president, Murli Manohar Joshi, in New Delhi yesterday
Castro hints at retirement
PRESIDENT Fidel Castro has said he would like to step down in five years if Cuba's faltering economy improves.
Asked during a news conference with foreign reporters late on Wednesday if he expects to be president in 1998, he said: ‘I hope it will not be necessary.
We will have to see what life will say.’
He said: ‘Even marathon runners get tired.’
President Castro, 66, spoke after the country's first popular elections for parliament since the revolution.
No candidate, including himself, faced an opponent or disagreed with the Communist Party line.
President Castro and the island's communist authorities had urged voters to give massive backing to 589 official candidates to form the 589-seat National Assembly (parliament) and 1,190 candidates for provincial assemblies.
Foreign correspondents who visited polling stations in Havana saw a number of ballot papers marked ‘No’, spoiled in other ways or left blank, although these were not a majority.
Cuban officials had made clear that these spoiled or blank ballots would not be considered valid and so did not affect the election.
The Cuban leader said the election had been a success in the face of intense pressure from the United States, hostile radio stations run by Cuban exiles in the US had called on Cubans to abstain or spoil their votes.
— AP and Reuter 
President Fidel Castro: ‘Even marathon runners get tired’
THE United States and Russia yesterday challenged Arabs and Israelis to resume peace talks in April and agreed to hold a first summit between Bill Clinton and Boris Yeltsin.
The accord on a Clinton-Yeltsin summit, on 4 April, had been expected, but the announcement on new peace talks appeared to be a gamble.
The US secretary of state, Warren Christopher, said in Geneva that the major powers had agreed on negotiations, but it seemed that Mr Christopher did not have a cast-iron Palestinian commitment on new talks.
— Reuter
Airdrops to reach all Bosnians, Clinton says
THE US military will airdrop relief supplies to all ethnic and religious groups in war-torn Bosnia-Herzegovina, President Bill Clinton announced yesterday.
Timing of the airdrops was to be determined by the defence department in co-operation with the United Nations, the president said in a written statement.
‘These airdrops are being carried out strictly for humanitarian purposes; no combat aircraft will be used in this operation,’ he said.
Mr Clinton made no mention of any other countries joining in the operation, which he said would be co-ordinated with existing United Nations relief efforts.
The airdrops would be intended for Muslims, Serbs and Croats living in inaccessible areas of Bosnia, Mr Clinton said.
‘The war that has raged in Bosnia-Herzegovina over the past year has taken a staggering toll: thousands have been killed or imprisoned, thousands more are at risk due to hunger and exposure, and over two million people have been forced from their homes,’ he said.
The president acknowledged that ground convoys are the best way to deliver aid, but said the airdrops were ‘a temporary measure, designed to address the immediate needs of isolated areas that cannot be reached at this time by ground.’
The announcement ended more than a week of consultation and speculation about the scope of the mission during which the administration won UN backing for the operation and sought to involve its allies.
The Prime Minister, John Major, offered support during a visit that ended yesterday but said British troops would continue only their ground operation.
An administration source said the White House still hoped to get other countries involved in the airdrop.
Mr Clinton said on Wednesday he had instructed General Colin Powell, chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, to design an operation that would protect US pilots and guard against drawing America into a deeper military role in the region.
Administration officials said that to achieve that goal, the planes would fly at night and high enough to avoid danger of being shot down and would have no combat escorts.
Experts said that would limit the effectiveness of the operation because of the difficulty in pinpointing airdrops to those in need from high altitudes.
The former defence secretary, Dick Cheney, appearing on NBC's Today show, said the airdrop plan may have ‘symbolic significance,’ but ‘whether or not it's an effective way to deliver humanitarian supplies remains to be seen.’
He noted that the Clinton administration apparently wanted to make the drops in the dark, from high altitudes and without ground support, ‘so the likelihood is that a lot of the supplies will end up outside the targeted area.’
Mr Cheney questioned whether the United States was pursuing the plan ‘because it's the best military solution…or are we doing it because there was an announcement of a policy and now everybody's scurrying around trying to put together a policy to carry out what the president stated as an objective.’
The announcement by President Clinton was made as a UN aid convoy reached 70,000 Muslims trapped in the eastern Bosnian town of Gorazde after Serb rebels held up its progress for two days.
But a stand-off over another convoy carrying food and other supplies to French UN troops in the Bosnian capital Sarajevo developed on the border between western Serbia and Bosnia.
The convoy to Gorazde, carrying 102 tonnes of family parcels, flour and medicine, had been seen as a key test of Serb promises to co-operate with relief efforts.
Serb rebels shelled the Adriatic port of Zadar in an escalation of fighting with the Croatian army, Croatian state television said.
It reported a strong Serb artillery attack on Zadar and showed footage of residents running for shelter in the city, situated just outside Serb-held enclave of Krajina. — AP and Reuter
French labour clerks boost strike count
FRENCH labour exchange employees were the latest to go on strike — in protest at mounting work caused by rising joblessness — as labour unrest proliferated yesterday.
Hundreds of fishermen descended on Brussels to press EC fisheries officials for minimum prices and protection from cheap imports.
They had dodged the farmers who covered the Paris-Brussels motorway with potatoes.
The state railway, disrupted on Monday when farmers laid blazing barricades across the tracks, faces more trouble.
Ticket clerks irritated by a new automated reservation system have threatened to go on strike today.
— Reuter
ZAIRE
Worthless notes prompt takeover
TROOPS held Zairean legislators prisoner for the second day yesterday, demanding they approve use of controversial banknotes which have caused riots and crippled trade.
Witnesses said armed soldiers kept up an overnight siege at Kinshasa's People's Palace conference centre because the notes used to pay them are said to be cursed and are almost impossible to spend.
— Reuter
SOUTH KOREA
Outsider sworn in as president
KIM YOUNG-SAM, opposition leader turned establishment stalwart, was sworn in yesterday as South Korea's first civilian head of state in more than three decades.
He pledged an era of innovation and renewal.
On a bright but cold day, the austere 40-minute ceremony was the culmination of a peaceful switch of power from 31 years of politics dominated by an army elite to a man with no military background.
— Reuter
NEW ZEALAND
Hopes for £50,000 wine are smashed
A £50,000 bottle of wine arrived at a New Zealand restaurant this week — smashed.
The 1979 Robert Mondavi Cabernet Sauvignon Californian wine was won by Champerelle restaurant in Wellington in a British wine magazine competition.
A replacement bottle was being flown in. — Reuter
RUSSIA
MOSCOW'S mayor, Yuri Luzhkov, has ordered the thousands of signs written in foreign languages in his city to be translated into Russian, Itar-Tass news agency said yesterday.
The expensive new shops, restaurants, casinos and nightclubs opening up in the status-conscious post-Soviet capital are often given Western names, which represent luxury to the city's chic new bourgeoisie. — Reuter 
An evening for the connoisseur
Gillian Glover invites you to a special dinner with the head of the Sandeman port dynasty
EVER since Dr Johnson observed that ‘claret is the liquor for boys and port for men’, Portugal's gloriously rich and robust wine has been arousing feelings just as strong as itself.
The traditional rituals of port drinking are well-known, but it may came as a surprise to many that it is not the crusty British lawyer savouring his even crustier port that constitutes the core market for port shippers, but the trendy young Frenchman, enjoying young ruby.
If the double entendre offends, I lay the blame firmly at the door of the most famous port company of them all, the House of Sandeman.
Ruby and her naughty overtones were first used to advertise Sandeman's port in 1968, when it was already becoming clear that a younger drinking market needed to be cultivated.
Monocled colonels, vast dining rooms and glittering decanters were all very well, but the world was not blessed with too many of them.
Cherishing port as a special occasion drink was certainly flattering, but it did rather inhibit sales.
And Sandeman was the first port company to acknowledge publicly that sales were a crucial aspect to any business.
Back in 1919 they made what was considered a ‘momentous’ decision: they chose to market their wines under their own brand name.
The City was shocked, heated debates about wine merchants' honour and the threat of commercialism were reported in newspapers and a jolly good row erupted.
Of course people do not become frenzied quite as readily in 1993 as they did in 1919, but with the assistance of one of Edinburgh's premiere restaurants, The Witchery, The Scotsman and the House of Sandeman have devised an evening which should enthuse even the most jaded citizen.
Last month, for the second year running, The Witchery won the Decanter Magazine/ Sandeman award for Britain's best restaurant wine list.
George Sandeman, the company's general manager flew in from the Douro valley to present Witchery proprietor James Thomson with the award, and it was then that a decision was made to offer a unique dinner to readers of The Scotsman.
This dinner, to be held on Monday March 15, will be hosted by George Sandeman, and present the opportunity to sample the restaurant's renowned cooking of fine Scottish produce, matched to wines specially chosen for the occasion by Witchery sommelier Claus Nielsen.
The menu will then highlight Scottish farmhouse cheeses to be sampled alongside a selection of Sandeman's ports.
The price for this remarkable meal, including all wines and canapes, is £30 and booking should be made directly to the restaurant at Castlehill, Edinburgh.
Telephone 031 225 5613.
Cabinet shuffle
SHOON Don Shik is a correspondent of the Chosun-Ilbo, a South Korean daily newspaper with a circulation of 1,400,000.
He was due to visit the Scottish Office next month, accompanied by a Foreign Office minder, in order to ‘learn more about the constitutional debate and the relationship between Scotland and the rest of the United Kingdom’.
Unfortunately, the trip has now been cancelled.
Mr Shoon has been  appointed to the new South Korean cabinet of the recently-elected president, Kim Young Sam.
A rather classier excuse than ‘I have to go to my aunt's funeral’, methinks.
A special relationship goes back to normal
So, John Major left Washington in triumph?
Well, not exactly, says Ewen MacAskill, there's still a small matter of a global economic battle looming
IN Washington's superb bookshops, which stay open all night and serve coffee and bagels, tomes on the Cold War have given way to a new theme: the prospect of a trade war between the three great economic blocs — Japan, the US and the European Community.
Even if all-out confrontation is avoided, many US academics and journalists are convinced that skirmishing between the three will dominate the post-Cold War era.
What has set the United States' pulse racing is a realisation that it is no longer the most prosperous of the three, but lies second to Japan (and Europe, if ever its internal bickering stops, could easily push the US into third place).
And then there is recession, the evidence of which is all around.
Even Washington, still one of the world's most opulent capitals, bears the scars — cafes, shops and offices closed down, and huge numbers sleeping on the streets by night and begging by day.
President Clinton is determined to arrest this economic downturn; he sees it as his overriding task and everything else is a diversion, including John Major's visit to the White House and the so-called ‘special relationship’ between our two countries.
However, Major and his team were delighted on Wednesday night after meeting the new president for more than four hours.
And well they might be.
In usual government tradition, expectations had been played down so that any sign of agreement, no matter how small, could be hailed as a triumph.
But this time Major's reserve had been more genuine.
Here was a president and prime minister from fundamentally different sides of the political spectrum; a president reported to bear a grudge against the Tories for their part in Bush's muck-raking campaign in the election.
Major could expect no favours.
But the Prime Minister left Washington yesterday with the president's praises ringing in his ears.
Yes, Clinton told the world's press, he was personally committed to maintaining the ‘special relationship’, and he was pleased to accept the advice of Major as the elder statesman.
Fears that Clinton would adopt a protectionist stand, favouring a trade war over co-operation, also appeared to be groundless; the president favoured settling the GATT negotiations on world trade.
And what of the US proposal to send a special envoy to Northern Ireland?
Yes, embarrassing for Britain, but a measure more aimed at placating the Irish-Americans who voted for Clinton and the sympathisers within his own Democratic Party.
The two, we were told, were also in agreement on a whole range of other issues, including policy towards Iraq and Russia.
So, a triumph for Major?
Well, not exactly.
Certainly, he can enjoy the outcome for a day or two, but there is still a question mark over dealings in the longer term on the all-important economy, with the rivalry between the trading blocs dictating how ‘special’ the ‘relationship’is likely to remain.
‘The trend over time has been for Britain to become less important (in US eyes) than Europe as a collective,’ Robert Hunter, vice-president of the Centre of Strategic and International Studies, told the Washington Times.
‘We tend to pay increasing attention to Germany and Japan.’
Another academic suggested that Clinton's ties with Britain lie only in his Oxford education, that he lacks the sentimental camaraderie of the last generation of US presidents who remembered, first hand, Britain as a redoubtable ally first against fascism and then communism.
IN other words, Clinton's generous praise of the ‘special relationship’ and Major was an easy and sensible piece of politics designed not to alienate an old friend unnecessarily.
But still the likely reality is that Britain will be increasingly demoted by Washington to its proper station — a second-rank nation, perhaps one day a third-rank nation, whose importance is only as part of the European Community.
Some optimism can be drawn from Clinton's promise to secure a GATT agreement, but it also would be foolish to forget that the president can haggle over the complex details in the months ahead.
And what if Clinton should press ahead with proposed measures to penalise foreign imports?
The target may be Japan as the US's main economic rival, but Britain — an otherwise irrelevant part of this particular battle — would be simply caught in the crossfire.
Of course, it may be that Clinton and Major will get lucky.
There are signs that Japan is heading for a downturn and the European Community too is in trouble, with Germany possibly heading for deep recession.
With this scenario, yes, the president could afford to take a more generous view of trade agreements.
But all this is a long way from the heady days of the ‘special relationship’ of Thatcher and Reagan and even Major and Bush.
The relationship is no longer special, it's just normal.
Bill and John: presidential praise for the Prime Minister as the elder statesman
Taking more of the Euro cake
GRAMPIAN'S campaign to win access to greater European funding will move up from a fast trot to canter, now that the Highlands and Islands look to have won their case, said regional convener Bob Middleton yesterday, writes Peter Jones.
The sums of money at stake are large — Grampian has drawn up a six-year programme envisaging spending around £33 million on the north-east fishing communities and west Aberdeenshire.
The council is aiming at money earmarked for spending on rural development, what the European Commission calls Objective 5b, the status which the Highlands and Islands have been the only Scottish region to have had in recent years.
But now the Highlands and Islands are heading towards reclassification as an Objective 1 area, local authorities and the Scottish Office believe more areas of Scotland could gain Objective 5b status.
Areas looking to gain also include the Borders, and Dumfries and Galloway, but Grampian's case is strengthened by the commission's decision to widen the definition of Objective 5b to deal with areas hit by fishing industry decline.
Grampian has drawn up six programmes which they hope will qualify for EC aid, ranging from re-training schemes, tourism development in upland areas and harbour towns, and transport and communications improvements.
Middleton said: ‘We have had some encouraging words from the Scottish Secretary and we believe will get some support from Michael Heseltine at the Department of Trade and Industry.
We will be asking to see him very quickly.’
Borders Regional Council also believes the new fishing dimension in the funding rules, given the fishing industry at Eyemouth, will strengthen the case for access to rural development to finance which they have been working on with Scottish Borders Enterprise for several years.
Douglas Scott, the region's senior corporate advisor, said that so far the council has concentrated on upping the region's profile in Brussels and honing its statistical case.
He said: ‘We believe we have a great case.
Our GDP per head is 78.5 per cent of the EC average, which is actually lower than that for the Highlands and Islands.
We are the second lowest area for population density in the UK and the 13th lowest in the EC.’
Also preparing to hit the lobbying trail are Argyll & Bute district councillors, shocked to learn that they are apparently excluded from the Highlands and Islands Objective 1 zone because the district is in Strathclyde region.
The district council's chief executive Michael Gossip said talks would now be arranged with representatives of Highland and Islands Enterprise, Strathclyde region and the Scottish Office, and councillors would go to Brussels if necessary.
Wishing under an EC star
The Highlands and Islands may soon be off on a spending spree to boost its amenities and infrastructure with European millions.
Tom Morton reports
THE two sound-bites in the Highlands and Islands yesterday were ‘wish-list’; everybody had one, and new projects were being added hourly.
Then the magical incantation ‘Objective 1’ had sent imaginations spiralling, to the extent that people were talking about causeways between Harris and Uist, universities, harbours, bridges, ferries and swimming pools.
It was, in fact, as if the football pools had been won on a massive international scale.
‘Objective 1 funding would provide a platform for growth for the Highlands and Islands which would take it from the edge of Europe to the community's very heart,’ said the Highlands and Islands Enterprise chief executive, Iain Robertson.
Meanwhile, Chris Claridge, deputy chief executive of Highland Regional Council and the closest Inverness comes to a Eurocrat, counselled caution.
But with a new enthusiasm: ‘We're cautiously optimistic,’ he said.
‘We won't be entirely happy until the final decision is made, but this is a major hurdle we've crossed, obviously.
At the end of the day it's a political decision from the council of ministers, but it seems to be going there with a firm endorsement of support from the commission.’
As to wish-lists, Claridge agreed that projects like the much-maligned Mallaig to Fort William road would be a priority, but unexpectedly broadened the range of funding possibilities.
Harbour developments by local trusts, training, assistance to tourism — all have already been mentioned by others hopeful of appropriating some Eurocash.
But the possibility of health care being eligible for Objective 1 support had never been voiced before.
‘For the first time, Objective 1 measures are being talked about in relation to health and education,’ Claridge said.
‘We don't know in detail what these would involve, but they are aspects we will be exploring precisely over the next few weeks and months.’
In the Highlands, faced with abnormally high rates of suicide, accidental death, alcoholism and heart disease, funds for health would be more than welcome, according to Highland Health Board.
Bob Shorter, director of contracts, said any cash would open up many possibilities.
‘I've got a list a lot longer than my arm of projects which would benefit from financial support,’ he said.
‘The key would be knowing whether the money would be a one-off, or if continuing funding would enable running costs to be taken care of.
You can build a hospital — but you have to pay for running it too.’
Priorities already established in the Highlands, he said, were care for the mentally and physically disabled, in co-operation with local authorities and voluntary agencies; health promotion, and the building of new general-practice surgeries.
‘Any money would help,’ he said.
‘The reduction of waiting lists and the care in the community policy are already priorities we have put before the Scottish Office.’
‘The question of education and health was being discussed in the run up to the Edinburgh Summit and at the summit,’ said Claridge.
‘We don't have the details though — we don't know if it might include the replacement of schools or whether it has to be directed at education in different ways.’
Under Objective 1, the question of ‘additionality’— top-up cash which must be added by the British Government before a project can proceed — becomes less potentially stultifying.
Additionality will drop from 50 per cent under the Highlands' previously anticipated Objective 5b status to 25 or even 15 per cent in certain cases.
It is clear that because of the additionality aspect, the Scottish Office must approve any projects seeking Objective 1 funding.
In fact St Andrew's House will act as a kind of brokerage for grant applications.
The three islands councils, Highland Region and Highlands and Islands Enterprise, plus a representative of the district councils and possibly the health boards, will meet to thrash out a list of priorities, as has already been happening under Objective 5b.
‘If the Scottish Office approves then it goes to Brussels,’ said a spokesman for Highlands and Islands Enterprise.
‘It's just another arm of government — Scottish Office, Whitehall, Brussels.’
The HIE wish-list includes ‘hard infrastructure’ projects like the Mallaig, Kinlochbervie and Lochinver roads, which service ports through which half of Britain's fish comes ashore.
‘Anyone who's ever faced a 38-tonner on a single track road in north-west Sutherland would agree,’ said the spokesman.
‘But other ideas loom large.
Among things we would like are the acceleration of helping along the Highland university, office and factory developments, marketing schemes, training programmes, and workshops.’
Once the various Highland councils and HIE have analysed the needs and priorities of the area, and Scottish Office approval has been obtained, the European Commission will go through that list with a fine toothcomb.
‘They'll decide if they want to accept it,’ said Claridge, ‘add any modifications and then come back with their own document called the Community Support Framework.
That sets out how the money is going to be delivered, what sort of organisational structure is required, and evaluation and monitoring to ensure objectives are met.’
While Claridge waits in hope, HIE have more battles to fight.
The exclusion of west Moray, Argyll and parts of Strathclyde from Objective 1 status is not being accepted meekly.
The commissioners made their decision to apply Objective 1 only to areas covered by the regional and islands councils because of regulations requiring funding areas to conform to the French system of prefectures.
Regional councils are seen as the nearest equivalent.
‘We presented a case for the whole of the HIE area that was fully supported by John Major,’ said the agency's spokesman.
‘We will continue to press the council of ministers, who make the final decisions, that the final decision must be to award full status to the whole area.
In the end it is a political decision.’
And so the wish-lists of Arran, Cumbrae, Cowal, the rest of Argyll and west Moray — where the Highland MEP, Winnie Ewing, has a home — will have to wait until June, when the heavily lobbied council of ministers finally approve — or not — what could be more than £20 million a year for the Highlands and Islands.
Elsewhere, from Lewis to Barra and from Unst to Strathspey, from Nairn to Kyle, the wishing continues apace.
JOHN PAUL
Bridge to prosperity: Iain Robertson, chief executive of Highlands and Islands Enterprise at the Kessock Bridge, Inverness, a project funded by EC cash
Stormy month included ‘low of the century'
JANUARY 1993 will be remembered as one of the stormiest months in living memory.
No fewer than 20 Atlantic depressions affected Scotland during the month and one in particular may have been the deepest low seen near the British Isles this century.
Only on the very last day did an anticyclone grace our shores.
The first nine days of 1993 saw the large European anticyclone and rather typical Atlantic depressions draw a mainly mild, south to southwesterly airstream across Scotland.
Frontal zones gave periods of rain followed by brighter, more showery conditions.
Snow was a problem on high ground in the northeast on the 3rd, 4th and 8th but strong winds were the main feature on several days.
The most noteworthy gale around this time was on the 5th when a severe southwesterly gale drove the powerless oil tanker Braer onto a reef in Quendale Bay, Shetland, as a television audience of millions held its breath.
On the morning of the 10th, the nation at large, having been well forewarned, battened down the hatches as the ‘low of the century’ tracked towards a position between Iceland and Shetland.
That day, a high tide and strong winds brought flooding to coasts fringing the Firth of Clyde.
In the evening, as very cold air was drawn fiercely across Scotland from the west, the frequent showers turned wintry and power lines were brought down in Lothian Region.
Monday the 11th was, as travellers and commuters will recall, one of the most wintry days over Scotland for some time.
The heavy, and at times prolonged, snow showers, strong winds and freezing temperatures combined to give severe conditions, even in low-lying parts on the lee side of the country such as Fife.
Where snow depths increased rapidly in central and eastern districts, scores of vehicles and their occupants were trapped on busy highways where such conditions have been rare in recent years.
The showery activity and strong winds eased during the 12th-14th as the offending depression drifted away northwards and a slight thaw was sufficient to help life return to normal on low ground.
Late on the 14th and during the 15th and 16th a further series of Atlantic troughs brought extremely changeable and, at times, very windy weather back to all parts.
Winds gusted to 70-80 mph at Glasgow and Edinburgh but, more ominously for the population in some other parts of the country where a blanket of thick snow still covered the ground, copious rainfall and exceptionally mild air from a southerly point swept Scotland.
This balmy airmass gave most places their warmest day of the month on the 16th — over 13C being recorded at Glasgow and Edinburgh.
Pride of place, however, goes to Inverailort in the West Highlands with the national high for the month of 14.4C, though the rain and gale rather spoiled things.
On the following day, the 17th, a very strong and much colder westerly flow replaced the tropical airmass and gusts to 150 mph blasted the Cairngorm summit station.
Lower down it was reported that a very large number of trees, including several fine and ancient specimens, were blown down in Borders Region.
By now, too, rapid and exceptional rainfall runoff and snowmelt had manifested itself as severe, widespread flooding affecting the valleys of the River Tay and its tributaries.
At Perth, where many buildings were inundated, the flood was reported to have been the highest since 1814.
Damage to farmland was catastrophic and main rail links were severed.
The weather continued in an extremely unsettled mode, another vigorous depression on the well-trodden path between Iceland and Scotland giving the strongest winds of the month on the night of the 21st.
The gust of 169 mph recorded on Cairngorm was a near-record for the UK and the peaks of 92 mph at Glasgow and 85 mph at Edinburgh were the highest recorded at those sites since the night of the so-called ‘Glasgow Hurricane’ almost exactly 25 years ago.
Mercifully, this time casualties were lighter than during that phenomenal event but there were reports of at least three fatalities which were attributed to the storm.
A further deep Atlantic low gave the bulk of the population their wettest day of the month on the 23rd but, from the 25th to the 30th, the depressions became noticeably less intense.
A healthy rise of pressure over the UK on the 30th and 31st heralded a complete change of weather type and the resultant anticyclone of 1040 millibars central pressure gave over six hours of bright sunshine and calm conditions over a good part of the mainland.
Surprisingly perhaps, January 1993 was generally a degree or two milder than normal.
The explanation for this being that weather caused by frequent vigorous systems coming off a relatively warm Atlantic is not conducive to lengthy spells of severe frost.
For the fifth January in a row rainfall shows a distribution such that the extreme northeast had less precipitation than normal.
Elsewhere there was an excess, markedly so in many districts where two to four times the norm was recorded.
At Glasgow it was the wettest January for 65 years and stations as far afield as Stornoway and Leuchars also reported record totals.
Monthly sunshine figures often show a close correlation with rainfall and this held true for January 1993.
Amounts ranged from 9 hours at Cape Wrath to a better than average 58 hours at Dyce (Aberdeen Airport)— 20 hours more than London Airport recorded.
Provisional analysis reveals that the month was one of the windiest on record.
Sixty years of anemograph (wind-recorder) data for Glasgow show that severe gusts were more frequent in January 1993 than in any other month in the record.
If nothing else, television viewers worldwide will now never need to ask the question ‘are there sometimes strong winds and rough seas around Shetland in January?’
Fair Isle 4.3 180 10 Lerwick 3.3 227 10 Baltasound 3.4 228 10 Kirkwall 3.6 144 14 Wick 3.4 94 35 Cape Wrath 3.9 221 9 Lairg 2.8 279 24 Kinbrace — 203 32 Stornoway 4.3 269 18 Diabaig 5.1 285 18 Kinlochewe 5.2 511 14 Benbecula 5.3 215 18 Rum 5.5 501 12 Lochailort 5.9 510 — Onich 4.8 491 12 Fort Augustus 3.8 426 16 Aviemore 2.6 336 26 Inverness 4.5 145 30 Inverness Airport 4.0 112 — Forres 4.2 89 31 Glenlivet 3.2 128 44 Keith 3.5 65 48 Banff 4.1 67 — Braemar 2.2 195 29 Aberdeen Airport 4.1 75 58 Stonehaven 3.5 95 57 Dundee 4.4 137 — Loch Lee 2.6 261 — Arbroath 4.7 89 — Loch Venachar 3.5 448 — Ardtalnaig 3.9 348 — Crieff 3.6 417 33 Pitlochry 3.4 273 — Perth 4.5 272 — Leuchars 4.1 167 54 Edinburgh Airport 4.6 125 41 Dunbar 5.3 51 55 Blythe 3.4 95 38 Selkirk 3.7 158 — Kelso 4.6 77 — Tiree 5.5 259 23 Colonsay 5.7 199 26 Lochgilphead 5.5 392 — Oban 4.8 379 17 Brodick 5.4 373 — Rothesay 5.4 289 — Stirling 4.2 275 — Glasgow Airport 5.0 231 36 East Kilbride 4.2 291 32 Leadhills 2.6 265 — Carnwath 3.3 154 — Girvan 6.3 122 — Prestwick 5.6 142 31 Cumnock 5.2 163 24 Dumfries 4.9 184 38 Eskdalemuir 3.1 293 22 Whithorn 5.1 93 45 London Airport 6.9 63 38 Cardiff 6.6 123 40 Plymouth 7.8 118 35 Birmingham 5.6 71 31 Manchester 5.5 79 49 Tynemouth 5.2 39 43 Weather Total Station mm Kylesku 251 Glenelg 359 Balmoral 188 Leith Hall 61 Ellon 48 Forfar 155 Rannoch 393 Nunraw Abbey 67 Machrihanish 169 Loch Awe 571 Younger Bot Gdn 505 Grangemouth 199 EXTREMES RECORDED AT QUOTED SCOTTISH STATIONS HIGHEST TEMPERATURE: 14.4 C at Lochailort on the 16th LOWEST TEMPERATURE: -6.2 C at Lerwick on the 25th GREATEST RAINFALL IN A DAY: 74.2 mm at Kinlochewe on the 18th Text and data supplied by Meteorological Office, Edinburgh WEATHER OF JANUARY