

Sir William MacPherson: a ‘100 per cent, full-blooded Scotsman’ once over the Border
Heritage ‘key to prosperity for Highlands and Islands’
By Tom Morton
JOBS and prosperity in the Highlands and Islands can spring from history, culture and the Gaelic language, according to the chairman of Scottish Natural Heritage, Magnus Magnusson.
Speaking at yesterday's opening of the £750,000 Aros visitor centre at Portree, on Skye, Mr Magnusson explicitly linked his agency's activities in protecting Scotland's natural environment with the renaissance in Gaelic and interest in the past.
‘Our heritage is a key part of the economy of the Highlands and Islands,’ he said.
‘Not just for employment which it directly provides, but also in the way in which it underpins so many rural industries.
For that reason we should take extra care that we do not take it for granted or abuse it.’
The Aros Heritage Centre (Aros is Gaelic for home) is the brainchild of four local people — a radio producer and photographer, Cailean MacLean; a former hotelier, Robin Weir; a singer and shop owner, Arthur Cormacan and a businessman, Donald Macdonald.
The local enterprise company has committed more than £386,000 to the project.
‘This is an important day for our language and culture,’ said Mr Macdonald.
‘It marks the first genuine attempt to bring alive the remarkable range of heritage and culture which has sustained the area for hundreds of years.’
Wit, wine, good food served a la carte THE highly popular series of Scotsman Literary Lunches starts up again this month with an intriguing trio of authors: the actor Brian Blessed, the agony aunt Claire Rayner and the leading biographer Margaret Forster.
The lunches, which feature good food, wine and wit, have been a notable success since their inception in 1991.
Writers giving talks in the last year have included such diverse characters as Shirley Conran, Barry Norman and Nigel Tranter.
The first event of 1993 is again fortunate to have secured three leading figures from very different fields of endeavour.
Margaret Forster is a novelist, biographer and critic whose new biography of Daphne du Maurier, an investigation into the mysterious and passionate personality of one of the century's best-loved authors, is already generating lavish praise and attention.
Du Maurier's atmospheric and often sinister novels and stories made her a worldwide bestseller, while she herself remained reclusive and deeply private.
Forster exposes for the first time, with the official sanction of Du Maurier's family, her fantasy life, her secret wartime affair, and the many contradictions in this complex woman's inner life.
Claire Rayner is someone else well acquainted with the complexities of the personal as one of Britain's most empathetic solvers of problems.
She is also a prolific author with more than 70 books published.
In contrast, the great outdoors is more the theme of Brian Blessed's book, The Turquoise Mountain.
In it he details his childhood dream of climbing Everest — and his fulfilment of this remarkable ambition three years ago.
Chalmers boosts hopes of Lions' standby spot
By Harry Pincott
WHILE Craig Chalmers revealed in this paper earlier this week that he might just have a chance of being put on standby for the forthcoming British Lions tour, he is now more upbeat about the prospects of that happening.
The Melrose stand-off, who suffered a double fracture of the right forearm in the Calcutta Cup defeat, was first advised that the injury might take almost three months to heal, but medical opinion now is that the time could be trimmed to between six and eight weeks.
If that turns out to be the case, Chalmers hopes to be back in action before the end of the season, and that would certainly lead to a standby spot.
‘I am a quick healer, but even I'm surprised by the news that I could be ready to play again in another six weeks.
Now I can look forward to squeezing in one or two games before the season is over, and being put on standby would really give me something to aim for.’
The Lions squad will be named on Monday week.
Chalmers will be at Netherdale this afternoon hoping to see his club finish off their Division I season with a win over Gala, but no matter what happens, Melrose — Andy Purves is in for the injured Gary Parker — will be presented with the Championship Trophy after the match by the Scottish Rugby Union president, Robin Charters.
While crowds at Netherdale and at the relegation games should be large, the biggest attendance could be at Inverleith, where Stewart's-Melville will be hoping the experience of players such as Finlay Calder, Douglas Wyllie and Julian Scott will see them win their Division II promotion clash with Musselburgh.
If that happens, and West of Scotland beat Grangemouth at Burnbrae to accompany the Colleges up, there will be much gnashing of teeth among the Musselburgh XV, who have the best defensive record of the three clubs but could lose out because they have scored fewer points.
The South African Rugby Football Union has appointed the former Zimbabwe coach, Ian McIntosh, as national coach up to and including the 1995 World Cup in South Africa.
McIntosh will also join the six-man selection committee.
Consistent Couples opens with 64
NICK FALDO trailed Fred Couples by five shots, and Sandy Lyle was a further two strokes behind, after the first round of the £800,000 Honda Classic in Fort Lauderdale.
Faldo shot a 69 and Lyle 71 as Masters champion Couples hit all 18 greens in regulation and missed just one fairway in an eight-under-par 64 to take a one-stroke lead over Phil Blackmar and US Tour newcomer David Jackson.
McAllister sticks to the rhythm with another 70 From Mike Britten, Majorca
THE decision by Scotland's Stephen McAllister's to concentrate on rhythm and feel rather than technique brought him a rich dividend in the Balearic Open here yesterday.
The 31-year-old from Paisley had a second 70 at Santa Ponsa to move alongside Ronan Rafferty at four under par, two strokes behind Danish leader Steen Tinning, who has one stroke in hand over England's Jim Payne, South African Ian Palmer and Sweden's Joakim Haeggman.
McAllister, who three years ago won the Atlantic Open in Portugal and the Dutch Open, had only one top-ten finish last season.
‘I got too technical,’ he said, ‘and I forgot how to score.
So I have now decided to put the theory out of my mind and rely on rhythm when I am putting.’
It was his failure to survive the halfway cut in Valencia last week that provided the spur for McAllister's change of approach.
‘I failed by one shot when I should have made it easily, and that gave me the kick up the backside I needed.’
This week the bespectacled McAllister has missed little of note on the variable greens.
‘When I feel fine with the putter I usually play well.
Now I feel comfortable in my halfway position, and I will take it as it comes.’
His only regret yesterday was to fail from seven feet at the last, where his solitary bogey cost him the chance to stand alongside Payne, the 1992 Rookie of the Year, who had a best-of-the-day 66.
It contained seven birdies, but also a bogey 5 at the eighteenth, where two precise long shots are required to reach the heart of the two-tiered green.
Payne hopes to benefit from last week, when he squandered a three-shot halfway lead in the Mediterranean Open.
‘I think I have learned quite a bit from that,’ admitted the former Walker Cup player.
‘It was too easy to let the mind wander and I spent too much time looking at the leaderboards instead of concentrating on my own game.
‘With a three-stroke lead it's almost inevitable that you start to look ahead and it happened to me.’
Gordon Brand, jun, and Ireland's David Feherty, who were joint runners-up in Valencia last week, both failed to make the cut after taking 75 to finish on 148, and the Turespana Masters champion, Andrew Oldcorn (74) went out on 150.
But Colin Montgomerie just got through, thanks to three birdies in a homeward 33 for a 69.
His opening 76 in reality had been his practice round because of his late arrival, and he could make nothing of the greens in his outward 36 yesterday, starting at the tenth.
Then he holed from 20ft at the long second and six feet at the fifth and sixth to maintain his record of not having suffered a failure in Europe since the Cannes Open two years ago.
Aberdeen's Paul Lawrie had to thank a homeward 35 for his 73 after starting at the tenth with a 6 and taking another at the eighteenth where he three-putted.
Ross Drummond opened with a double bogey but came home in 34 for a 70 and 145.
Adam Hunter (72-145) and Gary Orr, who holed from eight feet to par the last for 71 and 146, also got through, but non-qualifiers included Brian Marchbank (78-153) and Andrew Coltart (75-154).
Tinning, now 30, won the Doug Sanders World Junior event, held annually in Aberdeen, when he was a teenager.
He is now back full-time on the circuit after breaking an arm in a car crash in 1990, which put him out of action for 12 months.
Like Payne and Haeggman who had 67, and another Swede Anders Gillener caught McAllister on 140, he is seeking his maiden Tour success.
Biggest dangers to the front- runners are Rafferty, who next week defends his Portuguese Open title, Kiwi Frank Nobilo, seeking his second win in seven days, and Spaniard Jose Maria Olazabal, who is at two under par and remains favourite after the withdrawal of the stricken Seve Ballesteros.
Stephen McAllister: two behind leader Steen Tinning thanks to poise on variable greens
Meanwhile Tinning, the 30-year-old Dane who is based on the Costa del Sol, reeled off his second  successive 69 for his leading score of 138.
Tinning, who finished sixth in last year's BMW International in Munich, attributed his new found form to a changed mental attitude.
‘I was putting too much pressure on myself and couldn't cope,’ declared the halfway leader.
‘I decided to hit every shot in a relaxed manner and not worry about the result.
It seems to have worked.’
That certainly appeared to be true as Tinning nudged ahead of Payne, Palmer and Haeggman.
Palmer, who hasn't won since last season's Asian Classic in Bangkok, came home in 32 for an impressive 68, while Haeggman had five birdies and an eagle in his 67.
Ready to pounce on the leaders are Ireland's Ronan Rafferty and Stephen McAllister of Scotland, who finished on 140 after a pair of 70s.
‘Generally it's coming right again and it's thanks to a new driver which I can hit,’ declared Rafferty.
McAllister, meanwhile, was in contented mood thanks to a smooth putting stroke.
The Scot had a chance to join Payne at five under, but was not too dismayed after bogeying the final hole.
‘I feel comfortable in this position and I'm looking forward to getting into contention,’ said McAllister.
Australia skittled by Kiwi paceman
NEW ZEALAND pace bowler Danny Morrison grabbed five wickets for 37 runs as Australia collapsed to 139 for nine on the first day of the third and final Test in Auckland.
Only bad light and rain, which prevented play in the final session, saved the tourists from total embarrassment after Allan Border's decision to bat gave the Kiwi bowlers the chance to exploit movement on an Eden Park wicket that looked deceptively flat.
A battling 53-run partnership between all-rounder Steve Waugh and bowler Merv Hughes saved Australia from being dismissed for under 100.
It had looked promising for the tourists as openers David Boon and Mark Taylor batted confidently for the first hour to put on 38.
But six wickets fell for ten runs, including the bizarre dismissal of Border.
A Morrison delivery beat him comprehensively, brushing his off-stump on the way to wicketkeeper Tony Blain.
The bails remained on, but umpire Chris King raised his finger, indicating Border had got bat to ball.
Morrison said later he felt Border had edged the ball, but he agreed that television replays appeared to show the ‘woody’ sound was probably the ball touching the stump.
Waugh struck seven fours in his 77-ball knock of 41 before he was caught in the gully by Andrew Jones off Willie Watson.
Hughes, after lofting four fours and a six, was caught on the boundary after scoring 33.
Australian team manager Bobby Simpson said his bowlers were looking forward to the second day, when similar overcast conditions were forecast.
— Reuter.
‘I don't think New Zealand's batsmen will be looking forward too much to going out there,’ he said.
Don't write off others, warns Bruce on eve of Old Trafford showdown
STEVE BRUCE yesterday warned about the dangers of Manchester United becoming gripped by title fever if they beat Aston Villa in the FA Premier League at Old Trafford tomorrow.
United's acting captain is worried about the match billing as a title decider — and insists Norwich are still in contention.
Bruce declared: ‘It would be nice to say that if we won against Villa we would win the League.
But that's far from the case.
‘Everyone wrote off Norwich a few weeks ago, but they beat Sheffield United in midweek while we lost, and Villa slipped up by only drawing with Tottenham.
Now Norwich are back in the hunt and can't be ruled out.’
The United manager, Alex Ferguson, discovered last season that there's many a slip on the way to the championship, and he didn't attempt to conceal the importance of this Old Trafford showdown, with United leading Villa on goal difference in pursuit of their first title since 1967.
Ferguson said: ‘You can talk all day about the pros and cons of this match.
We are level on points and the result means so much to both sides.
‘It's probably the most important match either team has faced for a long time.
There's a lot at stake.’
Bryan Robson will play some part in the proceedings, three months after his last Premier League outing.
He has played three reserve games since recovering from a calf injury.
Frenchman Eric Cantona will definitely be back for United after suspension, probably at the expense of Andrei Kanchelskis.
Aston Villa goalkeeper Mark Bosnich anticipates a hot reception when he returns to Old Trafford.
Bosnich made three  appearance for United before a work permit problem forced him to return home to Australia.
Atkinson stepped in to sign the 21-year-old 12 months ago and he has established himself in the Villa side ahead of Nigel Spink.
Only Chris Armstrong, of Crystal Palace, has succeeded in beating Bosnich without the aid of a penalty in his first seven games since taking over from Spink.
Hill up with the leaders
BRITAIN'S Damon Hill (above), making his Grand Prix debut in the second Williams, was fourth-fastest in the first qualifying session for tomorrow's season-opening South African GP at Kyalami.
His Williams team-mate, Alain Prost, marked his return to Formula One yesterday after a year's sabbatical by claiming provisional pole position.
Prost clocked the fastest lap with a time of 1min 16.8sec, three-tenths of a second clear of Ayrton Senna in a McLaren.
Michael Schumacher was third fastest in a Benetton.
— Reuter
Scottish National gets cash boost
By Isobel Cunningham
THE Scottish Grand National at Ayr next month is to be backed by the Stakis Hotels and Casino Group to the tune of £50,000.
The deal is a timely boost for Scotland's top steeplechase after a long, fruitless search for support following the decision by William Hill, sponsor for the past 15 years, to pull out after last year's race.
Disaffection with Ayr's earlier decision to award the franchise for the on-course betting shop to rival bookmaker, Ladbrokes, plainly had something to do with this move.
However, in the words of the track's marketing manager, George Steele, replacing this level of prize-money has been ‘a nightmare in the current economic climate, though to get a Scottish-based company coming to our aid is marvellous’.
Mark Kershaw, who started as general manager at Ayr just over a year ago with the task of halting the track's headlong hurtle towards debts of £1 million, described the rescue package as ‘an enormous boost, not only for Ayr racecourse, but Scottish racing’.
He added: ‘The Scottish Grand National is more than Scotland's top steeplechase, it is part of a select group of top races in Britain.’
Meanwhile, The Fellow was yesterday included among the entries for both the Whitbread Gold Cup and the Jameson Irish Grand National.
Trainer  Francois Doumen is clearly considering plundering more foreign prizes after contesting next week's Cheltenham Gold Cup.
The classy eight-year-old has never before been entered in either race.
He heads 50 entries for the Whitbread, to be run at Sandown on 24 April, and could face Cheltenham rivals Docklands Express, Rushing Wild, Garrison Savannah, Royal Athlete and Sibton Abbey.
The full list of entries for the Irish National, to be run at Fairyhouse on 12 April, will be announced on Monday, but the sponsor has revealed that The Fellow is included, along with Rushing Wild, Garrison Savannah and Sibton Abbey.
Scots ring the changes to conquer triple peaks
DURING the next six weeks Scotland are pledged to find the right blend in order that their assault on the Rugby World Cup Sevens at Murrayfield does not self-destruct.
Hence the reason sevens coaches Douglas Morgan and John Jeffrey were talking yesterday of some switches within the ranks, both in Canberra and in Fiji next week.
Morgan noted: ‘We basically have to peak three times in the period: Hong Kong at the end of this month, Melrose [where the Scots play under the guise of the Co-optimists], and the World Sevens.
In the meantime we have to find what will suit us best.’
The Scots opted to retain Derek Stark on the wing and to introduce Adam Roxburgh to the pack for their opening tie today against ACT in the Canberra Sevens.
ACT include two players in their squad who are no strangers to Scotland — centre Jim Swan who has returned after playing in the junior teams at Gala, and flanker Mark McInnes, who toured with the Wallabies to Canada and France in 1989 and spent some time with Peebles.
The tie is sponsored by Carmen Furniture, appropriate to the musical chairs likely for the Scots' second outing and key to qualification for the knock-out stages — against Canada — where the intention is that Tony Stanger and Carl Hogg will play.
In spite of nearly one in eight adult Australians being out of work, sponsorship remains vibrant here.
Even this morning, companies and individuals are apparently falling over themselves to spend breakfast with the Australian team, all for a moderate fee, of course, which goes to charity.
The Scots were seeded to meet the Fijians in today's semi-final, but the islanders' optimum squad are at home in a training camp.
One senses disappointment from Morgan: ‘Watching them on video, you cannot fail to be impressed by their repeated ability to get men behind the ball, which is the biggest thing in sevens.’
Australian coach Bob Dwyer and his squad attended a competitors' briefing after training.
Only three of the players who reached the final of a recent South American tournament (won by the All Blacks) are on duty.
But Barry Lea, a desperately quick winger who played against Scotland for Queensland Country on last summer's tour, is among them.
Dwyer is monitoring the continuing rumpus over whether players should be involved with their provinces in 15-a-side competitions or opt to play for Australia in the sevens tournaments.
Dwyer told The Scotsman that David Campese was most anxious to adjourn from the Italian leagues in order to play at Murrayfield, but it is uncertain whether he will be joined by Michael Lynagh, Tim Gavin and Willie Ofahengaue.
‘We are not sure whether Tim and Willie are the ones we would look to for Murrayfield, anyway,’ Dwyer added.
The briefing disclosed that Lolani Koko, who was named in the New Zealand squad for the Hong Kong Sevens, has apparently decided to stay loyal to Western Samoa.
A Samoan official could shed no light on his reasons and Koko himself was ‘resting’ in his hotel, apparently suffering from a slight cold.
New drugs scandal rocks Toronto showpiece
ATHLETICS was hit by another drugs scandal last night as world champion hurdler, Lyudmila Narozhilenko, was reported to have failed a dope test.
The Russian, who has confirmed herself this year as one of the world's greatest athletes by setting four world records, is said to have tested positive at a meeting in Lievin, France, last month after equalling her 60 metres hurdles world record.
The revelations emerged on the first day of the World Indoor Championships in Toronto, representing the worst possible news for beleaguered international athletics officials coming hot on the heels of the repeat Ben Johnson scandal.
Though International Amateur Athletic Federation officials insisted they could not confirm the reports, a source close to the sport's governing body confirmed Narozhilenko had provided a positive ‘A’ sample while the ‘B’sample was being examined.
There has never been a case where the ‘B’ sample has not matched the ‘A’.
Ironically, Narozhilenko is the reigning world indoor champion, and suspicions had been aroused when she did not turn up in Toronto with the Russian team to defend her title.
The positive test is said to have been given after the Lievin race on 13 February which saw Narozhilenko, the world 100m hurdles champion in Tokyo in 1991, begin an extraordinary record-breaking sequence at 60m hurdles.
In Lievin, she equalled the record in 7.69sec.
On 2 March, she improved it to 7.68 and, two days later, broke it twice in a day in Seville — 7.66 and 7.63.
The episode marked more problems for the IAAF president, Primo Nebiolo, who on Thursday had to defend himself against accusations that news of Johnson's positive test had been deliberately delayed in an effort not to cast a cloud over the Toronto event.
Meanwhile, Tom McKean was relieved to avoid one of his familiar acts of self-destruction as he successfully negotiated the first hurdle of his quest for gold in the 800m.
The Scot, first of the British medal hopes in action in the SkyDome, took no chances as he controlled the heat from the gun, led throughout and won convincingly in 1min 49.09sec.
After booking his place in today's semi-final as fastest qualifier, McKean said: ‘I felt totally in command out there, and I've taken a lot of confidence from that run.’
McKean looks much happier when he can control a heat from the front.
After breaking ahead of his experienced Brazilian rival, Jose-Luis Barbosa, he simply stretched out the five-man field, only stepping on the accelerator off the last bend to hold off comfortably the late surge of runner-up, Belgian Luc Bernaert.
Yvonne Murray was given an unexpected day off and handed a ticket straight into today's 3,000m final.
Scotland's European champion was due to be the first of the team's medal hopes in action, but lack of entries forced the organisers to abandon the heats.
Instead, Murray will find herself in a 12-runner final, with only four adversaries likely to bar her path to gold — the Netherlands' Elly Van Hulst, Romanian Margareta Keszeg, American Lynn Jennings and Russian Olga Kovpotina. — PA.
Results, Page 22
RUPERT MOON and Andrew Lamerton will win first caps for Wales against France in Paris after wholesale changes by selectors, including dropping scrum-half Robert Jones.
Phil Davies is recalled as Wales axe six players for the final Five Nations Championship match on Saturday.
Out go full-back Mike Rayer, centre Mike Hall, Jones, hooker Nigel Meek, lock Tony Copsey and No 8 Stuart Davies.
In come Tony Clement, Nigel Davies, Moon, Lamerton, Phil Davies and Mark Perego.
Emyr Lewis switches from blindside flanker to No 8, with Perego taking over on the flank.
930314 
Chalmers boost, Page 22
The Eagle has landed Preserving a listed building while constructing a new one presents architects with major problems.
Brian Edwards looks at a handsome solution in central Glasgow — the Eagle Building
AMONG the many new buildings in Glasgow which have sought to reconcile the traditions of the city with the need for modernity, none have done so with the wit and directness of the Eagle Building in Bothwell Street.
The building does not construct modern office space behind a retained facade but around it.
The old structure is cocooned within a contemporary shell of glass, steel and polished green marble.
Where once stood the two-storey Eagle Warehouse of 1854 there is now a 12-storey tower with an entrance foyer of sufficient height to engulf the surviving bays of the original building.
Conservation, which many designers claim dogs modern architecture, has led here to a situation where both exist quite happily side by side.
The facade of Eagle Warehouse is by the Glasgow architect Alexander Kirkland, who built the pedestrian suspension bridge over the Clyde at Carlton Place and became Chicago's Commissioner of Public Buildings in 1877.
As was the fashion in the mid-19th century, Eagle Warehouse employs the Venetian palazzo style popularised by John Ruskin.
Rather than remove these reminders of Glasgow's past, the city's planners wisely insisted that the facade survived not as a real building but almost as a museum exhibit whose Stones of Venice had appeared two years earlier.
The Kirkland facade is more than a mere architectural exhibit within the building, for
The old Eagle Warehouse had the appearance of a curve at the west end of Bothwell Street, though in fact it was made up of four straight sections each placed at a shallow angle.
Upon the top sat a magnificent eagle carved in sandstone.
Four bays of the facade — including a section of the street corner and the eagle — have been saved and incorporated as a screen wall within the new entrance foyer.
The arched openings provide access to a lightweight stair which takes visitors to a mezzanine level linking with the ground floor office space.
The hint of functional justification for the reconstructed arcade is, like the Gothic arches incorporated into the Burrell Gallery, a sign that new architecture can respect the old without aping its style.
The two co-exist as memories of their cultures, with a healthy clash where the two collide in the entrance foyer.
Here the new building is redolent of the symbols of commercial architecture — polished marble, hi-tech glazing, stepped cube facades — as the old one was of the values of its age.
Where one is large-scaled, minimal and spacious, the other is intricate, decorative and laden with cultural values.
Such juxtapositions are sometimes experienced in the street but rarely encountered within interiors.
Yet Glasgow has been cultivating a townspace of such experiences for nearly a decade.
Princes Square mixes old and new in a fashion reminiscent of a film set, while the Italian Centre has elements of real Glasgow buildings jumbled freely with neo-classical replication and a sparse metallic modernism that the critic is lost for words.
How, one wonders, can such historic complexity come about?
At the new Eagle Building it was largely the result of public consultation into the demolition of the listed building.
The Royal Fine Art Commission, while regretting the loss of the long facade by Kirkland, felt that a tall building was needed to act as a gateway from the M8.
The element of height provided the opportunity to incorporate sections of the original facade inside the building.
Had Kirkland's warehouse been taller, the cocooning of four bays may not have been possible.
Besides the main screen in the entrance foyer other details such as decorative keystones based upon characters in Greek mythology have been placed between bank of lift on each floor.
As an addition to the architecture of modern Glasgow, the Eagle Building breaks little new ground in other respects.
It does, however, continue a welcome trend towards well-articulated bays, quality materials and expressed lift shafts.
Coloured dark green with tinted glass, the building has the air of downtown Chicago — a final, if possibly accidental, tribute to Alexander Kirkland.
Buried treasure: in a happy mix of old and new, the Eagle Warehouse's 19th-century facade — complete with sandstone eagle — is cocooned inside the modern glass of the Eagle Building The latter provide splendid views along one of Glasgow's principal office streets and over the rooftops of BP's offices across the street.
The bays step forward and reduce in height to respect the curve of Bothwell Street as it becomes the access ramp to the M8.
Casualty list grows for Brugge return
WALTER SMITH will take his injury-ravaged squad out to lunch today aware that, in the present, stricken climate at Ibrox, food poisoning is one of the few afflictions not to have hit his players before their European Champions League tie with FC Brugge on Wednesday, writes Hugh Keevins.
Daily treatment sessions started yesterday at Ibrox to see what could be done about clearing a casualty list of Goram, Gough, Robertson, Steven, Stevens and Huistra.
Rangers' goalkeeper, who has a valid claim to the title of Britain's best by his displays in Europe this season, has missed two matches in succession for the first time since joining the club from Hibs and will not train today.
However, Goram, Huistra and Steven at least have been given a chance of recovering in time.
That is more than can be said of Rangers' captain, Gough, and the rest.
Gary Stevens will find out today if he requires another operation on the foot in which he cracked a bone during the summer.
Rangers' selection for Brugge will, under the circumstances, be left until the last moment.
Only five players — Goram, Robertson, McPherson, Brown and Hateley — have taken part in all seven European ties this season.
FC Brugge, meanwhile, defeated Lokeren 3-1 in their Belgian league match.
PATRICK DE NOIRMONT/REUTER
Disappointment for Jackson, but Reynolds back in style
COLIN Jackson once again had to settle for second best after a dramatic and controversial 60 metres hurdles final.
The Welshman was edged out by just two-hundredths of a second by his best friend Mark McKoy — but could have been forgiven for feeling he had been robbed of gold after the Canadian had seemed to get away to a false start.
McKoy, the home town favourite, had already been called up for one false start — and it seemed certain that he would be disqualified after appearing to have another flyer second time around.
But the race was not stopped, and both Jackson and American Olympic silver medallist, Tony Dees, found themselves trailing McKoy badly by the first barrier.
Both made great inroads into the Canadian's lead and all three hit the line almost together, but McKoy dipped fractionally ahead.
He was timed at a Canadian record 7.41secs, the fastest time in the world this year, with Jackson adjudged to have gained the silver, though both he and Dees were clocked at 7.43secs.
Though Jackson was the first to congratulate the Olympic champion, the disappointment was written all over his face.
This was supposed to have been the event where he at last assumed his rightful position at the summit of the athletics world following his nightmare at the Olympics.
Unbeaten all year and even expected to win by his rivals, the 26-year-old had looked odds-on to win the senior world title which British athletics had been expecting of him since he won the junior crown in 1986.
Butch Reynolds completed a triumphant return to international competition by capturing the 400m gold in 45.26, the fifth fastest indoor time ever run.
Reynolds, sidelined for 2-years by a disputed doping suspension, made the most of his first appearance back on the world's stage as he caught Nigerian Sunday Bada coming around the final curve and won going away.
Bada was second in 45.75, followed by Australian Darren Clark in 46.45. — PA
Reynolds seemed sedate, perhaps reflective, after his victory.
He raised his right fist in the air and then his left, and he waved to the crowd but never broke into a big smile in celebration.
‘I proved my point,’ he said.
Strang strikes silver in Toronto Golden double for Murray and McKean
By Mike Aitken
NEVER give up on your dreams — the line comes from a book of poems that coach Tommy Boyle sent to Yvonne Murray in the wake of the Musselburgh runner's failure at last year's Olympics.
The sentiment was, if anything, even more significant for Tom McKean.
Yesterday both Scots put the nightmare of Barcelona behind them, and made their dreams of becoming world champions for the first time come true.
Just when their prospects appeared to be at the lowest ebb, Murray, in the 3,000 metres, and McKean, at 800m, pulled off a golden double triumph in Toronto at the World Indoor Championships.
It gave Scottish athletics one of its biggest boosts since the same pair of athletes won gold at the European Championships in Split two years ago.
To complete a glittering weekend for Scottish sport, David Strang, the little-known Scottish-born middle-distance runner, took the silver medal in the 1,500m after finishing second behind Ireland's Marcus O'Sullivan.
There were only three Scots in the British team in Toronto.
For the trio to collect two gold medals and one silver was an unprecedented Scottish haul on the world stage which can only augur well for the highlight of this year's outdoor season — the World Athletics Championships in Stuttgart.
All Scottish sportsmen and women tend to produce their best when least is expected of them.
Murray and McKean were written off in many quarters after the  disappointment of Barcelona — Murray finished eighth after starting favourite, McKean failed to reach the final — and the pair went to Toronto with their careers at the crossroads.
In the event, both athletes discovered their best form, running from the front with assurance and power and putting the old failures behind them.
Murray was first to triumph on Saturday night, hitting the accelerator at the 1,000m mark and leaving the rest of the field for dead.
In a time of 8min 50.55sec, she finished more than 12 seconds ahead of her nearest rival, Romania's Margareta Keszeg.
It was one of the most comprehensive wins in the history of the event.
At 28, the first British woman ever to win a world indoor title, Murray crushed quality rivals.
And she believes the best is yet to come.
‘I've still got a lot to prove,’ she said.
‘But I still believe I can win a World or Olympic title — I wouldn't still be running if I didn't think that.’
However, Murray also admitted for the first time how close she came to quitting after Barcelona.
‘Tommy Boyle told me not to throw in the towel,’ she said.
‘There were a lot of traumatic phone calls between the two of us and I had to do a lot of soul-searching.
In the end, my coach, family and fiance gave me the support and encouragement to relax and go back out there and run.’
Murray said she was enjoying her running again, and the same was true for McKean.
The 29-year-old Motherwell man, who has made an art form of fouling up on the big occasion, acknowledged that he too came close to calling it a day after the Olympics.
‘For a week or two after Barcelona, I thought why am I doing this?’ he said.
‘But athletics is like a drug, it keeps dragging you back for more.’
With no expectations to live up to except his own, McKean ran a marvellous race in the SkyDome.
From the gun he ran straight for his favourite place — the front — and stayed there until sprinting away from Burundi runner, Charles Nkazamyampi, in a time of 1:47:29.
Ironically, while McKean buried his accident-prone reputation, Brazil's Jose-Luis Barbosa tripped up on the penultimate lap.
The Scot, however, steered clear of trouble and maintained a three-stride advantage till the line.
‘I came here under a lot of pressure, knowing I had to succeed,’ he said.
‘I was here in good shape, but I've been in good shape at other championships and failed.
This time I did it.’
David Strang, who was raised in South Africa, trains in the US.
But he was born in Govan and, in spite of an American accent, says he is a proud Scot.
‘I've never said I'm from anywhere else,’ he revealed after taking the silver medal on his debut for Britain.
‘I'm proud of Scotland — I love Glasgow, Billy Connolly, Scottish rugby, you name it!
If they didn't know who I was in Scotland before, they will start to know now.’
Along with McKean, Strang was a silver medallist for Scotland in the 4x400m at the 1990 Commonwealth Games.
Since gaining a scholarship at Stanford University, his progress in the US has been impressive.
Yet the authorities in America refused to give him a green card as a full-time athlete because they said he wasn't good enough.
‘Hopefully, they'll change their minds now,’ he said.
Little-known even to his team-mates, Strang, like McKean and Murray, won his medal with nothing but dreams to run on.
Jackson edged out by McKoy
COLIN Jackson once again had to settle for second best after a dramatic and controversial 60 metres hurdles final.
The Welshman was edged out by just two-hundredths of a second by his best friend, Mark McKoy — but could have been forgiven for feeling he had been robbed of gold after the Canadian had seemed to get away to a false start.
McKoy, the hometown favourite, had already been called up for one false start — and it seemed certain that he would be disqualified after appearing to have another flyer second time around.
But the race was not stopped, and both Jackson and American Olympic silver medallist, Tony Dees, found themselves trailing McKoy badly by the first barrier.
Both made great inroads into the Canadian's lead and all three hit the line almost together, but McKoy was fractionally ahead.
He was timed at a Canadian record 7.41, the fastest time in the world this year, with Jackson adjudged to have gained the silver, though both he and Dees were clocked at 7.43.
Though Jackson was the first to congratulate the Olympic champion, the disappointment was written all over his face.
Butch Reynolds completed a triumphant return to international competition by capturing the 400m gold in 45.26, the fifth fastest indoor time ever.
Reynolds, sidelined for 2 years by a disputed doping suspension, made the most of his first appearance back on the world's stage as he caught Nigerian, Sunday Bada, coming around the final curve.
Barnsley's John Mayock, who had been fancied possibly to go one better in Toronto than his silver in last year's European Indoor Championships, ran out of steam as the pace hotted up in the 3,000m final, and could only finish sixth, in 7:54.41, some four seconds behind Italian winner, Gennaro Di Napoli.
Steve Smith, the 19-year-old Liverpool high jumper, smashed his British and Commonwealth indoor record with 2.37m, but it was only enough to earn him the bronze.
Smith's brave effort ensured Britain's 26-strong team finished the championships with two golds, two silver and one bronze — easily their best performance in any world indoor championship.
PETER JONES/REUTER
Finishing burst: Scotland's Tom McKean leads the pack as he heads for the line and victory in the 800 metres at the World Indoor Track and Field Championships in Toronto
Troubled Selkirk stage a thrilling recovery Selkirk 33 Stirling Co 10
SHOULD Selkirk fail to make the grade and drop out for a fourth spell in Division II, they will at least on this occasion descend with honour.
With the plaudits of the 4,000 Bedford fans still ringing in their ears from their exhilarating brand of rugby from their pre-English international game last week, the Philiphaugh faithful were equally ecstatic following their team's magnificent recovery against Stirling.
From being 10-6 down at the interval their pure brand of running rugby thrilled the crowd as the Souter backs blazed over for four thrilling tries and for a victory that appeared well beyond their reach at the half-way stage.
The home side's troubles started when they lost three key players in quick succession in the opening session to completely disrupt their pre-match tactics.
Right-winger Alan Linton was the first casualty when he was stretchered off with a double break to a leg after 16 minutes.
Graham Marshall followed with injuries to his rib cage which according to the internationalist following the game, will possibly terminate his career.
Paul Minto followed with concussion and with Bill Gentleman on the opposite flank also in the wars and requiring treatment Selkirk were minus two active wing-forwards for a spell.
Deputy hooker Ian Jeffery drafted in at blindside flanker typified the courageous tackling of the home team to avert a glut of scores by the visitors the County pack plying back enough possession to win a dozen games.
A penalty goal by Mark McKenzie and the stand-off's conversion of a try by David Elliot of Langholm connections was scant reward for incessant attack by Stirling.
Rodney Pow responded with two penalty goals for Selkirk.
Former Herioter Dr Bill Fiddes was fully occupied coping with the stream of injuries reaching the first aid room as three visitors in Harper, Gibson and Ireland also departed the field injured and with Selkirk assuming control for possession, Middleton and McConnell rampant at the line-outs, the home backs settled to the style of play inherited from John Rutherford for points to come thick and fast.
Iwan Tukalo shot over for the first.
Pow added a penalty, one of 20 awarded to the home side, Scott Nichol, sharp and penetrating, got a second try for Michael Jaffray to round off with two more.
His first from David Hunter's pass.
The latter outshining Kenny Logan.
Pow added two conversions.
Captain inspires Colleges to promotion Stewart's/Melville 17 Musselburgh 14
By Harry Pincott
IT WAS not just the Stewart's/Melville players who celebrated their promotion-winning victory, but also the club treasurer who has had the impossible task of balancing the books this season.
Colleges reckon their spell in Division II has cost them about £25,000 in lost sponsorship, bar takings, gate receipts etc — Saturday's crowd of over 2,500 brought in more than the combined total of the previous home league matches — and there's little doubt that defeat against Musselburgh would have had a catastrophic impact on the club.
However, thanks to the promptings of their captain, Douglas Wyllie, the Colleges just managed to pip Musselburgh on points differential and will now go up with champions West of Scotland, all three ending on the 22-point mark.
While admitting it was not one of their better performances, Wyllie stressed there was a great deal of pressure on the Colleges younger players.
‘They stood up pretty well considering we lost a 10-0 lead and then had to come from behind to win.’
No-one is more aware of the weaknesses in the current XV than the Scotland utility back who will be playing at centre for the A XV this weekend, and he revealed that the club ‘already had some irons in the fire’ as regards to one or two new faces for next season.
While Wyllie himself played the leading role in his side's narrow victory, he was given excellent support by the equally experienced second-row pair, Ian Burnside and Ben Gordon, who won the touchline battle, and Finlay Calder, playing possibly his last first XV game for the club.
In an error-strewn, but thrilling match, it was the contributions from ‘the old heads’ that swung the match the home side's way plus, of course, a little assistance from Lady Luck.
Fifteen minutes into the first-half, Murray Thomson, who had a most unconvincing game at full-back for the Colleges, hit the bar with a penalty.
However, as the ball rebounded it struck a Musselburgh player on the arm and was then gathered by a colleague a yard in front of him.
It was purely accidental, but still a penalty and worth three points as Thomson popped it over.
Twenty minutes later, Cliff Livingstone, the Musselburgh stand-off, struck a post with a penalty effort, the ball this time going straight to prop Gordon Rigby, who cleared.
That's how close Musselburgh came to snatching victory and well they might had Livingstone used the first-half wind to better effect,
He has been one of the driving forces behind Musselburgh's revival and had it not been for his stout efforts earlier in the season, the Stoneyhill club would never have been in the promotion challenge.
However, on Saturday he had one of those games when little went right for him and as a result the pack rarely got up a good head of steam.
But young Martin McCluskie, the Scotland Under-18 prop, again acquitted himself well, helping hooker Andrew Robertson to two strikes against the head, while Colin Pow had a storming game in the loose.
Musselburgh also had the best centre in David Laird, who confirmed the good impression when last seen against Glasgow Academicals.
Laird's strength in the tackle and his straight running should have interested the watching Edinburgh selectors and he is likely to feature in their plans for next season, as will scrum-half Fraser McMillan, who also had a fine game.
Even though they were against the wind, Colleges made the better start and after Thomson had missed two penalties and John Mackenzie had had a ‘try’ disallowed for a foot in touch (signalled by the Colleges touch judge Bert Barclay) the home side went 10-0 up.
Thomson's penalty preceded a lovely try by winger Graham Stirling, who followed his own deft kick ahead to win the touchdown, Thomson adding the conversion.
Wyllie should have made it 13-0, but missed an easy drop goal in front of the posts.
Musselburgh stormed back after the interval to score the try of the match.
Laird scissored with his stand-off and then displayed both pace and power to race 50 metres to the Colleges line where, although tackled, he popped up a pass to fellow-centre Willie Weatherhead who scored, Livingstone converting.
In the 68th minute the huge Musselburgh contingent in the crowd went wild when McMillan broke up the blindside and sent winger Craig Ramsey racing in for a try to put his side 14-10 up.
But back came Colleges and after Rigby (damaged ankle) had been replaced at prop by Alan Kittle, Wyllie grabbed a loose ball 20 metres out and simply exploded through the visitors' defence for what proved to be the clinching score, Thomson adding the two points.
Then Wyllie just kept thumping the ball downfield and soon time ran out on Musselburgh, whose only crumb of comfort is that their coach, Raymond Clark, who had planned to call it a day, is now likely to stay on next season.
Glasgow H-K provide puzzle over relegation Glasgow H-K 39 Hawick 0
THE difficulty in watching this match was to ascertain how it was Glasgow High-Kelvinside who have anchored themselves in the relegation battle and not their more illustrious Border rivals, Hawick.
Admittedly, Hawick were without Stanger and Turnbull, but GH-K looked totally dominant.
Cammy Little, who was a very influential player and captain, opened the account with the only successful penalty of the game and soon Aidan Dow touched down, Little converting.
Hawick were showing little penetration and full-back Gregor Sharp was equally ineffective at a penalty attempt on 20 minutes.
Only three minutes later and try No2 arrived.
Again the danger came down the left flank as Dow passed to Drew Waddell who touched down.
Then Murray Wallace surged over for the third try, making the score at half-time 20-0.
With the third quarter of the game coming to a close, two minutes brought two tries.
First, Waddell notched his second try after an incisive break by Little who also converted; and then it was the right winger Manning who latched on to another break by Murray Wallace and made the score 32-0.
With 15 minutes left, Little capped off a fine performance with a fine solo try which he converted.
Melrose show championship form Gala 14 Melrose 30
MELROSE president Jim Russell has claimed that the best is still to come from the Greenyards men.
Few would argue with his words after captain Robbie Brown received the National League trophy from Scottish Rugby Union president Robin Charters following Melrose's six-try scoring spree against the runners-up, Gala, at Netherdale.
Yet despite eight tries in the game, there was a feeling of inevitability about the proceedings with the championship decided two weeks ago and both teams severely depleted by injuries, illness, and Scotland sevens calls.
On the day Melrose proved why they are champions and why Russell's words could be prophetic — now the Border League too looks a safe bet to stay at the Greenyards.
The Melrose forwards had control through sterling work by the back row of Andrew Redpath, Doddie Weir and Brian Laidlaw.
The Melrose pack were able to step up a gear when they wanted, especially with Gala's entire front row absent.
The Redpath brothers had a field day, sharing five of the six tries and a contribution to Melrose now and in the future could hold the vital key to unlock even more championship trophies.
Tries by Bryan Redpath, Steve Brotherstone and Andrew Redpath put Melrose 15-0 ahead at half-time and Craig Redpath added a fourth early in the second-half.
Mark Moncrieff gave Gala a lifeline when he raced in from the 22 for a try which Jim Maitland converted.
But Melrose simply took their feet of the brake and Craig Redpath and Bryan Redpath went over for tries.
In the final minute Gala prop Timmy Walker scored a consolation try which Maitland converted.
Meanwhile, three weeks ago, Heriot's lost a friendly by 50 points at Poynder Park and before the start of Saturday's game, they were still in the relegation zone.
However, any thoughts of having to scan anxiously other team's results at the end of the game, were swiftly banished as Heriot's went 29-3 up after only 20 minutes.
The contrasting commitment between a team needing points for survival and one, like Kelso, already safe has never been more obvious and Heriot's ended up winners by 86-8.
Heriot's forwards tore into the game and won an endless stream of possession which their backs used superbly.
Some of their moves were a delight to watch as they swept up the field constantly, and the rate of scoring hardly slackened all afternoon.
The stage was perfectly set for Heriot's full-back Henry Murray, who revelled in the freedom to attack and scored four out of Heriot's total of 14 tries.
Cameron Glasgow, making a welcome return after a broken thumb, scored two tries on the left wing and also managed six second-half conversions.
Kelso were guilty of missing far too many tackles, but they did lose all their back row through injury during the game, and Eric Paxton had to come out of retirement as a replacement.
The crowd generously greeted David Baird's consolation try, which came when they were already 70 points down.
Other Heriot's tryscorers were Mike Allingham, Scott Gilmour, Hugh Gilmour, Adam Buchanan-Smith, Andy Macdonald, Andy McRobbie, David Stoddart and Gordon Lawrie.
Amos try proves winner for Jed-Forest Jed-Forest11 Edinburgh Acads10
KEVIN AMOS sealed victory for Jed-Forest with an opportunist try four minutes from time in a match that the visitors could, and certainly should have won.
The Edinburgh men had dominated the opening 40 minutes, but it was only in the 39th minute that No8 Dave McIvor popped over the Jed line for his side's only try.
Rowan Shepherd added the conversion as well as being on target with a penalty.
The Jed revival started with a brace of Gregor McKechnie penalties early in the second-half and then came Amos's winner, courtesy of a McKechnie interception dep in his own half.
Currie's 19-6 win over Watsonians at Malleny Park gave them their highest finish in three seasons in Division I, but they did not have to be very good to beat a very poor visiting XV.
Ally Donaldson, the home captain, redeemed an unusually sub-par performance by notching two quicksilver tries and two conversions, while Murray Laugerson scored the other try.
Andrew Ker landed two penalties for Watsonians, who were missing a few regulars.
It looks as if the relegation issue in Division I won't be decided until Saturday week when Glasgow High-Kelvinside are away to Currie and Stirling County meet Boroughmuir at Bridgehaugh.
And waiting in the wings are bottom-placed Dundee who, depending on the above results, may not have to play their outstanding fixture with Boroughmuir.
David Barrett swept West of Scotland to the Division II championship, scoring 27 points (try, five conversions and four penalties) in their 52-6 victory over Grangemouth.
Young Ian Fletcher scored two touchdowns from full-back, and Dave McKee, Stuart Munro and Trevor Carmichael had the others, as West kept the scoreboard ticking over at a steady rate throughout the match.
In their best spell just after half-time, Kenny Halliday had a penalty for Grangemouth, and he further interrupted the West flow with another penalty midway through the half.
The Scotland A squad, who play France A at Rubislaw, Aberdeen, on Saturday in a match sponsored by Total Oil Marine, held a squad session at Murrayfield yesterday.
Because of knocks Kenny Milligan (Stewart's-Melville) and Stirling County's Kenny Logan did not take part, but will be fit for the match.
They will train again on Thursday, in private, and then have a public runabout at Rubislaw on Friday.
Scots now in need of early crash course
SCOTLAND's failure to reach the knockout stages of the cup competition in the Canberra international sevens was put neatly into perspective yesterday.
Ian Birtwell, coach of the Canadian team defeated by the awesome Western Samoans in the final, noted: ‘In the  initial rounds, this tournament was of a higher standard than Hong Kong.
It represented the most severe competition we have faced.
It was certainly harder than Dubai, not least in terms of physical confrontation.’
An indication of the strength of the tournament could be seen from the presence of Fiji (albeit not a first string seven) and New Zealand provincial champions Canterbury, who defeated Australia in their pool, in the plate competition.
The experience was certainly daunting for the Scots, yet one from which coaches Douglas Morgan and John Jeffrey hope they will learn.
It will have to be a crash course as the Rugby World Cup Sevens at Murrayfield are less than five weeks away.
Crash is perhaps the operative word, for it is in the realms of physical engagement that the Scots — who won the Dubai tournament — look likely to come off second best.
Scotland's tackling at the weekend was akin to a holding operation; not surprising really as only rarely in the domestic sevens circuit do you see the shuddering finality which the Samoans, Fijians and Canadians bring to their defensive chopping.
Scotland were blessed with greater pace behind the scrum than, for example, the Canadians, but there was a lack of direct, straight running among the backs, the sort of qualities embodied by Kenny Logan, Kenny Milligan and Ian Jardine (the last two-named winning defensive kudos, too, during the autumn events) who are not among the present selection, but could figure next month.
Morgan was understandably downcast following Scotland's pool loss to Canada — rapidly becoming something of a jinx team, given the sevens defeat in Hong Kong two years ago, the Test match loss in New Brunswick also in 1991, and the draw in Dubai last November.
The main gripe following the last dismal showing in Hong Kong was Scotland's lack of preparation.
That charge cannot be levelled on this occasion.
As Morgan observed: ‘If, at the end of the day, we lose because we are just not good enough, then I think you can accept that.
But it will certainly not be down to any shortage of hard work or effort beforehand.’
Scotland had opened with a 24-21 victory over ACT, with tries from Mark Appleson, Gregor Townsend and Derek Stark (2), and a conversion each from Townsend and Appleson.
Against Canada, Scotland seemed comfortably placed at 14-5 early in the second-half, Ian Corcoran and Townsend having crossed for tries, both converted by Appleson.
Thereafter, however, a series of self-inflicted wounds proved costly, the turning point coming when Scott Stewart's long diagonal to Canada's left touchline saw only Tony Stanger retreat into his 22 at suitable speed, though John Graf and Chris Tynan then got the better of him, the former's delightful pick-up releasing the latter for a try.
Canada eventually won 26-14.
Morgan lamented Scotland's lack of ruthlessness, a problem which recurred against Fiji in the plate semi-final.
Before the Fijians had scored, Townsend had essayed a daring cut, but the pass to Stark was delayed over-long, while in the second-half, before the Fijians could build on their 14-0 interval advantage, Stark was the recipient of possession in some space which he embellished by brushing off a couple of tackles, only then to run crossfield into trouble.
The Canadians improved with each tie.
Scott Stewart's superlative defence was the springboard for their recovery from 0-12 adrift against Queensland in the semi-final, the state side having qualified through a grand showing against Fiji where the virtues of strong running and persistent support were never better demonstrated.
Three of the Queensland team — Mark Catchpole, Brett Johnstone and Brenton Fielke, all of whom were in Dubai — have won selection for the Australian side for the tournament in Fiji this weekend, as the XV-a-side world champions continue to experiment with Hong Kong and Murrayfield in mind.
All teams, though, have much ground to make up on the Samoans, who in the course of their four ties at the weekend, scored 23 tries.
McGeechan leaves a nucleus of great potential
HAD anyone suggested back in December that Scotland would be in a position to win the Triple Crown by the last match of 1993, just after the A XV had played Italy, they would probably have been led quietly away for a mental examination.
But the transformation was quite extraordinary over the festive season, and the team deserved to be in that position by the end of their campaign.
Gavin Hastings's side were very positive in their approach to the Five Nations Championship.
There was no retrospective talk from the management about the players they had lost, instead they found new players who made a tremendous impact, and Scotland were consequently able to reshape their whole style and pattern of play.
The real find of the season has been the big Bath lock-forward, Andy Reed.
His addition to the Scottish pack added a whole new dimension to the lineout play.
Additionally he made some very useful contributions in loose play, and must now be a serious contender for the Lions.
For the past few years, when playing against sides with big lineout forwards, much of the Scottish game plan revolved around keeping the ball in play.
This drew comments from press and punters alike such as: ‘They must make sure that they find touch with their line kicks.’
Little did they know that that was the last thing the kickers were intending to do, for what is the point of conceding a lineout that the opponents will probably win?
By kicking deep, and applying follow-up pressure, the intention was to force the opposition to concede the throw-in.
Thereafter, normally by innovative ploys, it was hoped that Scotland could at least win their own ball.
But this season Scotland have dominated every other lineout in the Five Nations because, for the first time, they possessed three genuine jumpers.
The emergence of Scotland as a lineout side meant that they could play a different sort of game, and this abundance of possession has enabled Craig Chalmers to play some very assured football.
Chalmers's form has been quite a contrast to last season, when he was often indecisive in his play and tended to look for gaps which rarely existed before passing or kicking.
But as Ian McGeechan himself said: ‘He has been playing some of the best rugby of his life.’
What a difference some ball has made!
That said, the Scottish backs have also been looking extremely sharp all year, and it would have been a criminal offence had they been left starved of passes.
The return of Chalmers to form and his ever-improving tactical maturity have been essential elements in the Scottish success this year.
However, the loss of a No 8 of the calibre of Derek White has left Scotland devoid of much penetration at the base of the scrum.
Doddie Weir still has a lot to learn about No 8 play when it comes to back-row moves, witness the occasion against England when he picked up against the wheel and still tried to complete the move.
Such a mistake is down to inexperience, but I am still not convinced that Weir's best position lies in the middle of the back row.
It is a great shame that Rob Wainwright has remained sidelined all year, because he played some outstanding rugby in Australia last summer, and for me is still the best potential No 8 around.
That is not to say that he would necessarily replace Weir, because in the long term Weir could still find himself on the side of the scrum — his lineout talents are difficult to ignore, and he has revelled in the additional freedom that the No 6 jumper is allowed.
Guy Armstrong's return to the team after a knee injury forced him out of last year's competition has also been an essential part of the reformation of a new Scottish side.
His work rate has been prodigious all season, and although he may not have the quickest service around, he must rate currently as the world's no 1 scrum-half.
What a shame that Andy Nicol is not a few years younger, for he too showed himself to be of world class in last year's celebration of New Zealand's centenary, when he played for the World XV in Christchurch.
Before the season started, Ian McGeechan's secret ambition was to win the two home games and possibly either one of the matches in Paris or London.
I am sure that his side's performances have exceeded his expectations purely because of the manner in which the rugby has been played.
He has once again built a nucleus of what could be a great Scottish team.
But next season will also see changes in the Scottish set-up, for this time the master himself will be watching from the sidelines unable to give the team any direction.
Let us hope that Douglas Morgan, McGeechan's close friend and co-coach, is allowed to continue the good work.
David Sole
The return of Chalmers to form and his ever-improving tactical maturity have been essential elements in the Scottish success this year
Dundee struggle brings attendant problems Dundee1 Airdrie1
DUNDEE'S Canadian chairman Ron Dixon will have had an uncomfortable time since Saturday despite the distance between his home in Vancouver and his football headquarters at Dens Park.
Reports of his side having struggled to a disappointing home draw with lowly Airdrie will not have been his sole concern as he takes stock of his Scottish investment.
Having spent a healthy proportion of his personal wealth in a bid to provide a Premier Division platform for the club, figures show the public are not responding through the Dens Park turnstiles.
Successive visits by Motherwell and Airdrie have seen attendances recorded at 3,370 and 3,079 respectively; clearly insufficient numbers to maintain the running of a full-time outfit at Dens Park, let alone allow the investment manager Simon Stainrod says is required on the playing staff.
A lengthy list of injury absentees at the weekend underlined his call for further new faces at the club; youngsters Gary Paterson, Andy Dow, Neil McCann and Paul Ritchie receiving first team calls after Morten Wieghorst, Graham Rix, Jamie McGowan and Gary McKeown were forced to call off.
As it transpired, all four performed sufficiently well to satisfy the manager, but insufficiently to fashion out a much-needed win for the Dark Blues outfit currently flirting with danger on the fringe of the Premier League's relegation zone.
Dundee captain Billy Dodds scored his first goal in 11 games to wrest a point from the marginally more deserving Airdrie, who had taken the lead through an Andy Smith header prior to Dodds opportunist equaliser 13 minutes from the end.
The realistic Dods admitted afterwards: ‘While it was a relief to get back scoring again, the fact remains that with other threatened clubs earning points elsewhere in the country, it was just as well that we took something from this one.’
Gascoigne shines as Lazio frustrate Milan
ENGLISH midfielder Paul Gascoigne yesterday answered his critics with a fine performance for Lazio in the match against Italian Serie A leaders AC Milan in Rome.
He was back to his best after a series of poor displays and scored a goal as he inspired Lazio to come back from two goals down to snatch a 2-2 draw.
Jean-Pierre Papin had given Milan a 10th-minute lead and before the interval Milan went 2-0 up when Lazio's Dutch forward Aaron Winter headed an own goal.
Gascoigne replied within a minute with a close-range effort and as Lazio piled on the pressure in the second half they were rewarded with five minutes to go when Cristiano Bergodi headed home.
In Spain, Real Madrid dropped a point at home to lowly Logrones yesterday to leave champions Barcelona a point clear at the top.
Madrid, level with Barcelona before the weekend but with an inferior goal difference, took a 2-1 lead over Logrones in the 88th minute and seemed certain winners.
But two minutes into injury time their defence got into a tangle after a Logrones throw and let the ball run through to Agustin Abadia, who thumped in his second goal of the day to level the scores.
Barcelona beat Deportivo Coruna 3-0 at home on Saturday.
MASSIMO AMBUCETTI/AP Vested interest: AC Milan's Demetrio Albertini tries to slow down English midfielder Paul Gascoigne of Lazio in the Italian Serie A match at the Olympic Stadium in Rome yesterday
Falkirk seek their fortune in style Aberdeen2 Falkirk2
IDEALISM is a rare quality in the pragmatic world of football management, which is why it is important that Jim Jefferies should be successful in his attempt to keep Falkirk in the Premier Division by the rare route of playing attractive football.
Only the top three teams in the division have scored more goals than the Brockville side this season, but the fact that only Cowdenbeath have conceded more goals than them is the reason why relegation remains a distinct possibility.
Despite that, Jefferies refuses to resort to the usual remedy of a ten-man defence.
The upshot is that area remains undeniably fragile as two clearances off the line, a fortuitous break off the bar and an own goal in this game would suggest that the manner in which Falkirk salvaged the point at Pittodrie suggests they are confident of scoring at least as many goals as the opposition during a match.
Three points from the last four available after five straight defeats is the reward for the manager's faith and the sudden realisation that the First Division beckoned has focused minds magnificently as Jefferies acknowledged when he said: ‘There is still a lot to be done but if the players show the same attitude for the rest of the season we won't go down.
This is the perfect lift for games against St Johnstone and Airdrie this week.’
Aberdeen manager Willie Miller is an admirer of Falkirk's approach, although he was far from happy at contributing toward the policy's success after watching any lingering hopes of winning the title disappear with Forbes Johnston's late equaliser.
Aberdeen's frustrating afternoon was summed up by the loss of Gary Smith before the match with ‘flu and his replacement David Winnie with a stomach upset in the second half.
Ironically, substitute Andy Roddie's introduction for all the wrong reasons briefly turned the game to their advantage.
So much for forward planning.
The left-sided winger provided the width and penetration normally supplied by Eoin Jess and Scott Booth, but Aberdeen are far from convincing at the moment.
The return of several key players from illness and suspension will be crucial in avoiding a Tennents Scottish Cup upset at Clydebank tomorrow.
Dancing in the streets of Raith Raith Rovers 2 Kilmarnock 0
By Mike Aitken
LIKE the rest of the playing staff at Stark's Park, Gordon Dalziel is out of contract at the end of the season.
‘I honestly don't know what's going to happen then,’ reflected the centre-forward yesterday.
‘But no-one's worrying about the future just yet.
We've got to make sure we get up into the Premier Division first.’
Dalziel is 31 tomorrow.
The prospect of playing in the Premier Division for the first time in the decade which has elapsed since he played for Rangers has put a spring in the striker's step.
He's needed it.
The Fife club's leading goalscorer of all time — Saturday's opportunist effort was his 156th for Raith — picked up a groin injury in early January.
He has not been properly fit for months.
Even so, Dalziel not missed a first team game since October and Saturday's decisive strike against Kilmarnock took his tally for this year to seven as well as his total for the season to 30.
‘I can't train at the moment,’ he added.
‘All I do is rest and play matches.
The goal against Kilmarnock was sweet not just because it was my 30th.
It also made sure of the two points.
The sooner we win the league, the sooner I can get a rest!’
Having been knocked out of the Tennents Scottish Cup by the Rugby Park side and after failing to beat them in three previous league meetings, there was a distinct edge to Raith's play on Saturday.
Even the Press box got swept up in the occasion and there were roars of approval from the local scribes when Craig Brewster opened the scoring in the first-half and Dalziel applied the coup de grace in the second.
Brewster, a former midfield player with Forfar, plays the role of Mark Hateley to Dalziel's McCoist.
A tall, skilful target man, Brewster notched his 15th goal of the season against Kilmarnock.
With 45 goals between them, it is hard to imagine, whatever else may be in his mind, that Jimmy Nicholl won't offer his prolific strikers new contracts in the summer and the chance to show what they can do in the top 12.
There was a zest and a commitment about Raith's play against Kilmarnock — as well as their established qualities of organisation and industry — which Tommy Burns's men singularly failed to match.
‘This was a vital win for us,’ Dalziel went on.
’ Kilmarnock gave us a doing the last time we played them so we wanted to set the record straight.
But I don't think we've won promotion just yet.
It's not so long ago that Kilmarnock were talking about wanting to go up as champions and look at them now.
What I will say, though, is that I think we killed off Kilmarnock's challenge at the week-end and, if we don't go up now, we should be put up against a wall and shot.’
Tommy Burns, the Kilmarnock manager, did not accept that assessment of his side's prospects.
He believes the First Division is so volatile that anything may yet be possible.
Nevertheless, he was clinically frank in his analysis of his side's shortcomings on Saturday night.
Burns has reminded his players — the best paid footballers in the First Division — that they are playing for their future livelihoods.
Given the lacklustre contributions of some individuals at Stark's Park, Burns must have wondered about their desire to step up a grade.
‘The previous manager spent £1 million on players and they cost him his job,’ he said.
‘At the end of the season we will be in a position to change things — even if it means clearing everyone out.
We know the players who won't do it for us.
They continually let themselves down.
‘The way our supporters have been let down is a disgrace.
They're looking for answers and reasons.
But it's been the same all season — we've asked too much of too few.’
Burns rejected the notion that his side were psychologically harmed by the Cup defeat at McDiarmid Park.
‘The players did well that night but they can't use that result as an excuse,’ he said.
‘We can't be expected to wait six weeks for another good performance.’
In highlighting the weaknesses of his own team, Burns was generous in pinpointing the strengths of Raith.
‘Jimmy Nicholl has done an unbelievable job with them,’ observed the former Celtic man.
‘They're a good side, though on our day I believe we're a better one.
The difference is they've had more good days than we've had.
Jimmy has got a lot of winners in his team.’
Flight of fancy: Kilmarnock goalkeeper Bobby Geddes leaps spectacularly but cannot stop Raith Rovers' Craig Brewster giving the Stark's Park side the lead
McLean is drowning, not waving Hearts 1 Dundee United 0
By Martin Dempster
THE sight of a frustrated Jim McLean gesticulating to his players from the touchline can be amusing in normal circumstances.
When he is perched precariously on a sandbag at the time, however, you could just about get away with charging extra.
McLean popped up in this unusual viewing position — the advertising hoardings around the Tynecastle pitch are kept in place by sandbags — shortly after swapping his seat in the stand for the United dug-out on Saturday, and, arms waving, he remained there virtually throughout the final 15 minutes.
Though he almost came a cropper on one occasion — United had just squandered a chance to cancel out the first-half lead Ian Baird had given Hearts — his footwork was pretty good, which is more than can be said for those on the pitch itself.
McLean's attempt to impersonate a tic-tac man apart — all he needed was a pair of white gloves — the game offered little in the way of entertainment, which was particularly disappointing when the outcome meant so much to both sides as far as their hopes of finishing fourth in the Premier Division was concerned.
That Hearts are still favourites to secure the UEFA Cup spot which is likely to go with that — the Edinburgh men have restored a two-point advantage and also have a game in hand — was down to a combination of Nicky Walker's goalkeeping and, more significantly, inept finishing by United.
Making his 17th successive appearance since replacing Henry Smith in December, Walker was voted man of the match, which was mainly thanks to a fingertip save from a Michael O'Neill shot in the first half and a crucial stop which denied Paddy Connolly with only ten minutes remaining.
Though Connolly also headed straight at the goalkeeper in the 88th minute — that was probably the time McLean slipped off his sandbag — an even better opportunity for United to secure a share of the spoils was squandered by substitute Christian Dailly, who failed to even get his shot on target after getting in behind the Hearts defence.
‘When you create chances, especially against Hearts, and don't take them, then you can't have any complaints,’ admitted McLean after literally coming back down to earth.
‘That said, I felt we deserved to take more out of the game and I will need to check the papers before I believe the result.’
Certainly Hearts created precious few chances, and the fact their goal, which came in the 20th minute, stemmed from a blunder must have proved hard for United to swallow at a ground where they last won in 1985.
Goalkeeper Alan Main fumbled a Glynn Snodin corner and, in the process, allowed Baird to scramble home his tenth goal of the season after John Robertson had failed to connect when he got first bite at the cherry.
As against Falkirk in the Tennents Scottish Cup, Hearts managed to record a crucial victory without firing on all cylinders, though, in the circumstances — Gary Mackay, Tosh McKinlay, Neil Berry and Allan Preston were out injured and Peter Van de Ven was missing through suspension — it was understandable that Joe Jordan greeted the result with a smile.
‘It was an important game for us,’ he said, ‘and the players who came into the side did very well.
We found it hard at times, but my players showed character and that was what earned them both points.’
Certainly Graeme Hogg, who was playing only his second game since October, showed bags of character and he must have run Walker close in the man-of-the-match stakes after having given Duncan Ferguson little opportunity to make his mark.
With the reserves winning 2-1 at Falkirk to stay top of the Premier Reserve League, it was a good day all round for Hearts, though one disappointment for chairman Wallace Mercer was that the game at Tynecastle was watched by just over 7,000.
Jim McLean: his touchline protestations, while very entertaining, came to no avail
Thistle play for time with 900 minutes to go Partick Thistle 1 St Johnstone 1
By Mike McLean
ANYONE who thinks the 44-game season is worth preserving should have heard the Thistle assistant manager, Gerry Collins, describe this disappointing match as ‘an end-of-season-game’.
In the middle of March — with both teams on the fringe of the relegation area — and ten games left?
In fairness the players went about their tasks with a will, if little wile.
The need to avoid defeat was obvious, hence the draw was probably a fair result, as neither side deserved to win.
Both Collins, and Saints manager John McClelland, expressed themselves happy with a point, but there was no doubt they were unhappy with the performances.
Two avoidable goals gave them valid concern.
Thistle goalkeeper Craig Nelson inexplicably raced to the corner of his area for a through ball, only to stop, allowing Allan Moore to nip round him and cross for John Davies to scramble the ball home.
Whether Ray Farningham meant to collect Ian Cameron's low cross from the right as he did is equally puzzling, but he turned well and shot past Andy Rhodes.
New recruit, David Byrne, sliced in the ball as he tried to clear.
Yet there were some positive aspects.
Davie Irons again strolled through the game at the heart of Thistle's defence, and still found time to be one of their best attackers.
Cameron continued to make intelligent use of the ball.
Kevin Magee's introduction for Julian Broddle after the break produced a sense of urgency, and his pace and confidence could stand Thistle in good stead.
For Saints, Tommy Turner is clearly enjoying his new role as sweeper, while Paul Deas looks one for the future at left-back.
But Paul Wright played almost as a midfielder on Saturday, and McClelland was not happy with Paul Kinnaird's return to Firhill.
Gerry Collins was concerned that Thistle had shot themselves in the foot again.
‘The last four goals we've lost have all been self-inflicted,’ he lamented.
‘Yet we might have snatched it, although we didn't play well.
The next three or four fixtures will decide whether we stay in the Premier League.’
These are Motherwell and Dundee away, and Falkirk at home, with Rangers (twice), Aberdeen and Dundee United to follow.
St Mirren ‘pass-back’ anger
AS Raith Rovers and Dunfermline confirmed their status as promotion favourites, St Mirren yesterday were still upset at a refereeing decision which virtually ended their hopes and led to a 2-1 defeat by Dumbarton.
With the Paisley side leading 1-0 referee Douglas Hope decided a mishit clearance by Martin Baker which ballooned into the air and was picked up by goalkeeper Les Fridge was a pass-back.
From the free-kick Dumbarton equalised and went on to win with a John McQuade goal.
St Mirren manager Jimmy Bone said: ‘The referee is entitled to his opinion and his interpretation was that this was a deliberate pass-back.
He was the only one in the ground with that interpretation.’
A last-minute goal from Billy Herd gave Cowdenbeath a 1-1 draw with Stirling Albion and saved them from relegation for a least a week.
Defeat would have officially sent Cowdenbeath to the Second Division but that inevitable fate has only been delayed.
Stirling should have made sure of victory and further ease their own relegation worries after taking a 25th minute lead through Willie Watters.
Extrovert Rangers in display of great reserve Rangers 3 Hibernian 0
By Hugh Keevins
THE post-match critic who wondered if Hibs had come off the team bus moving backwards might have been guilty of allowing his cynicism to get the better of him, but there can be no-one at Easter Road this morning able to derive any satisfaction from the side's performance at Ibrox.
Any comment made about the sub-standard display of the opposition against Rangers can be misinterpreted as an implication that the champions occasionally thrive on the shortcomings of others.
But this is far from the case.
Rangers, minus Goram, Gough, Steven, Ferguson, Mikhailichenko and Huistra were comfortable and deserved winners.
It seems reasonable to ask, though, why a side who had gone the previous 42 games undefeated, were allowed to spend such a relatively undemanding afternoon in the company of a team who ought to have harboured more serious intent than was ever evident.
Hibs turned out to be the kind of compliant opponents Rangers needed to help them develop only a fine film of sweat before their European Champions league match against FC Brugge on Wednesday.
Alex Miller's team asked no questions of a drastically altered Ibrox side containing more than a smattering of Rangers' impressive reserve strength.
It was Hibs and not Rangers who looked as if they were the ones holding something back for a bigger midweek game to come.
This was a Hibs side, too, with no need to fear relegation and every incentive to probe for damage done by Rangers' injury crisis while seeing if they could move themselves closer to a place in Europe.
That it took Hibs 37 minutes to record their first shot at Ally Maxwell vouches for the minuscule depth of their ambition and explains why they were, in the end, beaten hollow.
Losing the potent force of Murdo MacLeod can not be used as an excuse, either.
Neither MacLeod nor Michael Weir was available four days earlier when Hibs put up spirited  resistance to Aberdeen and came within minutes of getting at least one point.
It was a performance unworthy of the faithful supporters who had travelled from Edinburgh and one that requires to be expunged from the collective memory at the first opportunity, which is against Celtic in Glasgow tomorrow night.
Ironically, the only Hibs player who appeared to have any kind of conviction going forward was Pat McGinlay, who has taken up the attention of Celtic's manager, Liam Brady, and will be the object of a move from that quarter when his contract expires in the summer.
Otherwise, Hibs could now go on their summer holidays and few would notice.
It looked on Saturday as if they had declared a premature end to the season, in any case.
Rangers' Stuart McCall spent more time on the ball than all of Hibs' midfield put together and never wasted a moment, either.
The outstanding player afield when Rangers drew with FC Brugge in Belgium two weeks ago, McCall will look to help his club go one better on Wednesday night.
‘There was a feeling of disappointment that we were held to a draw in Bruges and the atmosphere in the dressing room at the Olympiastadion only lifted after we heard that Marseille had suffered the same result against CSKA,’ said McCall.
‘Now, we can not afford to look beyond the return game with the Belgians and start thinking about Marseille.
‘I have family and friends who assume that Rangers will beat FC Brugge with a couple of goals to spare, but in order to do that we will need to play throughout this week's game as we did in the second half over there,’ he added.
The game against the Belgians affords Rangers the opportunity to go through a complete year without losing at home in any competition.
Celtic, on 21 March, 1992, were the last side to beat Rangers at Ibrox and that is a record which, domestically at any rate, could stand for the foreseeable future unless visiting clubs are willing to alter their attitude to them.
David Hagen, meanwhile, played from the start for the first time in Rangers' colours and scored after he had knocked the ball over Tortolano's head inside the penalty box, killed it on his chest and then struck a volley beyond Burridge.
If Walter Smith is going to continue producing them out of a hat from the reserve team like this, Rangers will remain without peer and the rest will have an even greater excuse for abandoning hope before they start.
Old Firm march on
THE Old Firm are unbeaten after two games in the Glasgow Cup.
Goals from Joe Robertson and James McGinty yesterday earned Rangers a 2-1 win over Partick Thistle, while Celtic beat Queen's Park 4-2 in the tournament in which the clubs now field their youth sides.
Scots' Wembley win
SCOTLAND Under 15s came from a goal down at Wembley on Saturday to beat England Under 15s 2-1.
Andrew O'Brien equalised Jamie Cassidy's opening goal just after the break and Chris Pollock scored the winner from the penalty spot after Ian Harty was fouled with 11 minutes left.
Holders travel
THE OVD Scottish Junior Cup is set for an outstanding quarter-final stage following yesterday's draw which pitched Central League favourites Petershill and holders Auchinleck.
OVD Scottish Junior Cup: quarter-final draw: ties to be played on Saturday 3 April: Lesmahagow v Kilbirnie; Dundee St Josephs v Glenafton; Petershill v Auchinleck; Tayport v Downfield.
Hughes keeps United in championship race Manchester Utd1 Aston Villa1
MARK Hughes yesterday hauled Manchester United back from the brink of championship disaster against Aston Villa.
The Welshman grabbed a 58th minute headed equaliser after Steve Staunton's spectacular strike five minutes earlier had threatened a dramatic smash-and-grab of three Premier League points by former manager Ron Atkinson.
Instead, Hughes' 14th goal of the season, set up by Frenchman Eric Cantona, meant the title showdown left the two contenders locked together on 61 points with nine games to go.
United had more than enough chances but were defied by a 21-year-old Australian goalkeeper who left Old Trafford after Peter Schmeichel was installed as first-choice.
Mark Bosnich, snapped up by Atkinson when he left United last summer, produced a wonderful performance to keep Villa afloat in a match dominated by United.
Sheffield Wednesday yesterday reached the Coca Cola Cup final with a 2-1 semi-final win over Blackburn Rovers.
Wednesday, who won 6-3 on aggregate, face Arsenal at Wembley on 18 April.
Bloodstock lifeline predicted
THE  beleaguered bloodstock industry is set to receive a Budget boost tomorrow.
Chancellor Norman Lamont is expected to announce a solution to the VAT problem that threatens the industry's future in Britain.
British breeders face VAT rates of 17.5 per cent compared with 2.7 per cent in Ireland and 5.5 per cent in France.
The inconsistency led Tattersalls, Europe's leading bloodstock auctioneer, to move its top sale from Newmarket to Ireland this year.
However, Mr Lamont, who may also make a cut in betting duty, is set to sanction the VAT registration of owners, enabling the recovery of VAT incurred on buying horses and on training fees.
Irish pair to miss Festival targets
THE Irish challenge at this week's Cheltenham Festival weakened yesterday, when Champion Hurdle contender Novello Allegro and leading novice chaser Soft Day were both ruled out.
With conditions virtually guaranteed to remain fast, trainer Arthur Moore decided not to risk Soft Day in the Arkle Chase.
Moore walked the course yesterday morning and then reported back to Novello Allegro's trainer, Noel Meade.
‘He said the ground was what he would call perfect rather than firm.
It is safe unless you have a horse that needs it soft like Soft Day,’ Meade said.
Novello Allegro's participation was also in doubt because of the ground, but Meade added that the horse is not 100 per cent.
With Novello Allegro absent, Charlie Swan will now switch to Eyelid in the Champion Hurdle.
Meade will rely on Heist in the Festival Bumper, and both Mubadir and Glencloud in the County Hurdle.
Ground conditions — good and good to firm in places — are unchanged at Cheltenham, where watering has resumed.
Clerk of the course Philip Arkwright said: ‘We are watering as though we are not going to get any rain.
Every forecast I have listened to makes me think we are unlikely to get any.’
Ladbrokes cut Rushing Wild to 8-1 from 10-1 and Docklands Express to 12-1 from 14-1 for the Gold Cup.
Docklands Express was also shortened by  William Hill to 12-1 from 14-1 and Coral to 12-1 from 20-1.
Another Coral, 16-1 from 20-1, and Garrison Savannah, 25-1 from 40-1, were also supported with William Hill.
In the Champion Hurdle, William Hill cut Flown to 9-2 favourite from 5-1, pushing out Coulton to 11-2.
Coral reported support for Oh So Risky (12-1 from 14-1) and Ruling (16-1 from 20-1).
Adrian Maguire, who gave up two rides after injuring his back in a fall at Chepstow on Saturday, will be back in action with five rides at Plumpton today
Laughlin takes Grange through
GRANGE were the only side involved in the quarter-finals of The Scotsman Cup to register a weekend double, which was completed by a 1-0 victory over Menzieshill at Cramond, Edinburgh, yesterday.
Mark Laughlin rounded off a memorable 24 hours for the Edinburgh side by scoring the winner in the 49th minute.
He converted an inch-perfect cross from the left wing by Donald McFarlane.
It was McFarlane who netted the vital goal on Saturday against Edinburgh Civil Service with only 26 seconds remaining.
Civil Service forced no less than 16 penalty corners during the game but were unable to cash in.
They had a similar number in the Cup against Harris, but this time Mike Yellowlees scored in the 20th minute to cancel out a fourth-minute goal from Stuart Taylor.
Jonathan Smyth and Callum McLeod added second-half goals as Civil Service ran out 3-1 winners.
It was not such a good day for Waverley, Edinburgh's third side in the last eight.
They were beaten 2-1 by Pender at Uddingston, where goals from Ian McWhinney and John Brotherton put Pender in the driving seat before Dave Jackson notched a last-minute consolation.
The final tie between Hazlehead and Touche Ross was a story of squandered penalties.
Richard Freeland and Morgan Hay both failed to find the target for their sides, but Freeland at least had the satisfaction of scoring the only goal for Touche Ross 13 minutes from time following a penalty corner.
Western on course for double
THE holders, Western Klick Photopoint, will meet Edinburgh Ladies in the final of this season's National League Cup, to be played at Peffermill, Edinburgh, on 2 May.
Western, who on Saturday clinched the Torrie Stockbrokers National Premier Outdoor League title for the 11th consecutive year, booked their place with a 2-0 victory over injury-hit Hyndland at Peffermill, where Susan Fraser and Linda Chirrie got the goals.
In the other semi-final, Western's second team led Edinburgh Ladies 1-0 through a Lyn Forsyth goal, but Pauline Robertson equalised to force a shoot-out.
Ladies won it 3-2, with Caroline Howard, Pauline Robertson and captain Diane Thorburn getting the goals that mattered.
Western's 6-1 league victory over Royal High Gymnasts at Cramond — internationalist Susan McDonald scored a hat- trick — extended their unbeaten run to 173 games.
It also clinched their place in the European Clubs Championship, in which they have won the silver medal for the past four years.
Holders Boroughmuir and Hyndland A will contest the final of the National League Plate, also to be played at Peffermill on 2 May.
JACK CROMBIE
Three's a crowd: Alison Ramsay (Western Klick Photopoint) is squeezed out by two Hyndland players at Peffermill yesterday
Tufnell toils as England take turn for the worse
ENGLAND's thirst for Test match mediocrity seems to be insatiable.
Having been given a perfect platform to put Sri Lanka under severe pressure by their openers, the middle order yesterday slumped from 316 for three to 380 all out.
The bowlers then found no difficulty in maintaining the lack of momentum as the second day in Colombo ended with Phil Tufnell again struggling for form, taking nought for 50 from 13 overs, with six boundaries being plundered from his first five overs.
Sri Lanka moved smoothly to 140 for one.
Sri Lanka opener Roshan Mahanama hit 64 off only 84 balls before a fine reflex catch by Robin Smith at silly point ended an entertaining innings in which he cut and turned England's spinners with relish.
Mahanama struck 11 fours and Tufnell, in particular, found him a handful.
John Emburey eventually took the wicket, but the 40-year-old off-spinner is clearly not the bowler he was back in 1982, when he bowled England to victory in Sri Lanka's inaugural Test in Colombo with a second-innings 6-33.
It was England's batting which disappointed most of all, especially after Smith had defied the heat and humidity for 7 hours to make 128 and both Graeme Hick, on Saturday, and Alec Stewart, yesterday, had complied fine half centuries.
Smith, who was on 91 when England resumed at 245 for three, soon completed his first overseas Test hundred — his eighth in all — in his 40th Test.
He faced 335 balls, hitting 20 fours.
In eight innings in his new role as opener in the last few weeks he has totalled 451 runs.
Acting captain Stewart, his delightful 63 taking 122 balls and including ten fours, gloved to short-leg a delivery from Warnaweera that bounced and turned disconcertingly.
But Neil Fairbrother and Chris Lewis still looked capable of boosting England's total before Sri Lanka's spinners were further rewarded for their persistence.
Fairbrother, on 18, was bowled by a quicker ball from Warnaweera.
Lewis was then run out needlessly when failing to react to Emburey's call for a third run, and Paul Jarvis was lbw to his first ball.
Tufnell was also  adjudged lbw in the next over and a couple of clogged sixes by Devon Malcolm off Muralidharan was the sum total of England's eight-order  resistance .
Warnaweera and Muralidharan both finished up with four wickets apiece — but for the second day running very few Sri Lankan  spectators turned up to watch, preferring the spectacle of a college match series in the city.
— PA
At least half a crowd of 1,000 were English holidaymakers but most of Colombo's cricket fans are currently hooked on a series of college matches in the city which over three days have attracted a total of 20,000  spectators at three venues.
England will tour South Africa in the 1995-96 season for the first time in 30 years.
They will play five Tests.
Overdoing the expressions of regret
TELEVISION'S merciless eye does footballers few favours and perhaps it is unfair to take them to task too readily for their occasional excesses.
Maybe they have always gone on at opponents, teammates and referees, but their rantings are now shown in close-up and full colour.
They might bear that in mind.
Probably the saddest aspect of the crowd invasion at last weekend's FA Cup quarter-final between Manchester City and Tottenham Hotspur was the fact that it didn't come as much of a surprise.
The tone of the afternoon had been set earlier, on the field.
It was not so much that the match was any more frantic or violent than usual, but rather that there were in evidence throughout the afternoon, a lot of faces quick to register those expressions which used to be peculiar to spoiled infants whose worn-out parents had cracked and dared to cross their wills.
They were, in fact, the sort of looks which precede the casting of the Teddy from the pram.
They were the sort of looks which at one time, if indulged in by children who'd outgrown toddlerhood, could be guaranteed to attract a resounding ding around the ear and the terse instruction: ‘Take that look off your face.’
This painful, though, in its context, highly effective course of action was part and parcel of a brutal and unenlightened society and no doubt it left all those who survived it spiritually stunted and psychologically scarred.
It would never do now, of course.
Fortunately, we're more alive to the dangers inherent in the bruising of delicate psyches.
We are aware that serial killers and the like are merely expressing themselves, working out their various hang-ups and generally freeing themselves from those inhibitions which might, if suppressed, make them less complete human beings.
As one who grew up in the Dark Ages and is, as a result, spiritually stunted and psychologically scarred, I regularly find myself cringing at the sight of moaning footballers and speculating, in a twisted fashion, on how much better they might play if all the energy spent on operating the jaws were to be concentrated on getting on with the game.
Much the same line of thinking is prompted by post-goal celebrations, which, unless imagination is beginning to run riot, is increasing in complexity by the week.
The impression is that we are fast reaching the stage where the actual scoring of goals will be less important than the manoeuvres which follow.
In the match at Manchester, the scorer of one of the Tottenham goals took off on a frenzied high-stepping run, knees and arms pumping like pistons — and he was going backwards.
as if this was not enough, he was joined in his mad reverse by a colleague.
What happens next?
Are there plans afoot, even now, for the entire team to prance off backwards?.
We've al ready had the squiggly-hip gyrations, the pat-a-cake routines and the dreaded High Five.
It may be only a matter of time before goals trigger outbreaks of mass aerobics and the odd square dance.
To revert to the afflicted generations referred to earlier, the intolerance with petulance and ill-temper to which they were subjected was often perpetuated by non-commissioned officers in Her Majesty's Services who, in their own inimitable way, took things a step or two further.
The standard NCO, having drawn his victim stiffly to attention, would inform him in colourful and lurid detail on his shortcomings, concluding briskly by observing that he was, for example: ‘A bleedin ‘orrible cross-eyed little git.’
Having allowed time for the full import of this profound conclusion to sink in, the NCO would then inquire: ‘What are you?’
The victim, anxious to co-operate, would open his mouth to confirm that he was, indeed, everything the man had just said, only to be told to shut up.
Had he not opened his mouth, he would have been done for dumb insolence.
They were not intellectually fruitful, these little exchanges, but they served to get across the message that a good soldier should be smart, disciplined to the point of pain, unquestioning in the face of authority and preferably dead.
Hendry romps through with record break
SCOT Stephen Hendry set a new tournament record break of 144 in the £180,000 Nescafe Asian Open in Bangkok last night.
Hendry took only 52 minutes to complete a 5-0 victory over Dave Finbow, of Worcester, who is ranked at No63.
World No1 Hendry held too many aces for the second-season professional, who scored 51 points in the first frame, eight in the third and none in the other three.
Hendry, who has not won a ranking event this season but could well be timing his peak to perfection with the world championship less than six weeks away, followed up with a break of 105 to lead 3-0.
A third successive century was on the cards until he suffered a ‘kick’ on the pink in frame four with his break on 91.
‘I'm playing well and getting better and better all the time,’ said Hendry, who now plays Jamie Woodman for a place in the last 16.
Thai James Wattana defeated former British champion Tony Meo 5-1 and now plays Irishman Stephen Murphy.
The 23-year-old World Matchplay champion kicked off with breaks of 86 and 58, before finishing off the Londoner with a matchwinning 80.
World No5, Neal Foulds, became the fifth player in the top ten to be eliminated in the last 64 when he was beaten 5-3 by Paul Tanner.
Payne pays back dues with first Tour win From Mike Britten, Majorca
THE four Lincolnshire farmers who financed Jim Payne's first season as a professional saw their faith repaid in Majorca yesterday when the 22-year-old from Sandilands scored his first European Tour victory.
Payne took the Balearic Open with a par 4 at the first extra hole after he and Sweden's Anders Gillner had tied on 277, 11-under-par.
Payne shot a final round of 67 on Santa Ponsa while Gillner, who had led by two shots with two holes to play, closed with a 70.
David R Jones, of Essex, who equalled the course record held by Jose Maria Olazabal with a 64, was third on 278, with Scotland's Colin Montgomerie sharing 11th place with Olazabal to add 5,340 points to his Ryder Cup standing.
Montgomerie now takes a five-week break from the European circuit as he awaits the birth of his first child next weekend.
He will then head for the US Masters at Augusta and does not plan to return to the Volvo Tour until the Cannes Open on 29 April.
Payne, who three-putted the seventeenth was fortunate to be given a second chance by Gillner, who looked set to gain his first senior win when he required two par 4s at the seventeenth and eighteenth.
But the 25-year-old tour newcomer also took three putts at the seventeenth, spinning out of the hole from three feet, then went into sand at the last thinning his recovery.
He holed from five feet to force a play-off, but lost it when the pair returned to the seventeenth, by missing the green and fluffing a recovery chip halfway to the hole.
Payne, who had forfeited a winning chance in Valencia the previous week by taking 78 in the third round, was not going to let another chance slip by, and comfortably obtained his 4 to collect a £50,000 prize.
It takes him to tenth place in the Ryder Cup table and the farming philanthropists will also get their reward.
‘I could not have started my professional career without their help,’ said Payne.
‘They got me going by guaranteeing my expenses until I started to win some prize money.
When I became rookie of the year in 1992 they got their money back and a bit extra, and it will be the same this season.’
Payne also has Jack Nicklaus to thank for his breakthrough.
They played together in the final round of the 1991 Open at Royal Birkdale and the great American quickly spotted the potential of the 6ft 4in Walker Cup player.
‘I will always remember that day,’ said Payne.
‘Jack told me so many things but what I remember most was him stressing that I should keep my energy and emotional levels the same throughout a round of golf.
I am not exactly pushing a supermarket trolley but I make sure I have plenty of apples, bananas and water to keep me going.
Staying calm is pretty natural for me.’
Now Payne wants to take advantage of the current absence of stars like Montgomerie, Nick Faldo and Ian Woosnam from the circuit to advance his already impressive claims for a place in Bernard Gallacher's European team at the Belfry in September.
‘I reckon I will have to win twice to have a chance of getting a Ryder Cup place,’ he said.
‘Now I have got that first win I am looking for the second.’
So it will be back to work on the Algarve this week when Payne bids to win the Portuguese Open, a tournament that provided Montgomerie with his first success in 1989.
Montgomerie closed with a 70 after a trio of birdie 3s in an outward 34 to strengthen his grip on second place in the Ryder table.
He has won nearly £87,000 this season.
Paul Lawrie also had 70 for level-par 288 to be 25th with Adam Hunter's 72 for 289 giving him a share of 31st place with Stephen McAllister (74).
Gary Orr finished with 70 for 292 (54th) but Ross Drummond scored his second 77 in a row to share.
NICK FALDO shot a second-round 72, adding to a first-round 69, to stand five strokes off the lead after two rounds of the Honda Classic at Fort Lauderdale, Florida.
Overnight leader Fred Couples, who hit a course record-equalling 64 in the first round, shot 73 and is one stroke behind Larry Mize, who added a 67 to his opening 69 to take the lead.
AUSTRALIAN Craig Mann sank a 30ft birdie putt on the second play-off hole yesterday to beat Taiwan's Hsieh Chin-sheng in the Thailand Open Championship.
City's all-action tactics secure title
CITY of Edinburgh have won the Scottish Women's League first division title for the first time, writes Sandy Sutherland.
They beat Boroughmuir Aces 77-54 at Meadowbank yesterday and cannot be overtaken by the champions, Livingston, whom they meet in their final match next Sunday.
Despite losing Australian dual national Lisa Smith in mid-season, the City team, with their mixture of youth and experience, have been unbeaten in the league thanks to their all-action, all-court game.
‘It's been a long road,’ said their coach, Toni Szifris, who has guided the nucleus of the team from a group of minis, playing in Portobello, through high school.
There have been some fine contributions this season from St Augustine's FP Tracey Phillips, new signings Kerri Marshall and the rapidly improving Vlasta Jamnicky.
Holders Edinburgh Burger Kings meet Dunfermline in the final of the Bank of Scotland Junior Cup next month.
In the semi-finals, Kings beat Livingston Bulls 61-54 at Queensferry High School and Dunfermline beat Glasgow City Brightsiders 66-55 at St Mungo's Academy.
City of Edinburgh overcame Royal High Dunedin 80-53 to win the Lothian Women's Cup at Wester Hailes Education Centre.
Despite being without several of their leading players, Edinburgh University retained the British Universities Women's Team Championship, beating Loughborough 65-56 in the final at Sunderland yesterday.
Edinburgh survived a narrow 65-64 win over Bedford in their pool and went on to defeat surprise semi-finalists Heriot Watt 70-42.
Room for a Fifth Man in Scots' think tank
THOUGH much could yet depend on what happens on Scotland's forthcoming short tour, the solution to one of the great controversies of the past season — the unexpected supplanting of Douglas Morgan as the coach for that island venture — continues to look simple enough.
Namely, to have, in 1993-94, as Scotland have had in the past season, three coaches.
In that scenario, the provisional supposition would be that Morgan would take over at the helm from Ian McGeechan, with David Johnston and Richie Dixon as his assistant coaches.
That said, the 1995 World Cup is fast approaching.
In one of its more far-sighted moves, the SRU had a pool of four coaches in the build-up to the 1991 World Cup, and one trusts that the union will work along the same lines this time.
The demands grow ever greater, not least in terms of assorted representative fixtures.
It would make good sense to increase that cadre of coaches to five.
That coterie would also act, as they did for the 1991 event, very much as a think tank.
Partly on that score, and partly against the possibility that he might come back between now and South Africa in 1995, the players would want McGeechan as one of the quintet.
The suggested Fifth Man badly needs to be an up-and-coming forwards' coach.
One of the problems, of course, is that, with the invariably available and endlessly enthusiastic Dixon having achieved the remarkable feat of being appointed to no fewer than five of Scotland's summer tours, there has not been too much opportunity for anyone else to advance his claims.
Still on the subject of coaches, the national coaches from the leading powers will congregate in Hong Kong later this month at the time of the Cathay Pacific Hong Kong Sevens.
No great hardship!
They will discuss the new laws and, in particular, the experimental variations.
The idea is that their views will go forward to the IRFB and, astonishingly, it is not out of the question that one aspect or more of those variations could be dropped even before the Lions set foot in New Zealand.
In other words, crazy though it sounds, players could have been picked under one set of laws to play under another.
Don't think that that does not matter.
England's Wade Dooley, to cite but one obvious example, may go anyway.
Yet his curriculum vitae would be very much stronger if there were not that one-metre gap between the rival lines to stop him from imposing his physical presence on his opposite number in quite the same way as he did to such crucial effect upon Steve Cuttler in the 1989 series in Australia.
However, one has not the slightest doubt that the moving spirits behind the coaches' gathering will have been England's Geoff Cooke and Australia's Bob Dwyer.
Their main target will be not so much that gap at the lineout, or even the debatable inside arm requirement, assuming either is a target at all, but the turnover law.
The ‘use it or lose it’ ruck-maul experimental variation which both detest…
It was not until ten years or more had passed that the disastrous side-effects on ruck and maul of the abolition of the old ‘play the ball with a foot after a tackle’ law began fully to be felt.
Many may feel that the ‘use it or lose it’ ruck-maul law has not really been given a long enough trial.
Again, not everyone — and surely not McGeechan — would view with any great enthusiasm the prospect of returning to the previous law and the spectacle of sundry sides, but England especially, so often merely playing for the next scrum.
It should be a lively debate both among the coaches in Hong Kong and among the members of the International Board at their meeting in Edinburgh.
But, before either, the last two matches in the 1993 Five Nations Championship will have come and gone.
In the matter of the ultimate composition of the 30-strong Lions' squad, those games could still be important.
Putting aside their more immediate patriotic considerations, the Lions' selectors and coaches might be glad enough to have as much supporting evidence as possible with regard to eschewing token selections, made just to keep all four countries happy, and that could certainly make a difference to the size of the Scottish contingent.
Indeed, if France were to hammer Wales at Parc des Princes and England win with plenty to spare at Lansdowne Road, then the representations from both the Principality and the Emerald Isle might be meagre indeed.
Maybe just Ieuan Evans and Scott Gibbs from Wales and Nick Popplewell from Ireland.
On the other hand, rugby internationals have much in common with FA Cup ties, as witness this season's Welsh victory over England.
Assuming one is right in the notion that the Lions' selectors intend taking, as their No 8s, both Ben Clarke and Dean Richards, what happens this Saturday could be particularly pertinent to Doddie Weir.
The fear remains that one of the most influential figures in this year's championship could yet lose out.
One has been convinced for some time that the idea was to take Weir in the guise of a No 6.
But if England and Wales were to provide them with the right context come this Saturday, Mike Teague — who has been shortening in the betting and who was integral to the Lions' strategy under the same coach, McGeechan, in Australia in 1989 — and either Emyr Lewis or Richard Webster could win the two blindside berths.
Both Robert Jones and Dewi Morris will be in action on the final Saturday of the Five Nations but Jones — probably only Ireland's Simon Geoghegan has lost more ground than him in the course of the season — would need just about the game of his life to regain his lead over Morris as the other scrum-half to Gary Armstrong.
Jones has a lovely service but he has not been looking good behind a struggling pack.
Again, it is said pejoratively of him in his native land that, where Morris is the kind of natural breaker who ties in an enemy back row, Jones ‘breaks at 3:20pm’.
In other words, according to his detractors, he breaks not because he has spotted an opening but because a break should be part of the complete scrum-half's armoury.
Unfair, maybe, but a horribly damaging allegation to have made about you on the eve of the Lions' selection.
Moreover, such comment is liable to prove all the more harmful after a Calcutta Cup in which — for all the criticism that the scrum-half should have fed his backs more — Morris so tellingly demonstrated with Stuart Barnes the value under the current laws of having two half-backs, each of whom poses a very real threat in his own right.
Still in the realm of half-backs, the original conclusion from the post-match inquest into who had called the back-row move which led indirectly to that heartbreaking injury to Craig Chalmers — that it had come from half-back — was subsequently rescinded.
The call came, would you believe it, from within the bowels of the front five and Chalmers, with another dropped goal itching in his boot, had not time to change it.
One last point.
For once, it was the losing side who seemed to have fewer reservations about the performance of the referee.
Mind you, what constituted Brian Stirling's conception of ‘ten metres back’ was the strangest thing in terms of a referee's estimation of distance since Honest John Phelps decreed that the 1877 Boat Race was ‘a dead-heat to Oxford by six feet!’
Norman Mair
Crazy though it sounds, players could have been picked (for the Lions) under one set of laws to play under another.
Don't think that does not matter
SPORT & POLITICS IN-FOCUS
GEORGE HERRINGSHAW/ASP
Hands off: the splendid form of Dewi Morris (left) is likely to win him the nod as the second scrum-half in the British Lions' squad, pushing Robert Jones out of the picture
Hooligans raise ugly heads again
SPORT reflects the ills of society and, in the current climate of moral torpor, perhaps we should not be surprised by declining standards of behaviour both on and off the fields of activity.
Nevertheless, sport cannot afford to be soft on those who cause the problems — whether it is athletes who, as drug users, habitually cheat, or the spectators who take the law into their own hands and invade football pitches.
At the weekend, the world indoor athletics championships took place in Canada.
With an irony that will not be lost on the hosts, the event was staged in Toronto, the home town of Ben Johnson.
The former sprint champion, who built a career on the use of illegal substances, did not take part in the meeting, of course, after he was caught taking the tablets for a second time.
If anything, the ignominy heaped on Johnson second time around — not to mention the embarrassment caused to athletics — has been even greater than in Seoul.
After serving a two-year ban, Johnson, the alleged penitent, returned to top-class competition as an ambassador for the anti-drug lobby, lecturing children on the evils of the needle.
It all turned out to be sham and hypocrisy.
When he went back to the track, Johnson was half the size he was in Seoul.
He was also half as fast.
If he wanted to get back to winning ways — his target was a triumph in Toronto — he needed chemical assistance.
Whatever evidence the IAAF officials discovered in the laboratory, one only needed to look at recent pictures of Johnson, in which he resembled an inflated balloon, to guess that his improved times showed he'd been sucked back into the drug culture.
Johnson may be a forlorn, pathetic creature who was never clever enough to emulate more sophisticated cheats who can mask the effects that steroids have on the human system.
But to regard him as naive rather than evil is to miss the point.
Johnson's problem was the IAAF's problem, and the bottom line was that when he was caught cheating in Seoul, the powers-that-be imposed the statutory punishment of two years rather than banning him for life.
Drugs users don't deserve a second chance.
They are not intimidated by short-term bans and, as long as the rewards for success are so great, the temptation for them to cheat again seems to be irresistible.
And, if athletics is not conducted on a level track, how on earth are straight participants to be persuaded to continue playing by the rules?
To regain the confidence of athletes and public alike, tough action on drugs is now the only course open to the IAAF.
It's been suggested that around half those taking part in Toronto at the weekend have used drugs at some point in their careers.
For the sake of the 50 per cent who have resisted the urge to cheat, the fight against drugs in sport must get its act together.
The battle to eradicate hooliganism from England's sports grounds has, admittedly, taken giant strides in recent years.
But last week's pitch invasion at Maine Road, the home of Manchester City, was a warning that the war on crowd misbehaviour has not yet been won.
As a panellist on the McEwan's Sports Forum staged at the home of Edinburgh Academicals last week, it was interesting to hear a member of the audience ask if the incident in Manchester had posed a question-mark against the value of all-seater stadia.
His point was that the yobs who came on to the pitch did so from the comfort of a new, multi-million pound stand.
Personally, I think that the trouble in Manchester could be traced to inadequacies regarding the stewarding arrangements.
The rise in standards of behaviour at Ibrox, for example, since Rangers reconstructed their ground are evident for all to see.
It isn't just football that needs to keep an eye on its spectators.
A recent rugby match between Tredworth and Fleetwood at Moseley's ground saw rival supporters clash during the match.
As violence flared, a spectator had an ear sliced off and play was suspended by the referee for five minutes before order was restored.
There were no violent incidents of that magnitude at Twickenham for the Calcutta Cup match, but I know of many Scots who found the atmosphere unpleasant and have decided not to attend future rugby internationals in London.
I heard reports of scuffles outside the ground because the turnstiles couldn't cope with the late rush — amazingly, the game was allowed to start five minutes early — while inside the stadium many Scots, including the wives and girlfriends of the players, were subjected to verbal abuse.
There has been no love lost between Scots and English at big sporting occasions for as long as one can remember, but it seems that England's rugby aficionados find it hard to forgive Scotland for that Grand Slam defeat in 1990.
Moreover, changes in the way that tickets are distributed for big rugby matches at Twickenham appear to have led to an increase in the number of rowdies.
At Raeburn Place, one Scottish rugby follower revealed that he had travelled to Cardiff to watch Wales play Ireland last Saturday rather than go to Twickenham.
I also heard of a former Scottish internationalist who felt obliged to leave the ground 15 minutes before the end concerned that he might otherwise lose his temper and respond to provocation.
There are worrying indications that rugby internationals at Twickenham are no longer the civilised occasions to be found in Edinburgh, Paris, Dublin and Cardiff.
Like its counterpart in soccer, the RFU will ignore the warning signs at its peril.
Mike Aitken
Ben Johnson: turned out to be full of sham and hypocrisy
Miller's tale is one of survival and success The Hibs manager, Alex Miller, reflects on ten years in the football hot seat.
Mike Aitken reports
NOW THAT Jim McLean has decided to hang up his boots at Dundee United, Alex Miller is the Premier Division's most experienced manager.
This year marks his tenth anniversary in management.
A decade of doubt and dreams, in which the financiers tortured Hibs more than any opposing centre-forward, has left Miller sporting surprisingly few scars.
He is still the same tee-total football maniac he was when Hal Stewart gave him his first Scottish job as player-manager of Morton.
In 1983, when he took over at St Mirren, Miller was 34 and the youngest manager in the top ten.
Now he is 44 and something of a veteran in a championship where only his former Ibrox colleague, Tommy McLean, has lasted in the same job for longer.
In his seventh year at Easter Road, Miller has probably done more than anyone else to keep Hibs afloat.
When the receivers were knocking on the door he sold John Collins, Paul Kane and Andy Goram.
Without the £2.5 million raised by the sale of those players, Hibs might have gone under.
There was also the time when he was told he would have to win either the championship or the cup to ease the club's financial plight.
Miller survived that extraordinary pressure and steered the club away from the edge of extinction.
Not only that, but after beating bankruptcy as well as calls for his resignation, Miller took Hibs to Hampden last year and lifted the Skol League Cup — the first time in 20 years that the Edinburgh club had won a major trophy.
Although this has been an indifferent year for the club in the league, Hibs are in knockout mood again.
Having reached the last four of the Tennents Scottish Cup, it is not beyond them to go on to beat Aberdeen or Clydebank at Tynecastle next month and pursue a piece of silverware that has not been seen in the boardroom at Easter Road since the turn of the century.
If that happens, it will be Miller's ambition which has driven Hibs to another big occasion.
He craves success the way an alcoholic longs for another drink.
When asked to sum up how he sees himself as a manager, Miller replies: ‘As a player, maybe I wasn't the best.
I know that.
But the managers I played for all said I was the best professional.
I wanted to be a winner when I played football and I still do as a manager.’
In a profession where it pays to keep your own counsel, Miller has a reputation for being a bit deep.
‘Some say I'm a dour type of person, and maybe I am at times, but nothing means more to me than winning.
I am very ambitious.
Even at five-a-sides, I want to win.’
Born in the Anderston district of Glasgow and brought up in Drumchapel, Miller worked in the Clyde shipyards before signing for Rangers.
It was an experience he's never forgotten, helping him to appreciate the reality of the world outside football and the good fortune of those who earn a living from the game.
He played in ten Hampden finals and went home as a winner eight times.
When the time came to leave Ibrox after 17 years, Miller decided to try his hand in Hong Kong.
Playing was still uppermost in his mind, and the chance to go into management came about by accident.
When he joined South China Seas, their coach had just quit.
Miller, who had a B coaching licence, was persuaded to fill the breach and supervise the training.
‘I wanted to be a coach, there was no doubt about it.
In my last year with Rangers I'd looked after the S form signings — players like Ian Durrant and Derek Ferguson — but I knew I needed to see what life was like away from Ibrox.’
After four months in Hong Kong, Miller returned to Cappielow to discover that Morton had only ten players on their books.
On his first day in charge, he sold Andy Ritchie to Motherwell.
With part of the proceedings he bought five players and turned Morton into promotion candidates.
After Miller left for Paisley, Tommy McLean duly took them up.
Miller's career in management had got off to a whirlwind start.
He took charge of his third club in almost as many months after Alex Ferguson recommended him to St Mirren.
‘Morton was a great stepping stone for me because I was working under Hal and an experienced board of directors.
I was very green and, to be honest, when Ricky McFarlane quit St Mirren it never occurred to me that I had a chance of getting the job.
‘When they offered it to me, I was in turmoil because I wasn't sure I had the experience the job required.
On the other hand, if I didn't take it, I wasn't sure if I would get another opportunity like that again.’
Miller was confident about his coaching abilities but lacked the management skills needed to run a Premier club.
‘As a young manager, sometimes headstrong, I was fortunate that Yule Craig, the St Mirren chairman, guided me.
He was a father figure.
Looking back, that help was very much appreciated.
He taught me a lot of good things, particularly with regard to running a football club.’
Miller insists he has never been motivated by money, and his days at Love Street were probably numbered from the time St Mirren allowed his then assistant, Drew Jarvie, to leave the club and join Dundee.
Miller wanted the former Aberdeen striker to stay, but the board declined to back him.
‘I lost a little bit of love for St Mirren that day,’ he recalled.
‘I didn't like the situation and when Hibs came in for me, it made it easier to move.
Having said that, everything was done above board.
Things could have been done in an underhand way, but I insisted that Hibs ask for permission to speak to me.
‘I had too much respect for Yule Craig and would not have been part of anything that let him down.
If things were out in the open — and St Mirren did offer to meet any condition if I would stay — then I could make an honest decision about my future.
‘What eventually swayed me was the fact that Hibs were a big club with a greater potential support, although at that point I probably had a better squad of players in Paisley.
Ever since I'd been a youngster, watching and playing football, Hibs have held an important place in the game.
To bring them success was the lure that brought me here.’
Miller has always been expert at bringing out the best in players — he turned Frank McAvennie from a midfield player into a striker in his St Mirren days — and the evolution of Pat McGinlay as a goalscoring midfield player is merely the latest example of his handiwork.
The devotion to duty which made him a surprisingly successful stalwart at Ibrox for so long is still evident in Miller's conscientious work with his young players.
If he has a regret, it is that the majority of young footballers today know nothing of life outside football.
‘I worked in John Brown's shipyard as an apprentice electrician for 18 months.
I left the house at quarter to seven in my working boots with my pieces in my pocket.
‘The QE2 was being built at that time.
When Rangers gave me a chance, I walked through those big gates for the last time and thought to myself — I won't be back here, I'm going to make it.’
STANLEY HUNTER
‘As a player, maybe I wasn't the best.
I know that.
But the managers I played for said I was the best professional.
I wanted to be a winner and I still do’
Struggling backs not up to forwards' standard
Sir,— I cannot for one moment imagine that Ian McGeechan will ‘feel hugely satisfied because his backs are beginning to fulfil some of the potential that they have shown for years’(David Sole, 8 March) after the disappointment of the 26-12 humiliation by England last Saturday.
Three tries in four championship matches, and those against a weak defence, does not speak much for potential in the Scottish backs.
While Scotland's forwards have battled hard and bravely and produced plenty of ball all season, the back division have been left far behind in talent and imagination.
I for one did not get carried away with the Triple Crown hype after the ‘splendour’ of the victory over Wales (for which your publication was equally responsible).
It was certainly a convincing win but the warning signs were already there for all to see: despite the forwards winning a barrel-load of good possession, the Scottish three-quarters failed to score a single try at home in front of a vociferous support and against a decrepit Welsh side.
One could not help wondering how many tries the Australian, French, or dare I say it, English backs, would have run in that day, but double figures would not appear unreasonable even against an ordinary Welsh defence that is the norm in international rugby these days.
Scotland were found sadly lacking in the attacking department, and so it was that this was again highlighted against the English back line.
The loss of Chalmers so early on, although tragic, could not excuse the disarray that was Scotland's three-quarter line, not at this level.
The injury itself  occurred as a result of a cross-field back-row move, bereft of forward movement, that was quickly going nowhere to be swallowed up by the English midfield.
The drop-goal attempt was surely the best option; Chalmers had already just popped one over.
Dropped passes, backwards drifting movements, lack of idea, missed tackles, and above all, no penetration, were all part of Scotland's repertoire.
This latter point sums up Scotland's current midfield frailties: Is there not an attacking three-quarter in the land who can break the advantage line?
England's tries were not magical creations, just simple quick passing, where the movement is always going forward in the classic tradition of back play, but a tradition that seems beyond Scotland's ken at the moment.
Barnes showed the simplicity with which the gain line could be breached with ball in hand in the second, and best, of England's tries.
Scotland's long-standing inability to find a player who can play with ball in hand ‘up with the heavy traffic’(was Irvine the last one?) and the breakdown of simple passing moves was shown in all Scotland's games this season.
Our only game plan given these shortcomings is to punt away possession.
While Hastings senior is a solid full back, he is no Blanco or Joubert when it comes to attacking play, and his big Garryowen quickly becomes predictable.
The new laws are making tries a scarce commodity; if Scotland are to become a creditable force by the next World Cup, the three-quarters will need a good overhaul or at least the acquisition of the necessary skills to perform their moves in the heat of an international arena.
A solid forward base and sound defence is not enough, because it's try points that count at no-time.
Supporters missing out on Murrayfield tickets
Sir,— Following your correspondent A McKirdy, I would also like to express my dissatisfaction with the current system of ticket allocation for international rugby.
I missed out on the Welsh match, so you might think this is sour grapes.
You'd be right, but obviously I'm not the only supporter left feeling frustrated.
Officially, there are two methods of obtaining tickets.
First, take out a Murrayfield debenture — fine if you can afford (a minimum) £1,200, not so good if you can't.
Second, ‘join a rugby club’, also unsatisfactory because:(a) it still doesn't guarantee you tickets; and (b) there are many good reasons why a rugby supporter may not wish to be a member of a club.
A personal example: my rugby loyalty lies with Hawick, but for career reasons I live in Edinburgh, and I rarely have the opportunity to attend home games, so club membership isn't really worth considering.
But this doesn't mean that I am anything less than an enthusiastic supporter of Scottish rugby.
This season, I have attended a National League game almost every weekend, district matches, the international trial, even a women's game.
Unfortunately, all this means nothing under the current system of ticket allocation.
Would it matter anyway?
International rugby has cult status and when things get that popular, it's who you know, not what you are.
In 1984, it was perfectly possible to buy tickets on the morning of the Grand Slam decider with France.
Nowadays, it is an achievement to obtain a ticket for any international.
Where has all this interest come from?
Certainly not from the club scene, where an average gate is rarely more than a few hundred and even a big club like Hawick has had to launch a special initiative to arrest their declining membership.
I have two possible solutions (by no means original) to ensure fairer distribution.
First, the Scottish Rugby Union could institute a supporters' club, where in return for an annual subscription members receive a club magazine and at least the chance to apply for tickets.
Second, and perhaps in conjunction with the above, vouchers would be distributed at club and district games.
Collect, say, six vouchers from different games and you have the right to an international ticket.
This would encourage more people to attend club matches and help to root out those whose primary interest is the Murrayfield car park.
Quick-thinking England players can take a bow
Sir,— While post-match camaraderie among opposing rugby players is legend, it is less often that their respect and concern for each other on the field of play receives recognition.
In the moments immediately following the arm injury to Craig Chalmers in Saturday's international match at Twickenham (see picture below), Dewi Morris summoned assistance from the touchline even before play had come to a standstill, while another England player also paid more attention to Chalmers than to the ball.
Jonathan Webb ran some distance to offer his expertise as a surgeon.
Great care was subsequently taken not to move Chalmers more than necessary other than to place a stretcher beneath him, although he could no doubt have walked from the field.
A sharp contrast to the care which Chalmers received was apparent in the picture in your Sports Section today.
It showed the young Aberdeen footballer, Eoin Jess, being attended to, presumably by a qualified member of the club's medical team, and being ‘helped to his feet’ as your caption noted, despite having a broken ankle.
Such an action seems rather cavalier in relation to someone whose feet and ankles are widely believed to have the potential to be valued in seven figures.
Meanwhile, let Scotland's rugby community applaud the actions of Morris and his England colleagues which showed that the spirit of the game lives on, even although it may not always be apparent throughout a modern international match! 930315 
Unrelated
I'm afraid your diabetic cooks will not have been reassured to read (‘Springtime in Provence’, Weekend, today) that the Jerusalem artichoke is full of insulin.
The sugar in question is  insulin and totally unrelated to the hormone.
Councillor Brian Weddell's memory is short and his choice of slogan selective (Points of View, today).
How about ‘A Scottish parliament will be along in a tick’, for misleading the electorate.
This particular ‘tick’ must be endless in time.
With a Scottish mandate, Labour has progressed from the ‘feeble fifty’ to the ‘ineffectual forty-nine’as it sits impotently at  Westminster because of its allegiance to the Union and because of the English desire for Conservative governments.
That is the reality of the ‘True tartan Tories in ‘93.’
Sylvain Floirat: French tycoon
A CAPTAIN of French industry with interests spanning aeronautics, publishing and luxury hotels, Sylvain Floirat, has died, aged 93.
Son of a postal worker and trained as a car body builder, Floirat rose from a humble upbringing to become a major industrialist nicknamed ‘man with the golden fingers’ for his financial expertise.
In 1955, Floirat bought the ailing radio station Europe 1 and presided over the company for 30 years, transforming it into one of the country's most popular stations.
At the same time, he helped develop Matra Engins, of which he became vice-president in 1957, into the highly profitable defence, telecommunications and aeronautics firm, Matra.
Born in Nailhac in the Dordogne region of France, Floirat founded his first company at the age of 28 in the Paris area.
Named ‘the national salvage man’ by a former French finance minister, Pierre Pflimlin, Floirat rescued numerous failing companies.
He launched into bus production and truck transport, before expanding to aeronautics.
He was president of Breguet Aviation from 1955 to 1967.
Floirat remained attached to his native region and had held the mayor's post in Nailhac since 1959.
There he built a model farm specialising in truffles — the regional speciality — potatoes and nuts.
He became honorary president of the region's truffle farmers' union.
In the 1960s, Floirat managed television and magazine publishing companies.
In 1981, he became an administrator at the publishing company Hachette before expanding his interest to the Filipacchi group in 1984.
Floirat also owned luxury hotels, the principal concern of the new conglomerate Matra-Hachette.
Floirat is survived by a daughter and a grandson, who has assumed some of his business activities.
New champions see juniors as key to future
By Roddy Mackenzie
TEAM Components Bureau, having secured their first Scottish women's league title last weekend, are keen to ensure that they remain at the top.
The Whitburn side have surprised themselves with their progress since they mapped out a five-year development plan when Bob Stokes took over as coach three years ago.
The intention was that, at the end of that time, the club would be Scottish champions.
Now that they have achieved that ambition ahead of schedule, Stokes has the chance to take a team into Europe for the first time next season.
But even the grass roots of the club are sprouting.
Of the six national schools age-group competitions held this season, the Whitburn club has won five.
A West Lothian advanced training group was set up by the club and there are also two junior development groups which operate as feeder teams.
By broadening the base of the pyramid, the Whitburn club hopes to sharpen the peak, with Team Components Bureau reaping the benefits.
With this weekend's match against Paisley now rendered meaningless, Stokes is likely to promote at least a couple of players from the advanced training group to give them national league experience.
The men's first division title will be decided in Glasgow this Saturday when leaders Su Ragazzi meet champions West Coast.
Su Ragazzi need take only one set from the match to win their first title.
It is three years since West Coast beat the Glasgow side without losing a set but Su Ragazzi will take nothing for granted.
‘We need to go into the game looking for a win and we'll prepare accordingly.
We played as well as we've played all season last weekend and a match like this is the best way to end our league season,’ said coach Tommy Dowens.
Meanwhile, the Great Britain coach, Ralph Hippolyte, will attend the Scottish Volleyball Association's National Easter School at Moray House College, Edinburgh, from 3-8 April.
Places at the school are still available and application forms can be obtained from the association.‘
Nothing risky about Oh So Risky
By Isobel Cunningham
THE three-day Cheltenham National Hunt Festival, which gets under way this afternoon, is unlike any other fixture throughout the jump season.
Horses for courses is too broad a brush with which to paint a picture.
Though a good performance on the Gloucestershire track at any other time of the year counts for something, it's nothing to get carried away over, while the top performers through the winter months elsewhere are often made to look ordinary as they toil up the Prestbury Park hill.
More often than not, those who have seemed moderate since the previous year's Cheltenham Festival come into their own with a vengeance.
No-one knows whether it is the vast crowds — around 120,000 will be present over the next three days — or the mere hint that spring is really in the air again that motivates them, but Festival form certainly counts.
Which is why Oh So Risky, Flown and Duke of Monmouth can be expected to improve on their form of late in this afternoon's £120,000 Smurfit Champion Hurdle.
Oh So Risky, who ran away with the Triumph Hurdle — the crown for four-year-olds — at the 1991 Festival, came to the final flight in last year's Champion Hurdle with the race apparently won, and Sheikh Mohammed's Royal Gait had to bash two others aside to finally get to David Elsworth's five-year-old in a photo finish.
Without the ill-fated Royal Gait, Oh So Risky would seem the one the others now have to beat today.
However, only two hours before last year's Champion Hurdle, Flown, then a four-year-old, also showed his liking for these surroundings when winning the Supreme Novices’ Hurdle.
Trained by Nicky Henderson and the mount of Richard Dunwoody, Flown has come through a satisfactory preparation for the step-up to the ultimate test today.
Duke of Monmouth, following in Oh So Risky's footsteps, won last year's Triumph Hurdle and will get the strongly-run race and fast ground so necessary to see him at his best.
Irishman Michael Smurfit, who is sponsoring the race, runs Vintage Crop and will no doubt be hoping to recoup some of his generous outlay.
A good performer on the Flat, Vintage Crop won the Cesarewitch at Newmarket last October on his previous trip over from Ireland, but he is bedevilled by muscle problems in his back and has very limited hurdling experience.
He certainly has none at Cheltenham, which is what it is all about today.
The Trafalgar House Supreme Novices Hurdle, which sets the proceedings alight at 2:15, could contain the meeting's banker bet, for it is hard to oppose the Nigel Tinkler-trained Satin Lover.
The five-year-old is un- beaten in six races over hurdles, including one over the course, and his run today can only be seen as a dress rehearsal for the Champion Hurdle next year.
David Elsworth: runs Oh So Risky in Champion Hurdle
Couples back in business
FRED COUPLES won his first tournament since last year's US Masters when he beat Robert Gamez at the second hole of a sudden-death play-off in the Honda Classic at Fort Lauderdale, Florida.
‘It's a good time to win with the Masters coming up,’ said Couples, who lost to Corey Pavin in a play-off in the same event last year.
Couples led by four strokes with eight to play, but only forced the play-off by holing from a greenside bunker for a birdie at the last.
The pair finished the storm-shortened event with a 54-hole aggregate of 207, Gamez having closed with a 68.
Ryder cup clash: ticket sales to exceed £6.5m
TICKET sales to the public and to corporate sponsors will bring in more than £6.5 million when Europe meet the US in the most lucrative Ryder Cup match yet at The Belfry on 24-26 September this year.
However, spectators, who are expected to number over 100,000 during the practice and match days, will have no cause to complain about viewing facilities — as they did in 1989.
Then, the course was so short of mounds and high vantage points that only spectators just behind the ropes could watch play in comfort.
Since then, more than £800,000 has been spent in improving matters for the spectators who will flock to the event with improved viewing at the eleventh, fourteenth, fifteenth, sixteenth and seventeenth holes.
European Tour officials will not speculate on how much the Johnnie Walker Ryder Cup will make but, apart from the £6.5m in ticket sales, extra revenue will come from television and other sponsorship deals.
Ken Schofield, executive director of the PGA European Tour, points out that on the debit side there will also be huge expenses and says: ‘We shall not be able to assess the likely profit for some months.
‘What is known, however, is that we have already sold more than 60 per cent of the public tickets and will be informing the lucky applicants by 1 April instead of 30 June as we originally intended.’
For each of the three match days, 20,000 tickets are being sold to the public and 8,000 to corporate sponsors.
So the total for the week, including practice days, is expected to equal if not surpass the 1989 figures.
Plans are already being made for the 1997 match to be staged in Europe and Schofield expects to announce the name of the successful country, though not the venue, at the PGA Championship in May.
JIM PAYNE experienced every amateur's dream in 1991 when he partnered Jack Nicklaus in the final round of the Open Championship at Royal Birkdale.
Almost two years later, the memory of that wonderful day returned to help the 22-year-old Englishman claim his first victory on the PGA European Tour.
Payne, who beat Sweden's Anders Gillner in a play-off to win the Turespana Balearic Open in Majorca, received a lesson in course management from Nicklaus, and the 6ft 4in golfer from Lincolnshire took the advice to heart as he kept calm to catch and finally overtake 54-hole leader Gillner.
‘I'll never forget that day at Birkdale,’ recalled Payne, whose victory lifts him close to Ryder Cup recognition this year.
‘I read some of the things Jack said about me, and although it isn't exactly something I re-read every night, I suppose I must have been doing something right for him to make these kind comments.
‘He told me about the importance of eating and drinking on the course to maintain my energy level and to keep on the same emotional level throughout a round.’
THE Border Golfers' Association, which began with the amalgamation of seven clubs in 1893 and went on to play a major role in the development of the Scottish Golf Union, will launch a season of centenary celebrations at Kelso on Sunday.
The  highlights of the year, which is to be  sponsored by Pringle of Scotland, will be an exhibition match between, Nick Faldo, and Colin Montgomerie at Hawick on 22 August, a Texas Scramble at Hawick on 20 June for all Border clubs and a gala dinner at Peebles Hydro on 7 November.
This Sunday, Scottish champion Stephen Gallacher, British internationalist, Dean Robertson, and the present and past Walker Cup Captains, George Macgregor and Charlie Green, are on the guest list for the launch tournament at Kelso, at which BGA president, Colin Wood, will get the season under way in traditional fashion by striking the first ball.
A centenary booklet detailing the BGA's history and profiling noted Border golfers and administrators, including the likes of Dick Smith, David Campbell, Ian Ford, Alex Cleghorn and George Ovens, will also be available from launch day.
Hawick, Selkirk, Galashiels, Peebles, Kelso, Melrose and Innerleithen were the seven original members of an Association set up to promote competition throughout the Borders.
Other regions of Scotland were to follow that lead and it led to the formation of the the Scottish Golf Union which, today, has 16 member areas.
There are now 19 clubs in the BGA (including two non-course owning), and the 17 courses will all host a Border tournament this season, with Selkirk Glass providing special centenary trophies for each event.
England battle to salvage pride
ENGLAND dug deep into their last remaining reserves of energy to salvage some pride in the fierce heat of Colombo yesterday.
A Sri Lankan total of 408 for eight, and a first-innings deficit so far of 28, would not normally be a cause for satisfaction, but this has been no ordinary tour for England, beaten 3-0 in the Indian Test series and  consistently outplayed on the pitches of the sub-continent.
Being even on level terms with the opposition after three days of a Test match is a position almost of luxury for the current England team.
Yet again yesterday England's spinners were largely ineffective, with slow left-armer Phil Tufnell failing again to live up to his pre-tour billing as the tourists most likely match-winner.
Chris Lewis and Paul Jarvis were the pick of England's attack, making up for the spinners' lack of success with gutsy new-ball spells either side of tea.
Acting captain Alec Stewart also did his best to inspire his team to greater efforts with two brilliant diving catches and a smart stumping.
Stewart made just one error with the gloves on a day of sweat and toil — failing to hold a difficult leg-side catch offered by Aravinda DeSilva on 74 off Devon Malcolm — but also impressed with the handling of his bowlers.
The turning point for England was provided by Stewart, in the final over before tea, when the accomplished DeSilva aimed a leg glance at Jarvis.
Taking the new ball at 294 for three had not immediately provided a breakthrough, and DeSilva, on 80, looked set to steer Sri Lanka to a sizeable first innings lead.
However, Stewart dived a long way to his left to scoop up the ball one handed inches from the turf.
After tea Lewis produced one of his best, and fastest spells of the tour to reduce Sri Lanka to 349 for six.
New Zealand were within 33 runs of their first home Test victory in three years at close of play on the fourth day against Australia in Auckland.
New Zealand, chasing 201 for victory in the third and final Test, were 168 for five at close, with Ken Rutherford, the last specialist batsman, at the crease with wicketkeeper Tony Blain.
Rutherford was looking confident on 31 not out.
The Test has been delicately poised for four days, with fortunes swinging wildly.
The fourth day was no different as Australia patiently built a solid but modest total of 285 all out.
New Zealand began their chase as if they were playing a one-day game, flamboyant left-hander Mark Greatbatch repeatedly charging Australian pace duo Craig McDermott and Merv Hughes.
But after they had lost their first five wickets with only 134 on the board, Rutherford and Blain swung the balance back in their favour in the last 45 minutes, adding 34 runs to take their side agonisingly close to squaring the series after a humiliating innings and 60-run defeat in Christchurch.
Fiery pace bowler Hughes seems certain to escape punishment after it appeared he spat at Greatbatch and then obscenely gestured to the crowd when the Kiwi batsman was dismissed.
Match referee Javed Burki, of Pakistan, went on New Zealand television during the tea break to calm matters, saying the incident between Hughes and Greatbatch was ‘a bit of fun’.
‘I think what was going on today was fine.
There was no violation of the code because they had a bit of fun out there on the field.
They come back in the evening, they have a drink together and there are no hard feelings,’ he said.
Out: Kiwi Mark  Greatbatch is bowled by Merv Hughes
Strickland falls at final hurdle
WEST LOTHIAN's Joey Strickland saw his hopes of lifting the British junior singles championship end in disappointment at Swansea yesterday, when he went down to England's Greg Harlow in a top-class final.
Strickland enjoyed the best of the early exchanges and with 12 ends led 14-7.
Harlow, however, hit back to square at 17-17 and after the pair had traded singles on the next two ends, a finishing burst of three singles for the Englishman gave him the title.
In both the pairs and fours Scotland's interest ended at the semi-final stages.
Prestwick's David Gourlay, jun, and Robert McCulloch never recovered from a disastrous start against the Welsh pair of Stephen Rees and John Price who held a 15-0 six-end lead and went on to win 28-11.
In the fours, the Scottish champions from Cowal, Steven Scott, Doug Strachan, Bill Ferguson and Ian McIntyre went down 25-9 to John Bell's Cumbria.
In the women's event at Perth, Jean Miller, Sandra McLeish, Agnes Melrose and Jeanette Conlon gave Scotland their only success when they beat England 25-18 in the fours final.
However, there was disappointment for Stonehaven's Catherine McIntosh in the singles.
After an excellent 21-9 semi-final win over Doreen Hankin, she was beaten 21-11 by Betty Morgan of Wales.
The home international series begins at the same venue today, with England meeting Wales in this morning's opening match and Scotland taking on Ireland later in the day.
Hands-on Borderer who taught a hand-off lesson
ONE of the things which sums up Border rugby is that when one arrives at Mansfield Park for a match, the bloke cheerfully parking cars in the wind and rain is liable to be one of Hawick's living legends.
Quite possibly, a man who has already held office as club president…
Wattie Scott, their erstwhile warrior wing, to whom Hawick recently made a presentation in recognition of 50 years of wonderful service, typifies that loyal and unpretentious breed.
Aside from his deeds in the fifteen-a-side game, he was a noted exponent of sevens.
He even figured as a forward (in a frontal trio which also included one Bill McLaren) in the Hawick seven which won their own tourney in 1948.
One's abiding memory is of a hand-off with the impact of the proverbial kicking mule and reminiscences of him triggered talk of how much less use is made of that weapon these days.
Though the odd player such as Dewi Morris, the England scrum- half, still has a hand-off, it has become rare enough to make the criticism of Wales's Nigel Walker, the Olympic hurdler turned international rugby wing, sound almost like a phrase from another age.
The criticism in question being that he tends to carry the ball under the wrong arm…
The reason for it all is obvious enough.
Nowadays, even wings are expected, like everyone else, to keep the ball available.
ON the Sunday after the Welsh match, Sean Lineen played for Wayne Shelford's New Zealand Select against Northampton.
At half-time, Northampton led the Kiwis — John Kirwan and all — 21-7.
At which juncture, Shelford gave his troops a roasting.
Final score: Northampton 21, New Zealand XV 72.
All right, it was only a bounce game but one has a notion that there is a warning there which the Lions and their selectors will ignore at their peril.
In that connection, incidentally, Shelford shares the view that the Lions should take Leicester's Neil Back as one of their openside wing forwards.
Since the former All Blacks' captain has seen a lot of Back, and still knows the New Zealand scene so well, that opinion, voiced sincerely, should surely not be lightly dismissed.
The All Blacks, in line with their forefathers, will be hell-bent on making the Lions' pack look at once heavy-footed and statuesque.
Having on hand someone as fast about the field as Back, so quick on to man and ball, could well prove an invaluable option.
Alas, his selection would require an improbable U-turn on the part of the Sassenach segment of the selectors.
AS Alan Irons so rightly pointed out in The Scotsman Sportsview yesterday, the concern of England's Jonathan Webb and Dewi Morris for the injured Craig Chalmers in the one-hundredth playing of the Calcutta Cup was no different from the chivalrous  camaraderie of bygone days.
Would that all the crowd had mirrored that behaviour.
Instead, the Scotland stand-off's tragic misfortune figured in the jeering and taunting to which the wives and girl friends of the players, and of others in the SRU party, were subjected.
One at least was reduced to tears.
Heaven knows into whose hands many international tickets are now falling.
ONE still finds it difficult to believe that the International Rugby Football Board will abandon any of the experimental variations in the laws before the Lions' forthcoming tour.
Yet no less an authority on such international issues than the SRU's chief executive, Bill Hogg, confirmed over the weekend that such a thing is theoretically possible.
Thus, the Lions' selectors this time have a further factor to take into account.
Wade Dooley is by no means the only player who was apt to be more profitable under the old laws than he has been under the new.
Jeff Probyn is another.
With, generally speaking, fewer scrums, it would be interesting to know in how many matches this season Probyn's destructive scrummaging could be held to have affected the outcome.
In the past, whatever was said about his methods, he probably won even more matches for his side than was appreciated.
With, against him, not only the new laws — on the grounds that they could well still be fully operative — but his 37 years, Probyn may miss out on Lions' selection.
Yet, make no mistake, he remains a formidable foe.
Which was why it was so intriguing to hear that he had told one or more of the SRU's top brass that while Peter Wright was still scrummaging like a tight-head prop in that — one would have thought very wisely — he did not attempt any of the seasoned loose-head's tricks of the trade, he had found him a good, strong and heavy scrummager, difficult to budge.
Ironically, if — as is not unlikely — Jason Leonard and Nick Popplewell go as the loose-heads, it is Wright who could cost Probyn his seat on that Lions' plane.
Namely, by going as a tight-head with, as previously noted, the important additional credential of a proven ability to pack acceptably on either side of the scrum tunnel.
A selection which would not necessarily be fatal to Paul Burnell's chances.
Probyn's technique, controversial though it has been, was once virtually standard practice.
The laws of yesteryear offered scant protection to the enemy loose-head and hooker, both of whom had to find their own salvation — the most original being, of course, that to which the Gala and Scotland loose-head, Tom Elliot, resorted when playing for a species of international XV versus Sedbergh.
The schoolboy tight-head fancied himself as a hard man and was intent on working Elliot who, in fact, was so immensely strong that the lad can have been no more than the most minor of irritants.
But Tom was also one of rugby's most engaging humorists.
When the opportunity beckoned, he made his point by the simple expedient of picking up a worm and popping it into the panting youngster's mouth.
Ryder Cup clash: ticket sales to exceed £6.5m
TICKET sales to the public and to corporate sponsors will bring in more than £6.5 million when Europe meet the US in the most lucrative Ryder Cup match yet at The Belfry on 24-26 September this year.
However, spectators, who are expected to number over 100,000 during the practice and match days, will have no cause to complain about viewing facilities — as they did in 1989.
Then, the course was so short of mounds and high vantage points that only spectators just behind the ropes could watch play in comfort.
Since then, more than £800,000 has been spent in improving matters for the spectators who will flock to the event with improved viewing at the eleventh, fourteenth, fifteenth, sixteenth and seventeenth holes.
European Tour officials will not speculate on how much the Johnnie Walker Ryder Cup will make but, apart from the £6.5m in ticket sales, extra revenue will come from television and other sponsorship deals.
Ken Schofield, executive director of the PGA European Tour, points out that on the debit side there will also be huge expenses and says: ‘We shall not be able to assess the likely profit for some months.
‘What is known, however, is that we have already sold more than 60 per cent of the public tickets and will be informing the lucky applicants by 1 April instead of 30 June as we originally intended.’
For each of the three match days, 20,000 tickets are being sold to the public and 8,000 to corporate sponsors.
So the total for the week, including practice days, is expected to equal if not surpass the 1989 figures.
Plans are already being made for the 1997 match to be staged in Europe and Schofield expects to announce the name of the successful country, though not the venue, at the PGA Championship in May.
Coach has fears for the future despite golden double
By Sandy Sutherland
THE World Indoor Championship heroics of Yvonne Murray and Tom McKean in Toronto at the weekend have given Scottish athletics a ‘year or two's breathing space,’ according to coach Tommy Boyle.
Boyle spoke yesterday of how delighted he was for the two athletes and the satisfaction their golden double gave him.
But he also expressed his concern for the future of Scottish athletics: ‘It's pathetic really — there's no second tier of world class athletes after Tom, Yvonne, Liz (McColgan) and Tom Hanlon.
The next tier is a long way back and though there is another tier below that again with a lot of potential, they are some years away.’
Murray, from Musselburgh, has returned to Tucson where she is staying at the University of Arizona with a former Musselburgh Grammar PE teacher, Meg Ritchie, the head strength coach there.
She will run in another 5K road race in Carlsbad, California on Sunday: ‘It should be a cracking race, judging by the field,’ said Boyle, before returning home to prepare for the outdoor season.
She will be boosted by her 3,000 metres victory in Canada, even though her time of 8min 50.55sec was slower than her time in placing fifth when she last ran in the world indoors in Indianapolis in 1987.
But this win was all about tactics, not times, and the way she demolished a field including two women who have beaten Liz McColgan in major championships — Elly Van Hulst (who still holds the world record she set in taking the 1989 title) and Lyn Jennings, the world cross-country champion for the last two years — must have whetted her appetite for Stuttgart and the ‘real’ world championships in August.
Over 12 seconds ahead of the next competitor, Murray broke the opposition with a break at 1,000m and not one of her rivals dared to follow.
With McColgan (10,000m and half-marathon) and Murray, Scotland now has two female world champions and one male, a vintage era indeed.
McKean also got his tactics right on the track, even if later, when he should have been on the victory rostrum, he got ‘boxed in’ by some members of the press.
In a comedy of errors, the accident-prone McKean was too busy relaying news of his triumph on a press box phone to realise that the presentation was about to begin.
By the time he had rushed down in an elevator and emerged on the track, the other two medallists had received their medals — and the national anthem was being played without anybody on the gold medal podium.
But he still made the best of his big moment by bounding on to the podium to collect his medal after the official ceremony was over.
It was another highly talented Scottish athlete Ian McCafferty 21 years previously who spent much of his time (and money) phoning home from the Munich Olympics.
At least Tom saved his calls from Toronto till the end.
Times are irrelevant in indoor racing.
Controlling races from the front takes a lot of ‘bottle’ and fortunately the 29-year-old Motherwell club man has totally refuted those who claimed he lacked it.
McKean and Murray have now scored doubles at three major events — the 1989 World Cup in Barcelona, the 1990 European Championships in Split and now Toronto — but rather than give each other confidence by their successes, Boyle believes it's more a case of ‘anything you can do, I can do better.’
Such a situation is a product of the competitive training of the two squad-mates.
David Strang, whose South African-based  Glaswegian parents were in Toronto to see him become the first Briton to win a world indoors 1,500m medal, also has a connection with the Boyle squad.
Murray stayed with his family for several weeks in Germiston when she trained in the United States last year and her fiancee, Tom Mooney, returned the compliment when Strang was in Scotland last summer.
Unlucky not to gain selection for the 800m in last year's Barcelona Olympics, Strang, who ran a ‘blinder’ for Scotland in the 1990 Commonwealth Games 4x400 silver medal-winning team in Auckland, has made a remarkable transition up to 1,500m.
A Scottish indoor record of 3min 57.57sec for the mile and a 1,500m in 3:40.7 as well as several fine competitive performances in the US gave him the right racing background and confidence to tackle Toronto.
His medal was certainly no ‘cheap shot’ despite the disparaging comments in at least one English journal because the Toronto final times were slow.
The 24-year-old Strang has an American girlfriend.
That, and the need to earn a living, are the reasons behind his desire to stay in the US where he is seeking a green card as a full-time athlete having graduated from Stanford University last year.
But some enterprising sponsor could do worse than bring him over to Scotland before the Scottish Championships and the World Championship trials in Birmingham in July.
Nicol and Turnbull strengthen tourists for Fiji tournament
SCOTLAND left the Australian capital yesterday bound for Fiji and the second leg of their three-week sevens tour.
Local interest in this weekend's 16-team tournament in Suva is booming.
Some 4,500 stand tickets priced at Fijian $15 — more than the average daily wage — sold out within two days.
The Scots, perhaps only now fully acclimatised to Australasia, trained for an hour at Daramalan College before their 35-minute flight to Sydney, where they were due to collect reinforcements in the shape of scrum-half Andy Nicol and forward Derek Turnbull, before their four-hour flight to Fiji.
Captain Ian Corcoran and fellow forward Iain Morrison — the standby hooker — were excused yesterday's practice, Corcoran resting a strain to his left ankle and Morrison, bruising to his left knee.
Scotland manager Duncan Paterson said: ‘Their absence was just precautionary.
Corcoran went over on his ankle on Saturday and was quite lame on Sunday but he has improved a lot overnight.’
Scotland could be placed in something of a dilemma if both were ruled out, but Paterson remained confident both will recover.
The Scots presented a selection of SRU trinkets to their hosts from Tuggeranong Valley rugby club before their departure from a tournament which, in Paterson's words, had been ‘a privilege’ in which to participate, given the quality of the opposition.
New Zealand winger Terry Wright, a member of the All Blacks seven at the last six Hong Kong tournaments, has been dropped from this season's trip.
Instead, he will lead a New Zealand B side at Fiji this weekend which also includes Peter Woods, the Bay of Plenty back who starred when the province won Melrose Sevens last season, and Todd Blackadder, a member of the Canterbury team who accounted for Australia in the Canberra competition.
Rugby Scene, Page 16
Totten takes over as East Fife manager
ALEX TOTTEN returned to club management yesterday, accepting a job with East Fife three months after being sacked by St Johnstone.
The move takes Totten, who will be part-time with the Methil club, back to the Second Division where he originally found the Perth club.
It took only three years for Totten to move St Johnstone through the pecking order to the Premier Division and the club were in the top half of the table when, on 14 December, the McDiarmid Park chairman, Geoff Brown, decided a change was necessary.
Since his dismissal, Totten has been working as a radio journalist but yesterday admitted that only active participation in the game brought him genuine satisfaction.
‘I have been in the game as player, coach and manager for 30 years and for the first time in the last three months I can feel the adrenalin starting to flow again,’ said Totten.
‘I did not apply for the job but after I was asked to a meeting with the chairman, Jimmy Baxter, I was impressed by East Fife's ambition,’ said Totten.
‘This is a club with a tradition, having been the only Second Division team ever to win the Scottish Cup, and the great Scot Symon was once manager at Bayview.’
Totten appreciates that what was done with St. Johnstone might not be able to be repeated with East Fife.
‘They have no divine right to play in a higher division.
Only hard work will take the players anywhere and that is a message I will start hammering into them when we play East Stirling on Saturday.’
DENIS STRAUGHAN Back home: three months after being sacked by St Johnstone, Alex Totten settles in at Methil
Roxburgh's bold plans may yet be denied
By Hugh Keevins
THE Premier Division from which Andy Roxburgh yesterday took all 21 members of his squad for next week's friendly with Germany may yet be the cause of the national coach having to drastically review his plans before the arrival of the world champions.
While the likes of Brian Grant (Aberdeen), Nicky Walker (Hearts) and Darren Jackson (Hibs) gained full international recognition for the first time, all have yet to negotiate weekend derby matches.
Indeed Roxburgh was moved to say yesterday that the only certainty was that not all of his choices would make Sunday's squad gathering.
It is the coach's intention to have experience at the core of his team, bearing in mind the exceptional nature of the opposition, but Roxburgh did not rule out the possibility of a new arrival suddenly thrusting himself into consideration for one of Scotland's remaining World Cup qualifying ties on the strength of a display against the Germans.
‘I have had to be flexible and open minded on selection for all of the six-and-a-half years I have had this job,’ said Roxburgh.
‘The door is open to anybody who shows up well at Ibrox.’
Germany coach Berti Vogts yesterday recalled Eintracht Frankfurt midfielder Uwe Bein to his squad.
The 32-year-old Bein played in Germany's 1990 World Cup campaign but won the last of his 14 caps in a friendly a year ago.
The world champions have named an experienced 18-man party for Ibrox, including seven foreign-based stars and World Cup captain Lothar Matthaeus.
He appreciates, too, that he must, in this instance, tread a diplomatic line between doing his job properly and maintaining good relations with club managers whose assistance he will need when fully competitive matches arise.
There are six Rangers players in Scotland's squad and another three contained within the under-21 party to play Iceland in a friendly at Rugby Park next Tuesday.
Given the excessive demands already placed upon Walter Smith's squad at domestic, European and international level, and the injury crisis which envelops Rangers' manager as he prepares for the Champions League game with FC Brugge tomorrow, it would seem likely Roxburgh will lose some of the Ibrox contingent.
Neither Richard Gough nor Ian Ferguson was included in yesterday's Scotland squad because of their injury difficulties and Roxburgh's comment on the rest was that Rangers, in keeping with other clubs, would be given every consideration because of the nature of their programme.
Andy Goram, Rangers' goalkeeper, is wanted by Roxburgh at all costs, however.
‘It would be good for Andy's morale and best for the team if he played against Germany.
Andy's form is exceptional and he has waited such a long time to make the jersey his own that he will not want to miss a game.’
Potential will be assessed in other cases, though, against a team who will have millions of pounds worth of talent to spare on the substitutes bench.
‘The Germans are formidable but our young players have proved that they can come in and cope with the best, the outstanding example being Alan McLaren's handling of Italy's Roberto Baggio,’ Roxburgh said.
Jackson, whose last international experience was as an under-21 player against England five years ago, was described as being ‘skilful and enthusiastic’.
Grant, who was on stand-by for the full squad for a European Championship qualifier against Romania last season, was, Roxburgh reasoned, not unlike the effervescent Stuart McCall of Rangers.
The youthful trio of Scott Booth, Duncan Ferguson and Stephen Wright are all acknowledged, meanwhile, to be knocking at the door of opportunity with a greater urgency than most — apart from the indisposed Eoin Jess.
‘There would need to be an awful lot of call-offs before the five players untried at this level found themselves on the field at the same time, though,’ said the coach.
Scotland's Under-21 side will contain six First Division players and one from the Second Division in an experimental gathering designed to look for players eligible to take part in the summer's world invitation event in Toulon.
Craig Brown, the under-21 team manager, has lost three of his current squad — Ferguson, Booth and Wright — to the full squad and has decided to stand down the rest of his Premier Division-based players at a time when league commitments in England have deprived him of Anglos.
The emergence of three youngsters from Ibrox, Murray, Hagen and Pressley, could be looked at as an unusual bonus but that initial impression may not necessarily be the correct one.
Rangers are no longer  synonymous solely with multi-million pound transfers.
The scorers of Scotland schoolboy's under-15 team's goals in the win over England at Wembley on Saturday were both Rangers' signings and Brown's most promising players at Scotland Youth level are signed to the Ibrox club as well.
McKimmie faces Cup call-up as bug bites deep
By Hugh Keevins
ABERDEEN's Stewart McKimmie, who has not played a first-team game for seven months because of a knee injury, could be recalled for the Scottish Cup, quarter-final replay with Clydebank, at Kilbowie Park, tonight.
If Aberdeen's prospects of winning the only trophy left available to them have been weakened by a combination of indifferent form and disruption to Willie Miller's squad, the picture was little brighter for the party who travelled south last night.
McKimmie, who required surgery, could be necessary since Paul Mason, Lee Richardson and Gary Smith are all victims of flu.
However, Scott Booth, who was injured during the drawn tie with Clydebank at Pittodrie ten days ago, played part of a reserve game against Dundee United before boarding the team coach and his fitness is guaranteed.
‘We know Clydebank will make it difficult for us on their own ground but it is important to this club that Aberdeen go through to meet Hibs in the semi-finals,’ said manager Willie Miller.
Six of Aberdeen's players were named in the full and under-21 squads chosen yesterday by Scotland's national coach, Andy Roxburgh, and Miller considered that a timely boost for the Cup-tie which sees the Premier Division club's season condensed into a single evening.
‘Inclusion in the squads boosts players on an individual level and reflects well on the kind of season they have had up until now.
I hope Aberdeen get the benefit of those things at Kilbowie Park,’ Miller added.
Clydebank have had nothing but a damaging effect on Aberdeen, however.
Eoin Jess broke his ankle in the first meeting of the clubs and the cup draw was followed by a damaging share of the points between Aberdeen and Falkirk at Pittodrie in the Premier Division championship.
Clydebank make a practice of discomfiting clubs from the higher division when they meet them on the claustrophobic confines of their own pitch, as last season's finalists, Airdrie, discovered when they were knocked out after a third-round replay.
Airdrie's league status is now threatened by relegation and Falkirk could make matters worse for the club if they take anything off St Johnstone tonight and move closer to the third bottom team, Motherwell, who are only three points above them.
Celtic's task against Hibs at Parkhead tonight is to restore their six-point advantage over Hearts and move closer to securing a UEFA Cup place.
Defender Tony Mowbray could return to Celtic's side for the first time in ten weeks and silence speculation that manager Liam Brady is willing to sell the player.
‘I have no intention of letting Mowbray go,’ said Brady, who also has Gary Gillespie and Joe Miller in his squad.
The Scottish League, meanwhile, could soon consist of four divisions of ten clubs after a meeting of the top 12 clubs yesterday supported the principle of increasing the League's membership from 38 to 40 teams.
It is the question of how this transition takes place that is holding up the calling of an extraordinary general meeting for the purposes of formalising the arrangement.
The Scottish League management committee will now discuss the matter on Thursday along with the topic of how many clubs should be relegated or promoted to the new divisions once established.
Stevens out — six more doubtful
By Hugh Keevins
GARY STEVENS was yesterday ruled out of Rangers' European Champions' League game with FC Brugge and doubts remained over six others.
Even for the manager of a side who have, during the course of this season's European campaign, treated every obstacle as an inspiration rather than a burden, the weight on Walter Smith's shoulders is now considerable.
The complications caused by injuries to Goram, Gough, Steven, Ferguson, Huistra and Robertson preclude team selection and tactical planning for the Belgians' visit and place a considerable burden on Walter Smith's shoulders.
It is a situation much worse than the one Smith found himself in before the game with FC Brugge two weeks ago and could involve some drastic re-organisation.
The loss of full-back Robertson would leave Rangers short in that department but his hamstring injury does not lend itself to the taking of risks.
Smith, though, is of the opinion that Rangers' problems, while substantial, are better able to be handled now than they would have been five years ago.
Smith, though, believes Rangers are now better able to handle their injury problems than they would have been five years ago.
‘In the early days of my partnership with Graeme Souness, the first-team squad might not have had sufficient strength in depth to have handled this kind of troubled build-up,’ said Smith.
‘Now, though, the squad is positive in everything they do and even the younger players have the confidence to want to go forward.’
This is a quality that will, on the evidence of recent experience in Europe, be needed by Rangers tomorrow night.
‘Football on the continent has changed and the results in both groups of the Champions League show that sides are now willing to attack at home or in their away matches.’
Rangers have five wins and two draws from their games since the first round of the European Cup in September and respond to the fact that opposing teams are keener to attack them in that competition than they are in the Premier Division.
‘Brugge will arrive here thinking they can get a win at Ibrox and will be strengthened by the return of players like Dstl and Van der Heyden in defence and midfield,’ said Smith.
Rangers, on the other hand, abandoned the idea of training yesterday and attention was devoted to the treatment of the infirm.
Goram has not played since receiving a kick on the knee against FC Brugge; Gough has missed Rangers' last five matches because of a hamstring problem; Steven has played only once during that time, as has Ferguson; while Huistra last featured in Smith's team against Arbroath ten days ago when Arbroath were eliminated from the Scottish Cup ten days ago.
Colin Scott, Rangers' third choice goalkeeper, has been put on stand-by in a provisional squad that also contains Brian Reid but Smith's final selection will only be evident when the players take to the field for the pre-match warm-up tomorrow night.
BA's $300m US deal approved by Clinton
By Bill Millar BUSINESS CORRESPONDENT
BRITISH Airways put some of its recent troubles behind it last night when the Clinton administration approved a $300 million investment by the British airline in USAir Group, in the process overriding objections from the three largest US airlines.
The deal, which was agreed by the two airlines in January after BA had pulled out of its original proposed $750 million link-up with USAir in December, confirms the strong negotiating position BA has always been in and puts its aim of becoming a global airline firmly back on course.
It will also help it to deflect the spotlight trained on it and its relationship with Virgin Atlantic.
The three biggest US carriers, American Airlines, United Airlines and Delta Airlines, had hoped that approval of the BA-USAir deal would have been linked to their gaining a bigger foothold in the UK market and argued that the original $750 million proposal would have given BA wide entry into the US market while restricting US airlines from further expansion into the UK.
But those objections have been overridden, not least because USAir has lost $1 billion in the past three years and urgently needs BA's cash, although the US Transportation Secretary, Federico Pena, also laid down a warning marker on the type of negotiations to come when asked about British resistance to allowing US airlines to land at Heathrow Airport.
He said: ‘Our definition of open skies is open skies throughout a nation.’
Mr Pena said that the deal would be reviewed in a year and that congressional action would also be needed before BA could proceed with an additional $450 million investment, giving it more than 25 per cent of USAir.
Foreign investment is currently limited to 25 per cent in any US carrier.
He also said that the US administration would seek an additional agreement that would give US airlines new access to British airports.
Mr Pena hoped that a new aviation agreement could be reached this year between the US and the UK and added that the US would vigorously defend the right of its carriers abroad.
Blocking the BA/USAir deal would have required him to renounce the current aviation treaty between the two countries which would have been ‘a very dramatic step’.
The major benefit of the deal for BA was described yesterday as the sharing of flight codes which meant that transatlantic passengers booking on to a USAir flight in the US would automatically transfer to a BA flight for the Atlantic crossing.
This is expected to provide a considerable boost to BA volumes.
Last night, analysts expressed little surprise at the successful conclusion of the deal.
At Panmure Gordon, Charles Donald said it was within the letter of US regulations and was thus always likely to be approved.
In Brussels yesterday, EC transport ministers took a step towards allowing the executive European Commission to negotiate transport accords on behalf of EC states, when they agreed to set up a working party to see when and how the Commission could negotiate.
The Commission itself said this was insufficient and said it was considering court action to gain power to do the deals.
Maintaining that it had the power to negotiate now that there was a common market for air transport, the Commission said it would be better if the EC negotiated key accords with major competitors such as the US and Asia.
In the meantime, the transport  ministers also agreed to harmonise standards for air traffic control equipment to try and cut down the delays at EC airports.
Europe currently has 52 air traffic control centres, with 31 different systems, 18 different kinds of computer hardware and 20 operating systems with 70 different operating languages.
False starts: power switch likely
MOVES are afoot to ensure there will be no repeat of the false start controversy which cost Colin Jackson a gold medal at the World Indoor Championships in Toronto.
In addition, Britain's team manager Joan Allison wants neutral starting officials at major championships after suggestions that Jackson might have been the victim of home town bias.
Allison was among many who were convinced that the Welshman had been denied the 60metres hurdles crown because the race starter, Toronto property manager Ron Bell, had let local hero Mark McKoy get away with a ‘flyer’.
McKoy, having already been called back for one false start, would have been disqualified for a second offence — but he took full advantage of his head-start to pip Jackson for the gold.
Under new proposals expected to be brought in by the IAAF, starters are likely to lose their power as the final judges of what is a false start.
In future they look certain to have to abide by the electronic device which can record false starts.
‘The object of life is to enjoy it; it's far too short to be doing something you are bored by’ Competitor who stays a jump ahead
ANYBODY who pursues competitive sport to Olympic level before building up their business to £90 million turnover might be said to have earned success through hard graft.
But David Stevenson, chief executive of Edinburgh Woollen Mills and former international pole-vaulter, would have you believe that he has just been rather lucky.
EWM, which acquired Pitlochry Knitwear two weeks ago in a £6 million deal, now has about 200 high street shops in the UK.
Yet Stevenson claims the company was founded by accident — and that he had no plans to join the family firm in any case.
His father, Drew, started Langholm Dyeing Works just after the Second World War.
‘I had no intention of joining the family business.
It was a very small company — only 23 employees — and my brother Neil was already working there.
We didn't think there was enough room for another member of the family, so I trained as a chartered accountant.’
Stevenson readily admits that his business talents did not blossom early —‘I was a most inept apprentice,’ he says — but he successfully qualified as a CA and joined a subsidiary of the British Steel Corporation.
It was not an altogether happy experience.
‘The internal politics of the steel industry were interesting, but I felt that nothing much was ever achieved by anyone.’
Disheartened, he sought an escape route and, after 15 months as an internal auditor, he found his way back to Langholm and the dyeing works.
He set to, learning the dyeing business but, soon after, a mistake gave Stevenson his big chance — or so he tells it.
‘We filled a big order for a Yorkshire company, but got the colour of the material wrong.’
Naturally, the company rejected the material.
‘But there was nothing wrong with it, apart from the colour, so we decided to cut it up and sell it as skirt lengths.’
Thus was the Edinburgh Woollen Mill retail operation born.
By 1970, the first shop was opened in Edinburgh's Randolph Place.
In the early days, Stevenson described himself as having been a Jack of all trades.
‘The most fascinating part of any business is the early days, because that's when every experience is a new experience.’
That year, Edinburgh hosted the Commonwealth Games and Stevenson won the contract to design and market a commemorative games tartan.
His games connection that year was more than just a marketing one; it was also the third time he had been chosen for the Scotland team as a pole-vaulter.
‘It was my father who encouraged me as a high jumper.
As I got older I jumped higher, as he got older he jumped lower.
Then one day, when our heights crossed, he gave me a garden rake and said ‘try this’.
Since it helped me jump even higher, I took to pole-vaulting right away.’
Early encouragement was easy to come by, he says.
‘I got to be Scottish under-15 champion.
Mind you, there were only about three pole-vaulters in Scotland.’
Self-deprecation is a recurring feature as Stevenson talks.
He enjoys telling tales against himself, but modestly omits to mention that he was British pole-vault champion for some time, and competed for Britain (as did his wife Alix) in the Tokyo Olympics.
Does he still participate?
‘No!’ he laughs.
‘I doubt if either the pole or myself could take it nowadays.’
He gave up in 1972.
‘I was in a competition and my daughter — who was three at the time — was watching.
I cleared the bar at the first height, then at the second height, but on the third attempt I knocked the bar over.
I turned to my daughter and asked: ‘What did you think of that?’
She said it was good, but added: ‘You missed the first couple of times, though.’
Fifteen years of hard graft, all put into perspective with that one comment.’
Nowadays, Stevenson confines himself to the (occasional) early morning run and, more frequently, riding his horse.
EWM also sponsors Ian Stark, the international three-day-event rider.
That deal came about when Stark, a long-time family friend, won through to the British team.
EWM's auditors — who came from the same firm as the rider's accountant — suggested the link-up.
Under its Antartex banner, EWM has also acted as main sponsor for some of the horse trials on the Scottish circuit.
On a personal level, Stevenson has an interest in buying National Hunt foals and yearlings and selling them on as three or four-year-olds; some are kept for racing.
In 1972, Stevenson decided to sell EWM's range of tartan and woollen garments south of the Border.
EWM had been buying up high street sites at a rate of nearly one a month and its first English branch was opened in Carlisle.
Nowadays the group, still run from Langholm, employs more than 1,800 people.
The Langholm Dyeing Works — still managed by Stevenson's brother Neil — was sold in 1989 to the Leeds Group but companies in the group include the established tartan and knitwear business of Romanes & Paterson, the Heather Mills company, Antartex and Clan Royal of Scotland.
The group's manufacturing activities, based in Langholm, Selkirk and East Kilbride, supply EWM's shops and external customers.
Next year, with the inclusion of Pitlochry and James Pringle Weavers of Inverness, sales should edge above £90 million.
Some might think Langholm an unlikely location for a PLC head office — about as far from the madding crowd as you could get.
Stevenson disagrees.
‘We've got 200 outlets all over Britain, and I can get to 80 per cent of them by road within four hours of leaving here.
I couldn't do that from London.
Plus you have the benefits of country living.’
Gauging the importance of the export market is difficult.
EWM has no outlets overseas, although it did attempt a joint venture in the US.
‘There are opportunities in Europe, but there are differences in culture and differences in operating costs which make it difficult to enter other European markets.
The single market is a joke — it's a political and ideological nonsense.’
Nevertheless, Stevenson is sensitive to the overseas threat to the Scottish textiles and woollens industries.
The Italians, in particular, have made inroads, he says.
‘The quality of Scottish knitwear is far ahead of most of our competitors, but I believe our problem is probably a lack of fashionability.
‘I don't know why that is — perhaps it's to do with our national characteristics.
‘You think of the Italians, for instance, and you think of romance, style and fashion.
But the Scots?
You'd probably think of drunks, of Rab C Nesbitt.’
(Coincidentally, Gregor Fisher of Rab C fame is a former EWM employee.)
‘It's questionable if you could change that perception at a national level.
But we change it at a company level.
‘We have to focus on what the customer actually wants.
Sometimes I think the industry tends to focus on what we'd like the customer to want, rather than what he or she actually wants.
What we must aim for is to provide goods which are traditionally Scottish, but not old-fashioned.’
EWM is still private, but Stevenson has made noises about the prospect of a full stock market flotation in the years to come.
Why?
Such a move would go some way towards solving the looming problems of succession.
‘I'm now the only member of the family that's in the business, and it doesn't look like my daughters want to become involved.
Where businesses are owned by a family — but the family is not involved in the day-to-day running of the business — that breeds an insecurity within the business.
‘Really, there are only three options — to let the company wither and die, to find a successor, or to go for a flotation.
So it was logical to acquire Pitlochry through a share exchange, and it'll be logical to look to a flotation.’
Not that Stevenson has any immediate intention to cede the reins of control of EWM — he's still enjoying his work too much.
And, as he says: ‘The object of life is to enjoy it; it's far too short to be doing something you're bored by.’
Paris: beauty and the beastly Grunge has descended into grot on the Paris catwalks this week.
Only Christian Lacroix, says John Davidson, shines a light into haute couture 's gloomy penitence Lacroix's clothes were for real women to wear in real-life situations
WHERE is fashion heading next?
Well, according to designers showing their collections for next autumn on the Paris runways this week, it's going even further back in time.
There's a strong feeling for the sombre raiment of the Dark Ages (often as recollected through Seventies eyes) and more in the mode of fanaticism than fantasy.
The only thing which is being overstated in Paris is understatement.
Think penitent…and in less capable hands, downright dull.
Forget grunge, this is grot.
Or is it?
There is a fascinating groundswell of feeling on the avant-garde led by Martin Margiela with his elaborately deconstructed and reconstructed flea-market treasures for a fashion that is fundamentally different from the designerisms of the Eighties.
Fellow Belgian Ann Demeulemeester has inspired a whole generation of fashion school graduates with her heightened minimalism.
Beyond the Seventies pastiche which swamped last season's collections, there is a strong appetite for simplicity and something which perhaps evokes an emphasis on inner beauty.
Women's bodies are now to be covered up, in reaction to the confusing sexual messages of the underwear-as-outerwear flaunting of recent years.
Marcel Morongiu captured this idea of modesty in his recollections of Swedish roots.
He presented a beautiful collection of peasant-style clothing.
Long shirts billowing over skirts were trapped under little pieces of knitwear, capturing a sense of fragile beauty in an alien world.
Karl Lagerfeld also has Swedish ancestry (on his mother's side).
This great designer has an uncanny ability to capture the prevailing mood of the moment and to rework it in a way that can suddenly seem understandable, even wearable, and invariably highly influential.
Last season, in his first collection after returning from a lengthy absence to Chloe he re-established his presence with the prettiest reminiscences of the Seventies seen on Paris runways.
It was a stylistic departure for Chloe but not one at odds with the image of the house or, more importantly, its feminine, peach-packaged floral fragrance familiar to every woman who has ever passed through a department store perfumery.
This cannot be said of Lagerfeld's Chloe collection for next autumn.
Heavy, woollen — perhaps even wooden — tailoring with over-scaled collars and sleeve detailing opened up to reveal ghastly print linings.
Skirts were full but invariably finished just over the knee — and how many women would like to wear printed velvet breeches?
Colours were brutal and depressing; dank shades like dung and army-blanket fawn.
It all might be serviceable enough for a Polish field-worker to wear during the potato harvest, but it was surely no serious proposal for festive dressing.
Where Morongiu's collection looked fresh and light-handed, this seemed leaden.
The collection was presented to the pounding beat of aggressive rock music.
After last season's floppy-hatted waifs, this time around models were given hair styles which looked like a punk reworking of a clipped poodle; make-up featured a spatter of sequin shapes glued on around the eyes.
Perhaps Lagerfeld was trying to remind us that we live in a harsh world.
A less heavy-handed lesson would have sufficed.
If this was his attempt to give Chloe a radical new dynamism, it was all too laboured to succeed.
The melancholy was as asphyxiating as the soundtrack offence with its cacophony of four-letter obscenities.
One must assume that Chloe intends to launch a new fragrance based on the stench of rotting vegetables.
Where Lagerfeld seized the new sombre mood and produced something preposterous and monstrous, Christian Lacroix offered subtlety.
He proved that he can create a great ready-to-wear collection, strong in its own statement, not just a shallow imitation of his couture triumphs.
What made it work?
There was a fresh discipline in colour and form, a gentler line, a relevance to where fashion stands now.
Lacroix's woman doesn't have to eschew luxury for a boil-washed cardigan and a flea-market skirt, or bury her femininity in penitential sackcloth.
But she does now dress in a way that pays attention to the mood of the moment for quieter, softer clothes.
She chooses nature's autumnal palette of russets and ochres rather than the brash brights of before.
In the opening passages, print and adornment was kept to a minimum, excepting the occasional abstract leaf motif appliqued perhaps as an elbow patch.
But while ostentation was held in check, Lacroix's artisan touches imbued these clothes with a special charm.
Best of all were the knitted patchwork fragments, lash-stitched together as a coat, a skirt or even a zip-fronted poncho.
But then all the knitwear in this collection was masterful, from his now familiar long-striped tube dresses (recoloured in autumn's controlled palette) to the simple tunic sweater.
Tailoring didn't steal the show, but jackets were there for women who can't imagine a wardrobe without them.
Sometimes they were reduced to shirt-like softness; often replaced by a long coat.
Trousers invariably had some sort of skirt arrangement wrapped over them — not one of the collection's more convincing ideas.
But when Lacroix layered paisley and russet panne velvet over gently-toned organza pleats, he offered women a fashion vision which was both modern and beautiful.
Ingenues and waifs may find their perfect attire from more avant-garde designers, but Lacroix's clothes were for real women to wear in real-life situations.
What distinguishes his work is an ability to fuse artisan traditions, contemporary taste and fresh, innovative ideas in a collection that looks womanly and wearable.
Not predictable, not pedantic…a more beautiful image of fashion's future than Lagerfeld's beastly Chloe.
Mood of the moment: Lacroix's simple tunic sweater, in russet, under soft jacket and trousers Masterful: Christian Lacroix's ochre tweed coat with patterned lining worn over patchwork knitted top, demonstrate his controlled autumnal palette Buffed up: Lagerfeld's dowdy tailoring, better suited to the tattie harvest
Long arms
Your report today (earlier editions) on Berwickshire District Council's plans to sell 2,200 council houses makes interesting reading, especially as the proposed housing association is to operate at arms length.
These arms are indeed going to have to be of some considerable length as your excellent photograph appears to be of Tweedmouth, Berwick-upon-Tweed, in Northumberland (England)!
Katabatic set to regain two-mile chasing crown
By Isobel Cunningham
KATABATIC and Waterloo Boy will provide the main attraction at the Cheltenham Festival today when they clash in the £100,000 Queen Mother Champion Chase.
It will be the eighth meeting between these two-mile elitists and, so far, Katabatic is two ahead.
Their most recent meeting was in the Game Spirit Chase at Newbury last month, and with a 3lb weight concession, Waterloo Boy took the honours by a length.
However, Katabatic had reportedly been working lethargically in the build-up to Newbury and his trainer, Andy Turnell, is now much happier with the ten-year-old.
At level weight today it will be a different story and the ball looks back in Katabatic's court.
Katabatic looked set to dominate the two-mile championship in similar fashion to previous winners Badsworth Boy (1983-85), Pearlyman (1987 and 1988) and Barnbrook Again (1989 and 1990) when storming seven lengths clear of Waterloo Boy in 1991.
However, he was unfortunate to come up against a finely-tuned Remittance Man last March and, although Katabatic ran a cracker, mounting a ferocious challenge up the final climb, he was held by a length at the line.
Waterloo Boy, placed for the third year in succession, was 3 lengths adrift in third.
If either of today's rivals crack under the pressure, though, there are five others waiting to swoop, including Scotland's Moment of Truth.
Trained by Peter Monteith at Rosewell, just outside Edinburgh, the nine-year-old has been waiting the good ground he will encounter today and, in the words of his trainer, with prizes going down to £4,000 for fourth place and £600 for sixth, ‘it would be mad not to run him’.
Granville Again ends Pipe's title wait
THE magic touch from record-breaking champion trainers past and present conjured a brilliant winning formula when Granville Again won Britain's top hurdle race at the Cheltenham Festival yesterday.
Martin Pipe enlisted the help of fellow trainer Michael Dickinson, now based in the US but who saddled the first five home in the 1983 Cheltenham Gold Cup, in the preparation of Granville Again, who hit form on the day it mattered to win the £140,000 Smurfit Champion Hurdle.
Following the same victory route as his full brother, Morley Street, two years ago, Granville Again fought off the challenge from 50-1 shot Royal Derbi to win by a length.
Halkopous, who had been in line with the first two turning for home, faded to finish third, with King Credo fourth.
Numerically, Pipe has re-written the racing annuals, topping the double century mark in the last four consecutive seasons.
But this win was extra special — his first in a top championship.
‘Some of you thought I couldn't do it,’ chuckled Pipe, who then gave credit to Dickinson for the role he played in Granville Again's timely revival.
‘I went over to Michael's training centre in the US, then he came to visit me while on holiday in Britain — I learned an awful lot.
Granville Again was out of form with a few niggling problems, so after talking to Michael I decided to let him down for a break then bring him back to his peak for one day — this day.’
With a little gentle persuasion, Pipe encouraged Peter Scudamore to switch from his intended mount Valfinet, who finished 16th, to the winner who had fallen two flights out when poised to strike in last year's race.
With a smile, the champion jockey recalled: ‘For a long time I was always going to choose Valfinet because he has done so well and Granville Again was running terribly.
But Martin kept putting me on him at home and in the end I fell for it.
I'm glad I did.
‘I'm very pleased because Martin and I have achieved a lot together, and a championship race is what we were after.’
Scudamore hopes his judgment holds good for tomorrow's Gold Cup.
He has opted for Chatam over former hunter chaser Rushing Wild who will now be ridden by Jonathon Lower.
The novices, spearheaded by Ireland's Montelado in the opening race, went faster than the champion field, so quick in fact they set a track record.
The famous Irish roar echoed around the Cotswold Hills as Montelado shot clear two out in the Trafalgar House Supreme Novices' Hurdle, winning by 12 lengths from the Pipe-trained Lemon's Mill.
The performance earned the Pat Flynn-trained gelding a 10-1 William Hill quote for next year's Champion Hurdle.
Charlie Swan, rider of Montelado, completed a first-day double when Fissure Seal took the American Express Gold Card Handicap Hurdle Final.
Gibson is sole Scot in action
ANNE GIBSON is the sole Scottish flag bearer at the All England Championships which begin at Wembley today.
Gibson, who won her fifth successive Scottish title at Meadowbank last month but whose season has been ravaged by injury, faces an unknown quantity in Denmark's Maiken Mork in the first round of the women's singles.
If she gets through, she will face England's triple Commonwealth gold medallist Fiona Smith in the next round.
Two-times Scottish champion Kevin Scott, having been forced to play in the qualifying rounds, lost out in the men's singles 15-5, 7-15, 10-15 to Denmark's Jim Laugeson.
‘I didn't play particularly well and I didn't play particularly badly.
It was just one of those days,’ he said.
Scottish champion Jim Mailer was not included in the main draw; Bruce Flockhart had to pull out because of a leg injury; and Gordon and Jillian Haldane withdrew because of a family bereavement.
Meanwhile, Kirsteen McEwan, a triple winner at the Clydesdale Bank Scottish Under-18 Championships earlier this month, spearheads Scotland's team for the European Junior Championships in Sofia from 11-17 April.
Scotland are aiming to return to the top division after being relegated in Manchester in 1989.
The Scots failed to gain promotion in Hungary two years ago.
Scotland have been drawn in the same section as Ireland and Wales and are looking to go forward to a promotion play-off with the winners of a section involving Germany, Austria and Norway.
McEwan will also be the main Scottish hope for a medal in the individual events.
Only Anne Gibson has won a singles medal for Scotland in the championships — a bronze in 1987 — and McEwan, just 17, has an outside chance of repeating that.
The best performance by Scots in the individual events, was a silver medal for Pam Hamilton and Joy Reid in the women's doubles in 1977 but there have been five other Scottish bronze medal performances in the doubles since the championships began in 1969.
England paying penalty for lack of technique Jeremy Allerton analyses the changing face of cricket
THERE has been a lot of interest in Tracy Austin's return to top-class tennis at the age of 30 after a 14-year gap.
One of the first victims of teenage burn-out, she is now confronted with the world of graphite power play wherein the women now hit the ball harder than the men did 30 years ago with the old wooden rackets.
When Bjorn Borg recently made his unsuccessful comeback, he attempted it with his faithful old wooden racket as he had found the new weaponry too difficult to control.
After being demolished and outgunned by some indifferent players, he attempted to use the new compounds, but to no avail.
A peerless champion of his own era, he had been reduced to an ineffectual has-been by the modern gunslingers.
How could this be?
Quite simply, the passage of time and new techniques had taken their toll.
Yet, surely, the eternal verities of any game still apply.
But to the point.
Borg himself revolutionised the game with his two-handed backhand and top spin from either side.
A supreme baseliner, he approached the net about as frequently as Michael Heseltine visits a coal mine.
The game has moved on so dramatically that the introduction of only one serve and a longer court has even been mooted.
Likewise, skiing has been transformed by the use of new materials.
As fitness and strength improve in successive generations, so new records are created, although in athletics the use of new ‘compounds’ somewhat blurs this judgment.
Thanks to technology, golfers now propel the ball  prodigious distances and even America's Cup sailing has become a computerised nightmare.
As for Formula One racing, the day is fast approaching when the driver's presence will become mere tokenism in the face of computer control from the pits.
The progress (or not) of football and rugby has depended on the development of tactics and physique.
And even cricket has also undergone some radical changes over the last 20 years.
Not much can change in cricket other than a change of emphasis and tactics.
The West Indians have ruled Test cricket for the last 15 years through a succession of brilliant fast bowlers and batsmen.
Spinners have been thin on the ground.
Can you name any three since the great Lance Gibbs?
The fast bowling tactic has worked.
One new facet has been the increasing use of heavier bats.
Each change induces subtle adjustments and the heavier bat has brought about the introduction of the early pick-up with some resultant technical deficiencies.
As expected, Graeme Hick has prospered on the Indian tour and regained one essential ingredient — confidence.
But will we all once again this summer be analysing his shortcomings against Australian short bowling?
The doubts still persist that his statue-like stance — feet wide apart, legs straight and head looking down the pitch over the left shoulder — leaves him in no position to deal effectively with the fast, short delivery.
The straight legs allow no flexible movement while the wide stance prevents the proper playing of short or full-pitch deliveries.
His driving, although fluent and powerful, is not classical.
His head and shoulder are not over the ball.
Instead, head, knee and bat meet the ball in the perpendicular as with so many other modern players.
As a result, he is unable to lean into the stroke like Cowdrey or Hammond.
Watching England struggle against the Indian spinners emphasised another change in technique.
Up until the Seventies conventional playing of the spinners dictated that the batsman should be over the ball by dint of footwork or the bat smothering the spin by being in front of the front pad.
Nowadays players stick their front leg down the wicket and play with the bat behind their pad.
This can be an actual defensive stroke or merely padding up.
It is no wonder that so many are dismissed pad/bat.
English batsmen need to study the techniques of the likes of Javed Miandad and Salim Malik, even if the latter has just been dropped by Pakistan.
As England currently struggle against Sri Lanka, Keith Fletcher moans that he can't understand why ‘their spinners are able to turn the ball and ours can't.
It's as if they're bowling on a totally different pitch.’
I remember Jim Laker showing me his greatly distended index finger, the result of thousands of hours of actually spinning the ball on to a landing area the size of a pocket handkerchief.
England's cricketers may be fitter and stronger than in the past, but unlike other sports their technique still falls short of past masters.
Just as they have struggled against West Indian speed, they have now been unhinged by Indian spin.
A return to the eternal verities might be in order, but even then you can still end up clean shaven, well trousered and blazered and commentating for the pie in the Sky.
Scots size up opponents for World Cup Sevens From Graham Law Fiji
AN additional advantage of Scotland's sevens tour is the opportunity to run the rule over their pool opponents for the World Cup Sevens at Murrayfield next month.
Already, the Scots have seen Australia at close quarters in last week's Canberra Tournament, where the Wallabies reached the semi-final, while, earlier in the season, they faced a number of possible participants in the colours of Queensland in Dubai.
This week, in the inaugural Fiji International Sevens, the Scots will be able to devote further studies to the Australians and get their first glimpse of Tonga, against whom they are also drawn in the Hong Kong Sevens.
The trip to the colony next week will enable them to do their homework, too, on Argentina and Italy.
Thus only Taiwan from the Scots' pool for the Murrayfield event will not be seen in the flesh, although Scotland's sevens coaches, Douglas Morgan and John Jeffrey, will doubtless seek videotape of the tournament in Sicily last summer from which the Taiwanese qualified.
The Scots, having arrived in Nadi early yesterday, proceeded to their base in Suva in the morning.
Andy Nicol and Derek Turnbull, who met the party in Sydney, took part in the training, but did a minimum of work because of jet lag.
Iain Morrison continued to rest his knee injury, though Ian Corcoran was restored after his ankle strain.
Corcoran, however, suffered a cricked neck during tackling practice which ended his day on the playing field though it is not likely to limit him today.
The Scots have already benefited from the SRU's decision to send a doctor and physiotherapist — Harry Burnett and Colin Elliot — on this trip.
Other teams, denied the medical back-up, are already in the toils.
Canada, in addition to David Lougheed who sustained concussion in Canberra and is therefore out of both Fiji and Hong Kong, have three other players carrying niggling injuries which are proving slow to heal.
They may have to ask the Hong Kong Union for financial assistance in order to summon a replacement from home.
Donaldson broadens horizons
SCOTTISH champion Emma Donaldson, who rose to her highest world ranking of 39 last week, has now set her sights on the Far East in a bid to make further progress, writes Elspeth Burnside.
Donaldson, 20 on Sunday, made a significant breakthrough when she reached the semi-finals of the Danish Open last month.
Having also gained experience this year with regular appearances in the German Bundesliga, she now feels ready to tackle even greater challenges.
The Guernsey Open next week will mark the start of a campaign that includes the Hi-Tec British Open, the European Championships and, hopefully, a trip to Japan and Hong Kong in May.
The Far East leg of the women's circuit offers prize-money in excess of £60,000 and the Scot, who is already supported by the Fife company, Donaldson Timber, is hoping to find a major backer to finance the trip.
South African too strong for holder Chang
THE defending champion, Michael Chang, suffered a shock second-round defeat at the hands of South African Marcos Ondruska in the Lipton Championships at Key Biscayne, Florida.
Chang, the No7 seed, went down 7-5, 6-1 after wilting against Ondruska's powerful groundstrokes.
The ninth seed, Michael Stich, also came close to bowing out but escaped with a 4-6, 6-3, 6-4 win over Frenchman Rodolphe Gilbert.
Top seed Jim Courier crushed Byron Black, of Zimbabwe, 6-2, 6-2, while third seed Stefan Edberg defeated the Mexican, Leonardo Lavalle, 6-4, 6-3.
In the women's event, Olympic champion Jennifer Capriati went down 3-6, 7-5, 6-4 to the Austrian, Judith Wiesner.
Austrian Judith Wiesner returns against Jennifer Capriati
European crews out in force on Thames
TO MARK the end of the winter season of Head races, three major events take place on the Thames over the next few days.
Tomorrow the Schools' Head includes six Heriot's entries and a composite from Dumfries Academy/Dumfries High/St Joseph's.
The Head of the River Race is one of rowing's great occasions, and with an entry of men's eights, limited for safety reasons to 420, the 4 miles between Mortlake and Putney will be very busy on Saturday afternoon.
The event is becoming increasingly popular and includes crews from Austria, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain and Switzerland.
The Scottish total of 14 is about its usual level, and comprises mainly university crews.
On Sunday, the Vesta Veterans' Head, over the same course, includes St Andrew, who failed to enter for the big one on time.
Hendry fails to make the final as men falter in Swansea again
SCOTLAND suffered mixed fortunes yesterday with the women's side romping to a 138-82 win over Ireland in the opening game of the Home International series in Perth, while in the men's British championships at Swansea, the Scots were left empty-handed.
After defeats in the junior singles, pairs and fours on Monday, the Swansea spotlight switched to the singles and triples, but Scotland failed to reach either final.
In the singles, Perth's David Hendry went down 21-8 to Welshman John Price, who went on to take the title 21-14 against Ireland's Neil Booth.
In the triples, the Prestwick side saw a great fightback just fail to take them to the final.
The Ayrshire trio trailed England 12-18 with just three ends to play but finished 4, 1, 1, to force an extra end.
England got the all-important shot that took them through to the final which they lost 19-8 to Ireland.
But while Scotland's men were toiling, the women got their challenge for the Home International championship off on a winning note.
The Scots opened up a 20-shot lead over Ireland after just five ends and then pulled away to finish convincing 56-shot winners.
Tormented tourists face trial by spin
ENGLAND face a final trial by spin as their winter tour enters its last few days.
Today in Colombo, Sri Lanka's spinners will be aiming to inflict upon England their fourth Test defeat in seven weeks.
There are mutterings in some quarters, however, about the legality of the bowling actions of Jayananda Warnaweera and Muttiah Muralidharan — who shared eight wickets in England's first innings of 380.
England's management have not supported the view of New Zealand captain Martin Crowe, who earlier this winter raised the issue when his side were on tour in Sri Lanka.
Keith Fletcher, England's team manager, has refused to answer questions about the Sri Lankan pair's action, while home officials insist there is nothing wrong with their two spinners — as they did when Crowe first mentioned it.
Warnaweera, with fast off-cutters, and Muralidharan, with more orthodox off-spin, have both turned the ball far more than England's specialist spinners, Phil Tufnell and John Emburey.
Fletcher said: ‘It looks like two different pitches — one when they bowl and another when we bowl on it.’
Sri Lanka begin today's fourth day 28 runs ahead of England at 408 for eight.
In India, 47 English wickets out of 60 fell to spin as the Test series was lost 3-0.
An eight wicket defeat at Calcutta was followed by innings' beatings in both Madras and Bombay as England's batting technique against spin was exposed on turning pitches.
The surface at Colombo's SSC Ground is not as helpful as those produced in India, but Warnaweera and Muralidharan will not make life easy.
Acting captain Alec Stewart said: ‘We have got to bat sensibly, and take each session at a time.
‘There is a lot of work still to do in this match and we must concentrate on getting the right total in our second innings.
‘The pitch has held together reasonably well and the conditions have not changed that much from the first day.
‘But their spinners are pretty useful and we know we will have to bat well second time around.’
Lancashire batsman Neil Fairbrother, who jarred his shoulder in the field, will be fit to bat.
England's players had a lazy rest day today, many of them reporting that they felt drained by playing in the heat and humidity of the first three days.
Cricket in Sri Lanka is indeed a tough job with the high humidity as big a factor as the near 100 degree temperatures and the weather does add extra pressure on England's players at the end of a long and arduous tour as they try to regain a little bit of their lost pride.
ENGLAND have turned down invitations to play in two one-day tournaments in November, because they feel it will hamper preparations for the winter tour to the West Indies.
The Test and County Cricket Board yesterday rejected trips to the Diamond Jubilee in Calcutta — in which most of the Test-playing countries are likely to be involved — and the Sharjah Championship Trophy in the Gulf.
TCCB cricket secretary Tim Lamb said: ‘We are concerned about the total amount of cricket being played by our players, particularly one-day matches.
‘We looked at the tournaments in the context of the whole winter and decided they were not the best preparation for a challenging series against the West Indies.’
KEN RUTHERFORD hit an unbeaten 53 to steer New Zealand to a five-wicket victory and a share of the series in the third Test against Australia in Auckland yesterday.
But New Zealand's delight was tinged with sadness after opener John Wright's announced his retirement.
In his 82-Test career which began in 1978, Wright scored 5,334 runs at an average of 37.82.
Only Sir Richard Hadlee, with 86 caps, played more Tests for New Zealand.
Wright, regarded as a stubborn if unglamorous left-handed opening bat, said he had known since the start of the year that he would retire.
New Zealand's victory — their first home Test win for three years — levelled the series at 1-1 after Australia won the first Test by an innings and 60 runs in Christchurch and then drew the second in Wellington.
The home side resumed their second innings on the final day needing 33 more runs to win with five wickets in hand, and Rutherford and Tony Blain took only 29 minutes to reach the target of 201.
ZIMBABWE'S batsmen collapsed against the Indian spinners on the fourth day of the Test in New Delhi yesterday.
Despite an impressive display by the Flower brothers, Zimbabwe lost their last seven first-innings wickets for 47 runs to be all out for 322.
Following on 214 behind, they were 62 for two at the close.
It was scant reward for Andrew and Grant Flower who added 192 for the fourth wicket.
Andrew, the left-handed elder brother, became the third Zimbabwean Test century-maker with 115, while Grant made 96.
Left-arm spinner Maninder Singh, making a comeback to Test cricket after four years, claimed three wickets as did leg-spinner Anil Kumble, England's recent destroyer.
Zimbabwe's second innings began badly when Grant Flower was leg-before to Manoj Prabhakar's fourth delivery with only two runs on the board.
Kevin Arnott and Alistair Campbell put on 51 for the second wicket before the former was bowled by Maninder for 21.
GRAHAM LLOYD cracked his second century of the England A tour to steer his side to a commanding lead on the third day of their final tour match against a Western Australia XI in Perth yesterday.
Lloyd reached 100 in just 128 balls with a six and 11 boundaries in a thrilling run blitz as England A raced to 300 for five declared, leaving Western Australia to score 402 for victory in just over a day.
They were 19 for one at the close.
Depleted Rangers ready for make-or-break Euro tie
By Hugh Keevins
RANGERS look likely to go into tonight's crucial Champions League match against FC Brugge without six injured players.
With the prospect of a European Cup final place for the winners — and little hope for the losers — only Trevor Steven is thought to have a realistic chance of playing against the Belgians.
Andy Goram, Richard Gough, David Robertson, Ian Ferguson and Pieter Huistra are destined to be spectators among a capacity crowd of 42,000 at Ibrox.
Gary Stevens, whose non-appearance was announced on Monday, is to enter hospital tomorrow for an operation on his damaged left foot that will keep him out for the rest of the season.
For Rangers' other casualties, only miraculous recovery will be sufficient to strengthen Walter Smith's side for the game that will ‘clarify,’ to use the manager's word, the outcome of the section they lead in the company of Marseille.
The subject of injury brought a pained expression to the face of Rangers' manager yesterday, but not out of any sense of vulnerability created by multiple bruising.
Rangers have come too far and achieved too much in this season's competition for Smith to be intimidated by any form of mishap.
‘I would rather have the problems we've got and still be in the European Cup than be without them and a place in the Champions League as well,’ said the manager.
‘If we had gone out over two legs to Leeds and failed to reach the last eight of the European Cup, Rangers would have been branded failures.
‘After we had beaten Leeds home and away, Rangers then became favourites to win the trophy.
‘Heightened expectation on the part of supporters is understandable and tolerable so long as it comes with a sense of realism.
It does not follow that a good display in the second half against FC Brugge, and a goal to earn a draw, means we can dismiss the Belgian champions.
‘Rangers have played themselves into a good situation and proved we are a decent side.
There is still a bit to go, though.’
After tonight, the next stage of Rangers' journey is the visit to Marseille on 7 April, which dispenses with any margin for error against a Brugge side Smith expects to be fortified by the return of the Hungarian sweeper, Laszlo Disztl, and Stephane van der Heyden, the young midfield player who has recently broken into Belgium's national side.
Smith has a way of merging pragmatism with logic that prevents the escape of a lot of the hot air which inevitably hypes up these occasions.
Yesterday's summary of events was that if anybody at Ibrox genuinely knew how tonight's match would finish, the rest would be told and copious amounts of nervous energy would go un-used.
Managerial credit was given where it was due to Ally McCoist and Mark Hateley and, not unnaturally, Smith hoped for a continuation of their apparently insatiable craving for goals.
The players have now scored 70 goals  between them for Rangers in all competitions this season, though McCoist was jocularly chided by his manager as he attempted to reply to the unanswerable question, posed him by a foreign journalist, of how many goals he expected to score tonight.
‘So long as he (McCoist) scores one more than he got in Bruges, I'll be happy,’ remarked the manager of the goal machine that stalled two weeks ago.
Smith knows that McCoist and Hateley can handle the continental system of man to man marking with a sweeper at the back.
‘They need ammunition from midfield if they are to do their work, however.’
A combination of injury and UEFA's restrictions on the use of foreign players will mean that Dale Gordon and Steven, if fit, accompany Stuart McCall and Ian Durrant in midfield.
How Smith compensates for unavailability in defence is another matter, beyond having John Brown and Davie McPherson as certain starters at centre back.
Nisbet and Robertson, Rangers' full-backs in four of the last five games, are both doubtful and the emergent youngsters at Ibrox, like Steven Pressley and Neil Murray, will be placed in a state of readiness.
Even if Andy Goram should miss the game and Ally Maxwell is introduced to European competition for the first time, Hugo Broos, the Belgian side's coach, will refuse to read too much into that change.
‘The deputy tries to prove to his manager that he is as good as the man he is replacing,’ said Broos, doubtless applying that theory to all of Rangers' outfield worries.
FC Brugge also have a doubt over their midfield player, Gert Verheyen, and will be without the suspended defender, Alex Querter.
In the absence of any guarantees, Rangers may care to comfort themselves with the knowledge that the club have not lost a game in which McCoist has had to replace Richard Gough as team captain, the list including three previous European ties this season.
McCoist, whose next goal will be his fiftieth of the season for Rangers and Scotland, is in the midst of the kind of run in which he can do no wrong.
The player's manager will have no objection to whatever it is that is guiding McCoist staying firmly on course this evening.
McCoist, meanwhile, will attempt to reach the milestone of his 50th goal of the season with a plea to the Rangers fans to ‘Bring the house down’.
The striker wants the crowd to repeat the deafening noise generated against Leeds.
‘The atmosphere at Ibrox that night in October was one of the best I've experienced.
Although we went a goal behind, they were very vocal and got right behind us.
‘It is now up to us to give them something to shout about again.’
McCoist has already scored 46 Rangers goals, eight more than last year, and three for Scotland.
Last season's total of 38 seemed like a hard act to follow, but McCoist admitted: ‘I always knew that I was capable of scoring even more, but I didn't want to shout too loudly about it.
‘Publicly I said that I didn't think it was possible, but that was mainly to take some pressure off me.
Mark Hateley and I have 70 between us, which is incredible, but it really doesn't matter if I score or not tomorrow just as long as we get one more than Bruges.’
McCoist and Hateley's marvellous talents will be more invaluable than ever as Rangers once again try to overcome their massive injury problems.
The casualty list is so long that manager Walter Smith can barely face talking about it.
Rangers, however, have proved often this season that adversity is no obstacle to their ambitions.
McCoist, who had taken over the captaincy from the injured Richard Gough, shrugged his shoulders and said: ‘We've grown used to all those injuries and learned to accept them.
‘We've lost key players, for sure, but the manager has built a squad of players to compensate for injuries and suspensions.
The youngsters who have come in have done a great job.’
Gary Stevens is out tomorrow, while Gough, Ian Ferguson, Andy Goram, Pieter Huistra and David Robertson are extremely doubtful.
Trevor Steven, though, has a chance of playing.
Smith said: ‘I'm struggling even to provide an update on the injury situation.
They are all serious and Trevor has probably the best chance of playing.’
Rangers and Marseille currently head Group A in the Champions League with Bruges a further point behind at the halfway stage of the six-game competition.
Smith observed: ‘I think tomorrow will go a long way to clarifying the picture.
A draw would not be the end of the world for Bruges or ourselves, as we both have to play Marseille.
‘I'm happy with our current position and the fact that we are still undefeated.
However if we are going to qualify for the final, a victory would help us greatly.’
Bruges are without suspended midfielder Alex Querter, while Gert Verheyen is struggling to overcome an injury.
Coach Hugo Broos said: ‘If we lose we have no chance of reaching the final and the same applies to Rangers.
The loser tomorrow can forget about the final.’
Troubled World Cup tie moves out of Africa
THE World Cup tie between Egypt and Zimbabwe, to be replayed because of crowd trouble, will be staged in Lyon, on 14 April.
FIFA had ordered the match to be played in France on 28 March but Egypt protested that the date conflicted with the Moslem religious festival of Eid-al-Fitr.
Egypt need to win to move through to meet Cameroon and Guinea in the African Group C of the qualifiers while Zimbabwe need a draw.
Manager Jack Charlton has included Celtic's Pat Bonner and Tommy Coyne (Tranmere) in his Republic of Ireland squad for the World Cup qualifier against Northern Ireland at Lansdowne Road on 31 March.
No way back for Hibs after Payton's double Celtic 2 Hibs 1
By Mike Aitken
CELTIC savoured victory over Hibs at Parkhead last night for the first time since Liam Brady took over as manager, thanks to a couple of well-taken goals from Andy Payton.
After the Englishman had taken his tally for the season to 14, Hibs mounted a spirited fightback.
Keith Wright brought the Easter Road side back into contention and was unfortunate not to grab the equaliser with a shot which struck the base of the post.
In front of Celtic's lowest home gate of the season, the two sides served up a superb all-action second half which compensated for a dour first session.
On an eerily quiet night at Celtic Park — wind and driving rain had done little to add lustre to a low-key occasion — it was Hibs who made the brighter start.
The return of Mickey Weir and Willie Miller pepped up the side that lost at Ibrox on Saturday.
Weir looked sharp and eager as Jackson's partner in attack and set up Lennon for the best early chance of the game.
A beautifully-measured diagonal pass to the wing gave Lennon the chance to lob Bonner, who was caught betwixt and between after coming off his line.
Lennon, however, took fright and hurried into a shot which sped wide of the target.
A run of three wins prior to this game had seen Celtic strike a consistent, if unspectacular, vein of form.
McAvennie looked Celtic's most threatening attacker and twice came close to forcing a goal from over-head kicks.
One effort hit the bar and the other brought out a fine save from Burridge after deflecting off Payton.
Slater, who rarely looks like adding to his tally of one goal for Celtic, missed a peach even by his standards after good work by Collins, Payton and McAvennie.
With only Burridge to beat from six yards, the Englishman swept the ball wide.
By the time the interval beckoned, Celtic had taken a grip on the game in midfield.
McStay and Grant had got the better of Hamilton and McGinlay while Slater and Collins were more effective than Lennon and Wright on the flanks.
Celtic's pressure, though, was more insistent than incisive and the visitors defended comfortably enough.
Hibs showed a few signs of life when Tweed and Weir threatened on the counter-attack.
When they showed any urgency, they made Celtic's offside trap look vulnerable.
The Edinburgh side needed to move up a gear to jolt Celtic out of their rhythm.
When they showed any urgency, Hibs made Celtic's offside trap look vulnerable.
An inept clearance by Wright, who was in the left-back position, gave Celtic an unexpected opportunity to go in front.
McStay supplied the cross and a solid header from Payton, which seemed sure to find the roof of the net, prompted the save of the night from Burridge.
After a flat spell, Celtic were again in charge of the game and the match was won when Payton struck twice inside a productive three-minute period.
Celtic's breakthrough goal came from their most fluent move.
Collins made the running down the left and found Slater at the back-post.
His knock-down was finished off by a crisp strike from the centre-forward.
Slater was again the provider for Payton's second goal with a cross from the right which the striker headed away from Burridge.
Payton could have completed a hat-trick a minute later but shot wide when it  looked easier to score.
Hibs responded to that let-off by grabbing a 66th-minute goal which brought them back into contention.
Jackson started the move, Weir provided the cross from the right, and Wright stabbed the ball past Bonner from six yards.
It was no coincidence that Hibs were at their most dangerous after Evans had replaced Lennon and Weir moved out to the right wing.
Holders out
THE defending champions, Ajax, were last night knocked out of the UEFA Cup quarter- finals by French club Auxerre when their 1-0 home victory was not enough to overhaul a 4-2 first-leg deficit.
World Cup tie moves to France
THE World Cup tie between Egypt and Zimbabwe, to be replayed because of crowd trouble, will be staged in Lyon, on 14 April.
Egypt protested at FIFA's original date of 28 March as it conflicted with a religious festival.
Celtic's Pat Bonner and Tommy Coyne of Tranmere are included in the Republic of Ireland squad for the World Cup qualifier against Northern Ireland on 31 March.
Aberdeen scrape into semi-finals Booth settles seven-goal Cup thriller Clydebank 3 Aberdeen 4
By Hugh Keevins
ABERDEEN flirted with disaster at Kilbowie last night before two goals in the final 15 minutes from Scott Booth took them through to a Scottish Cup semi-final against Hibs at Tynecastle on 3 April.
Booth, who had played in a reserve match 24 hours earlier to prove his fitness, scored with two headers to conclude a remarkable night.
Aberdeen squandered a two-goal lead, fell a goal behind and then fashioned their own survival.
The Scottish Cup remains the Pittodrie side's only chance of a trophy this season and no doubt the sponsor, Tennents, will welcome their participation in the penultimate stage of a tournament which was brought to life by the courageous display of Clydebank, who had seemed crushed and then reshaped into tigerish opposition.
Traffic disruption and a shortage of change at the turnstiles saw the kick-off delayed by 15 minutes.
There was no lack of change in Aberdeen's team, though, with McKimmie replacing Winnie and Shearer being left on the bench to accommodate the return of Booth.
Only the thickness of the crossbar prevented Booth from scoring after five minutes when he turned on a Paatelainen pass.
Irvine had earlier hit the post and there was no doubting Aberdeen's willingness to put the first tie behind them and move purposefully into the semi-finals.
It was Irvine who gave Aberdeen a deserved lead in the 15th minute.
A carelessly conceded corner found its way to the defender but the execution had nothing to do with Irvine's height and power in the air.
Showing a striker's awareness, Irvine controlled the ball with his back to goal and then swivelled to send a low, diagonal shot past Woods.
The tie looked over as a contest when Paatelainen got his 15th goal of the season eight minutes later.
Booth's cross was met strongly by the Finnish internationalist and his header from close range relieved any pre-match tension Aberdeen might have felt.
Only the booking of McLeish, for a foul on Murdoch, contradicted the impression of the Premier Division team being at peace with their surroundings and prospects.
Apart from McLeish's indiscretion, there was such an air of superiority about Aberdeen that disintegration looked an imminent possibility where Clydebank were concerned.
Indeed, it required two outstanding saves by Woods from Kane and Grant before the interval to forestall the home team's collapse.
It was, therefore, completely against the run of play that Clydebank scored seconds before the break.
Full-back Hay had the first attempt and saw his shot only partially blocked by a hesitant Snelders.
Eadie pounced on the rebound and the tie was thus enlivened.
The unexpected turn of events perhaps explained why Clydebank, their adrenalin obviously racing, found no time during the interval to change mud-encrusted strips on a night of unremittingly hostile weather.
The First Division team had a stiff wind at their backs after the resumption and McIntosh tested Snelders's nerve for further flaws with a shot from 40 yards.
Aberdeen had, at that point, been slow to regain the composure shown before Eadie's involvement and this was illustrated when Aitken became the second experienced player to be booked.
Aitken tried to flout the referee's authority by refusing to take a throw-in from the right position and paid the price for his misdemeanour as the tie continued on its unpredictable way.
How uncertain the night had turned out to be was summed up by Maher's equaliser in the 59th minute.
The full-back appeared in Aberdeen's penalty area and determination carried him into a spot where he could see the right-hand corner of Snelders's goal, sending the ball there with all the assurance that had characterised Clydebank's return from the brink.
Clydebank then completed a breathtaking comeback by taking the lead for the first time after 68 minutes.
Flanagan's run on the left caught out Wright and his cross evaded the Aberdeen defence before finding Henry who nodded the ball over the line from inside the six-yard box.
It was then Aberdeen's turn to stare elimination in the face, and expulsion of the most embarrassing sort for a side who had earlier enjoyed a supposedly comfortable lead over the team from the lower league.
Booth answered the call for an Aberdeen saviour.
Ten Caat's free-kick in the 75th minute hit the crossbar and bounced kindly for Booth who glanced the ball home.
Aberdeen's debt to Booth was even greater ten minutes from time when he scored the goal that finally ended an enthralling tie.
In flicking Kane's corner beyond Woods, he brought a simple end to an otherwise complicated night for Willie Miller's team.
Dunne's first goal eases pressure on St Johnstone St Johnstone1 Falkirk0
THE smallest crowd of the season at McDiarmid Park last night saw St Johnstone recover from a backs-to-the-wall first half to take two vital points from Falkirk.
The visitors made an impressive start against a Perth side beaten only once at home in the past five months.
Home captain Andy Rhodes was in steady action after he punched over an opening effort by Ian McCall.
Then Kevin McAllister's corner kick was slammed against the post by Richard Cadette before St Johnstone had two further let-offs as shots by Neil Oliver and David Weir rebounded only to strike defenders' legs.
Paul Deas averted more danger for the home men as he ended a fine run by Neil Duffy.
With the opposite number still waiting for his first save, Rhodes was in the thick of things again as he pushed a header from Dave Weir against the crossbar.
The goalkeeper had to react quickly again to smother the dropped ball as Kevin Drinkell dashed in.
St Johnstone's first potentially dangerous move, in the 36th minute, faded out at the edge of the box when Alan Moore miskicked a return pass from David Byrne.
With the home side apparently transformed after the interval, former Irish under-21 cap Liam Dunne gave them an unexpected 50th-minute winner, scoring his first league goal since signing from Bohemians two years ago.
A cross from Moore provided Byrne with an opening and, after Ian Westwater was unable to hold the ball, Dunne netted from eight yards.
A misjudged pass-back by Gary McGinnis gave Drinkell a chance of a quick equaliser but a swirling wind and a difficult angle foiled him.
Rhodes saved from Duffy before Moore twice came close for St Johnstone.
No way back for Hibs after Payton double Celtic 2 Hibs 1
By Mike Aitken
CELTIC savoured victory over Hibs at Parkhead last night for the first time since Liam Brady took over as manager, thanks to a couple of well-taken goals from Andy Payton.
After the Englishman had taken his tally for the season to 14, Hibs mounted a spirited fightback.
Keith Wright brought the Easter Road side back into contention and was unfortunate not to grab the equaliser with a shot which struck the base of the post.
In front of Celtic's lowest home gate of the season, the two sides served up a superb all-action second half which compensated for a dour first session.
On an eerily quiet night at Celtic Park — wind and driving rain had done little to add lustre to a low-key occasion — it was Hibs who made the brighter start.
The return of Mickey Weir and Willie Miller pepped up the side that lost at Ibrox on Saturday.
Weir looked sharp and eager as Jackson's partner in attack and set up Lennon for the best early chance of the game.
A beautifully-measured diagonal pass to the wing gave Lennon the chance to lob Bonner, who was caught betwixt and between after coming off his line.
Lennon, however, took fright and hurried into a shot which sped wide of the target.
930317 
Oldest Briton dies at 115
BRITAIN'S oldest person, Charlotte Hughes, died yesterday aged 115.
Mrs Hughes, who waited more than a century for some of the most exciting times of her life, passed away peacefully in her sleep at the St David's Nursing Home, Redcar, Cleveland.
She was born the same day in 1877 that Alexander Graham Bell launched his first telephone company and became a teacher when just 13.
Mrs Hughes married after she retired 50 years later and her husband lived to be 103.
Mrs Hughes, from Marske, Cleveland, was 108 when she had tea at No 10 with the then Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher — and later she returned the compliment when the premier visited her home while in north-east England.
Although a lifelong Labour voter, influenced by the poverty she saw as a teacher, Mrs Hughes spoke of how Mrs Thatcher ‘gave me a lovely tour of No 10 and I thought she was such a nice person’.
The outing was set up by her former Tory MP, the late Richard Holt, who also fixed it for her to take her first flight — an 80-minute trip over the Bay of Biscay in Concorde — when she was 109.
She enjoyed it so much that she fancied celebrating her next birthday with a Concorde flight to New York.
Her wish was granted and her supersonic trip was rounded off with a stay in the famous Waldorf Astoria Hotel.
Mrs Hughes always had plenty to say about modern life and one pet grumble was the way grammar standards had declined since she stopped teaching the subject more than 50 years ago.
Wondering whether English was still taught in schools, she commented on her 114th birthday: ‘Many of the people I hear on the telephone don't even know how to speak the language properly.’
She put down her long life to what she regarded as healthy eating — her breakfast on her last birthday was brandy, bacon and eggs — and keeping the Ten Commandments.
The Guinness Book of Records lists the oldest person in the world as a Frenchwoman, Jeanne Louise Calment, who is 117.
Mrs Hughes became Britain's oldest living person ever on 25 February, 1992.
Setting the record straight on story of diplomat's pipe-playing activities
Tam Dalyell's sympathetic obituary (9 March) of my old friend and colleague, Sir Andrew Gilchrist, touches on his supposed bagpipe&rehy; playing activities in moments of crisis in Reykjavik and Jakarta.
It is time the myth of the kilted, bagpipe-playing ambassador is put to rest.
I doubt if Andrew, as a Lowlander, ever wore the kilt and I am certain that his skills as a piper were not of a high standard.
The authentic story, as related to me by Andrew himself, is as follows.
When, during the second cod war, the angry Icelanders demonstrated outside the British Embassy, he played some pipe music on his gramophone, very loudly and with open windows.
The crowd threw a few rocks and dispersed.
When he was transferred to Jakarta at the time of growing tension between Britain and Indonesia, there were ominous signs that action was intended against the British Embassy.
As the mobs gathered, an assistant military attache asked Andrew about the pipe-playing episode in Reykjavik.
He made some non-committal reply and thought no more about it until, a couple of days later, when the mob was actually storming the chancery building in the main square, he looked out of the window to see the assistant military attache playing the pipes.
It did not have a calming effect on the Indonesian crowd.
Andrew confided in me that if the officer had asked his permission to play the pipes on this occasion, he would have told him not to be such a fool.
As it was, he later declared, to support the officer, that the action had been taken with his authority!
Perhaps Andrew's quirkiness preferred the persistence of the myth rather than the inside story, but with his death the truth must be told, since it is a tribute to his generous nature.
No insulation from cold calculation
SHE gave me a row when I put on potatoes for her tea.
‘You don't need that much water,’ Madge complained.
‘Think what it costs to boil a full pot of water.’
But I don't, as a rule.
Any more than I give more than an irritated passing thought to turning up a heater when the temperature drops.
In contrast, for people like Madge, the matters of staying warm, and buying and heating food are a daily preoccupation.
Sometimes resolved by deciding that warmth and food on particular days are mutually exclusive options.
We met when I was researching some material on community care, and her great good humour and flawless memory for fascinating aspects of social history turned a one-off interview into an intermittently enjoyed friendship.
Her remarks about cost-efficient cooking were devoid of self-pity, merely a pragmatic evaluation of what was possible and what not on a small fixed income.
The kind of weekly income which probably no longer buys a decent lunch for two in one of the restaurants regularly patronised by members of the Government.
When you listen to the Chancellor of the Exchequer sweeping aside concerns about the decision to put VAT on fuel bills with a casual assertion that it will help the national debt and so ultimately benefit every consumer, it gives you the clearest possible indication of how divorced this government has become from the concerns of millions of electors.
The promise that the poorest will be protected by adjustments to their income support levels just doesn't begin to address the problems of the seven million British households who are already suffering from fuel poverty and unable adequately to heat their homes.
It doesn't resolve the problems of those who do not qualify for income support, yet are in receipt of paltry levels of pay or other benefits.
A pensioner will become eligible to pay VAT on any income above £57.15 per week.
A couple with two young kids starts paying on income over £69.70.
And a single parent with a child over 12 can only receive £67.15 before coming into VAT rating.
Yet who could assert that these are incomes which keep families out of poverty?
The European Community reckons that what they call the ‘decency threshold’ ought to be £207.13, while the minimum wage proposed by the Labour Party was £147.85.
Neither does it resolve the problems of people who are on income support in Scotland, since any increase in benefit will be a flat-rate payment across the UK, whereas it costs on average 30 per cent more to heat a house in Scotland.
In fact, the Campaign for Cold Weather Credits cites the results of working out a Climatic Severity Index which takes account of house type as well as wind, rain, and hours of sunshine.
And on that basis, there is, for instance, a 69 per cent difference between heating a home in London and one in Shetland.
Last month that campaign attempted to interest the Health Minister, Virginia Bottomley, in the rising number of what is known in the jargon as excess winter deaths.
What that means is the extra numbers who die in winter rather than summer months.
We have many more of these deaths in the UK than even Scandinavian countries which have a more severe climate, but better housing and more realistic welfare payments.
The figures for the deaths in Britain also produced predictable but depressing evidence that the poorer you were the more likely you were to become one of winter's grimmer statistics.
Women over 60 were discovered to be especially vulnerable.
Women like the ever thrifty Madge.
What is especially insulting about the decision to impose VAT on a purchase about which no family has a choice, is the flimsy pretence that this was all done in the name of greener government.
This, from an administration which routinely blocks moves to a cleaner sea, which gives occasional wrist slaps to regular industrial polluters, which encourages the import of dangerous waste for processing, which has starved rail freight services and increased road haulage and which somehow thinks the answer to the giant car-park which masquerades as the M25 is to add yet more lanes in which to crawl.
If this were a serious move to protect the environment from fuel pollution, then the Government would have been rather more convincing were it to use the new VAT revenue for a national programme of home insulation.
At a stroke this would have several dramatic benefits.
The programme would be labour-intensive and give work to skilled craftsmen as well as apprenticeships to unskilled school-leavers.
It would improve the housing stock and decrease the future need for renovation and repair.
Most importantly, it would make it possible to keep warm for much less cost and therefore mean fewer deaths and fewer illnesses from the effects of living in cold, damp sub-standard housing.
Just such a programme has been successfully undertaken over many years by the Scottish Heatwise programme whose funding has never, alas, matched its innovation and enterprise.
Instead, the only thing it is hoped the VAT receipts will help insulate is the Chancellor of the Exchequer himself, from further scathing criticism of his massive borrowings.
The Government has made much of not putting any money on the basic rate of tax.
I'm still sufficiently optimistic about the country in which we live to suppose that most of us here in Scotland would vastly prefer to pay a little more income tax, than have the least advantaged of our fellows dropped further into poverty.
THE longest fashion show in the history of the Borders knitwear industry — it has lasted 50 days — will come to an end in a blaze of colour and patriotism tomorrow, writes WILLIAM CHISHOLM.
For John Ross Scott (above), whose friends call him JR, there will be a welcome return to the suits he mothballed in his Hawick wardrobe in a one-man attempt to boost the jersey trade.
The Hawick mills were suffering so much from a lack of orders in the second half of 1991 that JR, a regional councillor for the town, lambasted his colleagues for not doing their bit by sporting the jumpers that have given the Borders a worldwide reputation.
The closure of Jaeger's Hawick factory in October of that year pushed the job losses in the local industry above the 1,000-mark.
It was time for Hawick's action-man to cast his jacket aside, and pull on his V-neck.
He launched his Wear Borders Knitwear campaign in Edinburgh and promised to wear sweaters until the industry took a turn for the better.
Mr Scott is chief reporter on the weekly Southern Reporter, so there were plenty of opportunities to stage his one-man fashion display at prestigious events.
The Royal Garden Party at Holyrood was followed by the Southport Flower Festival, the British Open Golf Championship at Gullane and the 1992 Hawick Common Riding celebrations.
Here JR lived up to his title, Mr Knitwear, by donning a Peter Scott number beneath his bailie's robes.
But yesterday he announced he was calling it a day.
The knitwear trade is on the upturn and can probably survive without him.
In any case, JR longs for the chance to try some jazzy ties.
He admits the scheme cramped his dress sense and made him sweat at official functions, but he hopes he has given the people of Hawick ‘a sense of purpose, pride and awareness of the quality of world-class knitwear they produce’.
Not everyone was enamoured by the decision to shelve his suits.
Selkirk's provost, Tom Henderson, director of a textile dyeing company, berated him for damaging the image of the tweed trade.
Cloth-making also had a vital role to play in the Borders economy, he argued.
The campaign will end in style.
Today JR will turn up at the Borders roads committee meeting in a Pringle of Scotland creation, complete with Saltire design, as worn by the golfer Colin Montgomerie at last year's Scottish Open.
GRAHAM McGIRK
Garrison Savannah may spring surprise
By Isobel Cunningham
CAN it be third-time lucky for the French steeplechaser, The Fellow, in today's £150,000 Cheltenham Tote Gold Cup?
For the past two years The Fellow, who is half a thoroughbred, half trotter, has come to the final fence with Europe's classic steeplechase seemingly won, only to lose it by a whisker on the run-in.
With two King George VI Chases at Kempton to his name and nearly £105,000 in the bank, this seven-year-old, owned by Marquesa de Moratalla, a 63-year-old who was born in Spain but now lives in Switzerland, and trained by Francois Doumen in a leafy suburb of Paris, seems vulnerable when faced with the infamous Cheltenham hill.
He must get it right today, however, if he is not to land himself with the label of being one of the best horses never to win a Gold Cup.
But is there yet another giant-killer lurking today?
And who will it be?
Peter Scudamore, after his invincible riding form yesterday — the champion jockey won the Sun Alliance Chase on Young Hustler and the Coral Cup on Olympian — could be in with a chance on Chatam.
Trained by Martin Pipe, Chatam put up a sterling effort in February when beaten a head by Jodami in the Hennessy Gold Cup in Ireland but he is also prone to errors.
Scudamore has opted for Chatham instead of stablemate Rushing Wild who first sprang to prominence on Gold Cup day 12 months ago when he demolished the opposition in the Foxhunter Challenge Cup.
Sent to Pipe to be prepared for a Gold Cup campaign, he indicated abundant potential when strolling home in a handicap at Wincanton on Boxing Day.
Stepped up in class, he again grabbed the attention when trotting up by 25 lengths in the Anthony Mildmay, Peter Cazalet Chase at Sandown.
Were it not for his defeat by Country Member at the same course in February, he would be half his present odds.
Cherrykino, meanwhile, is the last descendant from the family of the great Irish steeplechaser, Arkle — winner in his time of three Gold Cups — and may well be the one to spring a surprise.
On the other hand, this could come from the Jenny Pitman-trained Garrison Savannah, the 1981 winner having worked ‘brilliantly’ on the Manton gallops earlier this week.
Malton trainer Jimmy FitzGerald has withdrawn Gold Options from the big race after watching Trainglot fail to complete a circuit in the Sun Alliance Novices Hurdle.
Hard on the heels of the shock defeat of odds-on favourite Sybillin in the Arkle Chase on Tuesday, FitzGerald decided it was not worth risking the outsider in the Gold Cup.
‘I can't see any sense in subjecting him to a hard race in the Gold Cup when I know that his blood has been wrong,’ he explained.
FitzGerald discovered that his Cheltenham runners were suffering from a bad blood count after they were tested on Monday but still decided to run them.
‘They were already down here, anyway.
Sybillin was the worst of them but he didn't run a bad race in the circumstances,’ the trainer added.
‘I could tell beforehand he wasn't right.
There was no gloss in his eye as if he couldn't care less.
But he had been really well at home.
I wish I knew what was wrong with them.’
In the Foxhunter Challenge Cup, the point-to-point and hunter chasers version of the Gold Cup, Ian Stark, who has won two Olympic three-day eventing silver medals, partners the Edinburgh Woollen Mill horse Randolph Place.
Latimer to lead home challenge
FACING a programme of three individual events plus two relays, George Heriot's Paul Latimer will lead an almost single-handed assault on England's superiority in the senior section at this weekend's Speedo schools' international at Brecon, Wales.
The 17-year-old senior internationalist is making his fourth and final appearance in the event and, in addition to defending the butterfly title, he also lines-up in the medley and backstroke.
England have never been beaten in this annual event, but the Scots will be aiming to retain second place ahead of Ireland and Wales.
McManus falls to fightback
JIMMY WHITE yesterday won four of the last five frames to complete a superb fightback against Alan McManus in the fifth round of the £180,000 Nescafe Asian Open in Bangkok.
The world No3 launched his comeback with a break of 114 after he lost the first three frames.
Then he followed with breaks of 52, 61 and 103 to lead 4-3.
An exciting eighth frame saw the Scot compile a break of 69 before he found trouble after missing a snooker off the final red.
White cleared up to the pink with a break of 31 but missed a difficult black which McManus hammered into the yellow pocket.
White clinched a quarter-final place when he potted the last red and colours to the pink in the deciding frame.
Afterwards McManus said: ‘Give him an inch and he dishes up.
I fancy Jimmy to go all the way and win the tournament.
He's in good form.’
White added: ‘It's great to get my game back, but I would not have been disappointed if Alan had won.’
Scots face England in decider
A GOOD day for Scotland's bowlers yesterday saw the women's side set up a home international decider this afternoon against England while the men's team, bidding for a third successive title, cruised to a convincing win over Ireland.
In the women's series at Perth, both Scotland and defending champions England coasted to comfortable victories.
The Scots finished ahead on all six rinks for a 134-96 win over Wales while England beat Ireland 157-95.
In Swansea, Scotland survived a slow start before recovering to beat Ireland 134-95.
The Scots continue their challenge today when they face Wales.
Tough start to grand prix series
ANDY YOUNG (RP/Kapsco) sets out in defence of his Scottish Grand Prix title on Saturday, when the 1993 series gets underway with the Lomond Roads 85 miles race on the Rosneath peninsula in the Firth of Clyde.
The ten-event campaign to determine Scotland's top road man, comprises eight road races and two mountain time trials and runs until the tour of Madderty which is in September.
Eighty-five miles is a long way this early in the season, and the course is a hard one with an assent of the Whistlefield on each of the four laps of Rosneath.
St Aloysius complete Cup hat-trick Galashiels Academy12 St Aloysius College18
ST ALOYSIUS College won the Bank of Scotland Scottish Schools Cup for the third time when they defeated Galashiels Academy by three tries to two at Meggetland.
The pair were meeting in the final for the fifth time in six years with honours even up to yesterday.
There was a strong diagonal wind in favour of the Borderers in the first half and they turned round 12-3 ahead, although territorially the game was more even.
They scored a good try by internationalist Craig Lawson who crossed the line from a short pass from his scrum-half, David Paterson, son of the Scottish selection committee convener Duncan.
Peter Johnston kicked a penalty after 19 minute for St Aloysius when the Gala backs strayed offside to make the score 5-3 for Gala, but a minute before the interval Gala scored a bizarre try.
There was a period of considerable pressure on the Gala line with the final lunge by David Kent being stopped five metres out.
Gala won the ruck and Lawson made some ground before belting the ball up the middle of the field.
The wind caught it and it bounced awkwardly for the St Aloysius defence and Roy Montgomery went in for a try under the posts which was converted by Ross Houghton.
With the wind advantage in the second half, St Aloysius took command and on only two occasions did Galashiels set up a sustained attack.
The Glasgow school's forwards had tight control of the game and they supplied their backs with plenty of ball.
Their half-backs, Johnston and Kevin Devlin, kept play in the corner and the tries duly came.
Stewart McGrane scored the first seven minutes after the break with the second not arriving until five minutes from the end, which says a lot for the Galashiels defence.
Devlin scored the second after a number of scrums, free kicks and penalties all close to the line, and in injury time John Paul Speirs touched down to ensure victory.
No stopping them: St Aloysius College press ahead with an attack despite some determined tackling by Galashiels Academy
Farr aims for tour return
THERE is something rather special about this week's LPGA Standard Register Ping tournament at the Moon Valley Club in Phoenix, Arizona.
The city's favourite woman golfer, Heather Farr, is to be married on Saturday and all the players will be attending an evening reception.
Farr, who played in the 1984 Curtis Cup at Muirfield, was three years ago diagnosed with breast cancer and has since required all manner of chemotherapy and radiation treatment, together with a bone marrow transplant.
The LPGA established a benevolent fund to pay her expenses, thereby relieving their colleagues of all financial strain.
Farr was given the all clear at the start of this year and her next aim, after the wedding, is to get back to the tour where, in 1988, she demonstrated promise with a third-placed finish in the Mazda Classic and a 41st position on the order of merit.
Pam Wright and 15 other Europeans are teeing up at Moon Valley.
Wright finished 45th last week in Tucson but is seen as a player on the verge of her first win.
‘You don't do as well as she's done in the majors without being a very good player,’ said Jim Webb, the LPGA's deputy commissioner.
For the record, Wright finished in the top ten in last year's Dinah Shore and the US Open, while her stroke average for 1992 was a career-best 72.42.
Brown at the double in Melrose triumph Hawick 16 Melrose 27
MELROSE, this season's Scottish champions, added the Border League trophy to their collection last night by picking up the two points they needed under the floodlights at Mansfield Park.
Melrose, who led 7-6 at half-time, put in a storming finish, with captain Robbie Brown leading by example as he notched two late tries.
The second one was converted with the last kick of the game.
The other Melrose touchdowns came from winger Andy Purves and flanker Bruce Laidlaw.
Gary Parker, who was playing at scrum-half, kicked two conversions while David Leighton landed a drop goal.
Hawick stand-off David Gordon scored a try and two penalties, with the home side's other try coming from scrum-half Kevin Reid.
Gary Parker: kicked two conversions and drop goal
Torrance seeks Portuguese recovery
From Mike Britten, Portugal
RONAN RAFFERTY today begins the defence of his Portuguese Open title against a battery of English champions and Scotland's redoubtable Sam Torrance, the only golfer in the last 20 years to have twice won this well-established national championship.
Torrance was the winner at nearby Penina in 1982 and again the following year at Troia near Lisbon, and showed his liking for Portuguese courses by finishing fourth here at Vila Sol on the Algarve last year.
That turned out to be the highlight of a very disappointing campaign for the veteran Ryder Cup star who went on to finish 62nd in the order of merit, his lowest placing since he joined the PGA European Tour in 1972.
Because of that, Torrance no longer qualifies to play in pro-ams, the curtain-raisers that are important not only for public relations with local personalities, but also as a means of getting to know the golf course.
Torrance arrived in time yesterday for nine holes practice behind the pro-am field and like the rest of the contenders for the £41,660 first prize was delighted by the condition of this Donald Steel-designed course amid the pines.
It boasts the first greens in Portugal  constructed to USGA specifications and they are a joy to putt on.
Although they accept a well-struck shot they are firm and pacy, and the better putters should flourish.
Torrance said: ‘I have finished 12th and 13th in my last two tournaments and I would have done better in Valencia if I had not driven out of bounds at the last hole.
That dropped me down from second place.’
Colin Montgomerie, who is fast catching up Barry Lane at the top of the Ryder Cup qualifying table, has left the tour for a month, to await the birth of his first child this coming weekend, then to prepare for the US Masters in Easter week.
Lane has breathed a sigh of relief that he therefore cannot be caught this week, for Mark James (5th) is his closest rival present and he is almost £75,000 points behind.
‘I want to stay on top and win the order of merit as well,’ said Lane, a former Scottish Open champion who has his wife, Melanie, to thank for spotting the reason behind his recent poor putting.
He has notched only 17 birdies in his last eight rounds for which he is 18 over par.
‘I use a very small putter and I crouch over it,’ he explained.
‘My wife noticed when I started practising on the lounge carpet after Sunday lunch that I was also behind my arms.
As soon as I stiffened them my stroke improved.’
John Richardson, the St Andrews-born father of Ryder Cup player Steve, has also been dispensing family golf wisdom.
He spent a week in Majorca watching his son at Santa Ponsa and saw that the pause at the top of his backswing had gone.
‘I was all rush and no rhythm,’ said Richardson.
‘Dad told me to take my time and now I have got back my swing.’
Rafferty has regained form — he was seventh last week — because he has switched to a metal driver.
‘It has put me back on the golf course,’ he said.
Having sorted out his long game he just needs to acquire more consistency around the green.
Mark James, Jim Payne, David Gilford and Paul Broadhurst think they can beat him this week as does Gordon Brand jun who was joint second with Ireland's David Faherty in Valencia.
Andrew Oldcorn, the Turespana Masters champion in Cadiz is also among the title hopefuls and the Swedes, headed by Per-Ulrik Johansson and Robert Karlsson are again out in force, having placed six men in last week's top 20 behind Payne.
Hendry's shock defeat
THE world champion, Stephen Hendry, crashed out of the £180,000 Nescafe Asian Open in Bangkok last night.
The Scot was dumped 5-2 by 26-year-old Dave Harold from Stoke, who stands 93rd in the world rankings.
It was the second shock of the tournament in 24 hours, following holder Steve Davis's elimination by 192-ranked Irishman Fergal O'Brien.
Harold, through to the first quarter-final of his professional career, said: ‘This is obviously my best ever win, and while Stephen didn't play well I like to think it was something to do with the way I played.’
Hendry, still without a ranking event title this season, said: ‘I didn't expect to lose but Dave played well and all credit to him.
I went from bad to worse.
Nothing was right with my game at all.’
Alan McManus also bowed out of the tournament after losing four of the last five frames to Jimmy White.
World No3 White won 5-4, launching his comeback with a break of 114 after he lost the first three frames.
Antwerp's costly European ‘first’ Steaua Bucharest1 Antwerp1 (aggregate 1-1) Antwerp won on away goals
TWO players were sent off and four others booked as Antwerp, Belgium's oldest club, reached the semi-finals of a European club competition for the first time.
An 82nd-minute headed goal by Alex Czerniatynski gave them a draw in the away leg of their Cup Winners' Cup quarter-final against former European champions Steaua Bucharest.
Ilie Dumitrescu had given the Romanians the lead with a close-range shot in the 19th minute.
Antwerp took the tie on the away goals rule, the first leg having ended in a goal-less draw.
Steaua's Ionel Fulga and Antwerp's Rudy Taeymans were sent off in the second half, Fulga for dangerous play and Taeymans for a second bookable offence.
Nicol arrives aiming to make instant impact for Scotland
LAST YEAR Andy Nicol had to wait until August — five months after the event — to hold his 21st birthday party.
The Dundee HSFP scrum-half had worldwide rugby matters to attend to.
The finale to the Five Nations Championship, the Hong Kong Sevens, the World XV tour to New Zealand and Scotland's trip to Australia all delayed his big night.
Discounting an institute exam, he was able to mark his 22nd birthday in rather more conventional style last week, before his arrival here in the middle of the rainy season on the second leg of Scotland's three-week sevens tour.
Nicol, one assumes, will be given the chance to prolong his celebrations by slotting immediately into the Scotland seven who are drawn in one of four pools with Western Samoa, Vanuatu and local Fijian district, Nadroga — selecting from more than 50 clubs and far removed from pushovers.
London Scot, David Millard, scheduled to play in Saturday's A international in Aberdeen, is a renowned sevens exponent and but for his osteopathic studies would surely have made this journey.
Nicol — acknowledging club triumphs at the Midlands contest and at Panmure — has not had Millard's exposure to quality sevens fields yet, but it's not in Nicol's nature to meekly accept that Millard remains front-runner for a place in the World Cup Sevens at Murrayfield from 16-18 April.
Fiji's two-day tournament actually commences tomorrow, and not Saturday as had been generally understood by nearly all the international teams, yet the Fijians are unapologetic about the paucity of information on their inaugural tournament.
Last night, when the Canadians, Americans and Australians were just arriving, it was still impossible to learn anything about the knockout format on Saturday.
Nicol's gift of the gab was fortuitous last weekend as both he and Hawick's Derek Turnbull were upgraded on their flights from London to Sydney via Bangkok.
Prompt recovery from the effects of jetlag has taken on added importance given the rescheduling of events.
Nicol seemed the sharper of the pair when the Scots trained on a back pitch at the Government Stadium last night, rain falling the moment they arrived at the field.
The emphasis in much of that session from coach Douglas Morgan was on retaining depth in alignment and getting the ball through the hands at pace.
Should Turnbull shape promisingly today, he too could be pitched into battle as his fellow international flanker Iain Morrison's knee injury persists.
Morrison only completed some light running in the morning session at the army camp on a pitch which could have doubled as a minefield such were the undulations and mini-lagoons lying in wait for the unsuspecting.
He also has been compelled to sit out most of the practices since Scotland's omission from the Cup stages at Canberra last week.
Scotland manager, Duncan Paterson, noted that the weather the tourists have experienced here has changed a number of perceptions of Fijian rugby.
‘There we were thinking how marvellously they had adapted to win in the quagmire at Hong Kong last year and Gala the year before.
Little did we know that around Suva it's second nature.’
The rain at this end of the island tends to die off towards the end of March, but it has certainly damaged pitches including that at the Government Stadium, which Paterson reckoned would be deemed unplayable by most clubs in Scotland.
The local press are doing their best to satisfy the thirst for facts on the tournament and teams.
The best item was a profile of Vanuatu's playmaker, Jean- Pierre Serel.
The Pacific islander offered the following advice to youngsters: ‘Train properly before you play to avoid getting fatal injuries.’
Juventus relieved to reach last four Juventus3 Benfica0 (aggregate 4-2)
JUVENTUS gave coach Giovanni Trapattoni the perfect 54th birthday present by brushing aside Benfica last night to reach the semi-finals of the UEFA Cup.
A comfortable second-leg victory in Turin took the Italian club into the last four on a 4-2 aggregate and took some of the pressure off Trapattoni in the light of Juventus's poor domestic league form.
Juventus, who left out England captain David Platt, had the ideal start when German defender Juergen Kohler netted from a corner after less than two minutes.
Midfielder Dino Baggio added a second from another corner just before half time and substitute Fabrizio Ravanelli killed off the Portuguese side when he hammered the third shortly after coming on midway through the second half.
Freak goal keeps Rangers in the hunt Nisbet strike so vital after Hateley's first-half dismissal Rangers 2 Brugge 1
By Hugh Keevins
A DEFLECTED shot from Scott Nisbet that spun off an opponent and then bounced over the head of a bemused Brugge goalkeeper last night kept alive Rangers' hopes of a place in the European Cup final.
The Ibrox club's prospects of staying on top of Group A of the European Champions League with Marseille had, before the full-back's 70th-minute goal, looked bleak as a consequence of two contentious decisions by the Polish referee.
The sending off of Rangers' Mark Hateley, which came in between the opening goal from Ian Durrant and an equaliser from Lorenzo Staelens, was questionable in the extreme.
The same observation could have been made of the refusal to give Rangers a penalty immediately before the Belgians scored.
McCoist looked to have been hauled to the ground at the beginning of the second half, though not in the eyes of the official who also booked John Brown and the Belgian, Creva.
Rangers will now visit Marseille next month minus Hateley but with their unbeaten record in Europe still intact.
As in the game against the French champions at Ibrox in November, Rangers were second best for long periods of the match but their players have a deep-rooted sense of their own destiny in this competition.
It is that which drives on Walter Smith's staff and after eight games they remain undefeated — and unaffected by whatever mishaps come their way.
Rangers had to go to the expense of putting £30,000-worth of protective covering over the pitch after a day of persistent rain.
The steps taken to field a team who would maintain the Premier Division side's place at the top of Group A in the European Champions League were costly only in terms of the gamble that
There was no uncertainty about Walter Smith's choice of team, however, the manager playing Andy Goram, Richard Gough and Trevor Steven on a weather-ravaged surface unhelpful to anyone carrying a knock.
Robertson, Ferguson and Gordon were the home side's absentees.
It was difficult for anyone to make light of the conditions but the Brugge forward, Amokachi, did his best to advertise the obvious pace he possesses during an opening in which the Belgian side did everything except score.
Six minutes before half time, they were punished for their shortcomings when Durrant gave Rangers the lead.
A perfectly-weighted pass from Steven was treated with the respect it deserved by the midfield player as he swept the ball beyond Verlinden.
It was an object lesson in finishing that would have preyed on the minds of the Belgian team at half time as they reflected on an opening 45 minutes during which it seemed only a matter of time before they took the lead.
Goram, exceptional throughout his reintroduction to the side, was forced to muddy his tracksuit bottoms in response to the first of Amokachi's many attacks on the break and the more Rangers pressed forward, the more gaps there were for the Belgian side to exploit from a midfield they dominated.
The flaw in Amokachi's game was a failure to add poise to his pace.
Twice the Nigerian failed to see team-mates better positioned to worry Goram and preferred to try shots of his own that were blocked.
The best first-half chance for Rangers, before Durrant's goal, fell to Stuart McCall.
McPherson's lay-off found McCall with an unobstructed view of goal but the final attempt was too delicate and Verlinden saved easily.
Brown and McCoist were next to threaten the Belgian goal in a game that swung from one end to the other.
Verheyen twice had Rangers' goal at his mercy but on both occasions let the Ibrox club off the hook.
In the first instance he was guilty of carelessness; in the second he exposed Gough's lack of match fitness and the defender's mistake put Verheyen through on Goram though he was unable to score.
The finish was an apology for an attempt at goal, though the worry remained that missing the previous five games had left Gough seriously disadvantaged.
Rangers' biggest cause for concern, however, was the sending off of Mark Hateley before half-time.
Hateley and Staelens clashed midway between the centre circle and Brugge's goal and though both players looked equally at fault, the referee decided to dismiss Hateley on his own.
The repercussions of that controversial decision will be the loss of Hateley for Rangers' game against Marseille in France on 7 April and Goram was still remonstrating with anyone who would listen to his complaints as the teams left the field for the break.
The goalkeeper's mood would not have been improved by the sequence of events at the start of the.
The start of the second half was also dramatic, carrying Rangers from the brink of a two-goal lead to the precipice of expulsion from the European Cup.
Goram's prodigious clearance sent McCoist racing into the Belgians' box, where he looked to be impeded.
No penalty was given and insult was added to injury when Brugge equalised through Staelens in the 50th minute.
The finish was as accurate as the rest of the Belgians' efforts had been wayward and suddenly the numerical disadvantage Rangers were working under threatened to be a severe handicap.
Nisbet, with his first goal of the season, ultimately revived Rangers' European ambitions and no matter how fortuitous his strike was, it may yet turn out to be of inestimable value to an Ibrox team who clung on bravely in the closing stages.
Marseille hit six to remain on course Marseille6
CSKA Moscow0
MIDFIELDER Franck Sauzee scored a hat-trick as Marseille trounced CSKA Moscow last night to stay firmly on course for the European Cup final.
The French champions became the first club to hit six goals since the semi-final group system was introduced last season.
With six points from four games in group A, Marseille could virtually seal their berth in the May final by beating Rangers on 7 April.
French international Sauzee gave his side the lead from the penalty spot in the fourth minute and added two more superb strikes in the 34th and 48th minutes as his team cruised home.
The Ghanaian forward, Abedi Pele, scored his side's third goal after a brilliant solo run through the Russian defence just before half-time.
A substitute, Jean-Marc Ferreri, and defender Marcel Desailly, added second-half goals.
It was Marseille's 14th consecutive home triumph in European Cup matches.
— Reuter
Smith praises ‘unsung hero’ and second-half battlers
RANGERS manager Walter Smith last night paid tribute to his ‘unsung hero of Ibrox,’ Scott Nisbet, the scorer of the goal that keeps the Scottish champions in with a chance of a European Cup final place, writes Hugh Keevins.
‘I am very proud of what he and the rest of the team did in the second half when we were down to ten men,’ said Smith.
‘Scott is a valuable member of my first-team squad who readily fills in whenever someone like Richard Gough or Davie McPherson falls injured and, against Brugge, he stepped into the limelight on his own.’
Nisbet's 71st minute effort was an incredible fluke and the defender recalled: ‘I saw a couple of Brugge players coming at me and decided just to smack the ball.
‘The next thing I knew the people in the stands behind the goal were jumping up and down.
I was stunned — I just couldn't believe it.’
Smith said that he had taken a pre-match risk only where the fitness of Andy Goram was concerned.
‘Andy was keen to play and, though it was a lot to ask of him, he was outstanding along with Richard Gough who had a terrific evening as Rangers’ captain.’
Goram now believes that Rangers can make the European Cup final in May.
‘The way things are going for us, anything is possible,’ said the goalkeeper.
‘When you look at our results, the deflected goals we have had against CSKA and Brugge, and the way we fought back after being two goals down to Marseille, nothing holds any fears for us.’
‘There is all to play for and the pride we have in our long, unbeaten run, will make us fight every inch of the way to keep it.’
Nisbet, the 25-year-old full-back, refused to take all the credit on the strength of his contribution to the victory over the Belgians.
‘John Brown, for example, was immense throughout the last 15 minutes of the match, which also had to be the longest of my life,’ he stated.
‘The game against Marseille will now be a battle but so long as we have someone like Andy Goram behind us, we feel solid.
It is all about the work we do for each other on these occasions.’
Brugge coach Hugo Broos bemoaned Nisbet's goal and said: ‘I thought we were the better team.’
‘In the first half we had three very good chances.
If we had played for the whole 90 minutes as we did for the first hour we would have beaten Rangers.’
AC Milan are just perfect AC Milan 1 Porto 0
STEFANO ERANIO helped injury-hit AC Milan to maintain their 100 per cent European Cup record and take another step towards the final.
Eranio's superbly struck 31st-minute goal gave them victory over Portuguese champions Porto and made it four triumphs out of four in semi-final group B.
Milan, though, struggled to dominate stubborn opponents and Jean-Pierre Papin put two headers wide and Demetrio Albertini muffed a close-range shot before the Italians broke through.
Eranio played a one-two with Marco Simone then struck a fierce shot which goalkeeper Vitor Baia hardly saw.
IFK Gothenburg 3 PSV Eindhoven 0
OUTSIDERS Gothenburg hammered Dutch champions PSV to set up a decisive clash with favourites AC Milan for a place in the final.
Gothenburg showed their 3-1 victory in Holland two weeks ago was no fluke and fired a warning shot that Milan can expect a fight in Sweden in next month's group B semi-final match.
The 3-0 triumph kept Gothenburg two points behind Milan and boosted their goal difference.
Mikael Nilsson scored for the Swedes after two minutes and Johnny Ekstrom got the second on the stroke of half-time.
Mikael Martinsson wrapped it up with a header in the second half.
930318 
Training plane crash kills two
TWO people died yesterday when a single-engined training plane from the British Aerospace flying college at Prestwick, Ayrshire, crashed in a field near Kirkoswald, Ayrshire.
The aircraft had taken off from Prestwick half-an- hour earlier.
People living near the crash scene paid no attention when they heard the engine of the aircraft cut out in mid-air.
Planes from the college regularly shut down their engines and restart them in mid-air as an exercise.
That time the engine did not restart and the plane dived to the ground.
Last night the names of the two dead fliers were being withheld until relatives were notified.
Police said that a report on the crash would go to the procurator fiscal at Ayr.
Investigators from the Accident Investigation Branch at the Department of Transport were heading north last night to carry out their own probe.
Real Mackay
I was surprised to see that you applied the term, ‘The real McCoy’ to a picture (15 March) of the village of Pennan, Aberdeenshire, and not the original native term, ‘The real Mackay’.
The latter was first used, I believe, in describing good quality whisky and was later applied more generally to anything considered to be genuine.
McCoy is said to be an Irish-American derivation.

Michael Wittet: CA who passed exams in German prison camp
MICHAEL Wittet, former senior partner for Scotland of Deloitte, Haskins & Sells, chartered accountants, died at his home in Edinburgh on Monday after a long illness.
A true cosmopolitan in background and career, Mr Wittet achieved the heights of his profession in Edinburgh — having passed his accountancy examinations, with distinction, as a prisoner of war in Germany.
Michael George Wittet was born in Bombay in 1918, the son of a consulting architect from Perth and a French mother who was one of the first women to graduate in history and languages at the Sorbonne in Paris.
His father was responsible for the design of the Gateway of India, one of Bombay's most prominent landmarks.
Michael was educated at the Edinburgh Academy and Mill Hill School in London.
In 1936 he began his apprenticeship in accountancy in the City, but the outbreak of war interrupted his career.
He immediately joined the Royal Engineers and was commissioned in 1940 into the Royal Scots.
He was taken prisoner by the Germans during the retreat to Dunkirk, but with his fluent French and German and determined initiative he was able to escape three times.
In his third camp, Eichstatt, in spite of the crowded and stressful conditions, he managed with the help of the Red Cross and some accountant brother-officers to study for and sit his final accountancy examinations while actively preparing for his escape.
‘I sat my exams on Wednesday, Thursday and Friday and went through the tunnel on Saturday,’ was his later dead-pan summary of that period.
But he was recaptured yet again and this time transferred to Colditz, which he found a fascinating meeting place of a wide range of backgrounds and nationalities.
Shortly after liberation in 1945, he married Peggy Whitall, to whom he had been engaged for seven years.
She was born in Smyrna, a member of a British family who had been trading in Turkey for over 130 years.
Now a qualified CA, he worked for six years in the Middle East, mainly in Palestine/Israel and the Lebanon.
In 1952 he joined the Edinburgh accountancy firm of Graham Smart and Annan, and rapidly established a reputation for achieving novel solutions to problems.
He became senior partner in 1972.
The firm later merged with Deloitte, Haskins & Sells (now Coopers & Lybrand Deloitte) and he retired in 1982.
In 1970 he was appointed as the first honorary consul in Scotland for the republic of Turkey, a post in which his understanding and knowledge of the country was of great help to those in need.
Michael Wittet will be remembered by many as a man of wide knowledge and active mind, of thoughtful care and concern, whether to friends and neighbours, colleagues and staff, or to fellow ex-prisoners of war.
He is survived by his wife Peggy, their two sons and eight grandchildren.
CRT
Michael Wittet in 1940
Leith Aged Mariners' Fund appeal
THE LEITH Aged Mariners' Fund asks members of the public and companies to send donations to enable it to continue its financial assistance to more than 100 former merchant seamen and their dependants.
The fund is voluntarily administered by members of the Trinity House of Leith, whose Master will acknowledge all contributions.
Charles Sweeny: Eagle Squadron founder
CHARLES Sweeny, the archetypal rich American in London who founded a squadron of US fliers to help win the Battle of Britain, has died.
He was 83.
Before forming Eagle Squadron, the subject of a Hollywood film, he was an international champion golfer and one of the most eligible young bachelors in the London society of the early 1930s.
The millionaire stockbroker and financier, who was to live in Mayfair for 63 years, was the first husband of a beautiful debutante who later became Margaret Duchess of Argyll.
He died seven days ago while on holiday in America.
The author Michael Thornton, a family friend, said: ‘Charles Sweeny was taken ill on 11 March while sitting beside a swimming pool in the summer resort of Bar Harbour, south Maine, which was a favourite place of his.
He had what was apparently a heart attack and died there the same day.’
Charles Sweeny, born of wealthy parents at Scranton, Pennsylvania, on 3 October, 1909, moved to Britain in the late 1920s with his younger brother, Robert (Bobby), who was to become briefly engaged to the Woolworth heiress, Barbara Hutton.
On 21 February, 1933, 20,000 people jammed the streets around Brompton Oratory when Charles married London's most famous and beautiful debutante, Margaret Whigham, heiress to a £32 million textile fortune.
In 1937 they had a daughter, Frances, now the Duchess of Rutland, and in 1940, a son, Brian Sweeny.
Charles Sweeny's influence and financial backing behind the formation of the Eagle Squadron from American pilots before the US entered the Second World War, was recognised for posterity in 1986.
Margaret Thatcher, then Prime Minister, unveiled a memorial in Grosvenor Square to the 244 American and 16 British fliers who flew with the squadron from May 1940.
The obelisk names Charles Sweeny as founder.
He was divorced in 1947 by Margaret Whigham, who subsequently became the third wife of the 11th Duke of Argyll.
Sweeny's second marriage, in 1958, to a New York model, Arden Sneed, ended in divorce after eight years.
Margaret Duchess of Argyll, now 80 and in a London nursing home, was informed yesterday of her former husband's death by the Duchess of Rutland.
Mr Thornton said: ‘Margaret is deeply distressed by this news.
She and Charlie had always remained very close friends.
He was the first person to visit her after her divorce in 1963.’— PA
The funeral will take place on Thursday March 25 at the Roman Catholic Church of the Immaculate Conception in Farm Street, Mayfair, near Mr Sweeny's flat in South Audley Street.
— PA 
Rally boost is planned
THE annual Jim Clark Memorial Rally could become a Berwickshire-based roads rally of European stature in the next two years.
Borders Regional Council is to promote a private bill in the Commons which is necessary if public roads are to be closed for motor racing events.
Organisations are being asked to help to sponsor the bill and Berwickshire District Council is to contribute £1,000.
Clark, twice world champion racing driver, was the first honorary freeman of Duns.
St Jovite reaches the end of his tether
EUROPEAN Horse of the Year, St Jovite, is to be retired to stud after injuring a tendon during a workout in preparation for a campaign in the United States.
The four-year-old was due to make his American debut in May after spending the winter at owner Virginia Kraft Payson's training centre in Florida.
He was being trained by champion Canadian, Roger Attfield, who said: ‘St Jovite worked an easy mile at Gulfstream Park on Sunday, 7 March.
Sometime after the work it was discovered that an old injury to the tendon had appeared.’
St Jovite was champion Irish two-year-old when trained by Jim Bolger, and was runner-up to Dr Devious in the Epsom Derby.
— Reuter
Mansell accelerates to new winning formula
By Jim Dunn
NIGEL MANSELL may be about to give Formula One a much-needed lift when he competes in his first Indycar race at the street circuit of Surfers' Paradise in Queensland, Australia, on Sunday.
The reigning world champion, who turned his back on Formula One after he was outmanoeuvred by Alain Prost last season, has established himself as runaway favourite to win the Indycar championship.
Mansell has so dominated pre-season testing in his Ford-powered Lola that he is expected to win on Sunday by the large margin familiar during his dominance of Grand Prix racing in the Williams Renault last season.
If he does, the result will be interpreted as long-awaited proof that Formula One is the world's leading motor racing formula — a belief given added weight by Indycar champion Michael Andretti's disastrous showing in his debut at the South African Grand Prix last weekend.
Received wisdom is that only three-times champion Ayrton Senna is a match for Mansell on a street circuit such as Surfers' Paradise.
Though the 39-year-old Briton has not appeared there previously, it is similar to the Australian Grand Prix circuit in Adelaide, where he competed only four months ago.
But it is Mansell's unexpected prowess on the oval circuits, which make up six of the 16 races in the Indycar championship, which has been most impressive.
The Newman-Haas team leader, who has negotiated to carry his favourite red No 5 on the car this season, was immediately on the pace during his first attempt at a banked oval track.
On his second, at Phoenix, Arizona, Mansell lapped two-tenths of a second faster than anyone had gone before — and on race specification tyres rather than the softer, short-lived qualifying type used by the previous fastest.
Team-mate Mario Andretti, who has won world and Indycar championships, has acknowledged the ability of Mansell, and seems prepared to play a supporting role similar to that in which Riccardo Patrese was cast at Williams Renault during the past two season.
‘There is no question I'm a marked man.
Everybody and his dog wants to beat me,’ a relaxed Mansell told Reuter at a news conference yesterday at Surfers' Paradise, the only Indycar venue outside North America this season.
‘There's lots of great drivers that will absolutely be gunning for me on Sunday.
There's probably 25 out there that want to beat me, and there will be no favours.’
Mansell makes his Indycar debut on the streets of this Queensland holiday resort against a backdrop of high-rise hotels and rolling surf.
The 39-year-old Briton's move to Indycar with film star Paul Newman's Newman-Haas team has sparked intense attention for the series, previously regarded as mainly a domestic American race.
Organisers say the race, which is being heavily promoted as a duel between Mansell and Indycar's 1992 world champion, Bobby Rahal, is being beamed to 400 million households in 90 countries, including Russia.
Two years ago it attracted viewers in 30 nations.
‘It is an incredible adventure.
I think most of England are on this adventure with me and a lot of Europeans,’ said Mansell.
Only four months ago in Australia, Mansell, the world championship already under his belt, crashed with bitter rival Ayrton Senna in the last race of the Formula One season in Adelaide.
He said that no-one from Europe had moved from Formula One to Indycars and been consistently successful.
‘Nobody has come over here and tried to win a series.
I guess my motivation is trying to break new ground — my motivation ultimately is to win.’
Mansell is driving with former Formula One and Indycar champion Mario Andretti, once his teammate with Lotus in the early 1980s, but still a rival this weekend.
‘Yeah, he has passed on lots of tips -- slow down,’ said Mansell.
Inexperience in the heavier, but more powerful Indycars aside, Mansell said he could face problems if Cyclone Roger, which has been lashing the coast this week, brings rain on race day.
He has had only eight practices in the wet.
However, weather forecasters say the cyclone should move offshore, promising dry conditions on Sunday.
Mansell said that recent bone surgery on his left foot to fix a lingering injury was sore occasionally, but should not prove a hindrance.
The British driver, whose Formula One career ended in acrimony when he failed to agree new financial terms with Williams, could not resist a jibe at old rivals Senna and Frenchman Alain Prost, who has taken his place at Williams.
Asked about Senna he quipped: ‘Who was that?’ and said of Prost's winning performance in last week's South African Grand Prix he was surprised the Frenchman did not go faster.
Brimful of confidence: favourite Nigel Mansell with his new Indy car, Australian-style hat and cigar-chomping team owner, Carl A Haas, in the pits at Surfers' Paradise, Queensland
Stephen Holland/AP
Hill predicts new record
BRITISH Formula One driver Damon Hill predicted yesterday that the Donington Park lap record would be smashed by as much as five seconds at the European Grand Prix on Easter Sunday, 11 April.
He said at a reception at the circuit that it was amazing that modern grand prix cars could lap so fast on the twisty and demanding Leicestershire circuit.
‘I think we should be down to 1min 15secs or below.’
Donington Park owner Tom Wheatcroft confirmed
The circuit will also stage the British motor-cycle grand prix, scheduled for August.
Ironic lesson on value of foreign players
By Harry Pincott
IN their newsletter, Musselburgh have long campaigned against the influx of foreign players into club rugby.
Therefore, it's rather ironic that one of the clubs who pipped them for promotion to Division I, West of Scotland, reckon the very reason they are going up is down to their New Zealand lock, Gordon McPherson.
According to their former captain and hooker, Douglas Livingstone, McPherson's influence both on and off the field has been a major factor in what has been a very successful season.
‘He has a strong grasp of what the game is about, is a great motivator and he has introduced some fresh ideas at training, where he assists Colin Mair.’
Capped for the All Blacks against France about six years ago, McPherson, 30, actually brought the birth certificates of his Scottish grand-parents with him, but much to his regret he has gone un-noticed by the Scottish selectors.
McPherson, who has every intention of returning to Burnbrae next season, if he can manage it, turns out for West against Watsonians at Myreside tomorrow where the home side will have the considerable assistance of Gavin Hastings, who will spend a nail-biting weekend as he waits to hear if he is to captain the Lions, the squad being announced on Monday.
Last October, Glasgow High-Kelvinside administered a 56-13 thrashing to Heriot's in a Division I match, yet such has been the turnround in both clubs' fortunes since then, when the clubs meet in a friendly at Goldenacre tomorrow it's GH-K, who still face the possibility of relegation, while Heriot's have accelerated into mid-table.
The Heriot's vice-captain, Cammy Glasgow, made a surprise, and successful comeback against Kelso last weekend, and he retains his place on the left wing while GH-K include George Breckenridge at centre.
Currie give a debut to the 18-year-old Forrester stand-off, John Morrison, said to be an outstanding prospect, for their home match against Kilmarnock, while Duncan Macrae has recovered from a broken leg and reappears at full-back in the Boroughmuir XV away to West Hartlepool.
Scots take share of birdies bonanza From Mike Britten, Portugal
SCOTLAND'S Paul Lawrie and Stephen McAllister saw the benefit of hours of practice with coach Jim Farmer in the first round of the Portuguese Open on the Algarve yesterday.
The Scottish champion from Aberdeen and the former Atlantic Open winner from Paisley both had 68 at Vila Sol where the lack of wind and near-perfect greens resulted in a glut of birdies and eagles.
Argentina's Jorge Berendt led the roistering with a career-best 63, one stroke outside the course record set by Jose Maria Canizares last year, and Sweden's Jesper Parnevik was only a shot behind after collecting eight birdies in 13 holes.
England's David Gilford had 65 while defending champion Ronan Rafferty from Ireland opened with a flawless 67.
Lawrie and McAllister have been working hard to strengthen their games, and the Aberdonian has struggled in early events this season, failing in four tournaments to get beyond the halfway cut.
But he turned the corner by finishing 23rd in Valencia and 25th in Majorca last week.
He had seven birdies in his best opening round so far, six of them in the first 12 holes, but had trouble getting properly aligned on his long shots.
‘I had to ask my caddie to stand behind me to make sure I was aiming correctly,’ he said after pushing a 6-iron shot from the thirteenth tee then hooking wide of the short fifteenth green with the same club.
In both cases the result was a bogey.
‘Scotty’ Gilmour, who formerly worked for Tony Jacklin, duly performed the aiming function, and a birdie from 15ft at the seventeenth partially repaired the damage.
‘I did not play great golf, but I putted well,’ said Lawrie who three times sank chances from four yards elsewhere.
McAllister had six birdies and showed his determination to improve on his 1993 best placing of 31st, with a remarkable par-saving effort at the difficult second hole.
There he hit his drive into the water hazard, but stood in the ditch to hit a 4-iron recovery through trees to within 75 yards of the green.
He got up and down with a pitch to a yard, and holed from ten feet at the fifteenth and eighteenth to make the top 20.
Brian Marchbank had five birdies within six mid-round holes to score 69, while Sam Torrance, twice a winner, had 70 as did Bill Longmuir and Ross Drummond.
Gary Orr was also under par with a 71.
But none could match the sharp shooting of former caddie Berendt and the long-hitting Parnevik.
The Argentinian has a permanent wrist injury caused by pounding too many balls on hard practice grounds, which has forced him to use an unorthodox fore-knuckle left- hand grip.
It has not affected his ability, for he has scores of 61 and 62 to his credit, though yesterday's round in which he claimed ten birdies was his lowest by three strokes in Europe.
Parnevik had to wait until the sixth for his first birdie, but then had four in a row, and four more in his matching inward half of 32.
Gilford, winner of the Moroccan Open last month, was also in inspired form on the greens.
He had six birdies and an eagle, but lost his chance of catching the leader when he hit his only bad stroke with a 1-iron at the sixteenth.
Peter Smith and Andrew Coltart both had 75 while Gordon Brand, jnr, joint runner-up with David Feherty in Valencia a fortnight ago had 77 as did the Irishman.
Brand, jnr had two birdies in his first three holes but subsided to an inward 4f2.
Feherty took 40 for the same stretch then declared ‘I have only just got over influenza and I should not have travelled to Portugal.
My head feels like a helium balloon.’
Scots women lift home title as men seek double
SCOTLAND'S women's bowlers bridged an 11-year gap since their last victory when they overcame England 138-106 in their home international title decider in Perth yesterday.
Meanwhile, the men virtually tied up their third successive win in the series in Swansea.
The Scottish women's team led from the opening end for a comfortable victory over the defending champions.
With five ends completed they had opened up a 39-22 lead, and at the halfway mark had all but tied up the title at a convincing 78-37 ahead.
England battled hard to get back into contention throughout the second half, but the Scots kept them at arm's length and ran out worthy winners.
Both sides finished with three winning rinks, but Dorothy Barr's 31-8 win over Mavis Steele, Joyce Lindores's 33-17 victory over Mary Price and Nancy Davidson's 21-14 success over Evelyn Schooling proved good enough to give Scotland an overall victory.
At Swansea, the men produced a power-packed last quarter to beat Wales 119-90, as they chased a third  successive title.
The Scots led 79-78 after 15 ends, but with the winning post in sight piled on the pressure for what in the end was a comfortable win.
Angus Blair laid the foundations for victory against the Welshmen with a 25-11 win over Len Webley, Robert Provan beat Dai Wilkins 25-12, captain Robert McCulloch counted eight shots over the last six ends for a 22-14 win over John Price, and Alex Marshall edged out Spencer Wilshire 16-11.
Richard Corsie finished in a 17-17 share of the spoils with Gareth Jones while Wales's consolation win came from Robert Weale who beat Willie Wood 25-24.
The Scots go into their concluding match today knowing that they can afford to lose to England and still take the title — provided that neither Ireland nor Wales manage to secure a big win in their clash this morning.
New reports back Krabbe's case
KATRIN KRABBE'S hopes of avoiding a four-year doping ban received a boost yesterday when it was revealed that influential scientific reports backed up her case that she did not take banned steroids.
The German double world sprint champion was suspended with team-mates Grit Breuer and Manuela Derr last September after testing positive for the drug clenbuterol, which some scientists argue is a stimulant and not an anabolic steroid.
A German athletics source, who is very close to the case, said that two of three independent reports ordered by the arbitrating panel clearly stated that the drug was a stimulant, some of which are allowed during training.
The German athletics federation (DLV) panel, which is expected to announce its decision by the end of the month, has put a great deal of emphasis on the findings of the reports.
A continuation of Krabbe's suspension now looks out of the question.
‘Two of the three experts definitely say in the reports that clenbuterol is not a steroid,’ the source, who did not want to be identified, said.
‘On that basis nothing has happened and she should be free.’
— Reuter
Krabbe's manager Jos Hermens and panel president Wolfgang Schoeppe have refused to comment on the findings of the reports which have only just been completed and were supposed to be kept secret until the final ruling was announced.
But Hermens said he was confident Krabbe would be cleared after he had talked to leading athletics officials and heard about another report from the World Health Organisation (WHO) which also classifies the drug as a stimulant.
‘After talking recently to the IAAF (International Amateur Athletic Federation) and other officials and hearing of the World Health Organisation report, in my opinion she should not have been penalised,’ Hermens said.
‘My expectations are that the three athletes will be free,’ he added.
MORE APW CVL DP
Sri Lankans' Test victory points to new-look England
NEW faces are certain to be brought in for this summer's Ashes series after England's winter humiliation was completed by defeat against Sri Lanka in Colombo yesterday.
Following the five-wicket beating by one of Test cricket's minnows, the England manager, Keith Fletcher, came close to admitting that the whole tour selection policy had been misguided.
Fletcher acknowledged that losing all four Tests on this tour, after the 3-0 series defeat in India, was of far greater concern than any of the four defeats so far suffered in seven one-day internationals.
But before the tour, chairman of selectors Ted Dexter confirmed that the original 16-man squad, from which David Gower and Jack Russell were controversially omitted, had been picked because equal importance was being given to the tour's Test and one-day international commitments.
Yesterday, after England suffered their fifth successive Test defeat, their worst run since 1986 when they lost 5-0 in the West Indies and were beaten in the first two Tests at home to India, Fletcher said: ‘Test matches are more important than one-day internationals, although if you lost all your one-dayers then that would become important.
‘But people will remember this tour for us losing the Tests.
If we had won all the Tests but lost all the one-dayers, then it would have been considered to be a successful trip.’
He added: ‘We have not played well enough either here or in India, and players are not guaranteed England places.
If you don't perform then it is likely that another player will be brought in — and there will be some changes made.
‘I'm only one of the selectors, of course, but when we get back home we will have to start sorting out what our best team is to play against Australia during the summer.
And if players are not performing as you would like them to, then you have to find someone else.’
Asked if some younger players would be looked at, Fletcher added: ‘You have to get a balance between younger players and those with experience, and it's always hard bringing in youngsters.
But if they have the quality then they will come through.
‘I'm not going to name anyone in particular but you are all aware of those who have been to Australia this winter with the A team, and they have all got a chance of coming through this summer especially some of the young bowlers.’
Although Fletcher admitted that England have not come up to standard over the last three months, he also believes that a poor itinerary and a lack of turning pitches in English domestic cricket is largely to blame for the string of dismal performances.
Illness, too, was a factor in the Indian series.
Fletcher said: ‘If we want England sides to perform better overseas then we have got to sort out the itineraries.
‘This one has been unfair to the players because there has not been enough cricket in between the Tests.
There has not been enough time to prepare properly for each of the Test matches.
‘I'm obviously bitterly disappointed as any Test defeat is bad.
‘But I have gone over it many times in my mind about why we lost so heavily in India and one of the main reasons for me was that we were not used to playing on turning pitches.
‘We never see those sort of pitches in county cricket now and on this tour our batsmen had to start learning a different technique of playing against spinners in a very short time.
‘In fact, some of them have adapted very quickly, and Robin Smith in particular has improved immeasurably since the start of the tour.
‘And our spinners too have had to learn how to bowl on these pitches.
‘Both John Emburey and Phil Tufnell have not bowled as well as they can but they must be given the opportunity to bowl more on these kind of turning pitches at home.
You've got to get the ball in the right area to take advantage of them and that knowledge only comes with practice in similar conditions.’
Sri Lanka ended up needing 140 to record their first Test win over England and only their fourth success in 43 Tests since they joined the big league in 1982.
Victory was achieved in spectacular style in the first over after tea, left-hander Sanath Jayasuriya swinging his first ball, from Tufnell, over mid-wicket for six.
Emburey added just two singles in the morning to England's overnight 226 for nine before being bowled for 59.
Chris Lewis removed Roshan Mahanama in the third over, but by lunch Sri Lanka were 43 for one.
Three wickets fell, though, in the first half hour after lunch to leave them wobbling at 61 for four.
At the end of last year Sri Lanka failed by 16 runs to beat Australia in a Test in Colombo after being 127 for two.
But this time captain Arjuna Ranatunga and the dependable Hashan Tillekeratne put on 75 in 18 overs for the fifth wicket to clinch their country's famous win.
Ranatunga was caught at short leg with just four runs needed, giving Jayasuriya his moment of glory, while Tillekeratne remained 36 not out.
He scored 189 runs in three undefeated innings against England during the past week.
— PA
Wales reshaped for Paris
THE new pack leader, Gareth Llewellyn, yesterday sounded a call to arms as a reshaped Wales prepare to pick up the pieces against France in Paris tomorrow.
The Neath captain, who leads a pack which shows four changes — one positional — from the eight which fired on empty cylinders against Ireland earlier in the month, will be charging his front five with the task of creating an early impression on title-chasing France.
‘We have got to get off to a good start and then maintain momentum,’ said the 24-year-old Llewellyn.
‘We let things slip badly against Ireland.’
In a new-look pack, hooker Nigel Meek, lock Tony Copsey and No 8 Stuart Davies make way for Andrew Lamerton, Llanelli war-horse Phil Davies and Mark Perego, while Emyr Lewis switches to the middle of the back-row. — PA
In the back division, Mark Rayer is ousted by Tony Clement, Englishman Rupert Moon takes over from 46-times capped Robert Jones at scrum-half and Swansea centre Nigel Davies is preferred to Mike Hall.
Wales are seeking to end a run of 11 successive defeats against France.
Europeans give Doyle wide berth at Phoenix
THE 16 Europeans playing in this week's Standard Register Ping tournament at Moon Valley, mostly gave their executive director, Andrea Doyle, a wide berth when she arrived in Phoenix for discussions on next year's Solheim Cup.
When she arrives back at the WPGET's headquarters, she will find that Alison Nicholas, a key player in the 1992 Solheim Cup, has handed in her notice as a member of the WPGET's board.
‘I no longer have any confidence in my fellow members of the board or in Andrea Doyle,’ said Nicholas.
Laura Davies, Sue Strudwick, Trish Johnson and Nicholas yesterday all spoke as one on the subject of how, but for the support they had had from certain European sponsors down the years, they would all be thinking in terms of pulling out of playing in Europe altogether.
‘So much,’ they said, ‘has gone wrong since Doyle became our executive director.
Our credibility is falling by the minute.’
In listing the problems, they began with the Solheim Cup, where they had had to ban Doyle from the players' room for being a disruptive influence.
‘She got our backs up and treated us like schoolchildren,’ said Davies.
Her next mistake, in their eyes, was one of failing to inform them that the prizemoney for the Malaysian Open had been chopped in half.
‘The fact that it was eventually reinstated was not the point,’ said Davies.
‘She should have told us before we left Heathrow.’
Davies added that she had been present at a phone conversation in December when Doyle had assured one of the players that all $300,000 of the prizemoney was ‘in the bank.’
The New Year Open in the Argentine was the next disaster.
One minute, Mrs Doyle was found to be going along with arrangements to play it on a nine hole course and, soon after, it was cancelled altogether.
Davies, Strudwick and Johnson persuaded Nicholas to hand in her resignation because they could see that she was having an impossible time of it.
‘Alison,’ said Johnson, ‘has done her bit.
The time has come for us all to speak out, to make it clear that we are behind her in feeling that we need someone new at the helm.’
As Laura Davies was struggling with a right hand injured in a cricketing accident on the eve of the tournament, registering a 79 in the first round, Pam Wright was putting together the most meticulous of level-par 73s.
It left her six shots off an early lead held by Colleen Walker.
The Scot opened with nine pars then balanced three bogeys with three birdies.
‘I'm still a bit rusty,’ she exclaimed, ‘but I'll take that.’
Those who saw the 30 yard putt she  holed stone dead at the eighth, or her playing of the 18th, where she hit a glorious seven iron to ten feet before holing for her birdie, could be forgiven for wondering what on earth she was talking about.
The Davies injury occurred as the former U S and British Open champion was diving for a catch.
She had the joint X-rayed on Wednesday night and was somewhat relieved to learn that it was merely a bad case of bruising.
Where it made itself felt yesterday was on the downswing.
‘I simply couldn't hit through the ball,’ said Davies, who stumbled to the turn in 40 before finishing in a six-over-par 79.
Weir heads for Far East to replace Morrison
IAIN Morrison's part in Scotland's international sevens tour is over.
The 30-year-old London Scottish flanker will be returning to the UK to undergo exploratory surgery on the injury to his left knee.
His place will be taken by Doddie Weir (Melrose) who will leave Edinburgh on Sunday to meet up with the squad when they arrive in Hong Kong on Monday.
The Scotland manager, Duncan Paterson, said Morrison could not be considered for the Fiji Sevens starting today on account of the knee problem which limited his training to light running this week.
‘He may have a slight tear in his cartilage, and he will be going home so that a probe can be inserted into his knee to see the extent of the damage and what needs to be done.
If it is a damaged cartilage, further surgery might be required,’ Paterson explained.
Morrison, whose girlfriend was travelling out for the Hong Kong tournament, reckoned that he sustained the injury when he turned quickly during Scotland's opening tie against Australian Capital Territory in Canberra last week.
Scotland coach Douglas Morgan accepted: ‘It's a bit of a blow but the sooner Iain goes home the better, as depending on the results of the probe, he could still be available for the World Cup sevens at Murrayfield.’
Weir, who played in the northern hemisphere v southern hemisphere match in Hong Kong last year, will leave behind the lambing season at Cortleferry Farm to make his sevens debut in the colony.
His absence from this squad was perhaps surprising given his display at the Kelso tournament last autumn where his athleticism at kick-off virtually assured his team the ball, whether advancing or on the receiving end.
He does, too, represent a formidable lineout target.
Morrison's departure means that in extremis Adam Roxburgh would be the likely replacement should anything untoward befall captain Ian Corcoran at hooker.
The injury bulletin — issued by Paterson at the team's hotel swimming pool, a stone's throw from the Pacific Ocean — perhaps overshadowed the selection for this weekend's events which started today.
Derek Stark was left out of Scotland's ten-  strong squad, Paterson remarking pointedly: ‘He has a slight groin strain, but was available for selection.’
By his own admission Stark is very much a confidence player.
In Canberra last week, he continued to blow as coldly as he had at Twickenham earlier this month and was disappointing, though whether he will be react positively to being dropped is a moot point.
His undoubted pace is being sacrificed on an altar of greater sevens savvy elsewhere in the squad which seems to me a reasonable gambit to adopt.
‘Pace,’ Paterson asserted, ‘is only one element of the game.’
Scotland were due to start against Vanuatu with the following team: A Stanger (Hawick), M Appleson (London Scottish), G Townsend (Gala), A Nicol (Dundee HSFP), D Turnbull (Hawick), I Corcoran (Gala) and A Roxburgh (Kelso).
The rest of the squad comprise M Dods (Gala), M Walker (Boroughmuir) and C Hogg (Melrose).
Preliminary intentions were for Derek Turnbull to play in both today's games — the second was against Nadroga — when Carl Hogg was likely to replace Roxburgh.
Paterson said Murry Walker, who was not used in Canberra last week, was also ‘ready for a game.’
Assistant coach John Jeffrey — something of a folk hero in these parts — noted the players had found conditions very tiring, but the cocktail of stifling heat laced with heavy rain had not forced any tactical re-think.
‘If anything it has re-inforced what we have been working on, particularly retaining depth,’ he said.
Scotland, at least, have had some time to adjust to conditions here.
The Canadians arrived little more than 36 hours before their first tie and even in a bounce game against recruits at the army camp where they trained yesterday, they found it very taxing.
Scotland have offered some assistance in the Canadians' injury crisis, physiotherapist Colin Elliot will be available to them, but it seems the Canadians stopped short of asking Scotland whether they could borrow their spare player — Stark — for the Fiji tournament, for which Canadian captain Julian Loveday has joined David Lougheed as an invalid.
Lougheed will be replaced for Hong Kong by flanker Bruce Breen.
One further difficulty  facing Scotland today was the associated sideshow of parades, prayers and speeches — including the official opening address by that onetime prop forward, now Fijian PM Major General Sitiveni Rabuka — which necessitated their arrival at the stadium SIX hours before their first tie.
A long day was in store.
Hateley's ban keeps Rangers in suspense
By Hugh Keevins
RANGERS face an anxious wait to discover if UEFA intends imposing further punishment on striker Mark Hateley.
The Ibrox side are resigned to being without the Englishman for the European Cup showdown with Marseille on 7 April because of the automatic one-match ban which he must serve after his sending off against Brugge on Wednesday night.
But they are also concerned that the referee's report could result in more trouble for Hateley, possibly even a three-match ban.
To make matters worse for Rangers, they will not be allowed to attend the UEFA disciplinary hearing in Zurich later this month that will decide Hateley's fate.
The Ibrox club had intended to investigate the possibility of representing their player in order to make known their displeasure over his dismissal.
However, a UEFA spokesman yesterday confirmed that such a practice is not allowed; Rangers can only appeal after the committee has studied the report of the Polish referee, Ryszard Wojoik, and passed sentence on Hateley.
The hearing will take place on 25 and 26 March, and the committee is empowered to extend Hateley's statutory one-match ban if it sees fit.
Five years ago, Ally McCoist was given a three-match ban after being sent off against Cologne in a UEFA Cup tie.
Such a ban on Hateley would debar him from the European Cup final in May, should Rangers overcome Marseille and then do well enough in their last Group A match, against CSKA Moscow at Ibrox.
The committee must decide if Hateley struck, or attempted to strike, an opponent.
Privately, Rangers' management feel the Belgian player involved with Hateley was guilty of conning the referee into taking the action he did during the first half of Wednesday's match.
If there is no machinery for trying to limit the length of sentence, Rangers will need to trust in the fairness of the committee members.
Meanwhile, the definite loss of Hateley against Marseille was yesterday quantified by his manager at Ibrox.
‘The ordering-off broke up a successful partnership between Hateley and Ally McCoist and we cannot hide from that fact,’ said Smith.
‘Hateley is also the type you want to have on your side when you play away from home in Europe because of the way he works opposing defenders as an attacker and prevents them from properly clearing their lines as well.’
Campbell  Ogilvie , Rangers' secretary-director, will look into UEFA's appeals procedure when he returns from Marseille.
Ogilvie and Rangers' operations executive, Alistair Hood, spent yesterday inspecting the French club's ground.
Unless security arrangements can be improved for visiting Rangers supporters, the club will not handle tickets for next month's match and advise their following not to attend.
Smith is otherwise perfectly satisfied with the way in which his team will approach Marseille.
‘All I wanted on behalf of the team was the opportunity to qualify for the European Cup final off the back of our last two Champions League matches,’ said the manager.
‘Marseille lead the group and remain the favourites to go through, but we gave them two goals of a start at Ibrox and still drew with the French on a night when injury prevented us from having Ally McCoist.’
Digging deep for success at Ibrox
RANGERS are to spend £500,000 on a new pitch in time for next season — assuming an abbreviated summer break allows them enough time to restore the worst playing surface Walter Smith can remember in his time at Ibrox, writes Hugh Keevins.
More than 40,000 fans and millions of television viewers saw on Wednesday night the effects of bad weather and excessive use of a pitch that has recently been shared by Rangers and Scotland.
The final game of the season at Ibrox will be the World Cup qualifying tie with Estonia on 1 June.
It is Rangers' intention to then dig up the pitch and lay a new surface.
The problem has been caused by compacted earth surrounding the undersoil heating and the defect has been ‘creeping round the pitch’, according to the manager.
The fault came to Rangers' attention when they were forced to postpone a Premier Division game with Dundee United at Ibrox in December because of a fractured drainage pipe.
The repair bill was £22,000.
Despite using expensive state-of-the-art machinery, the pitch staff have been defeated by what they describe as the wettest season in living memory.
The handsome ground rent taken for temporarily housing the national side has come with a built-in penalty clause, too, it would seem.
Damage was done to the playing surface by the Maltese team who played Scotland last month, and next week the ravages of time, climate and fixture congestion will worsen when Andy Roxburgh's side play Germany in a friendly.
Rangers' pitch will now be lifted at the earliest opportunity and a new one laid in its place, so long as the work can be carried out in time for the new season.
Four-division plan will be put to vote
By Hugh Keevins
SCOTLAND's 38 senior clubs will vote within the next six weeks on whether four divisions of ten clubs each is the best way forward for the good of the game.
An Extraordinary General Meeting will take place in late April or early May, and should sufficient agreement be forthcoming, there would be included a clause that no further reconstruction plans be permitted for five years.
A two-thirds majority will be necessary to bring the new set-up into being at the beginning of the 1994-95 season, but last night a Premier Division chairman claimed to know of three others from the top 12 who would, along with his club, vote against the proposal.
It is understood that the quartet opposed to this form of change comprises Airdrie, Motherwell, St Johnstone and Partick Thistle.
The Scottish League Management Committee yesterday claimed the vast majority of clubs were in favour of expanding the number of senior clubs to a total of 40, however.
‘This is an important day for us,’ said Peter Donald, the Scottish League secretary.
‘The new set-up will create a better atmosphere and entice sponsorship and other commercial activities.’
A top league of ten clubs is also intended to appease those who were intent on breaking away and forming a Scottish Super League, since there will be a built-in level of autonomy for them within the Scottish league framework.
The process by which two clubs would be invited to take up full membership of the Scottish League would be decided after the EGM.
Under the management committee plan, the  existing 12-12-14 set-up would remain in place next season.
At the end of the season, three clubs would be relegated from the Premier Division, with only the championship winners being promoted from the First Division.
Five clubs would go down from a reformed league of 14 clubs in the First Division, with the Second Division champions being promoted.
When, or if, the four leagues of ten were in place, one club would be automatically relegated from the Premier Division, with one coming up from the league beneath.
There would be a play-off between the Premier Division's second-bottom club and the second-top in the First Division.
A system of two up and two down would apply throughout the other divisions.
It now remains to be seen whether the League Management Committee's confidence in the outcome of the vote at the EGM is justified or if, as the Premier Division chairman stated, self interest will lead to some of those clubs holding four votes each deciding they can not accept the new system as being good for them.
‘The new set-up will create a better atmosphere and entice sponsorship and other commercial activities’ Peter Donald (Scottish League secretary)
Old Firm game still the big one, says Smith
IT MAY be worth asking, when Rangers are touching unprecedented heights in Europe, where Celtic fit into the scheme of things on the eve of the last Old Firm game of the season, writes Hugh Keevins.
As Rangers attempt to win the domestic treble, and hold a 12-point lead over Celtic in the Premier Division, while harbouring notions of the European Cup, Liam Brady's side will finish their fourth season in a row without a trophy of any description.
The Ibrox manager, Walter Smith, had too much respect for tradition yesterday, however, to take an opportunity to diminish the modern-day importance of his club's historic rivals.
‘What happens in Europe remains only the icing on the cake for Rangers,’ he said.
‘There is no bigger game than the Old Firm derby because it is the one that has survived with its importance intact at a time when playing each other four times in the Premier Division has devalued every other fixture.’
Celtic defeated Rangers on 21 March last year, and have not known the feeling since then.
Their supporters would now love Celtic to end Rangers' 44-game unbeaten run.
‘The run has become a source of motivation for some, but I don't think Celtic need that kind of incentive,’ Smith observed.
The manager rejects any suggestion that his club may now think of themselves as being too big for the domestic stage, and yearn for a European set-up that mirrors the depth of their ambition and earning power.
‘Rangers are happy to be as successful as we have been in Scotland.
As for the question of how the game develops in the wider, European context, that, like domestic reconstruction, is something which stays outwith the control of club managers,’ Smith said.
So far as tomorrow's game at Celtic Park is concerned, Rangers' Goram, Gough and Steven all came through the midweek Champions League match without further mishap, and will play.
Two midweek casualties, David Robertson and Pieter Huistra, have an even-money chance.
Maradona drugs denial
DIEGO MARADONA and his former manager could be indicted for drug trafficking, according to a newspaper report yesterday.
An Italian daily paper said prosecutor Maria Cordova had asked for the indictment of Maradona and Guillermo Coppola for an alleged shipment of 6.6lb of cocaine from Argentina to Italy in 1991.
At the time of the alleged offence, Maradona was playing in Italy with Napoli.
Cordova was unavailable for comment yesterday, while Maradona's lawyer, Vincenzo Maria Siniscalchi, said the accusation was groundless.
Rome judges will decide on 17 May whether the two men will stand trial, according to Italian news agency, ANSA.
Maradona is currently playing in Spain with Seville after serving a 15-month suspension for cocaine use.
Sarah says…
SARAH HEEPS of the Scottish office of the outplacement specialist, HDA, answers more of your questions on recruitment, career development an other related matters.
If you have a problem, or simply feel you would like additional information on a topic, write to Sarah Heeps, c/o Supplements Department, The Scotsman, 20 North Bridge, Edinburgh, EH1 1YT.
Names and addresses should be provided though these will not be published.
We regret letters cannot be answered personally.
Though the information given is believed to be correct, responsibility for it cannot be accepted.
Q. In view of the well publicised challenge to rebuild the economies in Eastern Europe and the EC funds and initiatives to work there, are there many openings in these countries for qualified people prepared for a bit of upheaval and a drop in salary?
I, for one, would appreciate any suggestions you have about contacting companies or agencies recruiting people specifically to work in Eastern Europe.
I have fluent German and some French, but perhaps language qualifications are not always essential.
A. Our experience shows that many people are looking at the possibilities of working in this area and, therefore, with rules of supply and demand being what they are, a language ability is almost essential.
Your German and French are undoubtedly of value, but it must be remembered that this would not make you instantly preferable to, say, a German organisation with a manufacturing interest in Czechoslovakia over a fluent German speaker who is a Czech national or vice versa.
Having said that, there are a number of reference sources for organisations and agencies in Eastern Europe.
In addition to those sources which your membership of the Institute of Translators and Interpreters may supply, you might also consider referring to the European Directory of Management Consultants and the Executive Grapevine as organisations listed in these  publications operate a recruitment facility.
Some profitable European organisations find their way into the Times Top 1,000 Companies (published annually).
While you will find few Eastern European organisations listed there, conglomerates with a Eastern European presence do feature in the publication.
Additionally, the Institute of Directors publishes its European Directory of Consultants and Advisers and the Department of Trade and Industry has a comprehensive library available.
930319 
Salvation Army was warned of £6m fraud
By Audrey Gillan
THE SALVATION Army was warned that it might be the victim of an elaborate fraud weeks before the charity revealed in February that it had been defrauded of £6.2 million.
A Scottish solicitor, George Hann, told the charity it might be being set up but he believes it reacted too slowly and as a result the fraudsters were able to escape.
The Salvation Army is now attempting to recover its money in an English civil court action.
A writ was issued against 15 defendants at the High Court in London last month.
In it the charity names a Midlands financier, Stuart Ford, his company, Tilen Securities, and his Egyptian associate, Gamil Naguib.
However, by the time any action was taken the two had disappeared.
Mr Hann came across Mr Ford through the investigative work he carries out for financial institutions.
Information from his intelligence network led him to be suspicious last autumn.
It is alleged that Mr Ford persuaded senior officers within the charity to invest millions in a get-rich-quick scheme.
The charity paid $10 million to become involved in an international finance deal promising guaranteed high profits.
The deal involved the purchase of a standby letter of credit — effectively an IOU issued by a bank with a fixed redemption date.
Such letters can be traded for a profit.
Sometimes they are genuine, sometimes not.
Now £6 million of the Salvation Army's £7 million has disappeared along with the two men.
The Scotsman has obtained a copy of the mandate given to Mr Ford by the charity's business administration secretary, Lt-Col Ivor Rich.
It allowed Mr Ford to raise money against the security of any of the charity's hundreds of properties.
Mr Hann, who works from a small practice in Annan, saw the warning signs before the Salvation Army realised something was wrong.
‘I was approached by an accountant who produced a copy of a letter of authority from the Salvation Army to Ford,’ he said yesterday.
‘I was then introduced by telephone to Mr Ford and spoke to him but I was extremely unhappy with some of the explanations that Mr Ford had given.
He failed to provide me with information which I had requested.’
Mr Hann, who first became suspicious of Mr Ford in October last year, telephoned the fraud squad in London in November.
‘I later telephoned the Salvation Army's solicitors and Mr Ford's solicitors.’
A source within the fraud squad confirmed that it had received helpful information from Mr Hann at an early stage.
The Salvation Army's solicitors, Slaughter and May, also confirmed that they spoke to Mr Hann early in January but will not comment further.
The Salvation Army is one of the largest providers of social services in the UK.
Its income is around £80 million a year, of which £12 million is public donations.
As a temperance organisation it was particularly stunned to discover that some its missing money has been invested in drinking and gambling establishments.
Members of the Salvation Army have remained silent since their announcement that their money had disappeared.
Hunting the scams, Page 5
George Hann: phoned the fraud squad last year
Inquiry into official's race remarks
By Severin Carrell
A FULL inquiry has begun into remarks by a senior Strathclyde Region official that the high numbers of black and Asian children in special schools could be due to genetic or nutritional factors.
The leader of Strathclyde Region, Councillor Gerald McGrath, said yesterday that he had ordered an immediate investigation into the comments by David McNeil, the region's senior depute director of education, to be conducted by Frank Pignatelli, director of education.
With remarks denounced yesterday as racist, Mr McNeil claimed on Thursday that infant malnutrition or genetics could lie behind heavy over-representation of Asian and black children in the two most acute categories of special needs schools in the region.
His comments arose after The Scotsman revealed that the Commission for Racial Equality has begun an unprecedented investigation into possible breaches of education and race relations law in the region's assessment of children who speak English poorly and may have learning difficulties.
The region is alleged to have largely ignored children's bilingual and cultural backgrounds during their special needs' assessment, and, in a high number of cases, failed to provide interpreters or bilingual psychologists during interviews with children and their parents.
A council statement endorsed by Mr Pignatelli, Mr McGrath and Neil McIntosh, Strathclyde's chief executive, said: ‘The council dissociates itself totally from any view which links genetic theory and race in such a way.
‘We would make it absolutely clear that [the region]is firmly committed to achieving racial equality.
We apologise unreservedly for the offence caused by the reported remarks and give every assurance that we will continue to work positively with the community.’
It also emerged yesterday that Mr McNeil, who is due to retire later this month, is to explain his remarks next week before an emergency executive committee meeting of Strathclyde's Community Relations Council, which was infuriated by his remarks.
His comments are a major diplomatic gaffe as the CRC has supported the region in its disquiet over the CRE's decision to begin an investigation.
Mr McNeil is also charged with co-operating with the CRE's inquiry team on behalf of the region.
Bashir Maan, the CRC's chairman, last night called on Mr McNeil to apologise publicly.
He said the region had to take urgent steps to repair the damage his statements had caused.
‘I'm very upset,’ he said.
‘We've had calls from very many people today expressing their concern.’
Saroj Lal, director of Lothian Racial Equality Council, said Mr McNeil's views were outrageous.
‘It's totally racist to try to justify weaknesses in their own education system with genetic theories.’
Mr McNeil was unavailable for comment last night.
Golden oldies
Having just read Alexandra Henderson's article on geriatric parents (Lifestyle, 11 March) I feel compelled to write and defend the position of the ‘golden oldies’.
Not all serve as an embarrassment to their offspring.
Not all are ready for the scrap-heap.
Admittedly, when young, one does tend to be annoyed by remarks such as, ‘My grandad's older than your dad’, and become increasingly frustrated by mum's, ‘When I was young a shilling would buy’ lectures, but this is merely a passing phase.
Now, at 19, I don't believe my life has been impaired by having aged parents.
It has been more of a blessing than a curse.
An age barrier is not an insurmountable wall and I see it as my role to keep my parents young, a challenge indeed!
So, who cares if mum is more likely to win the ‘glamorous granny’ competition than Miss World 1993; not me!
After all, quality improves with age!
Alick Sherriff: leading role in whisky industry
A CAREER of 36 years devoted to the wine and spirit industry in Scotland, and to the development of the distilling firm of Matthew Gloag and Son, has ended with the death of Alick Sherriff, its deputy chairman.
Educated at Cargilfield School, Lawers, and Sedburgh School, Yorkshire, Alick Sherriff served an apprenticeship as a chartered accountant in Glasgow, followed by National Service as a second lieutenant in the 1st Battalion, Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders.
He took a history degree at Trinity College, Cambridge, before joining Matthew Gloag as a trainee in 1956 at the age of 25.
His family connection with Scotland's wine and spirit industry was well established through the firm of Sherriff's Jamaica Rum and ownership of Bowmore Distillery in Islay.
With youthful enthusiasm, he initially travelled extensively in Europe forging life-long contacts and friends in the wine trade.
Soon he was organising a sales force to sell The Famous Grouse whisky in Scotland.
So it was from the early 1960s that his career became inextricably linked to its growing success.
At all levels as he moved upwards in management roles, his commitment to The Famous Grouse and its employees was enormous.
His knowledge of Scotland, its people, and its countryside proved to be invaluable when talking about whisky and from an early age he became an acknowledged and accomplished voice of the industry.
From its inception Mr Sherriff was involved with the Keepers of the Quaich, a body whose aim is the promotion of the Scotch whisky industry, and he was a past president of the Wine & Spirit Association of Scotland.
His outside interests were numerous and varied.
He was a pillar of the his local community at Ballinluig, near Pitlochry, always willing to help in a good cause.
A church elder, he was convener of the fabric committee of Grandtully/Strathtay and Logiealmond Churches.
He was chairman of the Friends of Glenalmond and, having been a strong supporter of the Territorial Army, had recently been appointed Honorary Colonel of 32 (Scottish) Signal Regiment (V).
One of the honours he most valued was his election to the Queen's Body Guard for Scotland (Royal Company of Archers).
He was also a past president pf Perth racecourse and a Perth district committee member of the Scottish Veterans' Garden City Association.
Alick will always be remembered and appreciated for his energy, enthusiasm, experience and encouragement by all who knew him.
His departure leaves a considerable void.
He is survived by his wife, Sue, and three sons, Patrick, Neil and James.
Alick Sherriff: committed career to The Famous Grouse
Offside
‘ARE you one of the strikers?’
‘No, left-side midfield.’
‘Sure you're not a left-winger?’
‘No, no, midfield.’
‘I don't mean playing position.
Or non-playing position as it'll be this weekend.
I mean your political proclivities?’
‘You what?‘
‘Let's start again on a level playing field.
Are you, or are you not, a Dundee Sunday league football player?’
‘Yes.’
‘And are you, or are you not, sick as a parrot or over the moon respectively, about increased charges for changing rooms and pitches?’
‘More like gutted.
Really gutted.’
‘So how do you plan to tackle the situation?’
‘Well, we'll take each charge as it comes.’
‘Is there any chance it could be a charge of two halves?’
‘Not as far as we're concerned.
It was a diabolical decision.
We've been robbed.
It's all or nothing now.’
‘How do the boys feel?’
‘They've done brilliant so far.
Stuck together.
There's a ton of character among these lads.
And commitment.
Anything can happen over 90 minutes.
We'll keep going till the final whistle.’
‘Or not, at least this Sunday?’
‘That's right.
It's a funny old game.’
Players' chance to book places on islands trip
By Harry Pincott
WITHIN the next week the Scotland squad for the forthcoming tour of Fiji, Tonga and Western Samoa will be chosen, which provides a shop-window opportunity for the home players in today's A international against France at Rubislaw, Aberdeen.
With the likelihood that at least seven Scots will be going on the British Lions tour, there are plenty of places to be won, though they will have to be earned against what looks a strong French XV.
The Scots include six full caps against the visitors' four, and for four of the forwards, Martin Scott, Chris Gray, David McIvor, playing at No8, and Ian Smith, the match, sponsored by Total Oil Marine International, provides them with the opportunity to get back into the selectors' good books.
There will also be great interest in the displays of the two tallest forwards, lock Shade Munro, and lock-turned-flanker Andy Macdonald, the moving of the Heriot's player into the back-row giving the Scots a very strong hand in the lineouts.
Prop Grant Wilson will be seeking to emulate the deeds of his Boroughmuir colleague, Peter Wright, who was also third choice in the eyes of the selectors for the French game in Paris, but who then went on to prove he should have been selected in the first place.
In the backs, Kenny Logan has had a somewhat disappointing season after being capped in Australia last summer, but the stage is set for him to recover lost ground, as it is for his Stirling County colleague, Ian Jardine.
However, their chances will depend on how well the half-backs, David Millard and Ally Donaldson, gel .
The selectors certainly can't be accused of not spreading their nets far and wide, Division III being represented by the Haddington winger, John Kerr, and Division II by Steven Ferguson (Peebles) and the Stewart's-Melville pair, Kenny Milligan and Douglas Wyllie.
France have been forced to make a few late changes.
Michel Marfaing, the Toulouse centre, replaces Herve Couffignal with Perpignan's Patrick Arlettaz named as one of the replacements.
Left wing William Techoueyres has withdrawn because of a thigh injury and his place will be taken by Perpignan team-mate Laurent Arbo.
Stewarts-Melville's Douglas Wyllie goes through a passing movement with colleagues during a brisk A squad training session in Aberdeen yesterday
Scotland head for SA with hope and Love
JIM LOVE, the new director of cricket, today leads the Scotland squad on their second successive two-week tour of South Africa in what will be a demanding test for the former England player, writes Harry Pincott.
Not only will the Yorkshireman spend much of his time getting to know his charges, he also expects to play the odd game or two and his experience should prove invaluable.
Because he took over his new duties in the close season Love has not had too many opportunities to meet many of the players, but the squad have had two nets at Moray House College, Edinburgh, the last two Fridays and Love has been impressed by the effort put in by the players at these sessions.
That applies especially to the Arbroath batsman, George Salmond, who showed little signs of the bad calf cut, sustained during a recent football match and which necessitated 18 stitches.
Love admits it will be very difficult for the players, who will be taking on opposition coming to the end of their season and in weather which will be completely different to what most of them have been experiencing over the past six months, though not to captain Bruce Russell, Iain Philip and Alastair Storie, who have spent the winter playing overseas.
The trip will undoubtedly be a learning experience for both Love and the players, and there won't be much time for acclimatisation as the Scots, who arrive at their base in Cape Town tomorrow will play the first of their eight matches on Tuesday.
Love reveals that Yorkshire have already been in Cape Town for a week and that their England A captain, Martyn Moxon, will be flying in from Australia to join them this weekend.
The Scottish Cricket Union will award caps for the games against Yorkshire and Western Province Colts, which Love expects to be a very hard fixture, and bearing in mind the high standard of youth cricket encountered in Johannesburg last March, he is almost certain to be right.
Defeat by England but title goes north
SCOTLAND made it three wins on the trot in the Home International Indoor Championships in Swansea yesterday despite losing out in their final fixture with England, 106-113.
Scotland knew before the match started that they could lose by up to 50 shots and still take the title.
England required a win to avoid taking the wooden spoon for the first time.
The Scots, equally determined to finish their programme in style and leave their Auld Enemy with the embarrassment of bottom spot in the table, opened up a 29-17 lead after five ends and by the halfway mark were still in front although their advantage had been trimmed to 53-50.
The Scots then pulled away again and with 15 ends completed looked to be out of sight at 88-65.
However they counted just five shots over the next three ends while England picked up 32 to transform the match and move 97-93 ahead.
England then pulled away over the last three ends to increase their advantage to 113-106.
Both sides finished with three winning rinks but a 15 shot defeat for Richard Corsie at the hands of Steven Halmai, a nine shot defeat for Angus Blair from David Ward and Andy Thomson's 19-17 win over Willie Wood proved good enough to give England their win.
Alex Marshall, Robert McCulloch and Robert Provan provided the Scottish wins and kept intact their own personal unbeaten runs in the series.
McCulloch, the Scots captain, led from the front with a 21-16 win over Tony Allcock, Alex Marshall trounced Pip Branfield 21-9 and Provan despite dropping a last end five beat John Bell 20-18.
Munich venue for final of Champions' Cup
IF RANGERS reach the final of the European Cup on 26 May, they'll play in Munich's Olympic Stadium.
The home of Bayern Munich was selected yesterday as the venue for the climax to this season's Champions Cup, writes Mike Aitken.
Rangers' meeting with Marseille on 7 April in France will go a long way to deciding whether or not the Ibrox club should pencil in a Spring trip to Bavaria.
The Scottish champions, however, are unhappy with the ticket arrangements for the tie in Marseille and have asked UEFA, the organiser of the tournament, to intervene.
Director-secretary Campbell Ogilvie and Alistair Hood, the club's security adviser, met with  Marseille officials on Thursday but were unable to resolve the situation.
In a statement issued yesterday, Rangers acknowledged that they were experiencing difficulties in obtaining the number of tickets previously agreed for the match in Marseille.
John Greig, the club's public relations executive, said: ‘We are far from satisfied with the security arrangements and greatly reduced number of tickets now on offer.
We realise this is an inconvenience to the supporters wishing to travel to Marseille officially through the club, but it is totally outwith our control and a further statement will be issued next week.’
Trevor Steven's quest for European glory with Rangers, however, has cost him his England place.
England boss Graham Taylor yesterday excluded the Rangers' midfielder from his squad for the vital World Cup qualifying match against Turkey in Izmir on 31 March.
Sheffield Wednesday's Paul Warhurst gets his first cap in a for England.
Wembley yesterday landed a second successive European final when the stadium was chosen to host the Cup Winners' Cup climax on 12 May.
A year ago it was the scene of Barcelona's 10 success against Sampdoria in the Champions Cup.
The London stadium will also be the venue for the FA Cup semi-final between Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield United on Saturday, 3 April.
The match was originally scheduled for Leeds' Elland road ground.
Middlesbrough striker Bernie Slaven yesterday joined second division promotion-chasers Port Vale on a 15-month contract after being given a free transfer.
Trevor Steven: Rangers' European commitments have cost him his place in the Graham Taylor's England squad
Gilford three ahead at halfway stage From Mike Britten at Vilamoura
DAVID GILFORD threatened to spreadeagle the field with eight birdies in his first 12 holes of the Portuguese Open second round yesterday.
But the five-shot lead he created was trimmed to a manageable three shots for today's third round which the English Ryder Cup man starts on a 13-under-par total of 131.
Gilford, winner of last month's Moroccan Open, added a 66 to his first-day 65 and his nearest challengers are the Argentine Jorge Berendt (71) and the New Zealander Frank Nobilo (68).
Jeremy Robinson with a best-of-the-day 64 and Swedish newcomer Olle Karlsson (66) are next in line at nine under.
Neither Paul Lawrie nor Stephen McAllister could build on their opening rounds of 68 at Vila Sol, where eagles and birdies again abounded in the warm sunshine and still air.
Lawrie had 74 and McAllister a 75 in which he went out in 43 and returned in 32.
Both figured among the qualifiers, though they were overtaken by Ross Drummond and Brian Marchbank.
Gilford was the star performer with his iron play, especially in an outward 31 in which he had six birdies.
Only one of his birdie putts was more than 12 feet as he continued to pepper the pins.
But he ran out of steam in the closing stages, took a 6 at the long sixth, and gave hope to the rest that the £41,660 top prize might still be available.
Long-range marksmanship was a feature of the day and to Martin Poxon went the honour of an albatross-eagle.
It arrived at the sixth, where he drove into the lake, picked out his ball under penalty, then hit it 260 yards with his 1-iron straight into the hole.
American Bill Malley, holed out with a nine-iron from 125 yards at the 12th and Karlsson sank a seven-iron shot from 155 yards at the fifth.
McAllister had five birdies in the space of seven inward holes to turn back from the brink of disaster.
Everything went wrong on his outward half in which he was twice in hazards and three times in bunkers.
When he took his second 6 at the ninth after tangling with bushes, he looked a lost cause.
But suddenly everything clicked and he had four birdies in a row from the eleventh.
Another at the 17th clinched his survival and McAllister commented: ‘It was a gritty recovery.
That is the worst first nine I have ever played, and probably one of the best inward halves.’
Drummond (71) and Marchbank (72) each had five birdies and Andrew Oldcorn, who won the Tour Espania Masters in Cadiz, managed six in his 70 including a hat-trick of 3s from the  sixteenth to the eighteenth.
That put him on the 142 mark alongside Sam Torrance (72), with McAllister just behind.
Gary Orr (74-145), Bill Longmuir (76-146), Peter Smith (74-149) and Andrew Coltart (79-154) were non-qualifiers.
So was Gordon Brand, jun, runner-up to Nobilo in Valencia a fortnight ago who had saddled himself with an opening 77.
Brand took 7 at his opening hole after being plugged in sand and subsided to an 81.
Scots out to book places on islands trip
By Harry Pincott
WITHIN the next week the Scotland squad for the forthcoming tour of Fiji, Tonga and Western Samoa will be chosen, which provides a shop-window opportunity for the home players in today's A international against France at Rubislaw, Aberdeen.
With the likelihood that at least seven Scots will be going on the British Lions tour, there are plenty of places to be won, though they will have to be earned against what looks a strong French XV.
The Scots include six full caps against the visitors' four, and for four of the forwards, Martin Scott, Chris Gray, David McIvor, playing at No8, and Ian Smith, the match, sponsored by Total Oil Marine International, provides them with the opportunity to get back into the selectors' good books.
There will also be great interest in the displays of the two tallest forwards, lock Shade Munro, and lock-turned-flanker Andy Macdonald, the moving of the Heriot's player into the back-row giving the Scots a very strong hand in the lineouts.
Prop Grant Wilson will be seeking to emulate the deeds of his Boroughmuir colleague, Peter Wright, who was also third choice in the eyes of the selectors for the French game in Paris, but who then went on to prove he should have been selected in the first place.
In the backs, Kenny Logan has had a somewhat disappointing season after being capped in Australia last summer, but the stage is set for him to recover lost ground, as it is for his Stirling County colleague, Ian Jardine.
However, their chances will depend on how well the half-backs, David Millard and Ally Donaldson, gell.
The selectors certainly can't be accused of not spreading their nets far and wide, Division III being represented by Haddington winger John Kerr, and Division II by Steven Ferguson (Peebles) and the Stewart's-Melville pair, Kenny Milligan and Douglas Wyllie.
France have been forced to make late changes.
Toulouse centre Michel Marfaing replaces Herve Couffignal, while left wing William Techoueyres has pulled out because of a thigh injury.
His place is taken by his Perpignan team-mate, Laurent Arbo.
Jed-Forest confirmed last night that they had suspended a player until next season because of misbehaviour on a recent trip to Twickenham.
Munich venue for final of European Cup
IF RANGERS reach the final of the European Cup on 26 May, they'll play in Munich's Olympic Stadium.
The home of Bayern Munich was selected yesterday as the venue for the climax to this season's Champions Cup, writes Mike Aitken.
Rangers' meeting with Marseille on 7 April in France will go a long way to deciding whether or not the Ibrox club should pencil in a Spring trip to Bavaria.
The Scottish champions, however, are unhappy with the ticket arrangements for the tie in Marseille and have asked UEFA, the organiser of the tournament, to intervene.
Director-secretary Campbell Ogilvie and Alistair Hood, the club's security adviser, met with  Marseille officials on Thursday but were unable to resolve the situation.
In a statement issued yesterday, Rangers acknowledged that they were experiencing difficulties in obtaining the number of tickets previously agreed for the match.
John Greig, the club's public relations executive, said: ‘We are far from satisfied with the security arrangements and greatly reduced number of tickets now on offer.
We realise this is an inconvenience to the supporters wishing to travel to Marseille officially through the club, but it is totally outwith our control.’
Trevor Steven's quest for European glory with Rangers has cost him his England place.
England boss Graham Taylor yesterday excluded the Rangers midfielder from his squad for the vital World Cup qualifying match against Turkey in Izmir on 31 March.
The Sheffield Wednesday forward, Paul Warhurst, gets his first cap for England.
Wembley yesterday landed a second successive European final when the stadium was chosen to host the Cup-Winners' Cup climax on 12 May.
A year ago it was the scene of Barcelona's 10 success against Sampdoria in the Champions Cup.
The London stadium will also be the venue for the FA Cup semi-final between Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield United on 3 April.
The match was originally scheduled for Leeds's Elland Road ground.
The draw for the semi-finals of the UEFA Cup, made in Geneva yesterday, was Juventus (Italy) v Paris St Germain (Fra) and Borussia Dortmund (Ger) v Auxerre (Fra).
The Middlesbrough striker, Bernie Slaven, yesterday joined second division Port Vale on a 15-month contract.
Beaumont confident Jodami can win Gold Cup again
TRAINER Peter Beaumont was yesterday dreaming of making Jodami one of the all-time great chasers as the Cheltenham Gold Cup winner received a hero's welcome on his return to Yorkshire.
Not since L'Escargot (1970-71) has any horse emerged triumphant in chasing's blue riband in successive years.
But Beaumont is already confident that the eight-year-old will make a bold bid to pull off the feat in 12 months' time.
‘Jodami will have developed even more in another year and though it's a difficult thing to do, it's certainly possible,’ he said.
‘It will certainly be the aim to go to Cheltenham again, and I would hopefully take a similar path.’
Beaumont is upset that Jodami's comfortable two lengths defeat of Rushing Wild is being written off as a sub-standard Gold Cup in some quarters.
‘I don't see how people can say it wasn't a good race,’ he said.
‘Jodami recorded a good time and we had The Fellow well beaten.
The Fellow seemed to run his race, as he beat Docklands Express further than he did last year.’
A licensed trainer since 1986, Beaumont celebrated the biggest success of his career with a meal and a few drinks in Cheltenham on Thursday night.
He drove the horsebox himself yesterday morning back to his base at Brandsby in North Yorkshire.
The crowds were out in force to cheer home Jodami as he reached the neighbouring village of Stillington.
Back at Beaumont's Foulrice Farm, television camera crews were waiting to heap more adulation on the horse.
‘Jodami is in grand form, but I really haven't decided yet whether he will race again this season,’ said the trainer.
‘I want to discuss things with the owner, and it will probably be a week or so before I make up my mind.
‘He's entered in a race at Aintree but he won't run there.
If he does run again this year, it will only be in a little race.’
French start favourites
THE new Five Nations Cup will be taken to Paris today as the tournament's organisers gamble that France will be the first to win the trophy.
However, a big England score in Ireland could mean the cup being brought back to Britain untouched for eventual presentation to Will Carling.
There is also the statistical possibility of all the other three countries winning the title outright.
The champions will be decided on points difference for the first time.
In the event of points difference being level, tries during the championship will be the next deciding factor.
— PA 
Barnes's mission, Page 18
Scotland must win next tie to progress
SCOTLAND's prospects of advancing to the quarter-finals of the main competition in the Fiji international sevens depend on the outcome of their final pool tie against Western Samoa this morning.
In front of a colourful and engrossed crowd of nearly 10,000 at the Government Stadium yesterday, the Scots accounted for the event's only whipping boys, Pacific Islanders Vanuatu, by 40-0, then lost to the local Fijian district, Nadroga , 12-7 in the last tie of the day.
There was, however, no dishonour in such a defeat.
Erase the notion back home that this was an equivalent of football's Costa Rica, though the galling aspect was that Scottish mistakes were a telling factor.
Other international sides were similarly smitten by the innate, breathtaking skills of the Fijians in whatever guise, national or district, they appeared.
Western Samoa — with an entirely different squad from those who won last week in Canberra — fell by the same margin as the Scots against Nadroga; Nadi hammered Australia (minus their stars) and coasted against Tonga; Suva dumped Canada; and Tavua, a team drawn from a village comprising ‘100 huts’ feasted on the US.
Add that Rewa — a district chosen from six clubs and late replacements for American Samoa — came desperately close to beating New Zealand and it is easy to understand the logic of the Scotland manager, Duncan Paterson, who mused: ‘The Fijians could send six or eight sides to the northern hemisphere and take everybody apart with their skills, pace and physique.’
The unfortunate news for Scotland is that even should they eclipse Western Samoa today, the Fijian national seven palpably await in the quarter-final.
The Australian coach, Bob Dwyer, was similarly awe-struck by the local talent and predicted the semi-finalists would be four Fijian sides.
Against Vanuata, Scotland waltzed to 40-0 through tries by Mark Appleson (2), Tony Stanger, Derek Turnbull, Gregor Townsend and Andy Nicol, Appleson converting two, Townsend three.
Given the benefit of hindsight, Scotland could have done with a more demanding opening and might also have deployed the likes of Murry Walker and Carl Hogg first out, instead of waiting for the taxing fixture against Nadroga.
The Scots trailed 12-0 to Nadroga at the interval though, as in Canberra, the opposition scores, through Lala and Esala, the latter's converted by Suka, had come from Scottish largesse when originally in possession.
If that point, which coach Douglas Morgan had amplified repeatedly in last week's aftermath, still needs re-inforcing, the coach was at least able to reflect with satisfaction on the birth-pangs of Scotland's try.
‘One of the things we have been working on is getting men back behind the ball,’ he said and when Stanger did just that in retrieving a kick-ahead from Nadroga, Nicol, Appleson (twice) and Turnbull, too, made sure the winger was not in isolation, for Ian Corcoran to boot on delicately and claim a grand try, Appleson converting.
‘Silly errors,’ in Morgan's view had cost the Scots the tie.
Can Scotland close the gap before the Rugby World Cup at Murrayfield from 16-18 April?
I have my doubts but Morgan maintained: ‘It's not insurmountable but we have to work very hard.’
That starts today when the Scots are pledged to choose their best side and desist from further experimentation.
Smith confident Old Firm atmosphere will lift his European heroes Mowbray may return for Celtic
By Mike Aitken
SINCE he limped out of the Old Firm game on 2 January, Tony Mowbray has missed all of Celtic's last 13 matches.
His manager, Liam Brady, must decide this morning whether or not to bring the Englishman back into his plans for this afternoon's game against Rangers.
If he does play, Mowbray is likely to be handed the demanding task of subduing Mark Hateley.
Brady admitted yesterday that he wanted ‘to sleep on the decision’.
The Irishman has yet to handle a winning Celtic team against Rangers at Parkhead.
How the home side handle the threat posed by Hateley, who was unfortunate to be ordered off against Brugge, could be a significant factor in altering a disappointing run of results against their city rivals.
Mowbray has performed well against Hateley in the past, but it may be a gamble to restore the centre-back to first-team duty.
The defender's last full competitive 90 minutes was on 26 December.
Brady will also bear in mind the fact that Celtic have steadied the ship at the back in recent weeks.
Since the partnership of Mike Galloway and Mark McNally came together, Celtic have won four and drawn two of their last six games.
Moreover, Celtic have only conceded two goals during their most consistent spell of the season.
Yet, having said that, the efforts of the Celtic defence to play an offside trap against Hibs in midweek nearly cost the team dear.
Only bad luck and poor finishing prevented Hibs from grabbing an equaliser.
Given the same  opportunities , Hateley and Ally McCoist are unlikely to be so generous.
Andy Payton's haul of six goals in four games has taken his tally for the season to 14.
Now Celtic's leading scorer, Payton is aware of what victory would mean to the club's supporters in another season without a trophy.
‘Our fans deserve something to celebrate,’ he said.
While Payton has struck up a sound understanding with Frank McAvennie, Celtic's greatest asset today may be their desire for victory.
One of the most impressive aspects of Rangers' form this season — particularly in Europe — has been their team spirit.
But it would be unreasonable to expect the Ibrox players to scale the heights again this afternoon in the aftermath of their ten-man win over Brugge.
Walter Smith made the point yesterday that while there might have been a reaction on the part of his players today in a bread-and-butter league match, the atmosphere generated by an Old Firm game would bring out the best in them.
He recalled how Rangers won earlier in the season at Parkhead after defeating Leeds in a European tie.
Maybe so, but one can't help feeling that Celtic will rarely get a better chance to end Rangers' unbeaten run of 44 matches.
The demands of beating the Belgian champions with only ten men must have taken a physical toll of Smith's side.
With so much else to concern them, and with such a big lead over Aberdeen, this is one game where Rangers may be satisfied with a point.
Ian Ferguson and Pieter Huistra won't be considered for first-team places until next week.
Today's match may also come a little too soon for David Robertson, who is back in the squad.
However, Richard Gough has shown no adverse reaction to his comeback game against Brugge and will lead out Rangers today.
It's derby day across Scotland, and having failed to beat Hearts in any of the last 16 meetings between the clubs, Hibs have a point to prove at Tynecastle.
Recent defeats from Aberdeen, Celtic and Rangers have taken their toll of the Easter Road side, but manager Alex Miller insists that his players will go into the derby game in a positive frame of mind.
Gordon Hunter will return from suspension, but Murdo MacLeod, Neil Orr, Tommy McIntyre and Joe Tortolano are all likely to miss out.
Hearts, too, have a host of injury problems.
Ally Mauchlen, Tosh McKinlay, Gary Mackay, Neil Berry and Allan Preston are rated doubtful, though Peter Van de Ven returns after suspension.
While Hibs have the motivation of registering an overdue win over their capital rivals —‘every player at Easter Road wants to beat Hearts,’ said Keith Wright — Hearts need to keep collecting points to sustain their challenge for a place in Europe.
‘Every match for us now has significance if we want that UEFA place,’ said Joe Jordan.
According to the record books, the North-east derby between Aberdeen and Dundee at Dens Park is an even more lop-sided affair.
Aberdeen have lost only twice in 23 visits to Dundee since the introduction of the Premier Division.
Paul Mason, Gary Smith and Lee Richardson are likely to return after missing the Scottish Cup win at Clydebank.
However, Willie Miller has other, unnamed injury doubts.
After their midweek win over Falkirk, St Johnstone's future in the Premier Division looks secure for another season.
Dundee United, on the other hand, need a win at McDiarmid Park to keep tabs on Hearts in the chase for Europe.
The remaining fixtures on today's Premier card have the look of relegation dogfights.
Motherwell should beat Partick at Fir Park to leapfrog into ninth place while in the battle of Brockville the losers of the Falkirk v Airdrie match will, realistically, have little chance of avoiding the drop.
Supporters will not be asked to pay more next season to watch games in Scotland.
Following consideration of admission prices by the Scottish League Management Committee, secretary Peter Donald confirmed yesterday: ‘We will not be suggesting any change.’
Target Munich, Page 18
Tony Mowbray: out since January through injury
Rookie Mansell off to a flyer as he smashes track record
NIGEL MANSELL smashed the track record in yesterday's first qualifying round for the Indycar grand prix in Surfers Paradise, Australia, and vowed to go even faster today.
The reigning world Formula One champion set a scorching 102.095 miles an hour around the streets of the Queensland holiday resort, clipping about two-tenths of a second off the previous record.
‘I'm delighted,’ said Mansell, whose car bears the rookie insignia of three red strips on its rear wing.
‘But you must remember it's only provisional pole and I've got two young tigers either side of me that will be going much quicker tomorrow so we've all got to find a bit of speed.’
Mansell snatched the lead in the two-session qualifying round ahead of another motor- racing legend, Brazil's Emerson Fittipaldi, and the ‘young tigers’ Paul Tracy and Robby Gordon.
‘I expect everyone to go at least a second faster tomorrow,’ said Mansell, who set the record in the penultimate lap of the session.
The previous record of 101.900mph was set last year by American Al Unser, also in a qualifying round.
Organisers are promoting tomorrow's grand prix as a historic meeting of two racing worlds — a duel between newcomer Mansell and the sport's reigning champion, American Bobby Rahal.
Final grid times for tomorrow's grand prix, the first in the 16-race season and the only one outside North America, will be established after the second qualifying round today.
Mansell, whose usual spot in Formula One in 1992 was on pole, said qualifying for the Indy was much harder.
‘When was the last time you saw me sweat like this,’ he asked the throng of journalists and photographers at the news conference.
‘It's very different only qualifying for 30 minutes and not for an hour.
You've got to pay attention to what you're doing because you've only got a few laps.’
Despite finally realising his dream of becoming world champion, Mansell quit Formula One last year after an acrimonious row with the Williams team over his contract.
The 39-year-old Briton could not have got a better start to his new career with the Indycar team owned by Paul Newman and Carl Haas, but now has every driver on his tail.
‘He proved today that he is very fast but I can tell him that tomorrow is not going to be so easy,’ said Fittipaldi, who clocked 101.472mph.
Fittipaldi, winner at Surfers Paradise last year, switched to Indycars in 1984 after clinching two Formula One crowns.
Only he and Mansell's Newman-Haas team-mate, Mario Andretti, have won championship titles in both sports — an achievement Mansell is hoping to emulate.
Rahal, regarded as Mansell's main rival this weekend, could only manage eighth place in qualifying because of problems with steering and road holding.
‘It's not where we would like to be.
It's a situation that can be fixed and I believe we'll be much faster,’ said the three-times Indycar champion.
In all, 26 drivers will be on the starting grid of the 2.8-mile) street circuit tomorrow.
However, Mansell is the big drawcard.
Organisers expect the crowds this year easily to exceed the record attendance of 170,000 over four days in 1992.
Scots fail to qualify for latter stages
SCOTLAND's interest in the Fiji International Sevens will be restricted to the Plate competition after they were beaten 19-0 by Western Samoa in their final pool match early today.
In the boiling midday sun, the Scots could make nothing of five minutes of first-half possession and  conceded tries to Pasikale (2) and Silolota, the latter converting two.
Scotland will now face New Zealand in the Plate competition, having finished third in their group.
In their two matches at the Government Stadium yesterday, the Scots accounted for the event's only whipping boys, Pacific Islanders Vanuatu, by 40-0, then lost to the local Fijian district, Nadroga, 12-7 in the last tie of the day.
There was, however, no dishonour in such a defeat.
Erase the notion back home that this was an equivalent of football's Costa Rica, though the galling aspect was that Scottish mistakes were a telling factor.
Other international sides were similarly smitten by the innate, breathtaking skills of the Fijians in whatever guise, national or district, they appeared.
Western Samoa — with an entirely different squad from those who won last week in Canberra — fell by the same margin as the Scots against Nadroga; Nadi hammered Australia (minus their stars) and coasted against Tonga; Suva dumped Canada; and Tavua, a team drawn from a village comprising ‘100 huts’ feasted on the US.
Add that Rewa — a district chosen from six clubs and late replacements for American Samoa — came desperately close to beating New Zealand and it is easy to understand the logic of the Scotland manager, Duncan Paterson, who mused: ‘The Fijians could send six or eight sides to the northern hemisphere and take everybody apart with their skills, pace and physique.’
The Australian coach, Bob Dwyer, was similarly awe-struck by the local talent and predicted the semi-finalists would be four Fijian sides.
Against Vanuata, Scotland waltzed to 40-0 through tries by Mark Appleson (2), Tony Stanger, Derek Turnbull, Gregor Townsend and Andy Nicol, Appleson converting two, Townsend three.
The Scots trailed 12-0 to Nadroga at the interval though, as in Canberra, the opposition scores, through Lala and Esala, the latter's converted by Suka, had come from Scottish largesse when originally in possession.
If that point, which coach Douglas Morgan had amplified repeatedly in last week's aftermath, still needs re-inforcing, the coach was at least able to reflect with satisfaction on the birth-pangs of Scotland's try.
‘One of the things we have been working on is getting men back behind the ball,’ he said and when Stanger did just that in retrieving a kick-ahead from Nadroga, Nicol, Appleson (twice) and Turnbull, too, made sure the winger was not in isolation, for Ian Corcoran to boot on delicately and claim a grand try, Appleson converting.
‘Silly errors,’ in Morgan's view had cost the Scots the tie.
930321 
Scottish Office admits errors over cost of council reform
By David Scott, Local Government Editor
THE Scottish Office has admitted that the cost of reforming local government in Scotland has been miscalculated.
Officials are preparing new figures after accepting that estimates by their own consultants, Touche Ross, are inaccurate.
The move follows criticism by leading local government officials and academics.
According to Scottish Office sources, some of the key criticisms have been accepted as valid and a re-assessment of the estimated costs and savings is now taking place.
Ian Lang, the Scottish Secretary, has confirmed to The Scotsman that the costs are likely to vary from the originals.
His officials have concluded that the consultants under-estimated the cost of setting up large councils and over-estimated the cost of smaller ones.
This will result in a narrowing of the range of costs which were given by Touche Ross when it costed four alternative options for single-tier councils.
It means the savings expected to follow council reform could be less than suggested — an issue which may become crucial since the Government has been anxious to demonstrate that dismantling the present two-tier council structure would bring meaningful savings.
The options costed by Touche Ross covered plans for 15, 24, 35 or 51 new councils.
In a report last October, the firm estimated annual savings ranging from £55 million for a 35-council structure to £192 million for 15 councils.
It said the 51-unit proposal would result in increased costs rather than savings.
Bodies like the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy — which represents local government finance officials — argued that the consultants had overstated the savings and understated the potential costs.
Interviewed by The Scotsman about the planned local government changes, Mr Lang acknowledged that costs were an extremely important element of the reforms.
When the Scottish Office published the Touche Ross report it had stated that further work on costing might be needed.
Mr Lang now says: ‘It may well be that some of the assumptions that Touche Ross made will be less relevant when the final decisions are taken.
For example, assumptions about numbers of staff that would be needed in different types of authority are open to question.’
But he stressed: ‘I think it is clear that there are savings to be had and we shall be keen to take those into account.’
The Scottish Office is understood to be preparing plans for between 25 and 30 councils.
These could range from councils covering a large area, like Highland Region, to those covering smaller territory like Eastwood District in Strathclyde.
But Mr Lang emphasised no decisions had been taken.
One of the critics of the Touche Ross report, Professor Arthur Midwinter, of the department of politics at Strathclyde University, said last night that it now looked as if the scope for savings would be narrowed to the point where it had to be asked whether it was worthwhile proceeding with the reforms.
A white paper setting out the reforms is due to be published in June or July.
The Scottish Office is yet to be guaranteed a slot for the legislation in the next session of parliament.
‘I cannot guarantee we shall legislate in the next session since one never can — it is always understood that a final decision is taken nearer the Queen's speech,’ Mr Lang said
Mr Lang's caution about the timing of the bill is thought to be more to do with protocol rather than an indication that the whole issue might be delayed.
He said the Government was on course for elections to the new councils in 1995.
Classic Rolls fetches £21,000 at auction
A CLASSIC Rolls-Royce limousine which had been in the same Scottish family for 60 years made £21,275 at a Sotheby's weekend car sale at the Royal Air Force museum, Hendon, North London.
Evelyn Vane Eden, later Lady Auckland, took delivery of the 20/25hp limousine direct from the firm's showroom in Conduit Street, London in October 1933.
The coachwork by the famous firm of Thrupp and Maberly matched the dark green and black livery.
Most of the stately saloon's 74,000 miles were done before the Second World War.
It was laid up during the war and last ran in 1962.
Lady Auckland died in 1971 and the car passed to her son, the Hon Ronald Eden of Cromlix near Dunblane, Perthshire.
He said the car had been laid up in storage for 30 years.
The original condition appealed to buyers and it quickly doubled the £8,000-£10,000 pre-sale estimate.
Mr Eden said yesterday he was very pleased with the price.
‘The car was very well looked after and meticulously maintained.
‘It was chauffeur-driven and chauffeur-maintained before the war and if anything went wrong it went straight back to Rolls-Royce.
‘My mother was a very careful owner and only did about a thousand miles a year between the end of the war and 1962.
‘I was sorry to see it go in a way, but on the other hand it's been laid up for many years and now it's going to give pleasure to other people.
‘It's a good thing someone else is going to care for it.’
The car was bought by a private British owner.
In addition to the old-style buff log book, the new owner also received the firm's original guarantee for the car, still in its Rolls-Royce postage tube complete with a 2d stamp.
Mohammad Junejo: Ex-Pakistani prime minister
THE former prime minister of Pakistan, Mohammad Khan Junejo, has died of a heart attack in Baltimore in the United States, where he was undergoing treatment for leukaemia.
He was 61.
He served as a martial-law prime minister from 1985 to 1988, when he was dismissed by the late military president, General Mohammad Zia-ul-Haq, after he tried to assert his authority.
A graceful and reserved man, he lacked fluency in his speeches and was not a natural politician.
As head of government from 1985 to 1988, Mr Junejo often looked more like a schoolteacher than a political leader and was a strict disciplinarian.
He was born in Sindhri, a semi-feudal area of rural Sind into a landlord family.
He studied agriculture in England, but entered politics at the age of 21 and won a seat in the Sind provincial assembly.
After Gen Zia's coup of 1977, he served as railways minister in the military government in 1978-79.
Mr Junejo won a seat in the National Assembly in 1985 elections, which were boycotted by the anti-Zia opposition alliance, Movement for the Restoration of Democracy.
President Zia picked him for prime minister in March 1985 but he was criticised by the opposition for providing a democratic civilian facade to a military dictatorship.
Nine months later President Zia lifted martial law, but kept the ultimate reins of power firmly in his grasp, remaining both president and army chief.
Many thought the mild-mannered Mr Junejo would obediently follow Gen Zia's orders.
But the two were at odds on many issues, especially the 1988 Geneva accords that led to the withdrawal of Soviet troops from neighbouring Afghanistan.
Gen Zia opposed the agreement because it did not include transferring power from the communist rulers to the Muslim rebels his government had armed for a decade.
Friction between Mr Junejo and the president grew and in May 1988 Gen Zia announced the dismissal of Mr Junejo and the National Assembly while his prime minister was addressing a news conference nearby.
It was clear Mr Junejo had not even been told in advance.
President Zia cited alleged corruption and lack of progress on Islamisation for dismissing Mr Junejo's government, but the former prime minister argued that General Zia could not tolerate his independence.
After losing power and suffering a humiliating defeat in the 1988 elections, he had little more than a spoiling role, thwarting attempts to dislodge him from the presidency of the Pakistan Moslem League, Pakistan's oldest political party.
His death comes amid a widening split in the party between his loyalists and supporters of Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, who leads a coalition government led by the PML and has been trying to take over the party leadership.
Mr Junejo was a conservative Muslim whose wife, following strict Islamic traditions, did not join him in public appearances.
He had five children and his hobby was hunting.
Posy longs to come out of her shell
SHE's brown-eyed, middle-aged and has a passion for shell-suits…but one thing is missing in her life — a swarthy Mediterranean lover.
Now the country's newest dating agency is seeking a suitable partner for 45-year-old Posy, a spurthighed tortoise which knows that spring is in the air.
Crealy Country, an adventure farm at Clyst St Mary, Devon, was planning yesterday to bring romance into Posy's life by opening Slow Date, the country's first Tortoise Dating Agency.
Helen Jackson, a ranger said yesterday: ‘We have got one or two male Mediterranean tortoises that are raring to go, but we would like to get some more for Posy.
‘The trouble is that ever since the mid-80s, when it became illegal to import them, tortoise numbers have fallen.
‘People often don't know how to look after them and their pet tortoise doesn't survive hibernation.’
Every tortoise will be given a Spring MoT to make sure it is in good condition.
Owners will also receive an information card giving the animal's statistics, weight, sex and species, plus a fact sheet with tips on care throughout the year.
‘We will let Posy have a look at the male tortoises we have got on Sunday to see if she likes the look of them,’ said Ms Jackson.
Crealy Country, which eventually wants to build up a data bank on tortoises, can be contacted on 0395 233200.
Mansell scores instant Indy success
THE world motor racing champion, Nigel Mansell, stormed to a remarkable record-breaking victory in his debut Indycar grand prix in Australia yesterday.
But he said afterwards that he still had a lot to learn about driving an Indycar.
After a victorious debut in the Australian grand prix at Surfers Paradise, Queensland, Mansell said that the next race in Phoenix, Arizona, on 4 April would be a venture into the unknown.
Mansell made a stunning start to his Indycar career, winning the 65-lap race through the streets of the holiday resort in a record time of just over 1hr 52min.
‘There's a lot to learn.
You can't compare it to anything that Formula 1 does,’ he said.
On pole after setting a lap record during the qualifying session, Mansell became the first rookie driver to win his first Indy grand prix since the late Graham Hill won the Indianapolis 500 in 1966.
It was also the 1992 Formula 1 champion's first victory on Australian soil.
‘I can't remember the last time I enjoyed racing like that,’ a jubilant Mansell told reporters.
Mansell now moves from street circuits to the high speed one-mile oval raceway at Phoenix.
‘It's a different science on an oval and that's going to be the biggest challenge in two weeks’ time.
At least the road circuit is similar to what I've known all my career.’
Mansell said he would go to Phoenix with an open mind.
‘If I'm reasonably competitive I'll be happy and, if I'm not, I've got to work harder.’
Emerson Fittipaldi, who finished five seconds behind Mansell on Sunday after a tough duel, said his rival would find oval racing a challenge.
‘It is a very demanding, very intense type of driving,’ said the Brazilian, who switched to Indycars in 1984 after two Formula 1 titles.
‘In a high-speed oval you have to be very smooth, very precise.
It is not forgiving.
You cannot make a mistake.’
Mansell, however, made several errors during Sunday's race — his first drive since quitting Formula 1 last year in a row with team manager, Frank Williams, over his 1993 contract.
His car barely made it across the finish line, spluttering and choking, before the fuel supply dried up.
Mansell also breached a race rule just 15 laps in, had a puncture, clipped a barrier wall and left a streak of burning rubber when he roared out of the pits on cold tyres.
He also suffered severe cramps in his right foot because the brake pedals were too sharp.
‘It's my first race so there's a few things I've got to work on,’ Mansell said.
‘I'm just delighted with what we have done.
We have not had a trouble-free run.’
Robby Gordon, one of the sport's young tigers, who closely tailed the two big names to score third place, was undaunted by Mansell's performance.
‘He's beatable,’ said the 24-year-old Californian, in his first full-time series in Indycars.
AC Milan surrender record
THE Italian champions and runaway first division leaders, AC Milan, surrendered their record 58-match unbeaten league run yesterday when they lost 1-0 at home to Parma.
It was Milan's first league defeat since they lost 2-1 at Bari on 19 May, 1991.
Colombian forward Faustino Asprilla struck the only goal with a superbly placed free kick in the 58th minute against an injury-weakened Milan.
The previous record had been set by Fiorentina, who went 40 league games without defeat in 1955-56.
Milan coach Fabio Capello did not share the belief they would be able to play more freely now the record was gone.
He said: ‘Defeat is never a liberation.
I prefer victories which charge you up — but we had to lose eventually.’
Milan lead the table by nine points from city rivals Inter, who won 2-0 at Juventus.
— Reuter
Hastings hot favourite to lead Lions
By Norman Mair
LONG before England came such a cropper at Lansdowne Road, there were many besides the Scots among the British rugby fraternity who were already positive that Gavin Hastings would be revealed this morning as the Lions' captain for the forthcoming tour of New Zealand.
Had England this season won a third successive Grand Slam under Will Carling, it would have been mighty difficult to go against his record.
Yet there were many even among his admirers who acknowledged that there were latent dangers in having the country who were certain to provide the numerically strongest contingent additionally furnishing not just the manager and assistant coach but also the captain.
When the erstwhile All Blacks' captain, Wayne Shelford, was asked on Saturday evening if the appointment of Gavin Hastings, assuming it transpired, was to be seen as a victory for the Celtic fringe, he answered simply that it would have an awful lot more to do with his having some decidedly impressive credentials.
An outstanding player, said Shelford, who was not just popular throughout the rugby firmament but who had the respect of players everywhere and not least in the Land of the Long White Cloud.
The strapping Scotland full back's own cheerful confidence has  always been infectious while Ian McGeechan was known to have been much struck by the esprit de corps he had engendered in a Scotland XV who but recently had undergone some drastic changes of personnel.
‘Gavin,’ noted McGeechan, ‘speaks to everyone — senior players, new caps, replacements, whoever — not because it is the thing to do but because that's the kind of bloke he is.
It comes naturally to him.’
On the field, Hastings had his problems at Twickenham after the loss of Craig Chalmers, who does so much to give the midfield defence its integrity and coherence.
Against that, coach Ian McGeechan would contend that the captain deserved no small measure of credit for the way Scotland refused to buckle, actually winning the last quarter when all England were looking for a scoring holocaust.
Hastings will be the fourth Scot to captain the Lions since the Second World War in succession to the late Arthur Smith in South Africa in 1962; Mike Campbell-Lamerton in New Zealand in 1966 and Finlay Calder in Australia in 1989 when the combination of a Scotland captain and coach ended triumphant.
It was football's Joe Mercer who said that the time not to be old is when you lose because age is such a convenient scapegoat.
Undeniably the birth certificates of such as Jeff Probyn, Wade Dooley, Mike Teague and Peter Winterbottom have taken on a new significance since 4.30pm on Saturday.
As for Ireland, they will, understandably enough, be looking for their reward.
The two fresh contenders of greatest interest, if only because they were not even in the side when Scotland trounced Ireland at Murrayfield, are Peter Clohessy on the tight-head — a player who incurred the wrath of Australia's Bob Dwyer but who was held to have made quite an impact on the Lions' top brass versus Wales — and the young stand-off, Eric Ellwood.
Aside from his kicking, Ellwood, the player who has done most to transform the Irish season, has shown that he can also break.
Again, he has been prepared to be physical when the necessity arose while his choice of options has been admirable for one so short of international experience.
But Geoff Cooke and company will have had to draw a deep breath, and had need of all their courage, if they have picked him ahead of Rob Andrew as the other stand-off to Stuart Barnes.
Not that the Irish manager, Noel Murphy, has too many doubts: ‘If only the Irish selectors had chosen him for their second game instead of bringing him in halfway through the campaign, he would be inked in by now.’
David Sole, Page 21
Roxburgh fumes over farce Call-offs hit squad for German friendly By Hugh Keevins
SCOTLAND's national coach, Andy Roxburgh, broke his silence yesterday and criticised the system that has caused the decimation of his squad for Wednesday's match against the World champions, Germany, at Ibrox.
Nine players — Goram, McPherson, Robertson, McCall, Durrant and McCoist (all Rangers), McStay (Celtic), McLeish (Aberdeen) and Malpas (Dundee United)— have been withdrawn because of injury.
Six others — Irvine and Smith (Aberdeen), McKinlay, Main, McInally and Bowman (all Dundee United)— have been called up as replacements.
Consequently, none of the 13 players who took part in the European Championship tie against Germany in Sweden ten months ago, remains in Roxburgh's plans.
It is obviously a ridiculous state of affairs and the national coach found himself asking two pertinent questions as he came to terms with loss on a farcical scale.
‘What I want to know first of all is does the national team have an important role to play?’ he said.
‘Secondly, what do other countries do to protect their national sides because nobody has the problems Scotland suffer from.’
Roxburgh made it clear that he was not making any implied criticism of an individual club or manager and certainly not Rangers' Walter Smith for taking out every Ibrox player originally at Scotland's disposal.
‘I know that people are not going out of their way to create problems but I believe the national side has a great role to play in terms of providing players with status, confidence and a substantially increased market value.
‘It is also my job to protect the national side and our qualification for the World Cup finals hangs in the balance because of league structures and the problems posed by television.’
An Old Firm game played on the Saturday before an international match is clearly not an aid to Roxburgh and the fact that it was the 34th match of a gruelling 44-game championship did not escape his attention, either.
‘Stress related injuries caused by the nature of the league programme are a new phenomenon and who is to say that all of those who have had to call off from this match will not still be in the same position when we go to play Portugal in our next World Cup qualifying tie?’ said Roxburgh.
The national coach's belief is that at the next meeting of the SFA's International Committee the question of how club is currently strangling country has to be at the top of the agenda.
‘We must now bring ourselves into line with England and only play international matches on nights when they, too, have games.
‘That way there will be no complications of the sort created before our first sectional tie against Switzerland in Berne, when the absence of an England fixture meant a league game between Leeds and Manchester United being played for television's benefit three days before the international.’
That arrangement meant Brian McClair and Gary McAllister turned up to play for Scotland in something less than prime condition.
The excessively long Premier Division will remain in its present state next season, when Roxburgh's side will play the concluding games in World Cup qualifying Group I.
‘It is a bizarre situation.
What will the Germans think when they arrive in Glasgow with players still fresh from a ten-week break in the Bundesliga and a legislative system which means that if any of their players has called off from this game they must not play for their club sides next weekend?’
Roxburgh, however, will not have it that a combination of injury and English-based players being unavailable because of league commitments has rendered the match with Germany an irrelevance.
‘I said when I named the squad that the match provided an opportunity for someone to thrust himself into contention for a place in the squad to go to Lisbon next month.
‘Now, I am in the position where I will be blooding practically a whole new team.
If I get even one player out of this exercise, it will have been worthwhile.’
Roxburgh's unfailing optimism was re-inforced by an observation made by Celtic's Tommy Boyd.
‘I got my chance in the national side when injuries put me into the match against Romania in Bucharest three years ago.
This is another opportunity for someone else,’ remarked the player who is the only one to have taken part in all of Scotland's matches this season.
Roxburgh summed up the occasion by saying his team had ‘everything to gain and nothing to lose’, an ironic choice of phrase given the fact that the national coach had been up since 6.30am figuring out ways to compensate for loss.
Scots suffer in Fiji From Graham Law, Suva
SCOTLAND made an undistinguished exit from a sevens competition for the second successive week on Saturday in the Fiji international tournament.
The Scots failed to qualify from their pool for the main competition and suffered a heavy defeat in the plate but, as they left their hotel, there were words of consolation.
The Fijian captain, Waisale Serevi — whose side defeated the district of Suva 26-0 in the final — came to the Scots' hotel to say ‘thank-you, good-bye and good-luck,’ to the teams who had ventured to Fiji's first such tournament.
‘I hope to see you in Hong Kong,’ he chuckled to the American Eagles.
Incredibly, only three of the Fijian party on duty — naturally, including Serevi — travel to the colony for this weekend's tournament, indicative of the phenomenal sevens resources at the islanders' disposal.
IT was the morning after the night before in Fiji and dark glasses were being donned by many participants in the weekend's sevens tournament.
Not for pose value, you understand, rather to hide incriminating evidence.
Scotland, though, were not thus attired.
At 8.30am yesterday they departed for a one hour, speed endurance training session, completed before the temperature began its climb to 30 C.
That had always been the plan and was not some presbyterian purge on behalf of the coaches Douglas Morgan and John Jeffrey in retribution for Scotland's showing in the tournament, where, for the second successive week, they failed to qualify from their pool for the main competition and suffered a heavy defeat in the plate.
As the Scots returned to their hotel to shower, have breakfast, pack, then make the tortuous/scenic (delete depending on your viewpoint) four hour bus trip to Nadi — on a vehicle bearing the legend ‘Adventure and Endless Holidays,’ partially accurate, one suspects — a familiar figure ambled into the foyer.
The press corps, having opted for a £30, 35 minute flight, had time to dwell on the impact of this visitor.
He did not carry the gong with which he had been presented as player of the tournament but Fiji's captain Waisale Serevi — the nation having defeated the district of Suva 26-0 in the final — is not an individual who requires a calling card.
Instead, the diminutive conjuror had ‘come to say thank-you, good-bye and good-luck,’ to the teams who had ventured to Fiji's first such tournament.
‘I hope to see you in Hong Kong,’ he chuckled to the American Eagles.
Incredibly, only three of the Fijian party on duty — naturally, including Serevi — travel to the colony for this weekend's tournament, indicative of the phenomenal sevens resources at the islanders' disposal.
Mark you, we are told that only two of their winning squad on Saturday actually play any XVs!
As he talked, Serevi constantly flexed wrist levers, which might explain his upper-body strength, a pre-requisite for one of his stature (around 5ft 7ins) hereabouts.
There is, however, no earthly explanation for his imperious contributions on the rugby field.
Thankfully, as he demonstrated at the weekend — during which he claimed 91 points from nine tries and 23 conversions — they happen.
Scotland, one fears, are going to have to hope for some snell April blasts for the Fijians to feel uncomfortable at Murrayfield when the Rugby World Cup Sevens are staged next month.
At least the Scots were able to bid their farewells from Suva in better heart when the result from Dublin filtered through, John Jeffrey even suggesting that the air fare back to London to appear as a pundit on television's Rugby Special might just be worth paying to hear the reaction of some of his English chums!
No return, Page 21
Scotland lose nine for Ibrox friendly Andy Payton celebrates with team-mate Stuart Slater after scoring Celtic's second goal against Rangers to end the Ibrox side's 44-game unbeaten run.
Report, Page 24
Biggar are up to the task
HADDINGTON return to the McEwan's National League Division Two where they will be joined by newcomers Biggar following Saturday's resolution of a tense promotion struggle.
Biggar beat Royal High 29-6 with tries from Graham, Steel, Nisbet and Brown and three conversions and a penalty from Lavery.
Hutchesons/Aloysians' victory by 31-13 at Union Park against Corstorphine was not enough and they were edged out of the race on points difference.
Gordonians were second bottom of Division Three before Saturday but they came good in the final game, defeating Morgan Academy 29-0 to leap-frog the Dundee club.
Perthshire passed Morgan with a 48-7 win over relegated St Boswells to send Morgan to Division Three.
Alloa, with a 52-0 victory over Cambuslang, and Livingston, with a 14-13 win against Linlithgow, stay in Division Four but Linlithgow will have to wait for the result of Cartha Queen's Park's final match before their fate is known against the already relegated Lismore.
If Cartha lose by more than 53 points to Lismore on Saturday they will go down.
Waysiders will accompany Moray out of Division Five after only drawing 5-5 in their final match at Glenrothes.
Aberdeen University defeated Rosyth Civil Service 24-19 in the play-off between the winners of the North League and the Midlands League for entry to Division Seven next season.
Annan won the West League and they will also play in the National League in September.
French flourish adds polish to trophy triumph From Chris Thau, Paris France 26 Wales 10
THE decision to take the Five Nations trophy to Paris before Saturday's match, strongly criticised by some sections of the English media, was fully vindicated after an exhilarating display by the French.
The emergence of a Five Nations cup, a handsome piece of silverware has signalled the end of an era.
The tournament is dead.
Long live the championship.
The old Five Nations competition, an unofficial series of matches was put to rest on Saturday.
Enter the new championship, with a complicated set of rules designed to promote an outright winner at the end of it.
As far as the game in Paris was concerned, the only lingering doubts before kick-off concerned the margin of the French victory.
As the Welsh had been written off even by their most loyal supporters, the French media was at pains to try to explain to their bemused readership the concept of points differential, in other words point out that in order to win the cup France had to score at least as many points as England had in Dublin.
With England being sorely demolished, the decision to take the trophy to Paris, strongly criticised by some sections of the English media, was fully vindicated.
Handed over to the Five Nations committee by its saviour Michael Davies — building contractor and exhibition organiser, the trophy commenced its official life once the content of five bottles of champagne was emptied in it, at the aftermatch function.
Without any shade of doubt, France deserved to win the first official Five Nations championship and — would have probably grabbed the Grand Slam as well — but for the Twickenham goal posts.
Wales started without inhibitions and proved equal to the French in enterprise in open play in particular.
They lacked the menacing physical edge of the French loose trio, however, which had inflicted terrible damage on Wales's budding stars.
The French back row in which a royal Philippe  Benetton , firing with all cylinders, seemed another product of the  Benetton Formula One production line was outstanding.
The French looses tackled the Welsh, admittedly naive enough to try to use backrow moves in the vicinity of the French line to a standstill.
The hardworking Richard Webster and the busy Emyr Lewis had been knocked backwards time and again, whenever they try to have a go at the French.
Despite that, Wales gathered momentum, once they tried to run around the French rather than confront them.
The Welsh ran in a beautiful try signed off by Nigel Walker following an impressive drive of the pack.
It was Wales's most accomplished performance of the season with their backs eager and capable of taking on their opposite numbers, despite poor service from fly-half Neil Jenkins.
By French standards, it was a unpolished performance lacking spark, adventure, not entirely entirely dissimilar to the one they produced against Scotland and England.
As far as Wales are concerned, the feeling afterwards was a sense of relief for being able to throw back at the French everything their opponents threw at them and a mood of confidence that their hard work is slowly paying dividends.
With the score 16-3 at half-time the French looked set to run riot in the second half.
After the break, though, the Welsh moved up a gear with the French slowing down by the equivalent amount.
Suddenly the balance was re-established.
It was a scrappy contest but nevertheless exciting as the news of the England disaster filtered through.
Asked what could be described as a difference between France's success and the rest of the Five Nations, field coach Pierre Berbizier stated: ‘It is the cup.’
He may have intended to use the symbolic value of the trophy to emphasise France's achievements.
In the end, he only emphasised what everyone had long suspected that there was not much of a difference between the winner of the championship and those languishing in the back seats.
France break free in face of low resistance
By Norman Mair Scotland A19 France29
THE scoreline from Rubislaw, Aberdeen, is a lie but not the try-tally of 5-1.
Scotland did worst where, especially in the full-scale internationals at Murrayfield, the French have come to expect them to do best.
The number of first tackles, which were missed, rendered null and void any ambitions Scotland may have had about denying France space.
The rugged David McIvor — at No8 on the Scottish scrum feed but on the flank on France's — was the one man who showed any real propensity for knocking men back in the tackle.
Often he was fighting a lonely battle.
There was no getting away from the fact that, as a unit, the Scotland back row were so disjointed as to be at times perilously close to a vacuum.
Ian Smith had a very good season for Scotland in 1992 and no one can ever take that away from him.
Moreover, according to David Johnston, the Gloucester captain was still knocking 'em back in the tackle in Australia last summer on Scotland's short tour.
However, this season he has been nothing like as unequivocal in the tackle and, dating from his display for the Barbarians versus the Wallabies, he was patently losing ground with the powers that be.
Nor had he got the old dig back at Rubislaw.
Andy Macdonald has more going for him than merely the fact that he stands 6ft 8in.
So big a man is never going to be exactly nippy, but he is not slow and not without ball-sense.
The trouble is that he is not a natural core forward, which is partly why he has been shifted from lock, but neither has he as yet convinced too many that he has that instinctive reaction in terms of man and/or ball which enables the born flanker to do his stuff.
Those observations made, it should be said that the Herioter did have his moments in the lineout.
He did well in the middle but clearly appreciated the more rarefied atmosphere available toward the rear of the lineout where his height dissuaded the French from any real attempt to exploit Smith's lack of inches.
Ally Donaldson, to his credit, gave the impression of being grimly determined to answer those who say he doesn't tackle but he was not the naturally punitive defender who was so badly needed in view of the back row's shortcomings.
A Craig Chalmers, with his penchant for plugging holes, would have been invaluable.
All of which meant that there was a hole right through the middle of the Scottish defence.
Normally, one is rather relieved to see the opposition bringing the ball back inside but at Rubislaw it set the alarm bells clanging.
Scotland were under the greater pressure in the scrummage while their threatened superiority at the lineout evaporated as Yann Lemeur at the front and, to a lesser degree, Olivier Merle in the middle began to time their jump across the great divide that is the mandatory gap.
But the most damaging problem was the Scots' inability to cope with the driving mauls of Gaul.
What is more, it was not a case of France eventually delivering slow ball to their backs: rather was it a matter of mauls which erupted into a forward on the break.
Jean-Marc Lhermet, in particular, excelled when the man so sprung.
Some of Donaldson's punting was shrewdly angled and flighted but the wings scarcely saw the ball.
In midfield, in both attack and defence, the momentum was always with the French which also allowed them, when they so chose, to play out of the tackle.
Having won the toss, and chosen to play into a headwind,
Scotland opened promisingly but Benoit Bellot's downwind, downfield punting made it difficult for the home side to sustain pressure.
From a lineout maul, Fabien Galthie broke on Donaldson, forcing Douglas Wyllie to take Bellot.
Jean-Charles Larran danced through for the opening try which Bellot converted.
Johnston faulted his defence for being too flat in that, as an outside centre himself, the A team's coach is quick to focus on the  insufficient depth which gives the player in that berth no chance to cover such a thrust by the opposition's inside centre.
Good handling allowed Larran to send in Fabien Bertrank on the overlap and then, from a scrum, Sylvan Dispagne picked up and fed Galthie breaking on the blind for Bertrank's second try.
Bellot retired, blood streaming from a head wound.
His  replacement , Frederic Labit, settled at once, figuring in the killer blow soon after half-time.
The visitors, in some contrast to their opponents, had the ability to run the ball out of deep defence against the wind.
From a failed dropped goal by Donaldson, against the frailest of follow-up tackling, Jean-Luc Sadourny detonated a counter-  attack .
The free-running flanker, Leon Llopy, made a deep incision.
Labit and Sebastian Morizot were backing up and, when the sortie was checked, the ball was flipped out to Laurent Arbo who went over in the corner.
Labit kicked a cruel goal across the face of the wind.
That made it 24-0 and the game effectively over and yet there were as many points to come.
Two penalty goals by Donaldson preceded France's fifth try, Galthie pouncing as the ball squirted from the side of Scotland's scrum.
As Johnston said, it was bad luck on Dave Millard who had begun brilliantly and who, though eventually submerged by force of  circumstances , had still shown Johnston a player he evidently never saw in Australia.
Another brace of penalty goals from Donaldson and, finally, a conversion from that same boot after Millard, from a tap free-kick, had given to Kenny Logan who swung through to score.
That swashbuckling youngster, though, had had more than one mishap and continues to look, at least at this juncture, less like an international full-back than a wing in exile.
McIvor: lonely battle
Scots set to decline return ticket to Fiji
SCOTLAND will be invited to return to the Fiji international Sevens next year but are unlikely to accept.
Logistics will simply not allow it.
Fijian RFU executive committee member, Seleni Vuetaki, said last night: ‘They will always be welcome and we will try to get the Pommies along too.
We also want to invite other leading nations, South Africa and Argentina.’
That the standard of the Fiji tournament — which according to such a seasoned sevens campaigner as the Scots' assistant coach, John Jeffrey, reached unprecedented highs — was beyond question.
The fact that Fiji and five of her district sides occupied quarter-final places was ample testimony, too, to the clout of sevens in these parts.
Scotland coach, Douglas Morgan, believes sevens have their place ‘but within our calendar it's very difficult to compete at this level’.
Fifteen-a-sides, rightly in my view, will always be more important but the fact that sevens could be used to improve handling skills — which, pity on us, lie dormant for most of the domestic league programme — is unequivocal on the evidence of here and Canberra last week.
Whatever the mitigating circumstances — the heat, effects of jetlag and an injury to Mark Appleson — Scotland did not make a very good fist of it on Saturday when they lost their pool match to Western Samoa and were then tumbled out of the plate 38-5 by New Zealand.
Following on from the second half of their previous pool game — against Nadroga — Scotland enjoyed five minutes of possession against Samoa yet could manufacture only one clear-cut chance.
Andy Nicol scything through the middle — as he sensed the outside pass to Tony Stanger was blocked — looked as if he would be able to detonate Stanger on the inside thrust, but as Nicol was clobbered, the ball ballooned off Stanger's shoulder.
Gregor Townsend later managed to pass to the referee — clad in near identical colours to the Scots — for the Samoans to plunder ball and scuttle in for the first of their three tries, though it might have been more had we not seen defensive heroics typified by a timely tackle on Leilane Une by Derek Turnbull.
To compound matters, the Scots lost Appleson with a back spasm during that tie, the London Scot having been bothered with the problem since training on an undulating pitch earlier in the week.
The management intend he will remain with the party, though obviously the lengthy bus journey to Nadi yesterday as the prelude to a three-and-a-half hour flight to Sydney today, could have a detrimental effect.
The Scots will rest in Sydney before flying to Hong Kong tomorrow and Morgan said the time would be ‘well-used’ as far as treatment for Appleson was concerned.
Michael Dods replaced Appleson and retained his place for the plate match with New Zealand, for which, happily, there was some cloud cover from the blazing sun.
Dods moved to stand-off, Townsend switching to centre during the New Zealand contest, in which the Scots conceded four first-half tries to Peter Woods (2), Todd Wolf and Todd Blackadder, three virtually straight from kick-offs where Townsend could not match the looping flight the Fijians achieved.
The scores also illustrated a recurring problem on this sevens tour — the Scots' physique puts them at great disadvantage in terms of weight of tackle.
Blackadder and Wolf crossed in the second-half, when Scotland were at least able to ensnare some ball for Nicol, Dods and  Townsend to release Stanger for a try, his second distinguishing act of the tie, having earlier pulled off a try-saving tackle.
Turnbull had to retire with a shoulder knock in the second half but he was so drained and short of breath that he could not finish his sentence.
‘All he could say,’ explained Jeffrey, ‘was get some ice for my…‘
The major tournaments are now looming, Hong Kong this weekend and the World Cup Sevens at Murrayfield less than a month away, but Morgan remained adamant there is no need to feel gloomy about Scotland's cause.
‘We know what we are up against now.
I do not think come this weekend either that we will have any worries about being able to last the pace,’ he asserted.
Additional priorities must be to encourage the players to express some individual flair and support those who are prepared to have a go rather than just retain possession which Scotland did achieve against Samoa for long enough.
This weekend and, back home, the Kilmarnock tournament on Sunday when the likes of Brian Renwick, Rob Wainwright, David Millard, Ian Jardine, Mark Moncrieff, Kenny Milligan and Graham Shiel might be expected to feature, will be the selectors last chance to assess candidates for the ten for the World Cup Sevens, who must be named by 31 March.
Irish make a rich stew of England's best From Nick Cain, Dublin Ireland17 England3
THERE was a time when, with other sides refusing to travel to Dublin because of‘the Troubles’ and English skipper declared after a drubbing on Irish soil, ‘We may not be any good — but at least we turn up.’
But in the age of the new super-fit, streamlined, red-white-and-blue ‘designer’ England, John Pullin's wry comment has looked badly dated.
Indeed, it has seemed of recent times, that all England needed to do to win in Dublin was just to turn up.
That was certainly the prevalent mood when England, confident of again sorting out the beleaguered Irish, and at least making the French work for the Five Nations Cup, took the field at Lansdowne Road with a side apparently brimful with Lions for New Zealand.
Eighty torrid minutes later Michael Bradley's Irish side had totally re-written the script with a performance of unremitting passion and fury.
Ireland were magnificent.
Manager Noel Murphy said: ‘Irish rugby is special — without us the Five Nations might be quite dreary.
A win like this is a tonic for the tournament.’
He was also bullish about Ireland's Lions hopefuls: ‘The selectors will have to pay very serious attention to today's very serious result.
This has been a very fine England side over the years, but I think there will be many more Irish players in the party than were mooted at the beginning of the season.’
Where Ireland's performance was a fanfare for a bright future, England's was more like a requiem mass.
The unshakeable commitment of the Irish pack in totally outplaying their vaunted English counterparts was typified by Mick Galwey.
Not only did the sturdy lock crown a storming performance by bullocking over for a try in the final minute, he undoubtedly played himself into a Lions place.
Taking pride of place with Galwey was fly-half Eric Elwood, who, playing in only his second international, displayed the cool head and maturity of a veteran.
He added to his first-half penalty with two second-half drop goals and landed a further penalty.
Others who could have booked their passages to New Zealand are the props Popplewell and Clohessy and No8 Robinson.
On this evidence, however, almost as strong a case could be made for Johns, Kingston and O'Hara — although the last two named have said they are unavailable to tour.
The measure of Ireland's forward effort was that they dominated the English pack despite a final lineout count that finished 28-16 in England's favour.
But England could do nothing with the advantage because of the ferocity and speed with which the Irish forwards hammered whichever luckless Englishman was left to tidy up the tap.
Will Carling said: ‘There just seemed to be no way through.
Their tackling was absolutely incredible.’
Time and again the English ball carrier was either hurled back or buried in the tackle.
It is, however, a much better thing for the Lions that England's formerly mighty but now creaking pack should have been found out at Lansdowne Road rather than in the Land of the Long White Cloud.
The Lions selectors have an impassioned Irish performance to thank for that — and, according to coach Gerry Murphy, a little divine inspiration: ‘We were going to keep it a secret,’ he quipped, ‘but we spent last weekend in Lourdes’.
Full stretch: England's Wade Dooley towers over his opposite number to get to a lineout ball first at Landsdowne Road, where English hopes of the Five Nations title were grounded
Practising with pleasure if not always profit
Publicly at least, Hogan — now an octogenarian — only once gave tongue to that exultant ‘I've got it!’ claim.
In his case, not only did the uncovered secret last but he sold it to Life magazine for what was in 1955 the veritable king's ransom of $25,000.
Alas, one knows only too well that if Life magazine had had to cough up just one dollar for every time one has oneself cried ‘Eureka’, or its golfing counterpart, that American publication would have been bled dry.
World champions in big demand despite pile-up of fixtures
Scots are not blameless
Sir,— I am impelled to reply to Mike Aitken's article on hooligans (15 March).
In the time-honoured fashion of Scots journalism, he indulges in the deification of Scottish supporters at the expense of their English counterparts.
Ibrox may be immune to the pitch invasion that occurred at Maine Road, but violence and intimidation are not exclusively physical, and every Saturday Scottish football grounds resound to racial and sectarian chants, most with violent overtones.
Moreover, as a resident of Edinburgh, and a fervent rugby supporter, I am at pains to understand how the Twickenham experiences described in the article are excluded from the ‘civilised’ experiences to be gained at other Five Nations venues.
On their last two visits to Edinburgh, I have seen English supporters exposed to extreme intimidation and provocation.
Is spitting, bottle-throwing and verbal abuse civilised behaviour?
As Mr Aitken almost points out, the perpetrators were unlikely to be genuine rugby supporters, but this is unfortunately a result of the national team's success and the unhealthy Anglophobia nurtured by much of the Scottish press.
Goram's looking after number one Andy Goram is having the time of his life with Rangers and Scotland, but the road to the top has been strewn with pitfalls.
Hugh Keevins meets the colourful goalkeeper
ANDY GORAM's biography, Scotland's For Me, was published in 1990.
And then the story began.
A career that spanned seven years at Oldham and four years with Hibs can now be seen only as preparation for the place where, and the time when, Goram would reach a higher plane of achievement.
It may be thought the height of irony that Rangers' goalkeeper should demand this much attention at a club so dominant Goram has known domestic defeat only six times in 18 months since going to Ibrox from Easter Road for £1 million.
However, Saturday's setback at Celtic Park marked the first time in a year Goram had been in a losing Rangers team (he was injured when Dundee won at Dens Park in August), and the assured nature of his performances at domestic, European and international level have helped gather an army of voters who could make the goalkeeper the first since Hamish McAlpine (in 1985) to win the Scottish Football Writers' Association Player of the Year award.
He would be only the second goalkeeper to be similarly honoured by the Scottish Professional Footballers' Association (Theo Snelders, in 1989, was the other).
Andy Roxburgh, Scotland's national coach, says his goalkeeper's main attributes are ‘hard work, attention to diet and a phenomenal willingness to learn’.
It would be not unreasonable to point out that the first two qualities have, by Goram's own admission, had to be learned the hard way by the man whose marriages to Rangers and Tracy, his wife of the last two years, have re-shaped his professional and private life.
‘If it had not been for Tracy, I would not be a professional footballer any more.
I would be an 18 stone, alcoholic bricklayer playing for Penicuik Athletic,’ says Goram with the mixture of candour and humour that characterises his conversation.
Such personal analysis does not come much more intense this side of the psychiatrist's couch, but Goram knows the kind of person he is dealing with.
‘I was always the type to be easily led.
As a kid at Oldham, I took over from a long-established fixture in the side at Boundary Park, Peter McDonald, and had most of my mistakes during games forgiven because I was so young.
‘Off the field, though, I went through all the youthful, Jack the Lad nonsense that comes before getting sorted out.
‘My good fortune lay in working with great men who were patient with me and taught me good habits that were never to be forgotten.
‘I did not feel guilty about having to be kicked up the arse.
I was a teenager, prone to the daftness that goes with that age group, and knew no better.
It was men like Joe Royle, the manager, and his assistant, the former Scotland full back, Willie Donachie, who taught me better.’
Craig Brown, the assistant to Andy Roxburgh, recalls the two men going to watch Goram — first capped by Alex Ferguson against East Germany at Hampden in 1985 — play for Oldham at the start of their stewardship of the national side seven years ago.
‘Joe (Royle) sat with us and kept leaning over to praise Goram by saying things like, ‘He's a terrific cricketer, you know.
Anything that involves hand to eye co-ordination, Andy's your boy’.’
However, Goram had to be patient while Jim Leighton, the man in possession of Scotland's goalkeeping jersey, entered the SFA's Hall of Fame and then departed the top flight under circumstances his room-mate for six years on foreign trips calls ‘disgraceful’.
Goram is a self-confessed amalgam of the best bits he has taken from Leighton, Alan Rough, the extrovert personality he replaced at Easter Road, and Alan Hodgkinson, the five times capped former England goalkeeper who has been his mentor since Oldham, and now works with the Scottish team.
‘Goalkeeping is about learning,’ he says.
‘Even losing a goal is occasionally good for you because it brings you back to earth and helps you retain a sense of vulnerability.’
That lesson was fully absorbed when Walter Smith took over as Rangers' manager and made Goram his first domestic signing — and the only Scottish goalkeeper ever to have cost a seven-figure sum.
It was a conversation with the manager in his office that completed Goram's transformation from outstanding prospect to the reliable goalkeeper now being spoken of as without peer in Britain.
‘While I was at Hibs, I had frequently watched Rangers on television and noticed Chris Woods having to make only a couple of saves per game.
I thought to myself, ‘I fancy a bit of that if the chance ever comes up’.
‘Once I got to Ibrox, the reality was entirely different.
I had no conception of what it was like to play for an honest-to-god institution until Walter put me straight.
‘In the first place, he threatened to sell me before I had made my Rangers debut, and I had no reason to believe that he was kidding, either.
‘My weight was 14st 4lb, and Walter said that if I did not lose a stone while Rangers were at their pre-season training camp in Italy he would sell me and keep Chris.’
The reduction in Goram's size was matched by the slender margin for error he showed in his opening spell at Ibrox, losing only one goal in his first nine games for Rangers.
The player knew he was still combating dressing-room uncertainty and terracing doubts over his capabilities as well, when he made the mistake against Sparta Prague at Ibrox in the European Cup which meant his club's elimination, and another trip up the marble stairway to see Smith.
‘The manager treats his players like adults and if you do right by him he will do right by you,’ Goram points out.
‘I had no idea of Rangers’ enormity and the depth of the supporters' expectations, and Walter put me straight on both counts.’
The days of being the last one to leave any night out —‘I was the sort who was afraid he was missing out on something’— were then at an end.
Last Christmas, I had to ask Goram to nominate his Book of the Year.
The choice was Floyd on Hangovers, a series of recipes to help the serious toper get through the morning after the night before.
The goalkeeper swore he had read the book out of interest and through no need of practical assistance.
‘I don't go to pubs any more,’ says the man whose well-publicised scrapes on the road to better behaviour meant that the journey from the penalty box to the witness box was not unfamiliar.
Goram, like the rest of the Ibrox playing staff, understands that his club could be on the verge of something exceptional in their history, and wants to be able to remember everything.
‘I have not known team spirit like the kind which exists in our dressing-room,’ he says.
‘Our long, unbeaten run was not a burden, only an inspiration to us all.
‘I could never have dreamed of the European Cup final at Oldham or Easter Road.
Now, it frightens me what could lie in store for this Rangers team.’
Testing the team's potential has cost the goalkeeper, by order of the Ibrox management, the enjoyment of his alternative sporting pursuit, cricket, but that is a small price to pay.
Still only 28 years old, Goram is imbued with the belief that his best days in the goalkeeping position that respects age have yet to come, and will be experienced over the next three years.
Almost inevitably, though, there is a tinge of regret to accompany the most satisfactory days of his career on and off the field.
‘I lost my father before I signed for Rangers and his death had a devastating effect on me since we had always been so close, and not simply because he had been a professional goalkeeper in his time,’ Goram said.
‘It is my deepest regret that my dad was not spared to see, and enjoy, all that is happening to me.’
A child, named Lewis after his father, was born to Goram and his wife 18 months ago, and added another stabilising dimension to the life of a player now consumed by the need to make the most of the gifts that were handed down from father to son.
‘If it had not been for (my wife) Tracy, I would not be a professional any more.
I would be an 18 stone, alcoholic bricklayer playing for Penicuik Athletic’
ALLAN MILLIGAN
Time for reflection: Andy Goram now knows ‘what it is like to play for an honest-to-god institution’ after some words of wisdom from Walter Smith.
‘The manager treats his players like adults.
If you do right by him he will do right by you’
White-collar champions punch holes in widely-held theory Brian Donald strikes a lethal blow against the view that hungry and socially deprived fighters are in a class of their own
HUNGRY fighters are the best boxers, right?
Wrong!
An excess of nutrition has produced as many great fighters as hunger or poverty ever did.
The ‘hungry fighter theory’— the idea that the best boxers were those from socially deprived backgrounds — is at best an ill-considered half-truth.
Bobby Neill, who won a British featherweight title in the 1950s and went on to play a significant role in the development of such top-class boxers as Alan Rudkin and Alan Minter, has said: ‘…hungry fighters?
What a load of crap!
I was the middle-class son of a comfortably well-off Glasgow bookie — I was even educated at George Heriot's in Edinburgh.’
The view is endorsed by the former World Boxing Council lightweight champion, Ken Buchanan, the only British winner of the prestigious American award, the Edward J Neil Trophy For Boxing Excellence.
‘I agree entirely,’ Buchanan says.
‘My father was a white-collar dental worker, we lived in a council house sure, but I never knew hunger or deprivation ever!
Look at rugby.
That's a tough, brutal sport traditionally played in England and Scotland by the sons of the wealthy who invented it — so talk of hunger breeding the best fighters is garbage.’
When Neill and Buchanan challenge what is many boxing fans' most cherished theory, it is worth delving into the social backgrounds of all the world champions and many leading contenders.
If we take British world title winners by decade from 1892 onwards to the present, the picture that emerges not only refutes the hungry fighter theory, but suggests that better living standards produce more world champions than poverty does.
The so-called Hungry Thirties when social deprivation was rampant produced only three British world champions — exactly the same as the ‘affluent society’ decade of 1952-1962.
Economic historians agree that the period of 1910-1920 was one of boom and rising living standards in Britain, yet this decade produced nine world champions — three times the number of the Thirties.
Nobody would argue that Britons in the decade 1982-1992 enjoyed living standards that 1930s world champions, Benny Lynch and Jackie Brown, would have regarded as being beyond the average working man's reach, yet this period of comparative prosperity produced 11 British world champions: the greatest number per decade in British boxing history.
The welfare state decades of 1952-1972 saw the rise of two of Britain's greatest ever amateur and professional boxers — Dick McTaggart and Ken Buchanan, who did not have deprived childhoods despite their working-class origins.
The truth is that gluttony has produced as many world champions and outstanding contenders.
Champions such as Joe Frazier and Willie Pastrano first entered gyms because they wanted to lose weight.
World middleweight champions Mickey Walker and Joey Giardello both came from solid middle-class homes, but fought like cavemen in the ring.
Indeed, ever since the Queensberry era began in 1892 every weight division has had a high proportion of middle-class world champions and contenders — men for whom deprivation was having T-bone steaks only twice instead of thrice a week [see table].
This is confirmed by the following table of world-class champions and contenders from middle-class backgrounds.
These 15 champions and contenders have been deliberately chosen to cover all eras of the modern game.
Perhaps most significantly of all, three of boxing's all-time greats — Ali, Robinson and Armstrong — were born into comfortable circumstances.
Anyone still not convinced that the hungry fighter theory is flawed should consider then the case of Irish-American ring great, Jimmy McLarnin.
McLarnin told American boxing writer, Peter Heller, in 1971: ‘I had $100,000 in the bank in 1926 when I was just 19 years old!’
That sum equates to half a million pounds at today's values — and this was six years before his two epic ring struggles with Barney Ross, so whatever motivated ‘Baby Face’ McLarnin to box Ross, it wasn't poverty or money.
So much for a romantic myth that has given Hollywood scriptwriters a nice living.
If that nice middle-class boy, Muhammad Ali, is truly The Greatest, then nobody can argue that social deprivation is a necessity for ring greatness.
Ken Buchanan: one of Britain's finest had a comfortable background
Payton places more pressure on Rangers Celtic 2 Rangers 0
By Hugh Keevins
A SENSE of perspective is not among the distinguishing features of the Old Firm follower.
There is an habitual inability to see the logical wood for the emotional trees, as the less discerning will have been proving since the final whistle sounded at Celtic Park.
For those Celtic supporters who have had to tread a thin line between desperation and devastation this season, there was no inclination to do anything other than wallow in it being their team who had put an end to Rangers long, unbeaten run.
Those of a nervous disposition among the Ibrox following, meanwhile, are now rendered uneasy by the approach of a Scottish Cup semi-final against Hearts and the Champions League match in Marseille four days later (7 April) that sees separated Rangers from the European Cup Final by only 90 minutes.
The impartial observation able to be made is that, in both cases, it is a question of where the clubs go from here and too early to jump to any conclusions.
Beating Rangers for the first time in a year (the first time for two years at home) did nothing other than give a long suffering Celtic support one night of remission.
In the cold light of day Celtic's win will have been seen to do nothing other than reduce the gap between them and Rangers in the Premier Division from 12 to ten points, which is hardly the signal for predicting immediate transformation within the club bereft of a trophy since 1989.
What happens to the rest of Rangers' season can only be determined by medical examination rather than any other form of analysis.
Injury and suspension could now give Walter Smith's team a vulnerability on two fronts that tests even their noticeable capacity for ignoring logic and achieving results that fly in the face of realism.
Richard Gough's absence yet again would have to be a cause for concern, while the knee injury that prompted Ian Durrant's withdrawal from Scotland's squad was said by his manager to be ‘quite bad’, an ominous sounding observation that passed almost un-noticed while Smith went through a lengthy sick list that will be worsened, whatever the recovery rate of some, by the automatic loss of Mark Hateley in Marseille after his sending off against FC Brugge.
It is the fervent hope of most Celtic supporters that Rangers are eliminated from Europe, of course, so that their team retains the distinction of being the only one from Scotland ever to have won that trophy, albeit 26 years ago.
Nothing personal, you understand, simply a need to have something for themselves as well as proof that Rangers' millions can not guarantee them everything.
Even more basic, though, was the pressure on a Celtic team playing for their dignity and self respect and who did so in such a convincing manner that all diagnoses of the final result came back to the same conundrum, where does the level of commitment shown against Rangers go when Liam Brady needs it most?
The manager who has watched the same side go out of the Scottish Cup to the Premier Division's bottom club (Falkirk) while inflicting all manner of wounds on their championship prospects saw his players do well enough not to have their efforts diminished by dwelling on Rangers' inertia.
One afternoon did not blind Brady to the demands of the future, however.
‘I am under no illusions and therefore unlikely to get carried away,’ he said.
‘I need two new players to make the team more competitive and if I can get them we will be.
‘What we must have at the same time is a greater level of consistency and the kind of spirit that was evident against Rangers.’
Andy Payton and Stuart Slater showed, for example, that they may now have come to terms with the tribal ritual that is entitled to pass their understanding until time and circumstances dictate that they become as wound up as the rest.
Payton walked out on Celtic earlier in the season, miffed over being excluded from an Old Firm game.
He then missed a sitter during a subsequent defeat at Ibrox that probably made him wish he'd gone AWOL before that match, too.
On Saturday, Payton fluffed a simple chance then regained his composure to score the goal that ensured victory and finished up having to change his jersey because it was stained with the blood of a cut that required him to go off temporarily for stitches.
This is the stuff of which Old Firm heroes are made.
It is not so much what Celtic do against Rangers that is important, though, as the need for more careful attention to the rest of their programme.
By the same token, the rest of Rangers' programme is, however difficult the zealots may find this to understand, more important than the fleeting frustration of losing to their arch-rivals.
Yawning gaps on Tynecastle terracing Hearts 1 Hibernian 0
By Ian Wood
DEREK Ferguson crossed and John Robertson, at the near post, headed wide.
It wasn't the sensation of the season, but when 15 minutes have passed without anything else happening, such incidents cause quite a stir.
This one came just as eyelids were beginning to droop at Tynecastle on Saturday when Hearts and Hibs staged the latest in what has become a very long series of tedious confrontations.
More than 13,000 people turned up to watch, which is 10,000 more than the standard of play merited and the stadium had all the atmosphere of a crypt — a sad pass for a fixture which used to crackle with excitement and produce play of fire and skill.
Managers, who live in a constant state of anxiety, tend not to see games as others do and Joe Jordan duly declared himself happy enough with the result which, apart from extending Hearts' unbeaten run against their city rivals to 17, keeps them in contention for a place in Europe.
John Robertson was happy too, having scored the goal, his 19th in the meetings between the two teams.
The habit is so ingrained that even his crosses are going in, as happened on Saturday.
The Hibs defence, moving out after a corner kick, left Robertson completely clear on the left.
Derek Ferguson gave him the ball and the striker swung in a low cross which invited a diving header.
Ian Baird went for it and missed, but his flight across John Burridge's line of vision made things awkward for the Hibs goalkeeper who was caught off balance as the ball came through, bounced off his shoulder and into the net.
Hibs, in spite of losing Gordon Hunter through injury after 35 minutes, had more than held their own until then.
Their use of the ball out of defence — mainly through Brian Hamilton, with Willie Miller making himself available on the right — provided some of the game's less jarring moments.
Playing out of defence, however, was about as far as it went, though in the closing stages they produced the most sustained attacking football of the afternoon.
Not that it did them any good.
Darren Jackson missed the empty goal with a relatively simple chip and an effort from Keith Wright trundled all the way along the goal-line, struck a post and came out to Mickey Weir, whose shot was cleared off the line by Graeme Hogg.
For the rest, the two goalkeepers were as busy as bookends.
It says much for Robertson that in spite of the general disorder he still contrived to look dangerous and Craig Levein and Derek Ferguson strove to play properly as the rubbish raged around them.
It wasn't a dirty game but there were dozens of irritating fouls, several feuds and Jackson was booked for returning the ball to the referee with what the official deemed to be undue vigour.
Even the good deeds went wrong.
The sole truth: Hibs' Gordon Hunter tries to keep his chin up as Hearts striker Ian Baird leaps high in the Edinburgh derby at Tynecastle on Saturday
The sole truth: Hibs' Gordon Hunter tries to keep his chin up as Hearts striker Ian Baird leaps high in the Edinburgh derby at Tynecastle on Saturday
Thistle do not shrink from task Motherwell 2 Partick Thistle 3
By Mike McLean
PERHAPS it was the power of positive thought that produced this Thistle win, perhaps not.
But yet again the mercurial Maryhill men were transformed in the space of eight days from uninspired lethargy to inventive industry.
Assistant manager Gerry Collins suggested that a couple of sessions with leading psychologist Cathy Smith last week had had an effect.
Neither he nor manager John Lambie attended the sessions, but the players certainly appeared to have benefited from the wisdom that has already been used by Rangers and Liz McColgan, among others.
From being two down at half-time, Thistle stormed into the lead within 25 minutes, and seldom looked like losing it.
New signing Alex Taylor from Falkirk ‘made the other play and had a great game’, according to Collins, while recalled striker Colin McGlashen found renewed zest for the game.
After a stagnant half-hour the game sparked into life and Thistle quickly found themselves behind to a Kirk shot from a Davie Cooper cross, and a fine Paul McGrillen strike after magnificent work by Phil O'Donnell on the left.
Thistle climbed back into the frame when Ray Farningham fired in a 20-yarder from Don McVicar's pass after 56 minutes.
Seven minutes later, McGlashen reached a through ball on the corner of the box yards ahead of goalkeeper Sieb Dykstra and neatly flicked in the second with his head.
Another eight minutes and Willie Jamieson powered in a header from an Iain Cameron free kick to complete the reversal of fortunes.
What a shame Gerry Britton collected the only booking for celebrating Jamieson's goal over-zealously.
Needless to say, Motherwell manager Tommy McLean found it all hard to bear.
Whether Motherwell deserved to be two ahead at half-time was debatable, but McGrillen's strike was worth the admission money alone.
‘We were in charge at 2-0, but didn't start the second-half positively enough.
We gave Thistle the initiative, lost a goal, and then flapped.’
McLean's summation was nothing if not accurate.
They had chances to regain control at 2-1, the best when O'Donnell fired tamely past after a sweeping end-to-end move but Motherwell's composure had already gone.
Even before Thistle scored, Sammy Johnston had the ball in the Motherwell net, but was ruled offside.
Motherwell failed to heed the warning, and paid the penalty.
Perhaps they should also pay the psychologist.
Who said football was a simple game?
Martin keeps Airdrie in the party mood Falkirk0 Airdrie1
WITH Justin Fashanu's black tie do to look forward to on Saturday evening, this was just the result to put the Airdrie players in the party mood.
Not only was it their first victory since early December but it moved them above their vanquished opponents at the foot of the table.
Defeat could have left Airdrie isolated at the bottom but they displayed no fear in the face of a tepid Falkirk performance.
Now both sides seem destined to join Motherwell in a three-way struggle to avoid relegation.
There was a general air of desperation surrounding this match and as Airdrie manager Alex MacDonald conceded afterwards that is an environment in which the Broomfield men tend to flourish.
‘We've been playing for our survival for a year and a half now so we are used to it,’ he said.
The strain under which Airdrie are operating began to tell in the second half when Falkirk attempted to mount a fightback.
When all else failed however the visitors could always rely on goalkeeper John Martin to protect the points.
He made two outstanding saves from Neil Duffy headers to ensure that Airdrie prevailed.
‘I shut my eyes for the second one,’ joked MacDonald.
‘That's what he gets paid for but it's giving me more grey hairs.’
Ironically Martin's opposite number Ian Westwater was, by contrast, guilty of the error which brought about Andy Smith's 23rd-minute winner.
He failed to hold an  innocuous drive from the edge of the box by Gus Caesar and Andy Smith reacted swiftly to despatch the rebound into the net.
Aberdeen show they can sit on defence Dundee1 Aberdeen2
THE well-publicised exploits of Duncan Shearer, Eoin Jess, Mixu Paatelainen, Scott Booth and others in compiling a total of 71 Premier Division goals for Aberdeen to date this season have tended to mask the contribution made by a miserly Pittodrie defence.
The score at Dens Park and Parkhead decreed that Willie Miller's defence has now conceded fewer goals than any other club in the top flight of the Scottish game, the Aberdeen rearguard having been breached only 26 times.
That fact was not lost on Dundee player-manager Simon Stainrod after Saturday's blow to his aim of steering his side clear of the relegation zone.
‘Aberdeen's strength of resolve in defence was what carried them through that one,’ he said.
While many among the 5,933 crowd may argue against Stainrod's claim, there was little doubt in the validity of it during the latter stages of what was a north-east affair rich in incident if not quality.
Both Stainrod and Willie Miller agreed that the blustery conditions did little to enhance the standard of play, but did play its part in forcing the occasional error which provided the series of goalmouth incidents so pleasing to the crowd.
The visitors' early grip in midfield assured a testing time of it for the home defence, and they ought to have secured a greater half-time advantage than that supplied them by Mixu Paatelainen's glorious second-minute header.
When young Scott Booth underlined his claim for a first full international start against the Germans on Wednesday by continuing his scoring form with Aberdeen's second goal six minutes into the second half, things looked bleak for the hosts.
But inspired by the experience of Jim Duffy at the back and battling Stainrod himself up front, the pattern of play changed dramatically during the final half hour, to the extent that it was the visitors who were forced to hang on, especially after Stainrod had forced goalkeeper Theo Snelders into an own-goal during the latter stages.
However, they clung on to a victory which served to rekindle hopes among the travelling support that all was not lost after all in the title race, especially after news leaked through of Rangers' demise at Celtic Park.
While few throughout the country would still be prepared to wager against Rangers, it is interesting to note that the two main contenders have still to meet twice and that the points gap has been reduced to seven.
Raith march on as Nicholl corners the market in inspiration Raith Rovers 2 Dunfermline 0
By Mike Aitken
ANOTHER big day at Stark's Park, another scalp taken.
At the end of February Jimmy Nicholl had fretted over how the Raith players would cope with ‘the mad month’ which lay ahead.
The way things have worked out, it was their First Division promotion rivals who needed to heed the warning — beware the ides of March!
Seven points from four games in March against sides in the top six — Morton, St Mirren, Kilmarnock and Dunfermline — have taken Raith to the very brink of the Premier Division.
On Saturday they travel to Ayr — where the Fifers have not won for 10 years — knowing that victory at Somerset Park would take them up if Dunfermline beat Kilmarnock at East End Park.
Otherwise a point at Hamilton the following week will earn Nicholl's men entry into the big time.
‘Just get your heads down and go for it,’ was Nicholl's message to his players yesterday.
‘Maybe we haven't been playing as well recently as we did earlier in the season, but we are still getting the results.
Our defence has been solid and we played with a lot of spirit against Kilmarnock and Dunfermline.
‘Now the chance is there for us to clinch promotion by the end of March.
What an  achievement that would be.
To know we were up with seven games left to play.
The players have been brilliant and all credit to them for their consistency.’
After Dunfermline had failed to scored against Raith for the fourth time this season, manager Jocky Scott conceded the championship race to the Kirkcaldy side.
‘Congratulations to them, they've won it now,’ he predicted.
‘All I hope is we are the side that goes up along with them.’
Having watched both the East End Park team and Kilmarnock in action against Raith this month, my guess is that two teams from Fife will compete in the Premier Division for the first time next season — provided Dunfermline get their act together in defence.
Unlike Kilmarnock, who were second best to Raith the previous week, Dunfermline looked the more eager and accomplished team for an hour in front of an all-ticket crowd of 6,500.
Only the derby matches in Edinburgh and Glasgow attracted more spectators in Scotland on Saturday.
‘But we seemed to freeze at the start,’ conceded Nicholl.
‘Dunfermline were hungrier, had more ideas and were the better side in tricky conditions.
At half-time, they had us.’
By full-time, though, it was Raith who had grabbed another vital home win — since the opening day of the season at Stark's Park when they hammered St Mirren 7-0 Raith have remained unbeaten throughout the league campaign — thanks to a unique contribution from their manager.
Though he recalled once scoring a hat-trick for Toronto Blizzard, Nicholl's two goals against Dunfermline marked the first time in his senior career that the Irishman had notched a double in top-class football.
‘What can I say?,’ he beamed.
‘I don't practise scoring direct from corner-kicks and it was just luck that the first one went in.
When the ball hit the back of the net and the players ran towards me, I was wondering how on earth it ended up there.
‘But the goal settled us down and after we went in front we started to play.
There was a spring in my step and when Craig Brewster played a nice through ball into the box, my old legs managed to carry me there and I got a second goal that I didn't expect.’
Peter Heatherston, the Raith captain, quipped that the player-manager's brace of goals had left the squad dreading the week ahead in training.
‘We'll have to suffer that Irish wit all week,’ he moaned.
‘That's the worst part of it — now he'll be showing us how to take corner kicks and how to score goals!’
More seriously, the midfield player was full of praise for Nicholl's contribution on and off the field this season.
‘On behalf of all the players, I'd like to thank him for what he's done,’ said Heatherston.
Like Rangers, there is a rhythm to Raith's play which grinds out results even when the team isn't playing particularly well.
They choke the opposition.
Once Dunfermline fell behind there was never any doubt about which side wanted victory more.
Mark you, until they made the ghastly mistake which led to Raith's first goal —‘an absolutely diabolical goal for a team of professionals to lose,’ was Scott's verdict — Dunfermline had Raith's measure.
Now Saturday's game against Kilmarnock will show the team's true mettle.
Celtic2 Rangers1
The manager, who has watched the same side go out of the Scottish Cup to the Premier Division's bottom club (Falkirk) while inflicting all manner of wounds on their championship prospects, saw his players do well enough not to have their efforts diminished by dwelling on Rangers' inertia.
Gascoigne on target again
ENGLAND midfielder Paul Gascoigne's return to form continued yesterday as he scored in his second successive game for Lazio.
His headed goal in the 2-2 draw at Atalanta moved the Rome club into third place in the Italian Serie A.
Gazza headed home Signori's free kick to tie the scores at 1-1 in the first half but took a knock on the ankle just before halftime and was less influential in the second half.
Reuter
England captain David Platt played in a more attacking role than usual but his team looked bereft of  confidence and ideas.
United are as bold as brass St Johnstone1 Dundee United4
PERTHSHIRE Brass Band played stirring music at the interval when the home side were only 2-1 down.
A trumpet solo followed midway through the second half but St Johnstone failed to rally as they lost two more goals without reply.
But for the woodwork and some fine saves by Andy Rhodes, defeat would have been turned into debacle as Saints' defence disintegrated under persistent pressure by their Tayside rivals.
Only two other teams have taken full points from McDiarmid Park this season — Rangers and Aberdeen.
An early mistake by Liam Dunne which led to Jim McInally chipping the 14th minute opener past Rhodes set the pattern for the game.
Michael O'Neill drilled home a second for the visitors before Dunne restored Saints' hopes on the half-hour mark with his second goal in successive games.
But United reasserted themselves when Paddy Connolly angled the ball home after a tremendous dash from the midfield in the 59th minute, and substitute John O'Neil completed the scoring ten minutes later.
St Johnstone coach John McClelland came on as substitute in the second half in a vain bid to restore confidence to a rearguard which badly missed the suspended John Inglis.
He said: ‘Before the match I warned that in the strong wind any mistakes would be costly — and we certainly made mistakes.’
United manager Jim McLean revealed that he deliberately took off Michael O'Neill six minutes from the end so that the travelling support could give him a personal ovation.
‘He has been our most consistent performer in the last two months,’ he said.
United's Maurice Malpas sustained a groin injury and is doubtful for Scotland's match against Germany on Wednesday but Duncan Ferguson should make it despite a thigh knock.
Maradona has hand in brawl
DIEGO Maradona was at the centre of an incident which provoked a mass brawl between Cadiz and Sevilla players in a Spanish league match yesterday.
The trouble flared just before the final whistle when Maradona tried to stop a Cadiz defender intervening in a dispute over a foul.
The incident degenerated into a fight as the players left the pitch and, according to radio reports, only the two goalkeepers were not involved.
Cowdenbeath are relegated
COWDENBEATH, following their 3-1 defeat at Meadowbank on Saturday, were relegated from the First Division.
Meadowbank and Stirling Albion, who meet this Saturday, are still fighting each other to decide who accompanies them downstairs.
Forest not out of the woods
NOTTINGHAM Forest yesterday missed a chance to move out of the Premier League relegation zone when they drew 1-1 at home to Leeds.
There were some signs of encouragement for manager Brian Clough, but his side again failed to make the most of their scoring chances.
With Nigel Clough withdrawn into a defensive position, Forest looked more solid at the back — even though they conceded a 12th minute Rod Wallace goal that gave Leeds fleeting hope of registering their first away win for almost 12 months.
Forest clawed their way level 12 minutes later with a Clough penalty but failed to take all three points as opportunities were squandered.
Fletcher concedes England blundered in tour selections
KEITH Fletcher yesterday looked back with regret and forward with concern at the end of England's disastrous winter tour of India and Sri Lanka.
The England manager chose the final moment in a long line of defeats — the eight wicket one-day hammering by Sri Lanka on Saturday — to admit for the first time fundamental policy errors.
But he was already looking ahead to this summer's Ashes series against Australia and the country v county dilemma in which he now finds himself involved.
Fletcher is worried that half of England's winter tour party will be at home for little more than a week before flying off again for pre-season trips with their counties.
Alec Stewart, for instance, leads Surrey on a tour of Sharjah from 1 April.
Fast bowlers Devon Malcolm and Chris Lewis will be making for Bermuda and South Africa respectively with their counties Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire.
Fletcher said: ‘It's bad that they are going away so soon after what has been a very hard and difficult tour.
‘I think it would be better if Chris Lewis had a month off before the season starts again but I'm afraid that is up to his county.
‘Counties have sponsorship deals now for pre-season trips, although at Essex we have never believed in pre-season tours because April is the only time you can get your first and second XI captains together.’
Fletcher is clearly concerned that some of England's key players would not get the right amount of rest before the start of the new season.
It is a perennial problem.
Ted Dexter, England's chairman of selectors, last year appealed to counties to give their international players time off after tours — a request which mainly fell on deaf ears.
Stewart said: ‘It's difficult because sometimes counties only get the trip because they are taking their big names.’
‘I myself have to go with Surrey because I am club captain — and that applies to several other players on this tour as well.’
Saturday's defeat, Sri Lanka winning with almost 15 overs to spare, left Stewart with the unenviable record of two Test and two one-day internationals beatings as acting captain on the tour.
Fletcher said he had spoken to Graham Gooch during the past week but that Gooch was still insistent that he would not be rushed into a decision about the England captaincy.
At least Gooch has been told he does not need an operation on a troublesome knee and will be fully fit for the start of the season.
Gooch's hand in selection this winter was considerable — but Fletcher made it clear that in future he will exercise more influence over the make-up of a tour party.
Fletcher admitted: ‘Our selection policy has misfired.
We tried to get a balance between a Test side and a one day side from the squad.
‘But my feeling is that we have to pick our best possible squad to win Tests — and that's something which I believe even more after this tour.’
Overseas trio hold the key to Scotland fortunes Harry Pincott reports from South Africa on the preparations for the tourists' opener
WITHIN a few hours of arriving in Cape Town yesterday morning, the Scotland squad had a training and nets session at a local boys' school where the facilities were superb.
Looking more sprightly than their colleagues in the 75F heat were Alastair Storie, Bruce Russell and Iain Philip, hardly surprising since they arrived back in Scotland last week after spending the winter playing in warmer climes.
Without question Scotland will be looking to the three happy wanderers to form the backbone of their batting, along with Jim Love and George Reifer, who has just signed for Uddingston.
Storie, who has played in Cape Town before, turned out for Latrobe in Tasmania where, after topping 1,000 runs for the season, he was voted player of the year in North-West Tasmania.
In addition to being captain of the side, Storie was coach and also helped prepare the wicket.
While he will be teaching at Watson's College on his return, Storie won't be performing for Watsonians this season, but is anxious to continue playing in Scotland.
Russell, who is again captain of the touring squad, again travelled to New Zealand to play for Mount Maunganui and while the team did not fare too well, the Stirling County professional was pleased with his form, averaging over 40 and taking quite a few wickets.
Like Storie Russell also did a fair bit of coaching.
Philip, a compulsive run-getter, returned to play for Scarborough in Perth, Western Australia for the eighth successive season and the Stenhousemuir batsman averaged almost 40 with the highlight being an innings of 125.
These three are likely to feature in tomorrow's opening match against a Stellenbosch Farmers XI, though any idea of a nice easy game should be dismissed as Yorkshire, who have been out here for a week, struggled to beat them a few days ago.
Among those waiting to welcome the Scots yesterday morning was Omar Henry — the former coach cum professional of the Scotland XI has had an excellent season for Orange Free State, being their leading wicket-taker.
He will be in action on Wednesday evening when OFS meet Western Province in the semi-final of the Benson & Hedges Cup.
Kelburne still in touch at top
DAVID MAGEE saved the defending Torrie Stockbrokers National League champions, Kelburne, from an embarrassing defeat at Touche Ross yesterday.
He scored twice in the closing eight minutes to force a 4-4 draw, a result which helped the Paisley men increase their lead at the top of the table to two points.
Earlier however Kelburne looked as though they were going to walk all over the young Aberdonians when they raced into a 2-0 advantage from scores by David McKay and Michael Starling but a goal by Philip Webster just before half time gave the northerners a timely boost.
They came out in the second half a much more committed side and proceeded to alter the whole complexion of the game with two goals from Paul Doney and Andrew Milne.
Kelburne, winners of the title for the past three years are always at their best when forced into a tight corner and so on this occasion Magee was the man responsible for getting them out of jail.
Magee and Michael Starling shared Kelburne's four goals on Saturday in their odd goal in seven defeat of the overnight leaders Torbrex Wanderers.
This was a much more comfortable victory for Kelburne than the score suggests for two of Torbrex's goals were scored late in the game by Gordon Shepherd whose second strike came from a penalty a minute from time.
Menzieshill moved into a challenging position by beating DW Clydesdale.
They are now joint second with Torbrex, but the dark horses in the title race could yet be Edinburgh Civil Service who easily beat Touche Ross 4-1 with comparative ease but while Grange overcame bottom side Stepps 4-2 this was possibly their worst performance of the season.
Stepps played with great courage throughout but they appear to have lost their fight for survival in the division.
Who will join them in the Second Division is still a long way from being decided but GS Stirling enhanced their prospects of survival by beating Inverleith 2-0.
Jon Taylor was responsible for both their goals.
Clough in V-sign row
BRIAN CLOUGH, the Nottingham Forest manager, is this morning pictured in several English-based newspapers apparently delivering a V-sign to the club's supporters at the City Ground.
He was photographed raising two fingers to a section of the crowd during his side's 1-1 home draw with Leeds.
The incident happened after Clough's son Nigel had punted an aimless long ball upfield, but Forest chairman, Fred Reacher, is quoted in the Sun newspaper as saying: ‘I certainly didn't see anything.
‘The rapport the manager has always had with the supporters of this club has been excellent.’
United are as bold as brass Magee to the rescue
Sheehan slugs it out on road to fame
THE 1993 British and US Open champion, Patty Sheehan, was locked in a tense battle with Canada's Dawn Coe-Jones on the last day of the Standard Register Ping tournament at Moon Valley.
The two had started the day at 14-under par and four shots ahead of everyone else.
After seven holes, Sheehan was ahead, still 14 under where Coe-Jones was back to 13 under after dropping a shot at the short and watery fifth.
Because a win here would catapult her into the LPGA's Hall of Fame, most people were shouting for Sheehan.
However, there is something very attractive about Dawn Coe-Jones's game.
She is a born golfer and one who, like Laura Davies, plays almost entirely by feel.
Indeed, it is more than two years since she had her last lesson — a half-hour check-up from the man who started her off as a 12-year-old.
She times the ball beautifully and has a lovely touch on the greens.
Her nine putts for her first-half 30 on Saturday was a record on the LPGA tour.
Pam Wright, who started the final day at two over par, was three over at the turn.
She birdied the tenth, her first, but, after that promising start, the rustiness she had talked of at the start of the tournament began to manifest itself.
There was a dropped shot at the twelfth and another at the fifteenth which had her turning in 38 against the par of 37.
Helen Alfredsson, winner of the 1990 Weetabix British Women's Open, was heading the European contingent, being five under par as she mounted the tenth tee.
Sue Strudwick was one behind having birdied the dog-leg third and the ninth.
 Meanwhile Laura Davies, who missed the cut, was winging her way to the Nabisco Dinah Shore.
Ever the optimist, Davies she was saying that the extra's day's practice would give her ‘a headstart over the rest of them’.
Crenshaw puts on the style to take early lead
BEN Crenshaw turned on his trademark putting touch to move into a one-shot lead after the third round of the Nestle Invitational tournament in Orlando, Florida, on Saturday.
Crenshaw, long regarded as one of the finest putters golf has seen, moved in front of Davis Love with a three-under-69 after making three critical putts each from about 15 feet near the end of his round.
One was to save par on the 15th, and the others for birdies on the 16th and 17th.
‘Three nice putts, three very nice putts at the end,’ said 41-year-old Crenshaw after completing 54 holes over Arnold Palmer's Bay Hill course in 210 — six under par.
Love, the second round leader, could not maintain the pace he set over the first two rounds and had to settle for a third round 71.
Scotland trailed in last in the Boys Quadrangular International, yesterday at Is Molas, Sardinia, after following Saturday's defeat against France with a 8-4 loss at the hands of host nation Italy.
A campaign which had promised so much, when Scotland held eventual winners Sweden on Friday, fizzled out disappointingly.
Dropping six of the eight singles points proved their undoing against France, losing 7-4, while they never recovered from giving up the foursomes to the Italians.
Still, there were two outstanding performances in yesterday's defeat.
Mortonhall's David Patrick was twice emphatically victorious, while Ralston's Alistair Forsyth crushed Italian Junior champion Fabio Pustetto 7 and 6.
Sweden's 7-5 win over France gave them the overall title by virtue of more individual wins, because while France enjoyed victories over Italy and Scotland, the unbeaten Swedes halved their contests against the same opposition.
Sheehan records famous victory
THE 1993 British and US Open champion, Patty Sheehan, had the better of a tense battle with Canada's Dawn Coe-Jones to win the $700,000 Standard Register Ping — a 32nd tour victory which has catapulted her into the LPGA's Hall of Fame.
Sheehan, who had started the day in a tie for the lead at 14-under-par, ultimately finished at 17-under to win by five shots.
‘The Hall of Fame,’ she later confided, ‘was driving me nuts out there.
Now I'm in, I'm happy…
It's a huge burden off my shoulders.’
Though everyone was behind Sheehan as she strove to become only the thirteenth entrant to the Hall of Fame, it was difficult not to feel for Dawn Coe-Jones.
There is something very attractive about her uncomplicated approach to the game.
She is a born golfer and one who, like Laura Davies, plays almost entirely by feel.
Her action is a little flat and a shade on the short side.
But she times the ball beautifully.
Again, she has a lovely touch on the greens, with her nine putts for her first-half 30 on Saturday a record on the LPGA tour.
Annika Sorenstam, the 22-year-old Swede who was playing in what was only her second LPGA event, finished as well placed as fourth — a performance which won her some $37,000.
Clearly, she is a player who should make the European side for next year's Solheim Cup at the Greenbrier.
Where Sorenstam finished at 11 under par, Helen Alfredsson, her sister Swede, came in at seven under.
Nor was that the end of the strong European finishes.
Trish Johnson had a closing 70 to sign off at five under, while Sue Strudwick finished on the same mark.
Pam Wright was three over at the turn but ended up with a level par 73 and a four-round total of 293. 930319 
World champions in big demand despite pile-up of fixtures
SCOTLAND's game at Ibrox on Wednesday against Germany, the world champions, will buck the trend of the recession.
Before it collects a penny in gate money — and the match is heading for a full house — the Scottish Football Association will pocket £450,000 from the sale of trackside advertising to German companies.
The combination of trackside sales and live television coverage in Italy for last autumn's World Cup qualifying tie was another money-spinner that brought in £800,000.
Thanks largely to the fact it has raised revenue from abroad — Rangers have enjoyed similar benefits from their involvement in the European Champions League and last week took in £1.5 million from the Brugge game — the SFA made a profit of £5.5 million in the last financial year.
International football, like the European club scene, is a major source of cash as well as prestige for the Scottish game.
Yet the status accorded to the national team is grudging.
There were even mutterings last week that the Germany match should be scrapped because of the catalogue of games on the domestic front.
Quite rightly, Andy Roxburgh, the Scotland coach, rounded on those who point the finger of blame at the national team for the present glut of fixtures.
He said that everyone knew that clubs were involved in too many matches but no-one did much about rectifying the situation.
‘I don't know if officials say one thing publicly and another in private,’ he argued.
‘But it's not the international team that's causing the trouble.
If we played any fewer matches we'd disappear.
We play less friendly matches than any other country in Europe.’
This column has long argued that Scottish football needs to reduce the quantity of matches played and increase the quality.
However, this doesn't mean we should scrap prestigious fixtures against the world champions.
One of the problems facing football is that with so many fixtures around, there are problems in lending matches a sense of occasion.
In rugby, the demand to watch Five Nations matches continues to exceed the supply of tickets, partly because each country only stages two home games a year — a classic example of how less can mean more at the box office.
As a professional sport, football has to meet different financial criteria from an amateur sport.
However, the principle is much the same.
The formula for future success in Scotland has to involve a combination of fewer fixtures, improved stadia and, regrettably, higher admission prices.
In other words, football has to learn how to market itself as an event once more.
Rangers managed the trick no bother last week with the Champions League match against Brugge.
The match was a 45,000 sell-out — even though the game was screened live on television — because it carried an air of glamour.
It meant something to be there.
By way of contrast, both Celtic and St Johnstone attracted their lowest home gates of the season last week.
The games at Parkhead against Hibs and at McDiarmid Park against Falkirk were both meaningful in the sense that they influenced either the chase for a place in Europe or the relegation issue.
However, there has been so much midweek domestic football this season that all but the most committed supporters — 12,178 of them in Glasgow, 3,546 in Perth — turned their backs on Tuesday night's matches.
Who could blame them when the sheer volume of fixtures means that injuries and suspensions force most clubs to field weakened teams?
Just as Rangers were left with no option but to field a patched-up side against Brugge, so Scotland will be forced to select a team some way short of full strength against Germany.
Many clubs, of course, would rather their players weren't involved in this match at all .
While one can sympathise with those experienced types who would probably benefit more from putting their feet up on Wednesday night, one has to say it isn't every night you get the chance to pit your wits against the world champions.
For younger players — think of Duncan Ferguson, Scott Booth, Stephen Wright and Alan McLaren — the fixture represents an ideal  opportunity to extend their international education.
McLaren, the 22-year-old Hearts defender, told me recently that when he made his World Cup debut against Italy (the game where he was asked to mark Roberto Baggio), the fact that he'd been part of the squad at the European Championship finals, as well as playing a couple of games on the tour of North America last year, were of immeasurable assistance in making the step up.
If he'd been thrown in cold against Juventus's £8 million man, McLaren might well have suffered a very different fate from the rave reviews that greeted his outstanding display.
Football asks too much of too few of its most able sons.
The solution to the problem lies not in axing international or European fixtures.
Rather, the decks have to be cleared on the domestic front to make room for the games the players want to play in.
And the games the public want to see.
Four divisions of ten may not be the ideal solution for the future of Scottish football — it doesn't, for example, address the problem of clubs meeting four times a season — but at least a reduction in the number of games from 44 to 36 will give everyone breathing space.
Meantime, what better case could there be for staging the Germany game at a time of fixture congestion than the fact that 10,000 youngsters, who watched the tie against Malta free of charge, have paid £1 a head to return to Ibrox on Wednesday.
930223 
Mike Aitken
Alan McLaren: grateful for chance to extend international education
Football has to learn how to market itself as an event once more.
Rangers managed the trick no bother last week against Brugge
Gaskell rhymes
I was so pleased to note that someone more knowledgeable than your reviewer Robert Nye about the Rev William Gaskell had written to you (the Rev Andrew M Hill, Points of View, 13 March).
Jenny Uglow, in new biography, certainly does not belittle William Gaskell's literary achievements, nor did William Wordsworth.
On receipt of Gaskell's temperance rhymes, he wrote: ‘I have read your temperance rhymes with much pleasure and cannot but think that they must do good’(1840).
Gaskell was ahead of his time in realising that a craving for alcohol was a disease and the drunkard needed aid and sympathy rather than condemnation.
Thomas Carlyle had suggested to Elizabeth Gaskell that she should ‘use her pen for the public good’ and this both husband and wife tried to do in their way.
Reading, writing and reminiscence
BEWARE politicians peddling a golden age.
Nostalgia, as recently deployed in the Prime Minister's sepia invocation of the village bakery, is just about the worst instrument through which to view the future.
This is particularly so in the field of Scottish education, where folklore about having once been the best in the world has too easily fostered the delusion that restoring the old ways is the route to excellence.
Ian Lang would deny that yesterday's speech on the concepts behind the Government's education policy draws on a golden age; and, indeed, there are elements that merit cautious welcome.
Not the least is his declared wish to advance by consensus, which is certainly easier on the ear than Michael Forsyth's strident challenges to the world and its big brother.
But there is also a recurrent motif of traditional answers to contemporary problems.
That may appeal to an audience of a certain age, but it is a pretty foggy vision.
Mr Lang talks about reviving the priority given to literacy and numeracy, about restoring teachers' standing in the community, about discipline, pride, respect.
The phrases are fine-sounding, and there is certainly nothing wrong with the three Rs.
But they scarcely constitute a full toolkit for the 21st century.
Mr Lang gave a passing nod to enhanced status for vocational education, but he will not find the feedstock for economic dynamism in gilded memories.
A constructive response to the Howie Report would be more pertinent than saloon-bar simplicities about getting back to basics.
That is where the real shortfall lies — in producing children with the skills, knowledge and enthusiasms to generate an innovative, competitive Scotland.
Meeting that need, while avoiding the conflict experienced south of the border, requires a thought-out educational strategy capable of providing unity in purpose.
To talk instead of making children accept the discipline of learning would seem to have more to do with coercion than with making lessons relevant and interesting.
This is exemplified by Mr Lang's perception of school uniform as a symbol of ‘status, commitment, self-esteem and pride in the institution.’
That imposing such values might incite adolescents to rebel against them appears not to exercise him.
More intriguingly, he has concluded that the rights which the Government has afforded parents imply responsibilities over problems like truancy or video game dependency.
Opt-out parents (surely an ambiguous phrase) lead to drop-out children, he says.
There should be a ‘triangle of trust’ between parents, teachers and children.
This has its attractive side, though it is not without irony.
Hitherto, the Government has tended to see parent power as a foil to ‘vested interests’ like teachers or local authorities.
The primary testing episode showed, however, a propensity to unite against the Government.
Now, everyone confronts the same challenge, and Mr Lang is looking for consensus.
That is a wholly worthy aim.
But whether it can be achieved on such a traditionalist agenda is rather more doubtful.
Coach Sewell eyes unique Cup double
By Roddy Mackenzie
KEVIN SEWELL, coach to Jets, is out to stake a unique claim at this Sunday's Royal Bank Scottish Cup finals at Meadowbank.
Sewell seeks to become the first coach to successfully guide a team to victory in both men's and women's cup finals.
Two years ago, he took charge of the Elliott Sports Jets side who won the women's trophy for the first time and, on Sunday, he will be plotting the downfall of Su Ragazzi in the men's final.
Su Ragazzi, who are bidding for a league and cup double, beat Jets in straight sets in Sewell's second game in charge earlier this season but defeated them in the return in Edinburgh.
‘We've improved a lot since that first match but the players know it will be tough,’ said Sewell.
Though both sides are playing in their first finals, Jets have the edge as far as experience is concerned — John Gaughan, Michael Owens, Bryan Banks and Tommy Kane having played in Telford's Cup-winning side last season.
Su Ragazzi, formed less than eight years ago, clinched their first Scottish League title ahead of West Coast last Saturday in spite of a 15-6, 12-15, 14-16, 11-15 defeat by the Kilmarnock side in Glasgow.
One set was all they needed from the match but coach Tommy Dowens admitted the defeat left him a little flat in spite of the fact his team clinched the title.
‘You tend to forget all the hard work that has gone in over the season.
I don't think there was any doubt that over the year we were the best team in Scotland,’ he said.
‘I would have liked to have finished the season with a win but, in the end, we did just enough to win the league.’
Whitburn's Team Components Bureau, who last won the trophy in 1981, face holders Glasgow Powerhouse in the women's cup final, also at Meadowbank on Sunday.
Bob Stokes, who was coach of the side when they last won the trophy (under the guise of Whitburn) has since been to the final on six occasions (with Whitburn and Team Scottish Farm) and lost every time.
The finals — which begin at 1pm — are likely to be a sell-out for the third successive year but tickets can be obtained from the Scottish Volleyball Association offices in Edinburgh or from Meadowbank on the day.
Mansell ace in pack as Indycar aims to topple Formula One
By Jim Dunn
FOLLOWING his triumphant rookie win in his Indycar debut at Surfers Paradise in Australia, Nigel Mansell will now be the spearhead of a campaign to help his new formula displace Formula One as the world's most popular motorsport.
The apparent ease with which the reigning Formula One champion, and most successful British grand prix driver in history in terms of wins, roared to a record-breaking victory sparking unprecedented interest in the mainly American-based sport.
Race organisers say about 220,000 spectators packed around the Surfers Paradise circuit during the four days, up from 170,000 last year, and the race was transmitted to TV viewers in 400 million households in 90 countries.
Indycar's organising body, Championship Auto Racing Teams (CART), now hopes that Mansell's defection to its ranks will help push the 81-year-old sport past Formula One in worldwide popularity.
‘It was obviously the best way we could think of to catch the attention of the world,’ said Bill Stokkan, CART's chairman and chief executive.
Mansell, 39, left Formula One last year to join the Indycar team owned by film star Paul Newman and Carl Haas after falling out with Williams-Renault over their choice of three-times world champion Alain Prost to partner the Englishman this year.
Mansell refused to be reconciled with Prost, with whom he fell out when the two were team-mates at Ferrari in 1991, and promptly signed the US deal despite taking an estimated cut of half his salary.
In Australia, he rewrote the history books in a display not seen since the days of Jim Clark and Graham Hill — they helped revolutionise Indycar racing with their rear-engined Lotus Fords — when he started from pole position, won the race and smashed the lap record in his debut race.
Now Mansell is an enthusiastic convert to Indycar and takes every opportunity to praise team owners, sponsors, his car, the mechanics and the circuit.
He is also far more relaxed than he was for the majority of his Formula One career, laughing and joking with reporters and rivals.
Winning the Formula One championship was the fulfilment of a childhood dream, but now, he says, victory in Indycar's famous Indianapolis 500 would top that.
‘There's no question the Indianapolis 500 is the biggest race in the world, period, over and above Formula One,’ he told reporters.
‘From a spectator point of view and from a sponsor's point of view, Indycar racing has a lot more to offer.’
Unlike the Surfers Paradise street circuit, however, the Indianapolis event, like five others in the 16-race Indycar season, is held on a banked oval track on which, his rivals claim, Mansell will face a new ball game.
Mansell, however, remains confident he can do the seemingly impossible by winning the Indycar title back-to-back with his Formula One world championship.
He has already laid down a marker by setting the fastest time in history during pre-season testing at the oval track in  Phoenix , Arizona, where the next round of the Indycar series  will be held on 4 April.
Jodami earns rest after Gold Cup win
CHELTENHAM Gold Cup winner Jodami will not run again this season, trainer Peter Beaumont said yesterday.
The Yorkshire handler has ruled out a trip to Aintree next week or an outing in a less demanding event in favour of a well-earned rest.
Beaumont said: ‘I have thought about running him again but have decided that is it for now.
‘Liverpool comes a bit too quick for him next week and he was only entered in case things went wrong at Cheltenham.
‘He has had a great season.
He is not in any other big races, which are closed anyway, so we might as well let him down and stop work with him.
I never like overdoing things.’
Jodami, winner of four of his six starts and the first to complete the Leopardstown-Cheltenham Gold Cup double, will follow a similar route to the Festival next season.
‘A few people told me it couldn't be done but the prep races all fitted into his programme and we would hope to do something along similar lines next time.
He loves the big occasions as all good horses do,’ Beaumont added.
Jodami was entered in the Martell Cup at Aintree, which has attracted 12 of the 13 finishers in the Gold Cup.
He joins Cheltenham fourth The Fellow, now heading for the Irish Grand National or Whitbread Gold Cup, among the absentees.
Mark Dwyer, who partnered Jodami at Cheltenham, has been booked by Somerset trainer Paul Nicholls to ride Western Legend in the John Hughes Memorial Trophy at Aintree on the opening day of the Grand National fixture.
Western Legend, off the course all last season with leg problems after gaining four victories early in his chasing career, returned to top form last month when scoring unchallenged in an amateur riders' chase at Wincanton.
The nine-year-old has been given 10st 2lb in the John Hughes and will be tackling the National fences for the first time.
Love adopts hands-on approach in SA tour opener From Harry Pincott Cape Town
TAKING the view that he will learn more about the players on the field, Jim Love will today make his debut for Scotland in the opening game of their South African tour, against Stellenbosch Farmers.
The 38-year-old Yorkshireman, who took up his appointment as Scotland's director of cricket just over six months ago, will also lead the side in the enforced absence of Bruce Russell who has flu.
Russell was one of two players not considered for selection, the other being the West of Scotland fast bowler, Mike Richardson, who has a cut leg.
Love also revealed that it had been decided not to include Iain Philip and Alastair Storie, as they had been playing overseas and it was a better option to give the others some match practice.
A former Yorkshire player, Love is well-versed in the one-day game, having played three internationals for England against Australia in 1981 and being voted man of the match in the 1987 B&H Cup final.
It seemed to be Love's day yesterday because he also announced he would be joining Grange as an amateur.
Also representing Scotland for the first time today will be the Ferguslie all-rounder, Stuart Kennedy, who follows in the footsteps of brother, Iain, who was capped six times.
In the absence of Philip and Storie, George Reifer will open the batting with Bruce Patterson, Clydesdale's new professional, and though Reifer has not had too much experience of going in first, he did open a couple of times during his 15-game spell with Barbados.
The strength of the opposition is an unknown quantity, but in last week's game against Yorkshire, who won only by seven runs, Stellenbosch had the Hampshire captain, Mark Nicholas guesting for them.
It is expected they will draft in one or two guests tomorrow.
Incidentally Yorkshire, who meet the Scots in two one-day games next week, won their fifth match in succession today, beating Northern Goodwood.
Germans out to put World Cup build-up back on an even keel Mike Chisholm reports on the mood of the opposition as they approach the match at Ibrox
HELL has no fury like a German footballer scorned.
Berti Vogts's team come to Ibrox tomorrow determined to wipe away the memory of an unpleasant recent experience, with a convincing performance against Scotland.
The world champions have grown accustomed to winning, even when they do not produce their best form.
But a 3-1 drubbing by Brazil on a South American tour just before Christmas has put pressure on manager Vogts in the build-up to next year's World Cup.
It was not so much the result in Porto Alegre but the manner of the defeat that has thrown a spanner in the works as Germany prepare to defend their title in the United States.
Brazil simply outplayed Vogts's side for most of the game.
Although the Germans bounced back with a 4-1 defeat of Uruguay four days later, the Brazilian experience has left its scars.
Some players, such as midfielder Stefan Effenberg, may have burned their boats for a while.
‘The way we lost disturbed me,’ Vogts said.
‘We cannot allow that sort of thing to happen in the World Cup.
But we managed to play well against Uruguay and we want to play well in Scotland.’
There are those, including Germany's 1990 World Cup coach, Franz Beckenbauer, who believe that world champions should be made to qualify for the following World Cup, rather than receive an automatic place.
In many ways the challenge of qualifying games could have made life much easier for Vogts, who has had the problem of motivating his team to play two years of friendlies before they defend their World Cup crown in 1994.
German teams have proved in the past that they produce their best football in the heat of competition.
Nevertheless, the Ibrox fixture is part of a carefully-planned World Cup build-up which provides some real challenges to Vogts's side.
The Germans are going to the US twice this year in June and December, when they will play games against England, Brazil and the US (twice).
Their home fixture list in the next 18 months includes internationals against Brazil, Uruguay, England and Italy.
Vogts cannot be accused of running away from top-class opposition.
The 46-year-old former defender is well aware of the challenge in Glasgow, especially after the experience of playing Andy Roxburgh's side in last year's European Championship finals.
‘We know how strong the Scots are.
That is why we chose them as one of our opponents in the build-up to the World Cup,’ Vogts said.
‘We know from Sweden that they play with a lot of spirit and determination but that they play fair as well.’
Vogts is expected to field largely the same team at Ibrox which played against Uruguay.
There is unlikely to be a place for the blond-haired Effenberg despite his good performance at the European Championship finals.
But the German manager has been lifted by the recent club form of 31-year-old captain, Lothar Matthaeus — absent in Sweden due to a serious knee operation — as well as his clubmate Olaf Thon's successful switch from midfielder to libero at Bayern Munich.
Vogts has been determined to bring on younger players since he took over, his hand forced somewhat by the disappearance of veterans like libero Klaus Augenthaler, defender Andreas Brehme and striker Rudi Voeller from international football.
It has been Matthaeus and the older heads who have impressed in recent months, however.
Vogts has recalled 32-year-old Eintracht Frankfurt midfielder, Uwe Bein, who played in the 1990 World Cup, into his squad after nearly a year out of the reckoning.
The German manager may take Bein and Brehme to the World Cup and ask Voeller to come out of retirement if Juergen Klinsmann and Karl-heinz Riedle struggle with their form up front.
‘I have tried one or two things in midfield and was not satisfied with some of them.
That is why a player like Uwe Bein has come back in,’ Vogts said.
Vogts says his team still have plenty of confidence.
But he and his players know a poor performance against Scotland in the wake of the Brazilian defeat would spark off intense criticism in the German media.
They are unlikely to be lacking in motivation.
Selectors move in Wright direction
PETER WRIGHT, the Boroughmuir prop whose international career took off after he made the switch to loose-head, was able to reflect yesterday on how quickly fortunes can change in sport, writes Mike Aitken.
When the door to the Scotland team opened in Paris earlier this season, the Bonnyrigg blacksmith seized the opportunity and went on to establish himself with further caps against Wales and England.
Along with the rest of Scotland's front five — Kenny Milne, Paul Burnell, Andy Reed and Damian Cronin — Wright made sufficient impact to earn selection for the Lions' tour of New Zealand.
‘I think it reflects on how we played together that the entire front five are in the party,’ he said.
From third choice for Scotland to becoming a member of the Lions' elite is an extraordinary change in circumstance for any player.
He gets married next month and one of his first tasks yesterday was to inform his wife-to-be that four days after they return from their honeymoon he'll be off for two months on a 13-game tour.
She was reported to be ‘not too chuffed’.
A former Lasswade forward, Wright's career reached a turning point last year when he won two caps in Australia and returned home a fitter and more experienced player.
If he thought last summer's trip down under was demanding, Wright has been warned by fellow internationalist and Boroughmuir colleague Sean Lineen to expect the ‘toughest eight weeks of your life’ in New Zealand.
It's a challenge the 17-stone prop is determined to savour.
‘Even to be on the bench at this level is an  achievement ,’ he said.
Peter Wright: from third-choice Scot to Lions' selection
Hastings the man to make Lions roar
By Mike Aitken
FOR Gavin Hastings, captaining the British Lions on their tour of New Zealand — just three months after he assumed the captaincy of Scotland — will mark the pinnacle of an already distinguished career.
‘Anyone who knows me will understand how delighted I am,’ he said yesterday.
‘It's a great honour for myself, for my family and for Scotland.’
His brother, Scott, who was among the eight Scots named in the 30-strong squad, reckoned that Gavin's previous experience of playing in New Zealand probably swayed the decision in the full-back's favour.
Hastings senior, with only four games as Scotland captain under his belt, agreed that his knowledge of New Zealand must have been a positive asset.
After the 1987 World Cup, the 31-year-old even played club rugby with Auckland University.
Will Carling, the captain of England, is travelling there for the first time and the selectors decided not to weigh him down with the cares of office.
The Englishman said he was very relaxed about the decision.
‘I hope I can give Gavin some help from my long experience of captaincy if he needs it,’ he said.
‘Captaining the Lions would have been a lovely honour, and obviously I'm disappointed, but I'm delighted just to have been selected.
Gavin will do the job in his own way, and has a wealth of experienced players to call on.
I am more than happy to contribute whatever I can.’
As good as his word, Carling telephoned Hastings yesterday morning to offer his congratulations.
‘It was very nice of him,’ said the skipper.
‘He must have been disappointed.
But Will made it clear he'll be happy to work with me and was keen that we all pull together.’
Hastings knew he'd got the job on Sunday night, and while he celebrated with a glass of champagne, the Watsonian harbours no illusions about the task that lies ahead.
‘It will be tough.
You don't get an easy game in New Zealand.
But I'm looking forward to the trip.
It's a real test — an opportunity to match yourself against the very best.’
Hastings had also received good wishes from Finlay Calder, the Stewart's-Melville player who captained the 1989 Lions in Australia.
‘The way I see it, my job will be to settle the guys down and bring everyone together.
Finlay was terrific at doing that.
He had the respect of all the players four years ago and everyone was behind him.
That's something I also hope to achieve in New Zealand.’
One of the other important factors which helped Hastings attain the most distinguished accolade in British rugby was his relationship with Lions' coach Ian McGeechan.
‘I've worked with Geech as he prepares the side for each game we play.
Knowing him for as long as I have done must have worked in my favour.’
With an English manager in Geoff Cooke and an English forwards' coach in Dick Best — as well as 16 Englishmen in the playing party — Hastings' appointment in tandem with McGeechan's at least gives the party a semblance of Celtic influence.
‘All the Englishmen in the squad are very experienced and any Lions’ side must be strong on that quality.
It's now about bringing everyone together for the good of British rugby,’ said the Scot.
At the helm: a delighted Gavin Hastings in Edinburgh yesterday after being named Lions captain
Levein to captain Scots against Germans
By Hugh Keevins
HEARTS' Craig Levein will captain Scotland against Germany at Ibrox tomorrow night despite rumours about the quality of the relationship the player has with the national coach, Andy Roxburgh.
Levein was widely reported after Hearts' game with Dundee United 48 hours before the squad announcement as having said he would ‘probably get in if Gordon McQueen is unfit.’
This was a sardonic reference to the distance which has sometimes separated Levein from selection by the national coach, though the idea of McQueen, last capped against Wales in 1981, being recalled has turned out not to be so fanciful after all in the midst of the worst injury crisis of Roxburgh's association with Scotland.
Levein will take charge of a side drawn from four Premier Division clubs — Hearts, Aberdeen, Dundee United and Celtic — and though Roxburgh will  withhold his final selection until this morning, he was yesterday willing to make promises about seven players.
Nicky Walker, previously uncapped at full international level will be in goal against the world champions.
Celtic's Tommy Boyd, who will be vice captain, will, along with Alan McLaren, Stephen Wright, John Collins and Duncan Ferguson, play from the start.
Roxburgh is dismissive of suggestions that his team are in danger of a mauling on an embarrassing level from Berti Vogts' full-strength side.
‘We have not been massacred in any game over the last six years and it won't start on Wednesday,’ he said.
‘If my players are written off, they react in a positive and aggressive manner.
In this instance, they will take a collective delight in upsetting the reputation of the world champions while being motivated by personal considerations.’
This is Roxburgh's reference to an apparently hungry group of players anxious to retain the squad places they have won, albeit under emergency conditions in some cases.
That description does not apply to Levein, however.
Hearts' defender was in Roxburgh's original squad and it was always the intention to play him after a worthwhile display against Portugal in October.
Levein is, co-incidentally, a survivor from the side who defeated Argentina during their reign as world champions.
The new captain, the only member of the squad with that responsibility at club level, is also typical of the kind of player left available to Roxburgh.
‘Those who have been around for a while and waited on an international chance tend to appreciate it all the more when one arrives,’ he said.
Nicky Walker falls into that category, too, and Roxburgh observed that he had ‘no worries’ over blooding the goalkeeper in this match.
‘Nicky has been round the houses at club level and that helps.’
The Tynecastle influence on Roxburgh's thinking could be further strengthened today by the inclusion of John Robertson to play in attack beside Ferguson.
Levein, while in sardonic mood, also ventured the opinion that Robertson might get ‘three and a half minutes against the Germans’.
Robertson is, like Levein, imagined to have a problem imposing himself on Roxburgh's mind and has recently fallen further behind in the pecking order with the emergence of Eoin Jess at Aberdeen.
Ibrox, therefore, could be an acid test for Robertson, Levein and a few others.
In order to prove themselves, the players will need to copy Roxburgh's behavioural pattern in these situations.
‘When everything goes wrong like this, I experience a feeling like a switch going on.
My head goes down and I focus on the problem until I figure out how it can be solved,’ said the man whose solutions make tomorrow's game a test of the Premier Division's worthiness as well as an international examination on a particularly thorough level.
Fresh start, Page 22
Craig Levein: faces stern test at Ibrox tomorrow
Ferguson's chance to make fresh start
By Hugh Keevins
THE innocence of youth will give way to the pressures of adulthood when Duncan Ferguson plays against Germany at Ibrox tomorrow night, ending a nine-month period during which his future at the highest level looked in doubt.
The Dundee United forward, compared to Joe Jordan in style by the national coach, Andy Roxburgh, yesterday, has, since September, been buffeted by bad publicity.
There were unsubstantiated allegations of serious misbehaviour while Scotland were in Berne for the first World Cup qualifying Group I tie against Switzerland.
Privately, Roxburgh and his assistant, Craig Brown, wondered if the questionable temperament which embroiled Ferguson in court cases arising from incidents off the park would ultimately hinder his progress.
Dundee United's manager, Jim McLean, then took typically forthright action to bring the player to his senses, relegating Ferguson to the reserves until he learned to accept the club's code of discipline.
A move by the player to contest the level and frequency of fines imposed on him by McLean was subsequently thrown out by the Scottish League Management Committee.
Now that Ferguson has returned to what he is best at, harassing opposing defences instead of those trying to shape his career, he is getting maximum support from Roxburgh.
‘I am keen for him to make it and Duncan has the potential to succeed.
It is up to him, though.’
Ferguson celebrated his 21st birthday while negotiating his months in the wilderness and watched Eoin Jess, who has a much sounder temperament, make a sizeable impact on the national coach at the same time.
Yesterday, Ferguson used Jess's example to explain why the depleted Scotland squad should have no reservations about their meeting with the world champions at Ibrox.
‘Eoin did brilliantly against the Maltese and proved that the Premier Division is full of good, young talent,’ he said.
‘I like to think that I have a lot to offer as well and I don't want to have to wait years before I get the opportunity to prove myself.
‘The call-offs mean that if anybody plays well against Germany he will have done himself a lot of good for the immediate future.’
Ferguson now sports a tuft of facial hair around his lips and chin, permitted him by the Tannadice tablets of stone, but it will take more than a beard to signify maturity.
The player is at least aware of this fact.
‘I can not deny that I have had my troubles off the park, or that my mind was on other things for a while, but my head is down and I am concentrating on making a contribution to the team once again.
‘All that has happened to me has helped open my eyes and I am still young enough to put the past firmly behind me.’
The last observation, of course, has, down through the years, been the stock response of the Scottish internationalist with his finger firmly jammed on the self-destruct button.
It is now up to Ferguson to prove he is doing something more than repeating a cliched defence.
Earlier this season, Mark Hateley of Rangers expressed the opinion that Ferguson was the kind of target man Roxburgh's side lacked.
Tomorrow night, Ferguson will get the chance against Germany to prove that Hateley is as accurate in his judgement as he is in front of goal.
A partnership between Ferguson and John Robertson, of Hearts, looks likely and that will provide both men, neither of whom is slow to put forward their own claims for a place in the national side, with the size of platform they should relish.
Dundee yesterday signed Lionel David from French Second Division club La Rochelle.
Rangers have still received no reply from Marseille over ticket and security arrangements for the crucial European Champions League clash in France on 7 April.
Celtic's Mike Galloway will be suspended for four games, starting on 3 April, after being booked against Rangers.
Fijians bank on hosting annual event after opening success
THE Fijian Rugby Union is expected to bank more than £110,000 in gate receipts from the final day of its inaugural sevens tournament, which attracted a record 30,000 crowd to the Government Stadium in Suva.
The cash — on top of £45,000 sponsorship, some in the form of airline fares and hotel accommodation — will leave the union with a handsome profit and a determination to make the competition an annual event.
Scotland's management have already verified my belief that the playing standards here set new highs in the abbreviated game.
One player, a Borderer at that, went further.
He reckoned most sevens tournaments back home could only be considered ‘a joke’ in comparison.
Refereeing — especially some of the key areas in sevens such as high tackles and off-the-ball obstruction — was of a consistently sound level, though the tendency for players to dive on top of other players who had gone to deck to retrieve ball, which is illegal, went repeatedly unchecked, as did crossing.
The exuberance of the crowd was especially rewarding.
If the skills dipped, there would be hoots of laughter.
For the record, Vanuatu got the highest guffaw count.
On the down side, day one of the tournament was too long, thanks to peripheral activities including parades and the opening ceremony.
The second day was equally a hard slog, particularly given a competition for the teams who had finished last in their pool.
Canada eventually plundered that trophy.
That Fiji won the main prize so easily led to something of an anti-climax, but that was hardly the fault of the organisers, though they were to blame for the scant and often inaccurate team information for public and press.
John Jeffrey's popularity on Fiji knew no bounds.
The White Shark, who would regularly sign autographs for all and sundry, had heard Gregor Townsend, tongue in cheek, suggesting that he (Townsend) and the gifted Fijian stand-off, Waisale Serevi, were best mates and knew each other well from Fiji's successful trip to the 1991 Gala Sevens.
Jeffrey had a word with Serevi, who to Townsend's bewilderment, appeared at his shoulder and asked for the Gala teenager's autograph.
Scotland rested in Sydney yesterday before their flight today to Hong Kong, where they are in the same pool this weekend as Tonga and Romania.
Mark Appleson's back injury is making good progress.
Australia have named their big guns for the Hong Kong Sevens, including World Cup-winning centre combination Tim Horan and Jason Little and three of their Italian-based players, David Campese, Michael Lynagh and Tim Gavin.
The New Zealand Youth team, who last toured Scotland in 1988, are set to make a four-match return visit this autumn.
The tour is sponsored by New Zealand's Rugby News magazine.
Meyer has her sights on McColgan again Harry Pincott meets Elana Meyer, who is hoping for more success in the World Cross-Country Championships
IT WAS a confident and relaxed Elana Meyer who left Cape Town yesterday bound for Spain, and another clash with one of her sporting heroines, Liz McColgan.
The pair will meet in the World Cross-Country Championships at Amorebieta, near Bilbao, on Sunday, and the ever-pleasant Meyer is determined to achieve a Spanish double, having already defeated the Scot in the Olympic 10,000 metres in Barcelona last year, when she won a silver medal behind Derartu Tulu (Ethiopia).
Meyer proved she's in the right sort of form by winning the 1,500m in the Western Province Championships at the weekend in a very respectable 4min 07.90sec, running alone for most of the race.
Still coached by Dr Pietr Labuschange, Meyer went through a rigorous training schedule over the winter months and ran in quite a few cross-country races, a new experience for her.
She also travelled to Japan in January to compete in a half-marathon and came very close to beating McColgan's world record of 67:11, Meyer winning the race in 67:22.
‘I was very pleased with that time,’ admitted Meyer yesterday.
‘When I left my home in Stellenbosch it was almost 30C, but when I arrived in Japan it was very, very cold.
It was quite a shock, I can assure you.’
Meyer also ran in a cross- country in Durham earlier this year but that time the ‘chill factor’ was too much for her, and she did not perform well.
Since the Olympics, Meyer has become one of South Africa's biggest personalities.
Her financial adviser and mentor, Bernard Rose, revealed she has done extremely well financially ‘because most of the sponsorship deals were fixed up before Barcelona and were performance-related.’
Meyer will return home for a few weeks after this weekend's race, and will then fly to Britain, where she will set up base for about four months, competing on the European circuit in her build-up for the World Championships in Stuttgart, where she will no doubt meet McColgan again.
The South African athlete has her own fan club in Britain, in Bolton of all places, and the 200-odd members are called Elana's Commandos.
‘I hope to meet quite a few of them,’ she said yesterday.
Because of her international success and recognition, Meyer is one of the personalities South Africa is using to encourage more and more youngsters from the townships and under-developed areas to take up sport.
She holds clinics in the areas in and around Cape Town — the shanty towns begin a few miles outside the city and the houses improve markedly the nearer the centre you get — and Rose believes that the fruits of her success will start to become evident in two or three years.
However Meyer is not looking any further ahead than this weekend.
She knows only too well that if she finishes in front of McColgan, she is also likely to be the winner of the race.
Late goal denies young Scots Scotland Under-211 Iceland Under-211
A GOAL in the 85th minute denied Scotland victory in yesterday's friendly international at Rugby Park.
Fielding a side picked with an eye on the forthcoming Toulon tournament and an under-20 game with Italy next month, the Scots took the lead on the stroke of half-time.
St Mirren's Barry Lavety sent Andy Roddie through and the Aberdeen forward made no mistake.
Roddie had the ball in the net on two other occasions only to be ruled out by the referee for  infringements , and Iceland duly rubbed salt in the wounds when Feyenoord's Arnar Gunnlaugsson crossed from the right and Thordur Gudjonsson blasted the equaliser past substitute goalkeeper Jim Will.
Picture shows Scotland's scorer, Andy Roddie of Aberdeen, in the thick of the action
DONALD MACLEOD
Eight Scots selected to tour New Zealand
Omission of Back could leave Lions pack short of vital pace
By Norman Mair
HAVING  finished second to France, and thereby won what the footballers used to call the Home International championship, Scotland can hardly be grudged the eight players they have in the British Isles task force for the invasion of New Zealand this summer under captain Gavin Hastings.
Namely, in addition to the aforesaid Hastings, his brother Scott, Gary Armstrong, Paul Burnell, Kenny Milne, Peter Wright, Damian Cronin and Andy Reed.
Even though shorn of the banker that was Craig Chalmers, it matches the size of the Scotland representation in New Zealand in 1983 though one fewer than in Australia in 1989.
But England, with their almost bottomless numerical depth, have 16, which equals the record Welsh representation named for New Zealand in 1977.
All told, there are 13 players with previous Lions' experience.
At the weekend, I happened to be on a panel in a Welsh phone-in along with Wayne Shelford, Brian Price and Phil Bennett.
I was amazed to find the Welsh talking in terms of winning as many as seven places, despite their wooden spoon.
As it is, four is the least that proud rugby nation have had since the 1924 tour to South Africa.
Turning to the Irish, they were reckoning on five last week and that was before they had beaten the English.
Now, with just two, the more perfervid chauvinists, as you would expect, are foaming at the mouth.
Tracking the selectorial spoor had left one convinced that, going into the last day of the Five Nations championship, Scotland had ten players still very much in the running.
Their number did not include Derek Turnbull for all that — outside of Hawick — his spiritual home as a rugby player would surely be New Zealand.
The two from that top ten who have missed out are Doddie Weir and Iain Morrison.
Among those omitted, only Eric Ellwood, and even then just in two games, can be said to have had as much influence as Weir on the ultimate placings in the international championship.
On that score, the Melrose forward can count himself very unlucky.
At one time, there was a good chance that Weir would be picked in a No6 jersey as a blindside flanker cum utility forward.
In the end, he has lost out on the grounds of inferior physique.
For the record, Galwey, who seemingly had a fine match from the second row against England, stands 6ft 4in and weighs 17st.
However, though now chosen as a blindside flanker, he has played for Ireland at No8 when not at lock.
At first sight, Weir may look as if he should be jumping at four in an LS Lowry Matchstick XV but the gangling Scot is an awful lot tougher than he appears.
Again, none of the other back-row forwards — no, not even Ben Clarke, on the evidence of the Calcutta Cup — is in his class as a lineout jumper.
An important point since getting that first touch can do much to nip in the bud those ferocious Kiwi surges around the back of the lineout…
All that said, the case for taking him was still not all that much stronger than the case for leaving him out.
But the passing over of Neil Back leaves the Lions without a commodity of which they could find themselves in dire need.
To wit, the kind of speed on to man and ball and to the breakdown which would in itself render it a great deal more difficult for the All Blacks to make the Lions' pack look heavy-footed to the point of statuesque.
Even in the Principality, Webster is regarded as much more a blindside flanker than an authentic openside wing forward.
As between Morrison and Peter Winterbottom, Morrison had the better season and the better game at Twickenham and he is the better part of three years younger than the 33-year-old English openside.
But the battle-hardened Winterbottom's experience has counted for more for this particular  mission .
The main danger to Burnell and Wright both going was that Ireland's tour de force last Saturday would catapult the abrasive Peter Clohessy into the squad.
In the event, Burnell goes as a dependable foot soldier and Wright as a tight-head who proved his versatility by scrummaging so solidly at loose-head against Jeff Probyn.
As regards Probyn, the only one of the England pack not to make the party, the new laws, which have so reduced the number of scrums, were as harmful to his cause as his 37 years.
Nor, assuredly, have they done any favours to another English veteran in Wade Dooley.
The decline in England's lineout fortunes, one would reiterate, owes most to the fact that, thanks to the mandatory gap, it is now so much easier to get in a jump against them.
On Saturday, such a view was at last endorsed from within England's recent ranks when his old comrade-in-arms, Paul Ackford, spoke of how, under the old laws, Dooley ‘would step across and bump his man out of the way’.
Since it is highly improbable that the current, by no means unpromising, experimental lineout variations will be jettisoned by the IRFB before the tour, there was an obvious argument for taking Martin Johnston as a front jumper and shunting Martin Bayfield back to his preferred station in the middle.
The selectors, though, clearly consider that they could still have need of the towering mass of Dooley's physical presence.
Behind the scrum — where Ian Hunter will have to prove he is fully recovered after a spate of leg injuries — Rob Andrew, as suspected, has held off the late challenge of Ellwood, though coach Ian McGeechan will certainly want him to do more to compromise the enemy back row.
The other talking point is the absence of Jonathan Webb who was in line, before Lansdowne Road, to do the midweek goal-kicking job which Bob Hiller did so invaluably for the triumphant 1971 Lions.
‘Now,’ acknowledged Geoff Cooke, the manager, ‘since we are a bit light in that department, Rob Andrew and Stuart Barnes will have to some goal-kicking to support Gavin Hastings.
Indeed, Tony Clement will probably have to do a bit as well.’
McGeechan's best ‘fix'
COACH Ian McGeechan, whose background includes eight Tests for the Lions between 1974 and 1977 plus being coach of the last Lions in 1989, rates New Zealand ‘the ultimate challenge’.
He added: ‘Being there is a rugby education in itself.
As a rugby junkie, New Zealand has given me most of my best fixes.’
Bacardi joins up with Grant
WILLIAM Grant & Son, the independent family-owned Scotch Whisky distiller, and St Raphael, part of the Bacardi Martini family group, have formed a new joint venture company in France to be known as St Raphael Grant.
The new entity, in which each company will have a 50 per cent stake, will distribute in France the brands owned by the two companies, including Glenfiddich, Grant's, St Raphael, Noilly-Prat and Otard.
The venture will also handle selected agency brands.
Tay sees long-term recovery
THE Leeds-based house-builder, Tay Homes, said yesterday that it believed the outlook for the housing market was improving, but it was unlikely that conditions would change much in the rest of the current financial year, writes Bill Millar.
Reporting interim pre-tax profits which have fallen from £1.82 million to just over £1 million for the six months to 31 December, the chairman, Trevor Spencer, said the many favourable factors now relating to the housing market must contribute to buyers' confidence.
This was important not only to the house-building industry, but to general UK economic recovery, he said.
‘The sales increase evident from the New Year has had little effect on margins and the key to the future is purchaser confidence.’
Real improvement in margins would not occur until the 1993/4 trading year.
House sales over the six months went up from 357 units for the previous comparable period to 409.
Tay's earnings per share slumped from 5.5p to 3.04p, though turnover rose from almost £25.5 million to £27.2 million.
The interim dividend is being held at 1.2p, but Tay's shares lost 10p to 175p.
BR leg-room
At long last Cyril Bleasdale, the director of ScotRail, is doing something about first class on the 158 trains, more leg-room, larger tables and new upholstery (as reported on 17 March).
This is needed for the standard class passengers also.
I am sure the passengers who travel on these trains from Edinburgh to Glasgow and to Aberdeen and Inverness would like more room for themselves and their luggage.
Money could be better spent on introducing a third coach on a two-car Sprinter for luggage, bikes, parcels and prams, etc.
As for meals being offered at no extra cost, this is a waste of money.
I have worked with ScotRail for over ten years and passengers on the early morning trains complain about one thing only, the lack of space.
Give the passengers what they want, Mr Bleasdale: seats and room for luggage.
Have no technofear Mr Lang, we don't compute
STUPEFY themselves with electronic games?
Oor wee angels?
Mr Lang, how dare you, sir!
And are you inferring that Thomas the Tank Engine is a video nasty.
Tom and Jerry, yes, there are some suspect moments, the ones which gave rise to both the Theatre of Cruelty and the entire oeuvre of that cartoon copyist, Salvador Dali.
But on the whole, the only video nasties in our house are accidental recordings of English cricket tours, made by an ill-programmed video machine in the silent watches of the night.
Yes, we have no computer games.
Although my elder two sons are experts in Streetcleaner Two, Sonic the Warthog and Attack of the Psychopathic Hippopotami, they live in Glasgow, where fast reaction times and knowledge of weird mutant creatures is necessary for survival on the no-mean-city streets, where the drivers are worse than the megabytten monsters.
We don't have computer games in the house because…well, because the younger two children aren't quite old enough.
And because, unlike some fathers, I can't interest myself in sending a multi-coloured hedgehog spinning around a televisual roller coaster faster than Esther Rantzen changes expression from moronic merriment to Dianesque poor-thing-how-you-must-be-suffering-thank-God-I'm-not solemnity.
Also, for the past six years computers have been essential, if initially unwelcome, tools in my job, and the idea of spending leisure time absorbing even more radiation from a cathode ray tube doesn't appeal.
Unless, there's, ummm…something good on telly, that is.
Six years ago the only computer I'd used was some horrid games machine a girlfriend had once become obsessed with.
We broke up after I met her mother, who walked into the room in which I was sitting, only to find me oblivious, shouting obscenities at a television screen whereon computerised pirates were digging up a desert island at my joystick's behest.
It was not a moment to treasure.
Or perhaps it was.
I'd struggled through a freelance career using a wonderful old black upright Imperial typewriter, the kind hammered manically by Jack (‘Cigarette me!’)
Lemmon in The Front Page.
Then came the first truly affordable home computer with serious wordprocessing, the Amstrad PCW8256.
Still, £399 plus VAT was a lot of cash.
Worse, after trying one out in Dixons, I suffered a major attack of technofear.
I felt the same way a horse must have when confronted with a steam engine.
Or Thomas the Tank Engine on meeting Diesel.
No.
The physical clunk and thunk of a typewriter, the adrenalin-pumping stimulus of a blank piece of paper, the whiff of Tipp-Ex — I needed it all
It took two years before I girded up my floppy disks and bought an Amstrad.
It had dropped in price by £100, and it was time to enter the computer age.
But I was not of that age, had no desire to learn programming languages, and had undergone game aversion therapy.
All I wanted to do was write, and correct and edit and shuffle and store, all the things people said were so much easier on screen than on bits of bleached and pulped wood.
I couldn't do it.
Locoscript, it was called, the word processing programme which came free with the Amstrad.
But I was an alien being in a green screen world, lost, weeping with rage and frustration, cuffing the poor old computer, banging my head off the keyboard.
I was, in Robert Pirsig's immortal phrase, caught in a gumption trap, expending more and more energy in a blind alley of endeavour from which I needed to quietly reverse in temporary resignation.
So I switched off the PCW, ignored it for a week, played pool and drank frequent large tomato juices.
When I came back to the world of RAM and ROM, my subconscious had apparently been connecting up some loose neurons, and everything fell into place.
My approach to computers then and now remains the same.
Identify what you want it to do, learn how to make it do that, ignore everything else.
My father in his retirement has become a computer hobbyist, upgrading constantly, browsing through those 500-page magazines which sell the same computer in different boxes, assembled by underpaid and exploited single mothers in the Midlands.
He is fascinated by the different programmes, awed by the machine's speed and complexity.
As for me, the things I expect a computer to do have advanced somewhat.
I want to write, correct and store articles, but also books.
Chapters can be quite long, and that means I need enough of a working memory in the computer gubbins itself to handle at least 6,000 words at a time.
The poor old PCW couldn't hold more than a couple of thousand.
Then there is the wonderful world of electronic mail, by which this column will pop up in the North Bridge computer within the next few minutes.
In spite of the laudable attempts by British Telecom and Highlands and Islands Enterprise to improve things, there is really only one way to send words down the telephone line, particularly to newspapers, and that is by Mercury's Link 7500 E-mail system.
For years, my little Amstrad earned its purchase price time and again, courtesy of a cheap modem.
But now I want to go faster than 1,000 words in six minutes.
And the other thing is, I want to carry the computer around with me.
And I want it to be cheap.
Portability I solved years ago with a Tandy 102, a tiny, bounce-it-off-the concrete newspaperperson's computer which came complete with built-in programmes, a modem for firing stories down phone lines and virtually no memory.
Portable and hardy it was, but slow and prone to blowing up telephone exchanges, because it was American and not approved for use in the UK.
Consequently I never did so.
That fact that every newspaper in the country has dozens of the beasts doesn't mean they're ever used, by the way.
Oh, no.
I borrowed one of my dad's mail-order magazines, and, leafing through the screeds of bankrupt stock, out-of-date and obsolete machines, put together a portable package capable of holding huge chunks of typically verbose Mortonesque meanderings, and spitting them down telephone wires eight times faster than I'd been used to.
The cost was less than the price of an Amstrad PCW 8256 when it first came out onto the market all of those years ago.
Of course the kids can't play games on it.
But I am teaching them how to programme the video properly, Mr Lang.
Then I'm going to make them erase all the Thomas the Tank Engine tapes and record something educational.
Like Tom and Jerry.
Chess body plans new title match
THE world champion, Garry Kasparov, and the British challenger, Nigel Short, have forfeited their right to play for the world championship title, according to the official ruling body of chess, the International Chess Federation (FIDE).
FIDE said yesterday it would ask the Russian Anatoly Karpov and Dutchman Jan Timman (beaten by Short in a qualifying event) to play off for the title instead.
The announcement was the chess federation's response to the decision by Kasparov and Short to stage their final outside FIDE's auspices in an attempt to attract higher prize money and give players more control over professional chess.
Kasparov and Short have set up a breakaway Professional Chess Association, and are considering bids for a title match, which would almost certainly be staged in London.
Clubs intend to chart course for the future
THE Scottish Amateur Rowing Association executive must have derived plenty of food for thought from open house discussions with clubs and individuals on Sunday, to help prepare the next development plan.
With an interlude for a half-yearly general meeting to approve the audited accounts, a somewhat frenetic round of discussion groups produced a remarkable degree of consensus on various fronts.
Without taking away from the association's present main activities in forming international teams and organising international events — mirrored by the clubs' heavy orientation towards racing — it was agreed that the whole base of the sport needed widening.
How each existing club will adapt to this remains to be seen, but clear messages for more non-competitive activity came across, including the civilising of premises where necessary.
A strong need to improve the geographical spread was found, with Inverness the only centre in the Highlands, and Aberdeen — strong though it may be — also out on a limb.
Largely because the sport had focused almost entirely on the racing craft used on inland waters, the Firths of Clyde, Forth and Tay, which had been strong centres once, had all but died away: with Royal West boating mainly in Glasgow and the new Dundee University on the Tay near Perth.
Even with the present set-up, their seemed reasonable recruitment figures overall but few stayed the course to reach the upper levels of racing achievement creating what was described as ‘a meatless sandwich.’
Vice-president MacFarlane will have plenty on his plate now as he tries to pull all the ideas together into the first draft paper on the way to creating the eventual plan for formal consideration in November.
Meanwhile, the much-hyped University Boat Race between Cambridge and Oxford takes place over 4 miles of the Thames in London on Saturday.
It lacks nothing that money and influence can provide.
Cambridge have had but one win since 1975, and Oxford seem set to level the overall score at 69 all since they started the series in 1829.
But the nature of the event, with the crews making their own courses on the tidal river, makes prediction a rather fraught activity.
Stroking Oxford for the second year running is a Glasgow Academy FP, Iain Gardiner.
He has the benefit of Olympic gold medallist Matthew Pinsent leading the ‘engine-room’ behind him.
Gardiner took up rowing on the Isis and after last year's event went on to play a valuable part in the Scottish senior men's winning of the Home International Regatta.
Immediately preceding the main race, there is one between Goldie and Isis, the second-string crews.
In Isis is James Annan, who hails from Ayr and attended non-rowing Edinburgh Academy.
He, too, has had the benefit of the college system which can bring beginners on very rapidly.
Aga Khan gives up long fight with Jockey Club
THE AGA KHAN is set to call a halt to his long-running legal battle with the Jockey Club over the disqualification of Oaks winner Aliysa, it was disclosed yesterday.
An appeal to the House of Lords was the only avenue left open to him after the High Court rejected his bid to overturn the decision and then, in December, the Court of Appeal refused his application for a judicial review.
But the Aga Khan's solicitor, Matthew McCloy, said yesterday: ‘You can take it that it is not His Highness's present intention to appeal to the House of Lords.’
The Aga Khan, one of the sport's leading owner-breeders, seems to have accepted that his three-and-a-half year challenge to the decision to disqualify Aliysa for failing a dope test after winning the 1989 Oaks has run its course.
But his boycott of British racing, which resulted in 90 horses being removed from Newmarket, will remain, with his string continuing to be exiled in France and Ireland.
The Aga Khan has spent millions of pounds on the Aliysa case.
He assembled a team of scientists who argued that the metabolites of 3-Hydroxycamphor, found in Aliysa's urine, could have come from feedstuffs or bedding.
Isobel Cunningham writes: Camphor, the old-fashioned remedy grandmothers the world over have rubbed on their chests since time immemorial, brought about the demise of Aliysa from the role of Classic-winning filly though why has never really been established.
Yet the substance had only gone on to the Jockey Club's list of prohibited substances a mere ten months before Aliysa failed her dope test.
The Jockey Club has always declined to give a reason for its suddenly being seen as performance-affecting, saying only: ‘Our list is being updated all the time.’
But in the opinion of one analytical chemist connected with racing, designer drugs have become big business in America and side-by-side with their development have come masking agents — innocent in themselves but if administered at the same time capable of totally wiping out any trace of them.
‘It could be that the horse racing forensic laboratory at Newmarket fears camphor could become such an agent,’ he said.
Racing's only Sunday meeting of the year is to be staged at Lingfield Park on 1 August.
The Jockey Club yesterday announced plans to maintain its Sunday racing campaign by sanctioning a mixed meeting of flat and jump racing at the Surrey track.
Trainer Michael Stoute with Alisya at Newmarket in 1989
Atkinson refuses to be fooled by Walker
RON ATKINSON yesterday accused Norwich manager, Mike Walker, of ‘absolute kidology’ on the eve of a Carrow Road showdown that will have a major bearing on the destiny of the Premier League championship.
The Aston Villa manager, whose team can confirm their new favouritism for the crown by building on a two-point lead at the top, insists he is not fooled by Walker's apparent concession of the title after Norwich's 3-0 defeat at Wimbledon on Saturday.
Atkinson said: ‘That is absolute kidology.
Norwich are still in the pot.
If they beat us and Manchester United, who still have to go there, they will be favourites again.’
Villa have failed to win any of their last eight games at Carrow Road.
Manchester United manager, Alex Ferguson, gave England winger Lee Sharpe a vote of confidence and named him in an unchanged side for tonight's home game against Arsenal.
Latest figures reveal England as very average Jeremy Allerton discovers that the Indian tour statistics and the Test ratings offer no hiding place to Keith Fletcher's men
THERE was an amusing television programme last week called BOFTY — Bore of the Year — which meted out awards to those most guilty of pretentiousness, rudeness, ubiquity and any other media excess as decided by the satirical magazine, Private Eye.
The weekend saw the official BAFTA awards to all those luminous darlings who managed to outshine themselves over the past year on TV or film, and the release of the England averages for their Indian tour, along with the Coopers&Lybrand ratings of Test cricketers.
It's rare nowadays to be in any form of employment without being connected to constant assessment of performance.
Thus the ‘feel good’ factor lies in the crowd's delight in the decline and fall of public figures: build 'em up, knock 'em down.
As far as the England cricketers are concerned, it is hard to subscribe to the view that there are lies, damned lies and cricket averages.
Over an extended period these particular statistics do tell the tale.
There is, of course, some truth in Keith Fletcher's bleat that ‘good players do not become bad ones overnight’.
Christopher Martin-Jenkins succinctly summed up the situation when commenting that in less than a year England had been outplayed by the entire subcontinent.
Ted Dexter, whom I sometimes believe must dwell in Dr Who's Tardis machine, would be hard-pressed on that point.
Like all good leaders, he has stoutly defended his men at various times as the victims of smog, aggressive prawns and a railway system which makes even British Rail resemble a Swiss timepiece.
It is as well to remind ourselves of the extent of England's Test defeats in India and Sri Lanka.
Against India they were routed by eight wickets; an innings and 22 runs; and an innings and 15 runs.
Only in the first innings of the third Test in Bombay did England score more than 300, while in the first two they were forced to follow on.
In the three Tests they captured only 28 wickets, while in the one-day internationals they drew 3-3, having led 3-1.
Against Sri Lanka it was even more humiliating as they lost the Test by five wickets and both one-day internationals by embarrassing margins.
Top marks go to Graeme Hick, who headed the Test averages with both bat (51.1) and ball (eight at 30 apiece), as well as the one-day batting list with 45.14.
These batting performances move him up three places, to 41, on the C&L list.
Graham Gooch, despite scoring only 47 in four innings, remains in second place behind Richie Richardson in the C&L list, with Robin Smith in fifth position.
Mike Gatting was very disappointing, with only 266 runs in eight Test innings at an average of 33.25 and a dreadful 7.66 in six one-day innings.
Phillip DeFreitas managed to play in only three matches in India, including one Test, and failed to take a single wicket.
His results in seven of the eight one-day internationals were only marginally better, with six wickets at 41.33, and he is ranked 12 with C&L — the highest Englishman.
The horror story in the spin department is depicted by John Emburey's six Test wickets at 51.50 each and Philip Tufnell's seven at 59.42.
Ian Salisbury, who played in half the Test matches, returned figures which will haunt him for some time.
He took just three wickets for 76.66 each at an average of 4.42 runs an over.
His best analysis was 2-142.
The England football management has for years moaned that there are no longer any easy matches, and England's cricketers learned this salutary lesson against Sri Lanka.
Seven of the Sri Lanka team which beat England are in the top 40 in the C&L ratings, which puts them alongside Australia as the country with the strongest all-round batting team in Test cricket at the moment.
The West Indians and Pakistanis could have something to say about that.
Anil Kumble, India's leg-spinner, has taken more wickets (50) in the last six months than all of England's bowlers put together — 43 in four Test matches.
The worrying point is that the England squad had never been so well prepared generally, but were specifically ill-prepared to counter the decisive factor — spin.
They will be much better against Australia, and some new blood will be inevitable.
But the worst aspect of the present cricket set-up is the advent of four-day county cricket this season, which has been introduced solely to prepare players for Test cricket.
I fear the result will be boring, defensive cricket, in conditions unlikely to enhance players' ability to cope with those they have recently encountered.
By extending the playing time on the same uncovered, bland pitches, you merely prolong the attrition, with no technical benefit other than individually longer innings plus longer spells from spinners on discouraging surfaces.
Salmond, Reifer efforts are not enough Harry Pincott reports from South Africa on the opening match of Scotland's tour
ALTHOUGH they eventually succumbed by five wickets, Scotland can take heart from yesterday's performance in Stellenbosch against a team which included two Warwickshire players, and one of Kenya's top pace bowlers.
Stellenbosch Farmers may sound like some sort of village team but they are an invitation XI, most of whom have played representative cricket in South Africa or abroad.
They lost by only seven runs to Yorkshire last week, and over the next ten days they will face Nottinghamshire, Northamptonshire and Glamorgan.
In a magnificent setting — the towering Boland Mountains on one side and the world-famous Stellenbosch Winery on the other — and in temperatures which soared into the mid-80s, Scotland's lack of match practice was, as their captain Jim Love admitted, their biggest handicap.
Put into bat by their hosts, with no toss required, Scotland were mostly indebted to George Salmond and George Reifer for their score of 152 for nine off 50 overs.
Reifer, as an opener, made 30 and Salmond, moving freely, hit a splendid 56 off 95 balls, including six fours.
The agile and fleet-footed Salmond showed little sign of the calf injury sustained in a recent football match and which required 18 stitches, but unfortunately only the two debutants, Love (14) and Stuart Kennedy (10), gave the Arbroath player any support, the last five wickets going down for 32 runs.
Though Kenya's Martin Suji, who is on a development tour, took only one wicket, he bowled at a lively pace, and the 21-year-old is likely to face the Scots in next year's Associate Members Cup in his own country, if Scotland are accepted into the competition.
The Warwickshire pair, Paul Booth and Paul Smith, took just one wicket between them, and it was left to the veteran coloured bowler, Johnny Hendriks, to emerge as Stellenbosch's top performer with four for 20.
Andy Bee raised Scotland's hopes briefly when he bowled Paul Matthews in his second over, but Wayne Truter with 58 and solid contributions from Craig Marais, Rob East and captain Howard Bergins saw Stellenbosch home with more than two overs to spare.
The Scots fielding was mostly very good, though Kennedy and David Orr put down catches, and there was a controversial moment at the end of the 33rd over when Bergins was adjudged lbw.
He claimed the ball had hit his bat, the square-leg umpire agreed and he was recalled, much to the chagrin of the bowler, Ian Beven.
The Scots have a rest day today, and those who did not play against Stellenbosch will turn out against Bellville tomorrow.
Weir present as Scots start to plan for next campaign
SCOTLAND arrived in Hong Kong last night and soon joined forces with Doddie Weir, summoned as a replacement for the injured Iain Morrison.
Today, they begin their serious preparation for this weekend's Hong Kong Sevens, in which they are drawn in the same pool as Tonga — who defeated Australia's second string in Fiji last weekend — and Romania.
Should the Scots qualify for the quarter-finals, their most likely opponents are Western Samoa, fielding the personnel who triumphed at the Canberra event.
Meanwhile, the New Zealand youth team, who last toured Scotland in 1988, are set to make a four-match return visit this autumn.
The tour, sponsored by New Zealand's Rugby News magazine, also looks likely to include four games in Ireland.
All Blacks Ian Jones and Pat Lam — the latter also having represented Western Samoa — were graduates from the last tour when the team lost to South Under-21s in a cracking contest at Poynder Park, yet defeated Scotland Under-21s — including Craig Chalmers and Tony Stanger — 25-21 in a match at Murrayfield which was played as a curtain-raiser to the Scotland v Australia international.
The youths are likely to be in Scotland at the same time as the New Zealand national side and Auckland provincial side.
All in all, quite an exodus from the Land of the Long White Cloud.
Paula Bale, the Fijian-born Canterbury winger who played for New Zealand in Suva last weekend and was in the All Blacks' squad for the RWC Sevens at Murrayfield from 16-18 April, has been given clearance by the NZRFU to represent Fiji — proof, yet again, of what a farcical situation the present haphazard laws on international eligibility place the game.
Not surprisingly, he has been enlisted promptly for the Fiji squad for Hong Kong which also arrived last night.
Dundas due to play in three majors
By Martin Dempster
STEPHEN DUNDAS, the 18-year-old British Amateur champion from Haggs Castle, is to play in three of the four majors this season.
Since becoming the first Scot in 35 years to win the Amateur title at Carnoustie last year, Dundas has known that he would be playing in the US Masters at Augusta and Open Championship at Royal St George's, and now he has received an invitation to the US Open, to be played at Baltusrol, New Jersey, on 17-20 June.
If that's not enough, the young Scot has two other events on the professional circuit to look forward to.
For, hard on the heels of being asked to play in Jack Nicklaus's Memorial Tournament in June, he has also been invited to play in the Benson & Hedges International at St Mellion, prior to which he will play a practice round with Jose Maria Olazabal, himself a former British Amateur champion.
Turnberry's Mhairi McKay, last year's winner, and Curtis Cup player Catriona Lambert (North Berwick) will represent Scotland in the team event incorporated in the Helen Holm Trophy, to be played over Royal Troon and Troon Portland on 24-25 April.
The pair have also been selected along with the Scottish champion, Janice Moodie (Windyhill), for the Hermitage Scratch Cup, to be played at The Hermitage, Dublin, on 2 May.
Meanwhile, the Scottish Ladies' Golfing Association has named a 12-strong girls' squad for Sunday's training match against Helensburgh boys.
Dalglish snaps up Gallacher and Le Saux in deadline swap deals
KENNY DALGLISH, who has already spent £12 million on Blackburn Rovers' quest for glory, set the transfer merry-go-round spinning again yesterday.
The Blackburn manager set up two swap deals which led to the departure of strikers Roy Wegerle and Steve Livingstone, and the arrival of Kevin Gallacher from Coventry and Graeme Le Saux from Chelsea.
With tomorrow's English transfer deadline looming, Dalglish led a burst of activity in the market by swapping Wegerle for Scottish international striker Gallacher in a deal worth £1.5 million.
There was a cash adjustment in Coventry's favour and both players are expected to play for their new clubs tonight.
It is the third £1m-plus move in the career of South African-born 29-year-old Wegerle, previously with Chelsea, Luton and QPR.
Gallacher, 27, was Coventry's record signing when they paid Dundee United £900,000 for him in January 1990.
He scored 36 goals in 117 games and has earned 12 caps for Scotland.
Dalglish then handed over Livingstone and £400,000 to Chelsea in return for England Under-21 midfielder Le Saux, 24, who has played only once since Dave Webb took charge at Stamford Bridge.
That deal, valued at £700,000, was registered too late for the two players to be available tonight.
Webb also allowed goalkeeper Kevin Hitchcock to join West Ham on loan until the end of the season, as fit-again Russian international, Dmitri Kharin, was named in the Chelsea squad for tonight's trip to Leeds.
Hitchcock was axed after one game under Webb, who recalled Dave Beasant to the No 1 spot.
He goes to Upton Park as cover for West Ham's Czech international, Ludek Miklosko.
Norwich's record buy, Darren Beckford, looks set to join relegation-threatened Oldham for £500,000.
He has agreed terms with Oldham manager, Joe Royle, and will have a medical this morning.
The 25-year-old striker scored 13 goals in 50 games for Norwich after joining them two years ago from Port Vale for £925,000, but has been left out of the squad for the past 11 games.
Barnet, desperate for money to resolve their problems, are likely to net around £500,000 from the sale to Notts County of striker Gary Bull, cousin of Wolves striker Steve.
Bull has scored 127 goals in four seasons at Underhill.
Nottingham Forest, who have already had bids of £1.5m and £1.75m for Stan Collymore rejected by Southend, are expected to bid for the 22-year-old striker again.
Republic of Ireland Under-21 forward, Kieran Toal, given a free transfer by Manchester United, has joined Motherwell.
Kevin Gallacher: switched clubs with Roy Wegerle
Hay beats Swiss on extra end
KIRSTY HAY and her Scottish junior champions were taken to an extra end by Manuella Kormann's Swiss quartet at the world junior championships in Grindelwald yesterday.
Two draws by Pegg set up a 10-8 win, with Kormann being forced to attempt a draw to the two-foot from the frosty outside ice; it slipped through to the back of the house.
The Scottish junior men's team were beaten 6-2 by Canada's Michel Ferland.
Two down going into the seventh, the Scots were lying four but Ferland played two perfect draws round guards.
Gunn still rooting for Ferguson in title race Myles Palmer reveals why the Norwich goalkeeper makes Manchester United his second choice
THE Norwich goalkeeper, Bryan Gunn, says that if anyone is going to win the FA Premier League apart from his own club, ‘I'd love Manchester United to do it.’
He explains: ‘This is because Alex Ferguson helped me on my way in football when I was 14 years old, and taught me most of the things I took with me from Aberdeen.’
Third-placed Norwich crashed 3-0 at Wimbledon on Saturday, but can redeem themselves by beating the league leaders, Aston Villa, at Carrow Road tonight.
‘We've got ourselves into a great position, even over our closest rivals in fourth and fifth spot,’ says Gunn, who is in his seventh season with Norwich.
‘We've given ourselves a chance to finish in the top three, a tremendous achievement for a team that was tipped for relegation at the start of the season.
And we might go on and create a shock.
‘Both Villa and United have spent a lot of money on quality players.
Norwich can't afford to spend so much, but we've bought wisely, nurtured this squad over a couple of seasons now, and we're all maturing nicely together.
‘Ian Crook came out of Tottenham reserves and has shown what a quality player he is.
He learned a lot from Glenn Hoddle and Ossie Ardiles.
At the moment Ian is playing as well as he has ever played in my time at Carrow Road.’
Aston Villa are having a great run, but they hold no particular horrors for the Norwich players.
‘We played a sweeper system up there to try and nullify Dean Saunders’ pace and Dalian Atkinson's flick-ons, and it worked well for us,’Gunn said.
‘It was a hard-fought game, but we played some quality football and won 3-2.
We got a lot of plaudits for that victory because it took us back to the top of the league.’
After Villa, Norwich's next home game is against Ferguson's Manchester United.
Gunn says his old boss is not dour, it is just that people misread his temperament.
‘That impression comes across from the way he concentrates on everything on the pitch, but underneath he's one of the funniest men you could meet.
He used to have us in stitches at times at Aberdeen, and I'm sure he does at United.
‘Of course, he has had rows with many top players, but he's also helped them improve their game.
He's not shouting at you for the sake of it — he's shouting at you in an effort to improve you.
His passion for the game shines through everything.’
Norwich have now replaced Nottingham Forest as a model of entertaining, educated football and good sportsmanship, and at last seem to be acquiring some of the defensive solidity that Forest had in their glory years.
So what was manager Mike Walker's reaction when Norwich lost 7-1 at Blackburn in October?
‘He just said: ‘We've only lost three points, and that's it.
This is a one-off game, it's not going to happen to you again.’
And he was right.
We went out the following week against QPR, who were up there challenging, and beat them 2-1.
‘Now, every one of our last seven matches is going to have atmosphere, and every one will be hard-fought.’
GEORGE HERRINGSHAW/ASP Bryan Gunn: ‘Alex Ferguson helped me on my way in football when I was 14 years old, and taught me most of the things I took with me from Aberdeen’
We're not second class — Robertson Pride will motivate makeshift team
By Hugh Keevins
HEARTS' John Robertson yesterday spoke up for all the members of Scotland's impromptu squad to face Germany when he railed against any suggestion that the side who will tonight take on the world champions at Ibrox is made up of ‘second class citizens’.
‘You would be a braver man than I am if you went into our dressing room and told the players that was how you thought of them,’ said Robertson, rebuking the journalist who ventured the opinion that any squad minus nine of its original complement was necessarily sub-standard.
Robertson will tonight play from the start in a Scotland side who can, collectively, muster only 61 caps.
Germany's Lothar  Matthaeus [pictured right]has 96 caps on his own, while the other members of Berti Vogts' side will have exactly 300 among them.
Andy Roxburgh, Scotland's national coach, will name his substitutes this afternoon but not one of the seven players left at his disposal, Aberdeen's Booth, Grant, Smith and Shearer along with Main and McKinlay, of Dundee United, and Darren Jackson, of Hibs, has been capped at full international level.
Robertson was speaking about professional pride as opposed to wallowing in excessive sentimentality when he catalogued the reasons why there was only eager anticipation of the friendly fixture that has taken on a hostile look since injury decimated Roxburgh's initial choice of players.
‘There are 11 players who cannot wait to get this game started and as soon as those Scotland jerseys are pulled over our heads the dream of playing against the world champions will give way to proving individual worth,’ said Robertson.
‘Obviously the odds against Scotland overcoming everything and winning are high, but matches of this type do not always work out the way they have looked beforehand.’
Roxburgh put the occasion, a friendly with no bearing on Scotland's prospects of qualifying for a sixth, successive World Cup, even more sharply into perspective.
‘For me, pressure means being homeless or unemployed.
But a football match…?
You motivate the players for one of those and then let them enjoy themselves,’ stated the man who then elected to put the apparent hopelessness of Scotland's position into focus.
‘When Scotland met Germany in Norkopping during the European Championship last summer, we had 14 corner kicks and they had two.
‘Germany won the match on a lucky goal and a silly mistake on our part.
Berti Vogts is acutely aware of how close that match was in Sweden and he knows his side has not come here to take on the equivalent of a San Marino.’
Scotland's record against Germany — either unified or federal republic — is a close one, with three draws, three wins and four defeats.
‘The crowd will be supportive of the players, too, because what they ask is that the players do all they can for their country,’ said Roxburgh.
More specifically, the national coach has assembled a side in which there are those in defence who have, like Alan McLaren, shown that reputation alone is no means of access for opponents.
Scotland's midfield contains those who can ‘put in the tackles’, while the partnership of Robertson, at 5ft 6in, and Duncan Ferguson, at 6ft 4in, offers an unpredictable foil for a proven goalscorer.
It should be borne in mind, too, that only five German players — Buchwald, Kholer, Hasler, Klinsmann and Doll — remain from the last meeting of the two countries.
The occasion's capacity for firing up, rather than wearing down, Scotland's players was summed up by Aberdeen's Stephen Wright, one of two new caps, the other being Hearts' goalkeeper, Nicky Walker.
‘It is not possible to get a better debut than a game against the world champions,’ he said.
‘I played for Scotland Under-21 against them in the European Championship quarter-final tie last season, when we were two goals behind on aggregate and then scored three times in the final 20 minutes to win.
‘It was the best match I have ever played in and proof that the underdog can sometimes come out on top.’
Turning reality on its head is now the objective of a national coach who is made to understand it is far from an ideal world every time he picks a Scotland squad.
Chunnel detour for Tour de France
THE Tour de France will make a detour through the Channel Tunnel when cycling's most prestigious race visits England for two stages in July 1994.
Two stages of the three-week race will be decided on the roads of Dover, Brighton and Portsmouth to mark the opening of the tunnel.
It is only the second time the Tour de France has visited Britain.
On its first visit, in 1974, the riders were confined to a closed circuit on a new stretch of bypass near Plymouth.
Unveiling the route in London yesterday, the Tour's general manager, Jean-Marie Leblanc, said: ‘The Tour is truly a European event and we are delighted to be bringing it to England.
‘We have inspected the course and are convinced that it will provide outstanding racing for thousands along the route and millions watching on television.’
Dover Castle will be the starting point for the first day's racing on 6 July over a 125-mile course through  Folkestone , Canterbury, Ashford and Tunbridge Wells to Brighton.
The climb of Ditchling Beacon and the finish of the stage on Brighton's Madeira Drive are expected to attract huge crowds.
The next day's stage will be a 120-mile loop starting and finishing in Portsmouth.
Portsmouth will host the stage as part of its 800th anniversary celebrations and will be the embarkation point for the return to France by ferry.
The Tour will begin in northern France before the 200 riders plus an entourage of 3,500 in 1,500 vehicles then cross by train to England via the Channel Tunnel.
Scotland to award full caps for South Pacific Tests
By Norman Mair
IT WASN'T a record but that grand Heriot's FP hooker of yesteryear, Bob Tollervey, who was 16 times reserve for Scotland without ever winning a cap, could be excused for feeling that he was born at the wrong time.
For Scotland, with more than half their current first-choice XV seconded for duty with the Lions, are to award full caps for this summer's three Tests against Fiji, Western Samoa and Tonga.
It is logical in so far as Scotland, in pacing themselves in a World Cup context, have already given caps when deliberately fielding understrength XVs versus the like of Japan and Zimbabwe.
But it should also be a reminder to some of the inveterate statisticians to keep a sense of perspective when measuring some of the spectacular cap hauls of today against, say, the 20 caps of the great Ross Logan.
That legendary scrum-half, whom no less a pundit than Vivian Jenkins once included in his World XV, built his tally in the days when there was not only no World Cup and no Scotland overseas tours but no French match.
You can make your own judgment as to what he, and others like him, might have totalled today.
THOSE once jealously guarded holy vestments, international rugby jerseys, are now sold — figuratively but, my word, certainly not in fact — ten a penny.
They can be big business and it is is more for their commercial and promotional appeal than their scenic, that the SRU yesterday launched, in conjunction with Umbro International, Scotland's World Cup sevens jersey.
The national garment is the SRU tartan in pin-stripe.
The full-size, adult jersey will retail at £34.99, the junior versions costing roughly half as much.
With no fewer than 70 countries taking television coverage, it should not lack exposure — not, that is, while Scotland last!
Still on the World Cup sevens, the 20 players for the reserve pool provided by the SRU to replace the injured in any of the 24 teams will come from the 30-strong Scotland sevens squad.
They will be selected at the same time as Scotland finalise their team of ten.
Under their own coaches, Eric Paxton and Andrew Ker, the reserves will train and be together throughout the tournament, having competed in the Kilmarnock sevens this Sunday.
The Co-optimists, alias Scotland, will take part in the Currie sevens on Sunday, 4 April.
THE SRU is in favour of the ratification of this season's experimental variations in the laws or, at the very least, the continuation of such experiments as are not ratified by the IRFB at its meeting in Edinburgh in April.
It was a view, noted the SRU's chief executive, Bill Hogg, at Murrayfield yesterday, which Ian McGeechan fully endorsed — the Lions' and Scotland coach contending that where they had not been proved they had not, as yet, been disproved.
The Union — which was nothing if not progressive — had canvassed a broad cross-section of the game in Scotland, including players, coaches, referees, club officials, rank and file supporters and even — may Aikman Smith forgive them — members of the media.
Incidentally, the SRU will continue to press for the IRFB to form a Laws Advisory Committee consisting of genuine experts as opposed to five members of the board who may be good men and true but who know damn all about, for example, why the laws have evolved as they have.
A very necessary starting point, one would have thought.
Still in the realm of the laws, Jim Fleming has been appointed to referee New Zealand versus Western Samoa on 31 July.
Italians bid for top without Baggio
ITALY, Scotland's World Cup rivals, must make do without gifted Juventus playmaker Roberto Baggio today when they seek a victory over Malta which would lift them to the top of the qualifying Group I.
Baggio, scorer of 16 goals in just 27 internationals, badly bruised his side as his club defeated Benfica in a UEFA Cup tie last week and has been ruled out.
Coach Arrigo Sacchi names experienced Sampdoria forward Roberto Mancini as Baggio's replacement for the tie in Palermo and gives Atalanta defender Sergio Porrini and Parma striker Alessandro Melli their debuts.
The Netherlands are forced to field a second-string team for today's qualifier against San Marino in Utrecht — but coach Dick Advocaat has still ordered a goal spree.
He said: ‘We need at least 12 in our two matches against them to beef up our goal difference.’
The Dutch are without Marco van Basten, Ruud Gullit, Frank Rijkaard, Dennis Bergkamp, Ronald Koeman, Danny Blind and Wim Jonk through injury or suspension.
Advocaat has shaped his team around a five-man attack aimed at overwhelming San Marino's part-timers.
Holland, third in Group II behind England and Norway, visit Wembley on 28 April.
German coach launches attack on UEFA over Scotland's plight
THE German national coach, Berti Vogts, an old friend of Andy Roxburgh, came out in sympathy with him yesterday by blaming Scotland's selection plight for this evening's game at Ibrox on UEFA, European football's governing body, writes Hugh Keevins.
Vogts, an expert angler blissfully at home with his squad on the banks of Loch Lomond, took a harpoon gun to the legislators for their idea of forming a European Champions League.
‘When club football is put first to the extent of having two mini sections to find the European Cup finalists, it is obvious that national sides must suffer as a result of the extra matches,’ said Vogts.
‘I happen to be one of those people who likes to see the game played at its highest level and a great opportunity has now been lost for Scotland.
‘It is not every week a side gets to meet the reigning world champions and I would have thought Andy Roxburgh would have got more support from his clubs.
It is a sad situation for him.’
The same problem could not arise in Germany, according to Vogts, because of the ‘wonderful relationship’ which exists between the Football Federation and those who look after the national team.
The coach's argument, however well meaning in support of Roxburgh, is nevertheless flawed.
Scotland's national coach has been disadvantaged only in the sense that so many of his squad come from one club, Rangers, who have had to withdraw six players because of injury.
This, with the exception of AC Milan in Italy, is not a trend that is commonplace on the continent.
Yet if part of the problem at Ibrox in respect of injury has been caused by the addition of European Champions league matches to an already congested domestic schedule, it is only Vogts's good fortune that no German side was able to make it to the last eight of the European Cup.
Had Leeds United not removed Stuttgart, Germany's coach might have experienced the same difficulties as Roxburgh.
The rest of the major clubs in Scotland, meanwhile, have given unselfishly of their players to compensate for the mass withdrawal from Ibrox.
Hearts and Aberdeen, who have six players between them in tonight's starting 11, have helped Roxburgh while one, the Edinburgh club, is going for the Scottish Cup and the other is involved in that tournament as well as the league championship.
The Germans showed yesterday, though, that they have a suitably high opinion of themselves as world champions.
A press corps reaching into three figures has accompanied the side to Scotland and, in the absence of World Cup qualifying matches to play, each appearance made by Vogts' team has taken on a genuine significance.
When Vogts spoke about Germany's next match, against Ghana, there was also a hint of missionary zeal.
‘I think it is correct that the world champions play in the Third World as often as possible,’ he said.
There is widespread disbelief among Germany's camp followers, then, that tonight's match may not be a complete sell-out at Ibrox in spite of thousands of tickets having been given away to youth organisations.
A look of bewilderment comes over the faces of visitors who cannot comprehend why some supporters will not go to watch the national side simply because they are playing on Rangers' ground.
Incredulity greets even more esoteric difficulties surrounding the non-appearance of those fans who would not go to watch Scotland wherever they were playing.
What does not need to be explained to Vogts, however, is the determination possessed by Scottish players.
Tonight's fixture has certainly not been devalued in German eyes.
‘I have yet to see a Scottish team look weak, no matter how depleted they were to begin with,’ he said.
‘I would rather Germany played the proper Scottish team but I want to keep a sense of proportion.
‘Scotland will play aggressively and their players will each give 140 per cent.’
Ironically, the one area in which Vogts had no criticism to make concerned the Ibrox pitch that has recently looked as battered and in need of rest as any Rangers player.
Last week, Rangers announced plans to lay a new pitch, at a cost of £500,000, in time for next season.
‘Considering there is no mid-season break in Scotland, I must compliment Rangers on the state of their pitch,’ said Vogts.
THOSE once jealously guarded holy vestments, international rugby jerseys, are now sold — figuratively but, my word, certainly not in fact — ten a penny.
They can be big business and it is is more for their commercial and promotional appeal than their scenic, that the SRU yesterday launched, in conjunction with Umbro International, Scotland's World Cup sevens jersey.
The national garment is the SRU tartan in pin-stripe.
The full-size, adult jersey will retail at £34.99, the junior versions costing roughly half as much.
Still on the World Cup sevens, the 20 players for the reserve pool provided by the SRU to replace the injured in any of the 24 teams will come from the 30-strong Scotland sevens squad.
They will be selected at the same time as Scotland finalise their team of ten.
Normal Norma's story is as flat as her pancakes
I'M GOING to ask my next door neighbour if I can write his biography.
He seems a terribly nice old chap.
His name is Dick and although our conversations are strictly limited to what day the binmen are coming and blimey, wasn't the post late today, I do think he would make the most fascinating subject.
I've only been in Dick's flat once and the most interesting thing I've gleaned about him is that he never uses washing-up liquid and he has a rather interesting pile of yellowing press cuttings sitting on a shelf.
What can it all mean?
Plastic plates?
Perhaps he lives on newsprint, like a little hamster.
You might not think this is enough raw material to spin out over 345 hardback quarto pages, but why not?
Anybody can write a biography about a nobody these days, why should Dick and I be any different?
Take a stroll around your local bookstall and find them crammed with the life stories of the not-very-rich and famous for 15 minutes.
There is a biography of Jasper Carrot which I can hardly wait not to read, there is a biography of Cliff Richard written by a woman who hugged him once 20 years ago (‘I would have married him if he'd asked me’).
Brian Wilson, the former Beach Boy who ingested Grade A drugs at the same rate his fellow Californians gulped down vitamins has brought out his autobiography.
I haven't actually seen this one yet, but it should make fascinating, if brief, reading.
All you need to know about Brian is that in the Sixties one of his friends send him a postcard of planet Earth with a message saying: ‘Wish you were here.’
There is a whole slew of heavyweight biographies on the shelves, too, each of which has divulged sex secrets about their subjects which have subsequently made the front pages.
Do we believe them?
Who cares, just check those sales figures.
Puritanical Lord Reith was in love with another man throughout most of his adult life, Daphne du Maurier was a lesbian, J Edgar Hoover liked to dress up in women's clothes.
Philip Larkin had a very odd relationship with women which made mind-boggling reading.
Still, forget Andrew Motion, I could have written it all in a sentence.
Girls are horrid, girls are quite nice, I like myself best.
The end.
Still, all this pales into bland insignificance in comparison to Norma — A Biography, a new book by journalist Tim Walker, an in-depth study of quite possibly the most boring woman in the western world.
This is not Norma's fault, she's probably quite a nice dear who never wanted the fame, never wanted a prime minister for a husband, just wanted to get on with the washing up back in Huntingdon.
She wanted to be left alone, but now the tedium of her resolutely normal life is plastered across 190 pages.
You need read no further than the picture captions listed at the beginning of the book to realise what a treat you have in store; Norman Giving An Interview, Norma starts a pancake race, Norma bellringing and — my personal favourite — Norma and John Shop For Bathroom Fittings.
How interesting to read that Norma had A Past —‘a somewhat flamboyant character who had worn braces, a hand knitted V-neck top and carried a purse.’
One national newspaper is offering a bottle of champagne for the first reader who can give more information about Norma's former boyfriend.
I've already posted off my suggestions: it's either Charlie Drake, Seth from Emmerdale Farm or Noel Edmonds.
The most interesting fact revealed about Norma is that the poor dear is obviously deranged.
The first time she met John Major he was wearing a brown suit and a pair of NHS specs.
Norma deemed him ‘glamorous, gorgeous, kind.’
Maybe she should have stuck to Mr Tank Top.
One of my favourite bits concerned the column she was commissioned to write for a newspaper during the general election.
Among the more interesting snippets which Norma chose to share with the electorate was the fact that her washing machine had gone on the blink, a button had fallen off her jacket — but, hey!— she sewed it back on.
She had a cup of Bovril, and she met Ken from Coronation Street.
As the weeks passed, the column got shorter and shorter due, said the ever-so-diplomatic editors, to lack of space.
David Mellor makes a special guest appearance talking about being invited to a Sunday lunch at Chequers avec the Majors.
‘Very informal affairs,’ said the pompous Mellor.
‘Just larger versions of the kind of Sunday lunch which ordinary people have.’
Dick and I are ordinary people, but I think we would make a great team and dream up something far more interesting than most of the claptrap stuffing up the biography departments of bookstores.
Our picture captions would be better than Norma's — Dick Opens Front Door, Dick Goes To Shops, etc.
Perhaps I could even invent some spurious sexual peccadillo to ensure maximum coverage and boost sales.
Dick cross dresses, confesses he hates women, admits that he once shook Lulu's hand in 1962, ‘If she'd asked me to marry her,’ said Dick, smoothing down his silk stockings, ‘I would have said yes.’
A brilliant read, or what?
My debut on the bestseller list should happen any day now.
Loss of a talking shop
IF you are depressed or anxious, having relationship difficulties or worried about work, finding a qualified counsellor to talk things over with isn't always easy — especially if you can't afford fees of between £15 and £30 an hour, or don't feel able to wait the weeks or even months it can take to get an appointment.
Well, things are different if you live in the Gorgie-Dalry area of Edinburgh — or at least, they were until recently.
For the last two years, local residents have had access to a pioneering service run by the area's Health Help for All Project.
A team of qualified volunteers have been providing free short- term counselling — generally six to eight weekly sessions — with waiting times kept to a minimum.
Potential clients made contact through their GP or simply by calling in to the project's information and advice shop on Dalry Road.
Over the past year, the counsellors have helped 51 people to deal with a wide range of problems, including marital breakdown, sexual abuse, bereavement and terminal illness, and almost three times that number have been given information and informal counselling.
But lack of funding means the service may not be able to operate for much longer.
Unless a new source can be found, it will close at the end of April.
The project coordinator Sue Torrance believes this would be a serious loss to the local community, for it has reached people who might not otherwise have received help.
She says: ‘Coming into the Health Shop is far less threatening than going through official channels.
People are coming who wouldn't previously have thought of seeking counselling.
Considering how little publicity the service has had, the amount of interest it has generated has been enormous.’
The counselling development worker, Fiona McRae, adds: ‘When we started there was only one other agency offering counselling that was completely free, and that was for the whole of Edinburgh.
Now a service has been set up in Pilton based on our model, but there's nothing else entirely free — most places ask for donations.
And a lot have had to close their lists because they have so many would-be clients.’
Local GPs have been particularly supportive of the Gorgie-Dalry service.
Dr Ian Dickson of the nearby Springwell House Health Centre, which provides working space for the counsellors, says: ‘It's very helpful to have local agencies we can refer people to.
A lot of the problems we meet up with in the surgery are related to difficulties people have in their lives at present or in the past.
Often counselling can help them come to terms with a lot of this and help them set out a means to try and change in the future.’
He would be sorry to see the service close.
‘I don't think there are enough of these services around.
If anything, they should be expanding rather than removing it.’
The overall project, which is not under threat, is funded jointly by Lothian Region's Health Board and its social services policy committee, both of which provided start-up cash for the counselling service.
Since then, it has survived on a one-off grant from the Scottish Office and money donated by private trusts, but these too have run out.
An application for social work department funding has been turned down, and although staff are still negotiating with the health board and the social services policy committee, the outlook seems bleak.
Fiona McRae explains: ‘Given the size of the service, the only way forward is be statutorily funded.
But money is short and it's open to question whether they will take us on.’
Meanwhile, the service is winding down — existing clients will finish their counselling by the end of April and no new ones are being taken on.
McRae is doing her best to remain optimistic.
She says: ‘We hope if it does have to close that we will be able to reopen in the future if there's a change of policy.’
But until then, she concedes gloomily: ‘It could mean people going without help.
It could also mean a possible worsening of problems leading to more severe psychiatric difficulties.
Something left undealt with is invariably going to recur and cause trouble in the future — things don't just go away because the possibility to talk about them isn't there.’
Alexandra Henderson
Invented words
Sir Nicholas Fairbairn, in his letter today, points a finger at the use by the Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, of an invented word, Europartenariat.
I share his dislike of the practice, but he should be aware, as he points his finger, that there are three more pointing back at him.
I like to understand the meanings of words and always refer to a dictionary when I come on a new word.
While reading Sir Nicholas's biography, not one new word I looked up was in Chambers.
They seemed to be personal constructions arising from his knowledge of Greek or Latin roots, and proving how clever he is with words.
So here we are again!
Having declined, in their infinite wisdom, to acknowledge the centenary of the Forth Bridge in 1990 by way of a commemorative stamp, the Post Office mandarins have now seen fit to ignore the centenary of the death of Robert Louis Stevenson.
Both RLS and the bridge are known throughout the world and are in no way local phenomena.
The current and disgraceful decision is made worse by the issuing of a stamp last year to commemorate the 350th  anniversary of the Battle of Edgehill.
How many English people, let alone a wider audience, have ever heard of this particular affray?
RLS forgotten
No stamp in 1994 to commemorate the centenary of the death of Robert Louis Stevenson?
I am dismayed, but not surprised.
In 1990, the Royal Mail refused to celebrate the centenary of the Forth Bridge, one of the engineering feats of the 19th century.
The Poet Laureate also declined.
While we might have had some sympathy with Ted Hughes, as he contemplated writing about cantilevered girders, the refusal of the Post Office to honour the 1990 event and now this is inexcusable.
Stevenson is a writer respected worldwide.
His initials are as well known as GBS.
The Royal Mail's ‘not Pygmalion likely’ rebuff is very disappointing.
It is another example of a disturbing myopia.
Vision to the north of the Watford Gap is impaired and anything north of the Solway Firth is but a distant and insignificant blur.
Licensing board
I write with regard to your report today [earlier editions]concerning the resignation of the Independent councillor, Billy Buchanan, from Falkirk District Licensing Board, following my re-election as board chairman.
Sadly, it seems that he has failed to grasp the relationship between the district council and the board.
The council appoints the members of the board once every four years at its statutory meeting.
It also has the dubious privilege of paying for the administration of the board.
Apart from that, it is a completely autonomous body, which reaches its own decisions outwith the control of the council and appoints its own chairman every 12 months.
Councillor Buchanan, therefore, is confused in imagining that the board is a committee of the council, on which he bases his argument that I should not have remained in office.
It is really quite incredible that, after ten months, Councillor Buchanan should still be unaware of such basic facts.
The most disappointing aspect of this matter is that he should have seen fit to introduce politics into licensing board affairs.
I have never known this to happen in the nine years on which I have served on the board, irrespective of the political colour of its members.
Even if he acted in ignorance of basic board workings, Councillor Buchanan's actions serve only to undermine the dignity of the board.
Perhaps his almost immediate resignation reflects the embarrassment which he has brought upon himself.
Anthony Bowles: music director
ANTHONY Bowles, the original musical director for Jesus Christ Superstar in London in 1971 and another Andrew Lloyd Webber hit musical, Evita, in 1978, has died at his London home.
Mr Bowles, who was 61, studied at the Royal Academy of Music in London from 1948 to 1953, then worked as a teacher at a London school before getting a series of jobs as a pianist in small shows.
Later he became an assistant to the composer Benjamin Britten and was a pianist for several ballet companies, including the Stuttgart company in Germany and Sadler's Wells in London.
His show-business break came in 1956 when he was appointed musical director for the show Cranks which ran in London and on New York's Broadway.
Much in demand for stage and film productions, he became associated with the early musicals of Lloyd Webber and his then partner Tim Rice in the 1970s.
Mr Bowles also worked in New York at theatres like SoHo Rep, where in 1984 he conducted Mandrake, a musical for which he wrote the score.
He orchestrated a number of other shows, including in 1976 Fire Angel, a version of Shakespeare's Merchant of Venice set in the New York underworld.
His own work as a composer was on a smaller scale.
The Royal Academy of Dramatic Art produced his Shut up and Sing in 1960 and the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art, where he was music director from 1963 to 1973, produced his Excuse Me for Living in 1964.
His Love in the Country was produced in 1974 by the Guildhall School of Music, where he also taught.
Sharp featured, with a Cockney accent and a biting wit, Mr Bowles was a gifted teacher.
Popular with the actors, actresses and students in his charge, he drove them hard, employing what actress Maureen Lipman called ‘a dizzying display of bullying, teasing, cajoling and sheer blind faith.’
He was musical director at the National Theatre in London from 1966 to 1967 and musical director for the Stuttgart Ballet Theatre from 1973 to 1974.
Mr Bowles also composed music for television and films.
He was in charge of musical direction for the 1968 movie Isadora.
In 1980, he formed the Actors' Choir, an organisation of actors and singers who work in TV, film and the theatre.
— AP 
Change afoot as Flat season gets under way 
By Isobel Cunningham
HISTORIC change is heralded by the start of the new Flat season at Doncaster today.
Not since the Jockey Club was founded 243 years ago has such radical racing reform been in the air and today is also the threshold of a new era which begins with Britain's betting shops next Thursday.
From then they will be allowed to stay open each weekday to 10pm until the end of August.
It can only now be a matter of time until they join supermarkets and open on Sunday as well.
That will, of course, ease the way for Britain to join Europe and Ireland and run big races at Sunday fixtures.
If so, the Derby, which in its current and traditional Wednesday slot is now losing both crowds and kudos at an alarming rate, can set about regaining its glory.
The forerunner to this change has been the decision of the Jockey Club with its fairly visionary determination to give Sunday racing a kick start with the experimental meetings.
Doncaster and Liverpool set the agenda last year and the pot is to be kept boiling with a Sunday point-to-point near Warwick on 26 April and a mixed flat and hurdles meeting at Lingfield on 1 August.
Yet, by the time Sunday racing becomes a reality, the Jockey Club, though by no means a thing of the past, will undoubtedly be different from the unchallenged ruler of British racing it is today.
In the next two months it will hand over many of its roles to the British Horse Racing Board and racing in this country will certainly never be the same again.
Whether it will be better or worse no-one can tell at the moment, but the hands on the reins of administration will be more varied, more democratic and more in tune with the times — at least that's the theory for this huge volte in the face of what has gone before.
However, before racing ceases to be a single-parent sport, the Jockey Club deserves full credit for not only having forged ahead with the Sunday fixtures but also firing the well-aimed salvos that finally got through to the Government the iniquities of the level of VAT being charged on the breeding, rearing and racing of bloodstock in this country compared with France and Ireland.
Last week's budget about turn certainly ensures that this Flat season and many to follow get off to the sort of flying start it had been very difficult to envisage 12 months ago.
Crowe leads by example
CAPTAIN Martin Crowe scored an unbeaten 91 to lead New Zealand to their first victory over Australia in the five-match one-day series in Wellington yesterday.
New Zealand won by 88 runs to trail in the series 2-1.
Crowe's gritty innings against a tight Australian spin attack steered New Zealand to 214 all out before Australia collapsed against a medium pace bowling attack led by Gavin Larsen, who took three for 17 from ten overs.
Penalties pile up in pressure game
THE controversial Liverpool manager, Graeme Souness, was yesterday advised to keep calm by a top referees' representative.
Souness faces another touchline ban after being banished from the Selhurst Park dug-out by referee Roger Dilkes for allegedly swearing at a linesman during Liverpool's 1-1 draw with Crystal Palace on  Tuesday night.
‘Managers getting excited and emotional on the touchline are very unhelpful to referees,’ said John Deakin, president of the Association of Premier League and Football League Referees and Linesmen.
‘They certainly don't help the official gain and retain control.
It seems to be happening more and more.
We need some direct dialogue with managers about this sort of thing.’
Souness marched along the touchline shouting at linesman Mike Bullivant and afterwards claimed the officials had done nothing to prevent goalkeeper David James being pushed at corners.
The fiery Scot has had numerous run-ins with referees and linesmen since taking over as manager of Rangers in 1986.
In 1989 alone he was hauled before the Scottish Football Association three times to be punished for misconduct.
Souness, who won more than 50 caps for Scotland in a playing career that saw him become the driving force in Liverpool's domination of Europe, was fined £100 by the Scottish FA in January 1989 for comments to a referee after a Premier Division game at Aberdeen.
Two months later he was fined a further £100 and banned from the touchline until the end of that season for remarks to a linesman during a game at Dundee United.
Within a month he was back before the SFA, which increased his last fine to £2,000 and extended his ban for another season for violating the previous month's punishment during the Scottish Cup semi-final against St Johnstone at Parkhead.
Souness's problems continued when, in May 1990, he was fined a record £5,000 for again breaching the touchline ban during a home match against Hearts.
Since taking over from his friend, Kenny Dalglish, as Liverpool manager, Souness has struggled to recapture the glory days at Anfield.
He was suspended for five matches by UEFA after his verbal attack on Swedish referee Rune Larrson during the European Cup-Winners' Cup game against Spartak Moscow last October — four games of which will be carried over to the next Liverpool campaign in Europe following their elimination last October by Spartak Moscow.
FA officials at Lancaster Gate are awaiting referee Dilkes's report before deciding what action, if any, should be taken against Souness.
On Tuesday night, Ian Rush put Liverpool ahead but Chris Armstrong grabbed an equaliser to ease Crystal Palace's relegation fears.
Stark likely to return as Scots seek sharpness
CONTRASTING faces of Scottish rugby were presented here yesterday as the build-up for this weekend's glittering international sevens hots up.
While the national team were put through their paces at Fort Stanley, base for the Black Watch, who are on a two-year tour of duty here, the Scottish Survivors, a team largely consisting of former internationalists, drawn together by Iain Milne, were making their debut in the Carlsberg Tens competition at the Hong Kong Football Club.
The national side were not alone at the fort, which nestles high in the hills and was partially enshrouded in mist yesterday.
Fiji, too, were taking advantage of the seclusion the fort represented to conduct their training away from the media.
The Scots practised for around 90 minutes accompanied by the strains of the bagpipes as the regimental band rehearsed and the grunts of some budding javelin throwers among the troops.
There was an element of fitness training in the Scots' routines, but there was none for the Fijians.
All of their work was with the ball.
Scotland coach Douglas Morgan repeatedly asked players to be positive on the ball and not to dither in their decision making.
Aware of the draining effects of the Scots' travel itinerary — they had spent three days on the move from Suva — Morgan intends to have short, sharp sessions today and tomorrow.
The ten-strong squad for the weekend — in which the Scots are in a pool with Romania and Tonga — will be named today and the likelihood is that Derek Stark, omitted in Fiji after a lacklustre showing the previous week in Canberra, will be restored.
Stark's confidence appears to have been at a low ebb but the Scotland manager, Duncan Paterson, has been reminding him of his form earlier in the season: at the Dubai Sevens, which the Scots won; in the A international against Italy in Melrose when the Boroughmuir winger had a hand in both tries; and in his senior international debut against Ireland at Murrayfield, when he scored one try and was heavily involved in the other from Tony Stanger.
The Scots have little choice but to hope Stark heeds the message and, in the words of Paterson, that collectively they play with ‘more bite’.
Mark Appleson trained yesterday but following his back spasm last weekend, took no contact and was only able to run in straight lines.
It seems thought will be given to playing Tony Stanger in the centre to provide a bit more physique in defence and on that theme Michael Dods could be destined to be left out, not because he has played badly, but rather as a reflection that the powerhouse physiques are prone to get the better of him in escaping tackles.
Doddie Weir may have to impress at training today to force his way in among the forwards, who held a lineout session with assistant coach John Jeffrey at Happy Valley last night.
That ground is a grubber kick away from Hong Kong Football Club where the Scottish Survivors had a grand day in the ten-a-side event winning all their three matches against Bucks RFC (Singapore), 45-0; Hong Kong Forces, 34-0; and Wombats (Australia), 43-0.
They will meet Hong Kong in today's quarter-final.
Milne — who made a brief appearance in the game against Wombats — has done a grand job getting sponsorship from, among others, Royal Mail Scotland, while the luminaries he has persuaded to play include Roger Baird, Finlay Calder, Jim Calder, Jim Aitken, Euan Kennedy, Alan Tomes and Jim Renwick.
The tournament favourites would appear to be White Hart Marauders — named after a pub in Hampshire — who field among their ranks three of the recently-named British Lions, England's Jeremy Guscott and Dewi Morris and Wales's Richard Webster.
On the subject of the Lions, Finlay Calder wondered whether it might prove a mistake taking both Wade Dooley and Peter Winterbottom to New Zealand as he considered them to be past their best.
He also felt their might prove a shortage of pace in the Lions' back-row.
Perhaps motivated by such heady topics, the Scottish Survivors have not been taking matters that light-heartedly.
‘We've trained against the All Blacks sevens squad, seriously, we have,’ the Bear insisted.
His tale was verified by another member of the party Hawick's B international hooker Jim Hay, who recounted that his fellow Teri, Jim Renwick, had been so intent on chasing and tackling the electrifyingly quick Eric Rush that he had failed to notice a helicopter land on the pitch and it was only when they felt the down-draft from the rotor blades that they put on the anchors.
‘See,’ said Renwick pointing to his balding pate, ‘that's what happened to me the last time I didn't stop!’
Players asked to make heavy commitment If things go to plan, Scotland may be in for a bit more travel, as Harry Pincott in Cape Town explains
TO reach the very top in sport nowadays requires tremendous dedication and commitment, as Scotland's cricketers are about to demonstrate.
Assuming they are accepted into next year's Associate Members Cup — the decision will be made in July — the Scottish Cricket Union's plans are well in hand and involve the players being away from home for five successive weeks.
It is envisaged that the national squad will spend two weeks in Johannesburg next March and then head straight to Kenya for three weeks of Cup cricket after which the top three teams will qualify for the 1995 World Cup to be staged jointly by India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka.
Bert Barclay, secretary of the SCU, admitted here yesterday it was going to need a huge amount of commitment and co-operation from the players, and officials, especially those in full-time employment.
Over the next few weeks, players here and those that were unavailable for the tour will be asked about their availability, but already most of the touring squad have expressed their determination to go to Kenya, even if it means giving up their jobs to do so.
‘Look at the amount of playing and training the top rugby players do,’ points out Barclay, who reckons that Scotland's cricketers are now going to have to put the same amount of time and effort into their game to get to the top level.
In fact, with the World Cup now being held every three years, and with all the ever-expanding domestic programme which includes games in the B&H and NatWest Cups, against the MCC and Ireland, as well as the expanded area championship, one can see the international squad being mainly composed of full-time players.
Already Bruce Russell, the captain, Iain Philip, George Reifer, Alastair Storie and Bruce Patterson come into that category, while Jim Govan and Ian Beven are ex-professionals and, in addition, Jim Love is, of course , director of cricket.
Another hoping to make Kenya is George Salmond, who is at Dundee College of Education, training to be a primary teacher.
If necessary, the Arbroath batsman will try to take a year out of college — if that proves possible — which would also allow him to take up an offer to spend next winter playing for Newtons at Stellenbosch.
Barclay reveals that Johannesburg was chosen for the build-up because the altitude is similar to Kenya and the players have been there before, though Ireland, if they are also accepted into the AMC, will restrict their build-up to a week in Kenya before the tournament.
If Scotland are successful, they will get about £100,000 from the International Cricket Council for participating and if they reach the World Cup finals, they will receive a further £25,000.
That would mean the SCU would almost certainly increase the players' daily allowance, which was doubled for this tour from £5 to £10 a day.
Love also revealed yesterday that Heriot's new professional, Eugene Antoin, could well be Scotland's overseas professional this season.
The 6ft 7in Trinidad strike bowler impressed Love when playing for Harrogate last season and the paceman is almost certain to feature in next month's warm-up games against Durham.
Antoin was Trinidad's leading wicket-taker last year and, according to Love, Heriot's and Scotland could have a winner in the 23-year-old player.
Yesterday was a rest day for the Scots, who had a strenuous net session after which most were going to watch Omar Henry playing for Orange Free State against Western Province in a day-night game in the Benson and Hedges Cup.
Age no barrier for Gordon
NIGG BAY's Graham Gordon, who celebrated his 13th birthday earlier this week, will be the youngest of the 256 competitors in the Mobil Scottish Boys' Championship, which gets under way at West Kilbride on Monday week, writes Martin Dempster.
The field also includes Ralston's Alastair Forsyth, last year's beaten finalist — Alan Reid of Barassie is too old to defend his title — and Mortonhall's David Patrick, who took four points out of six for Scotland in last week's boys' quadrangular tournament in Sardinia.
Title first
WESTHILL's Ronnie McDonald won the North East Alliance Championship by three strokes at Duff House Royal yesterday.
McDonald's two-over-par round of 70 at Banff, coupled with a 69 at Fraserburgh in the first round, gave him a one-over aggregate of 139 and the Uniroyal Quaich for the first time at the age of 39.
Joy for Halls
PAST president Lawrie Hall (Royal Burgess) and his wife Irene (Baberton) won the East of Scotland Alliance mixed foursomes handicap for the Fraser Cup at Craigmillar Park, Edinburgh, yesterday.
The pair carded a net 69 to win by four from Ian Young (Braid Hills DR) and Joyce Reid (Baberton).
Graham Millar (Swanston) and Vivian Curran (Lothianbun) had the best scratch score of 81.
New push to sell football to Americans
WORLD Cup officials in New York launched a $20 million advertising campaign yesterday with the goal of convincing the American public that football can be played with a round ball.
Organisers of the 1994 World Cup finals admit they face an uphill battle in winning the support of US television viewers for a sporting event that to the rest of the world is bigger than even the Olympics.
‘Obviously it will be a major challenge,’ said Alan Rothenberg, chairman and chief executive officer of World Cup USA 1994.
‘On the other hand I think all the conditions are right for the challenge to be successful.’
He said 600,000 tickets for the first two rounds of the 24-nation tournament had already been sold.
The month-long finals, to be staged in the United States for the first time, will take place in nine cities, beginning on 17 June, 1994.
The tickets already sold have gone to an established network of football fans, Rothenberg said.
The marketing campaign unveiled yesterday is aimed at a raising the profile of the event among the general public in the United States, where football lags far behind many other sports in popularity.
The initial phase of the campaign, a series of humorous magazine advertisements and short television slots, playfully overlays a football theme on to traditionally American images.
In one, a giant football is superimposed on a picture of astronaut Neil Armstrong saluting the American flag on the moon.
The headline refers to the United States as ‘World Cup Soccer's Final Frontier.’
Another advertisement shows an American football player gripping a jumbo football over the headline, ‘In 1994, Football Season Starts on June 17th.’
One of  initial 10-second ‘teaser’ television spots, to be shown on regional sports networks, notes that the summer of 1994 will see football played ‘without shoulder pads, helmets or cheerleaders.’
Chas Conklin, who is supervising the campaign, said the advertisements were aimed both at raising awareness of the World Cup and at promoting the 18 international corporate sponsors who are backing the event.
The campaign also will feature celebrities such as former Dallas Cowboys head coach Tom Landry singing soccer's praises.
Organisers expect to sell out the 52 matches, culminating with the championship at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, California.
But they set their sights a lot lower when it comes to getting Americans to tune in on television.
While the Cup is expected to be viewed by billions overseas, no more than four per cent of U.S. television viewing households will tune in, network officials project.
By contrast, the annual baseball World Series pulled in 20 per cent of the potential U.S. television audience, while the Super Bowl pulled in a whopping 40 per cent share.
‘If you look at past efforts to launch soccer here in the States it has not met with a great deal of viewing support,’ said Bill Sherman, a vice president with the McCann Ericson advertising agency.
‘It is a very, very slow-paced game with very little scoring,’ he said, reflecting a typical American attitude to the sport.
From an advertiser's viewpoint, soccer's problems are compounded by the fact that the rules allow no breaks in the action -- a far cry from other major American sports which build in breaks for commercials.
In the past, to the horror of soccer purists, broadcasters have cut away from live action for commercial breaks.
But the 1994 matches will be televised live in their entirety, officials said.
Marketers said the ad campaign would enter a second phase in June, when tickets become available to the general public.
A total of 3.6 million tickets at an average cost of $58 each are available for the games, with 35 per cent reserved for sale outside the United States.
Diego Maradona was partly to blame for the brawl between Sevilla and Cadiz players at the end of Sunday's Spanish league match, according to police.
The Argentinian is one of two Sevilla players and two from Cadiz named in a report sent to Spanish  football authorities, with the police urging that strong action be taken against them.
Meanwhile, Cyprus came from a goal down at home to Czechoslovakia yesterday to grab a 1-1 draw in a World Cup Group IV qualifier.
Czechoslovakia went ahead in Limassol after 33 minutes with a fierce shot by Lubomir Moravcik, but three minutes after the interval Andros Soteriou shot home from close range.
The dropped point left Czechoslovakia in third place in the table with four points from four matches, the same record as Wales, who have an inferior goal difference.
Belgium lead the group with a maximum 12 points from six matches.
Hay still out in front
KIRSTY HAY's Perth team continued their winning form as they completely outplayed Mika Yoda's Japanese team at the world junior championships in Grindelwald, Switzerland, yesterday.
After taking a single at the first, the Scots counted 3-2-3-3 to lead 12-0 at the break.
In the sixth the Scots lay five when Yoda drew through a fine port to the centre of the house to count one.
Hay counted a single at the seventh, though, and Japan  conceded .
Two other semi-final places were decided when Canada and US won their games against Finland and Switzerland to join Scotland, who rank first after eight draws.
Scotland's junior men beat Switzerland 7-2 and only have to beat the US today to qualify for the semi-finals.
Mancini at double as Italians hit six
ITALY celebrated their 500th international in style by crushing Malta 6-1 in Palermo last night to move to the top of World Cup qualifying Group I.
Roberto Mancini, playing in place of injured Juventus striker Roberto Baggio, was the man who made the party go with a swing for the Italians.
The Sampdoria forward scored with two simple second-half headers — having netted just once in 31 previous games for Italy.
He also created goals for Dino Baggio and Giuseppe Signori which gave Italy a 2-0 half-time lead.
Defenders Pietro Vierchowod and Paolo Maldini also got on the scoresheet while Malta gained some meagre consolation when Carmel Busuttil converted a penalty.
Malta were unfortunate to lose 2-1 to Italy last December, but, with three defenders suspended this time, they could not repeat that performance.
In Group II, the Netherlands, lacking most of their leading players, beat San Marino 6-0 in Utrecht to go second behind Norway.
Both have seven points but the Norwegians stay ahead on goal difference with England third on five points.
Now England can go top of the group if they beat Turkey by four clear goals in Izmir next month.
The Dutch, like England at Wembley last month, struggled at times to break through against a side reduced to ten men for the last half-hour after William Guerra was sent off.
Midfielder John van den Brom scored after only two minutes but the Netherlands needed a 29th-minute own goal from San Marino defender Claudio Canti to take a 2-0 half-time lead.
However, John de Wolf made it 3-0 after 52 minutes and from then San Marino were in total disarray.
Guerra was shown the red card for a foul on Erik Meijer in the 58th minute and Ronald de Boer converted a penalty ten minutes later.
Peter van Vossen made it 5-0 with a powerful header in the 78th minute and De Wolf completed the rout with his second goal five minutes from time.
Dino Baggio rises above the Maltese defence to head home Italy's first goal in last night's World Cup qualifier in Palermo
English referees demand better deal
TOP referees and linesmen in England yesterday launched a campaign to repair their shattered morale.
The officials who control Premier League and Football League matches want a better deal and have produced a 14-page discussion document listing their main problems.
The document was drawn up by the Association of Premier League and Football League Referees and Linesmen and launched by its president, John Deakin, at a London hotel yesterday.
Deakin said: ‘Our aim is to enhance the status of match officials within the top professional game and hope that will have a knock-on effect at all levels.
‘Morale among the Associations’ 800 members has never been lower since I joined in 1977 and this represents the launch of a campaign for a better deal for referees and linesmen.’
The document deals with six main issues: Measurement of performance; physical fitness; education and training; manpower planning; conditions of service; funding.
Referees complain that they are not notified of their match performance markings made by club managers.
They want a return to the old style system of independent assessors for every match.
Referees earn £165 per Premier League match and £130 for a Football League game — well below the German level of £1,000 per game.
‘We accept that simply earning more will not make referees better but we still believe we are among the poor relations of Europe,’ added Deakin.
‘But it is not purely about remuneration.
It raises a number of issues designed to improve the quality of match control.’
Officials of the Association hope a new deal can be introduced to stop a trickle of officials leaving the game becoming a flood.
At least two top linesmen and one referee may quit after this season.
McLean rubbishes Ferguson reports
DUNDEE United's manager, Jim McLean, yesterday vigorously denied that today's English transfer deadline would be marked by the sale of Duncan Ferguson to Chelsea, writes Hugh Keevins.
Reports suggesting Ferguson would go to Stamford Bridge for anything between two and three million pounds while the ex-Rangers forward, Robert Fleck, made the journey to Tannadice, were knocked down by McLean.
‘The story is completely and utterly without foundation,’ he said.
The man in charge at Chelsea at the moment, David Webb, is on probation and it is unlikely his chairman, the fiery Ken Bates, would release such a sum of money to him during the trial period.
 Meanwhile , Gary McSwegan, the Rangers forward, will not be going to Notts County, according to Archie Knox, Rangers' No 2, while Liam Brady, Celtic's manager, said he had no plans to trade Gordon Marshall for another goalkeeper, St Johnstone's Andy Rhodes.
If Celtic did take Rhodes, it would give a club destined for Europe next season two ‘non-national’ goalkeepers.
Rangers and Aberdeen will meet at Ibrox on Tuesday in a re-arranged match.
The only other midweek game is a First Division match on Wednesday between Meadowbank and Clydebank.
Souness faces ban, Page 22
Four-match ban and finer for ‘Mad Dog’ Allen
WEST HAM midfielder Martin Allen was yesterday handed a four-match ban and a £1,000 fine by the Football Association — less than 24 hours after his team-mate Julian Dicks received his 40th booking in five years and admitted he had considered quitting the game.
Allen, who has been booked 12 times this season, was ordered to appear before a special FA disciplinary committee after becoming the first professional player in England to top 41 points for the season.
His suspension starts this Saturday, along with a two-match ban for Dicks, who is now even further over the 31-points mark after being booked in a stormy clash at Oxford United on Tuesday night.
The West Ham manager, Billy Bonds, who has already fined Dicks and stripped him of the club captaincy, admitted yesterday: ‘It is obvious we have had a disciplinary problem this season and it is something we are going to have to try to put straight.
‘We had a fair hearing for Martin Allen, but the result is a major blow because there are some vital games coming up and we are going to be without two important players.’
Allen, nicknamed ‘Mad Dog’ by Hammers fans, will miss the home game against promotion rivals and London neighbours Milwall on Sunday, the visits to Birmingham and Southend and the 11 April Upton Park clash with Leicester.
Dicks will miss the first two of those games.
Meanwhile, Arsenal and Sheffield Wednesday players will be the first to have their names displayed on shirts for a major Wembley cup final next month.
In a one-off experiment, the Coca-Cola Cup finalists will have their names above their shirt numbers for the match at Wembley on 18 April.
Forest ease relegation worries Southampton 1 Nottingham Forest 2
BRIAN CLOUGH, the newest freeman of Nottingham, saw Forest's relegation fears eased with their first win in six games at The Dell last night, thanks to stunning goals from his son, Nigel, and Roy Keane.
Clough, jun, currently being used as a makeshift central defender, put Forest ahead with a superb solo goal after four minutes.
He picked the ball up on the halfway line and strode to the edge of the area, where a mix-up between Richard Hall and Ken Monkou allowed him to run on and beat Tim Flowers.
Southampton should have hit back after 28 minutes when Carl Tiler pulled down Nicky Banger.
Matthew Le Tissier, with a previously unblemished record from the spot, saw Mark Crossley push away his shot and scooped the rebound over the bar.
Just before half-time Keane grabbed what turned out to be the winner when he exchanged passes with Kingsley Black before rounding Flowers and rolling the ball home.
Le Tissier made up for his earlier error after 72 minutes when he crashed home a 30-yard a left-foot volley but his team could find no way back.
A last-minute hitch prevented the £1.5 million swap deal involving Coventry's Kevin Gallacher and Blackburn's Roy Wegerle being completed yesterday, although it is expected to be settled today.
The problem arose over Blackburn completing inquiries into Gallacher's fitness.
Coventry will receive £1 million, plus Wegerle, in the deal which takes Scottish international Gallacher to Ewood Park.
Oldham yesterday completed the £300,000 signing of Norwich striker Darren Beckford.
Makeshift Scots skilful in defeat Ferguson stakes claim for place against Portugal Scotland 0 Germany 1
By Hugh Keevins
IN the midst of a defeat from the world champions, Andy Roxburgh may have found the vindication he was looking for in an exercise that was thought to be without relevance for Scotland.
The team that was made up of the remnants from Roxburgh's original squad — and three of those conscripted to compensate for nine weekend call-offs — distinguished themselves at Ibrox and none more so than Duncan Ferguson, of Dundee United.
Roxburgh had said the occasion would have been worthwhile for Scotland if the friendly match yielded a genuine contender for a place in the fiercely competitive atmosphere of Lisbon's Stadium of Light next month.
The performance of the gangling Ferguson was a particularly impressive application for a place against Portugal in the World Cup qualifying tie, especially since he was largely bereft of support while the Germans occupied Scotland's attention elsewhere on the park.
Ferguson's promise was more praiseworthy than pondering how much Germany might have been holding in reserve.
The Premier Division-based Scotland side were only beaten, in fact, by a goal of almost tragic proportions, conceded when an infrequent error was characteristically punished by Riedle.
The Lazio player was the scorer of one of the goals when a more orthodox Scotland side lost to Germany in Sweden by a larger margin during the European Championship.
The honour of being the first Hearts player to captain Scotland since Dave Mackay in the Fifties was tarnished for Craig Levein when he gifted Germany the opening goal of the game after 19 minutes.
Levein was attempting to operate within the new passback rule and head the ball behind him to Walker.
The intention was easier to understand than the attempted execution.
As the ball fell between the two Scots, Karlheinz Riedle arrived with clear knowledge of where it was going and  quickly dispatched it.
The goal was doubly harmful for the way it temporarily drained confidence from a Scotland team who had started the game far from traumatised by the size of the task that confronted them.
The allegedly second class Scots gave an undeniably first rate account of themselves in a first half in which the Germans set the mood for the evening with the quality of their possession play.
There was nothing regimented or reserved about Bertie Vogts' side as defenders like Thon and Buchwald proved by putting Walker's goal under threat before Levein carried out the most damaging move of all.
If the Germans had not come to short-change the paying public, the play of Duncan Ferguson, in particular, also shaped up to be worth the admission money alone before Scotland fell behind.
It was perhaps typical of Ferguson that his home debut for Scotland after a period of prolonged difficulty on and off the field should be an unfettered display of the forward's rich gifts.
If Ferguson was in any way troubled by erroneous morning headlines linking him with a £3 million move to England, he showed no outward signs of discomfort.
Had the player not been defied by a remarkable save by Kopke, Ferguson's value would have soared in time for the day when Dundee United are finally made the offer they cannot refuse.
Boyd's cross was taken on the volley by Ferguson as he deliberately launched himself backwards to make room for a full-blooded shot.
The goalkeeper was also required to throw himself acrobatically to his left-hand post when a header from Ferguson off a Robertson freekick once again underlined his threat.
The ultimate compliment was paid Ferguson before the interval when Buchwald was told by Vogts to man-mark the awkward 21-year-old in case his threat should turn into an act of aggression that brought an equaliser.
It was only the head of the diminutive Collins, clearing the ball off the line, which prevented Scotland from going two goals behind in the first minute of the second half, however.
Collins was the other striking contributor within Scotland's side, tirelessly continuing at international level where he had left off for his club in Saturday's Old Firm game and looking unaffected by the demands of a workload which had caused wholesale disruption to the national team elsewhere.
There was a need for vigilance of the type in which Collins specialises, since the Germans had restarted the match apparently intent on finishing it as a contest in time for the largely youthful audience at Ibrox to get home to bed at a respectable hour.
Robertson's drive over the bar and  Klinsmann's shot, astutely blocked by Walker, ensured that there would have been adolescent opposition to the idea of an early exit while there was so much to appreciate.
Scotland's determination to take something from the night was shown in the 64th minute, too, when a defender, Wright, was replaced by a forward, his Aberdeen team-mate, Scott Booth.
It was Robertson who came closest to scoring the goal the crowd craved, however.
His header from inside the six-yard box was somehow parried and then gathered by Kopke, to hint at a night of frustration for Andy Roxburgh's team.
Head boy: Germany's Jurgen Klinsmann rises above Craig Levein at Ibrox last night
United's title challenge flagging Manchester United 0 Arsenal 0
NOT even Bryan Robson could pull Manchester United's title challenge out of its tailspin as another two points disappeared against Arsenal at Old Trafford last night.
Robson swooped back into Premier League action for the first time since 6 December, but his 14-minute cameo appearance was not long enough for the rusty 36-year-old to re-charge a championship bid which is going rapidly flat.
United have now taken just three points from a possible 12 and manager Alex Ferguson's only consolation is that the defeat of rivals Aston Villa at Carrow Road means it is now Norwich who hold a twopoint advantage over them as they go into the last seven games.
It stokes up the pressure for the two teams' clash in East Anglia on 5 April.
It could have been worse.
Paul Merson was close to stunning Old Trafford in the 80th minute with a stupendous 35-yard volley which took goalkeeper Peter Schmeichel unawares, but smacked hard against his crossbar.
Ferguson insists his men have not lost their nerve but even the United manager concedes that his confidence is not shared in the stands, and that the fans' apprehension can seep into his players' hearts.
That was the danger as Arsenal, chasing success on two cup fronts but arriving on a roll of four straight wins and reinforced by the returns of Ian Wright, Lee Dixon and John Jensen, massed behind the ball and waited to pounce on the break.
United were on a diet of scraps — Gary Pallister's low driven free kick deflected wide, a free header for Steve Bruce not fully exploited, Mark Hughes denied by David Seaman's reflexes and then shooting wide.
Ryan Giggs and Lee Sharpe were subdued out wide, Brian McClair and Paul Ince having to battle for midfield domination.
Only Eric Cantona was on the top of his form, picking at Arsenal's seams with his exquisite cavalier touch.
Even when he had clear sight of goal, England's number two goalkeeper saved with his legs from his 44th minute close-range cracker.
And then moments later United, the team with all the attacking combinations, were almost unlocked as Arsenal surged out of defence and Wright wriggled through McClair and Ince's challenges.
It was the sort of movement that was music to England manager Graham Taylor but the 25-goal striker, recovered from groin trouble, was denied as his shot smashed against the legs of Schmeichel.
Predictably United returned breathing fire in the second half, but went no closer than Denis Irwin's 58th minute free kick which dipped just over the bar.
Much closer was Campbell, with a shot  deflected inches wide off Pallister with  Schmeichel committed and wrong-footed.
Villa agony as Polston's late strike puts Norwich on top Norwich 1 Aston Villa 0
NORWICH captain John Polston notched his first goal of the season at Carrow Road last night to knock Aston Villa off the top of the FA Premier League in a match that gave the Premier championship race yet another twist.
Centre-half Polston struck in the 81st minute to secure a Norwich double over Villa after they had won 3-2 at Villa Park in November.
He converted from close range after Villa goalkeeper Mark Bosnich pulled off a desperate save to keep out a Gary Megson point-blank header from Ian Crook's corner.
It was the perfect response from Mike Walker's side after Saturday's 3-0 defeat at Wimbledon which once again saw the East Anglians being written off in the title stakes.
They keep being written off but they keep bouncing back with this the eighth time they have topped the table this season.
But it was night of despair for Villa, who had that great championship feeling after going two points clear at the top at the weekend.
Garry Parker felt most wretched of all after a glaring miss in the 68th minute that would have put Ron Atkinson's men ahead.
The strong-running midfielder burst through the middle on to Ray Houghton's superb ball, rounded goalkeeper Bryan Gunn and then steadied himself to shoot from six yards.
Two defenders had scurried back but even so Parker looked destined to score but was then left holding his head in disbelief after pulling his shot badly wide.
Dwight Yorke was also guilty of failing to find net particularly just after the half hour when he had two chances in as many minutes.
First Parker put him clear only to see him miscontrol and allow Gunn to save — and then Gunn kept out his close-range diving header.
But it was certainly not one-way traffic in front of an absorbed 19,528 crowd although Dean Saunders had the ball in the net for Villa as early as the tenth minute only to see it wiped out for offside.
Bosnich stretched out his right boot to save from Ruel Fox when he had raced clean through after 26 minutes and repeated the trick on the hour after Megson threatened from 12 yards out.
But Bosnich almost threw it away in the 38th minute when he fumbled a Jeremy Goss shot and was grateful to see Earl Barrett scramble the ball past the foot of his own post.
Saunders thrashed a shot just past the angle two minutes before the interval but it was one of those nearly nights for Villa and an occasion when the script was already written for super-dad Polston. 930325 
Yeltsin warning on impeachment vote
RUSSIA's president, Boris Yeltsin, yesterday gave warning that his country would be plunged into ‘an abyss of confrontation’ if the Congress of People's Deputies went ahead with a vote to impeach him.
His words came as the parliamentary chairman, Ruslan Khasbulatov, Mr Yeltsin's arch-rival, appeared to retract his demands that the president be removed.
However, the climbdown came only after Russia's parliament, the supreme soviet, had voted that the congress should proceed with the vote today.
Declaring that there was still a chance of reaching agreement to end the power struggle that is paralysing the country, Mr Khasbulatov said: ‘Impeachment is the most extreme measure.
I don't think that among all possible measures we should immediately talk about the most extreme.’
Mr Yeltsin, meanwhile, asked the 1,033 members of the Congress of People's Deputies not to go ahead with its vote.
In a television address, he called on deputies to pull back from the brink.
A Yeltsin aide also gave warning that even if the congress voted to oust him, the president would refuse to quit on the grounds that the decision was illegal.
Full report, Page 7
Sore laughing
I should like to recommend to those readers who would not normally glance at your Sport supplement on a Monday, to make a point of doing so.
For some time now I have been greatly amused by Ian Wood's column in the back page.
Today, I was virtually sore laughing at his description of the immortal ‘filling of the bath’ problem.
Alcohol abuse
The whisky industry must be feeling ‘intoxicated’ with the recent news from the Chancellor of a tax reprieve.
While appreciating the need to continue good exporting conditions for this major Scottish commodity, one could argue that perhaps much of the tax revenue goes straight back into the system to treat those many people who suffer from alcohol misuse or abuse (not just whisky, of course).
If we turn our attention briefly to tobacco, much is made (and quite rightly) of the health risks of smoking and we are constantly reminded of the cost to the National Health Service for treating patients with smoking-related diseases.
Because of this, the tobacco industry has been legally obliged for some years now to print health warnings on packets.
Has it not occurred to the Government and the nation, therefore, that the excessive consumption of alcohol also incurs these same costs to health and the NHS.
In addition to that, the social costs to society due to alcohol misuse are far greater.
For example, have you heard of anyone being in court on a charge of murder, assault or disturbance of the peace while under the influence of a cigarette?
In contrast to this it is estimated that alcohol is a factor in 30 per cent of murders, 45 per cent of assaults and 88 per cent of criminal damage arrests.
The drinks industry has made a gesture towards its concern about alcohol misuse by setting up the Portman group.
Apart from many other initiatives, it has produced some good information in the form of leaflets, books, videos etc, advocating safer drinking.
However, I can't help but feel this education should begin with a message on the bottle, or can, as the case may be.
A health warning, such as, ‘Unless consumed in moderation alcohol can seriously damage your health’(translated from a French advertisement), must surely be in order.
Deirdre Keaney: an appreciation
DEIRDRE Keaney, a member of the Scottish Arts Council and chair of its literature committee since 1989, has died in a road accident, aged 60, writes Deirdre Chapman.
Deirdre joined the literature committee in 1985 after the closure of Craiglockhart College of Education, where she had been principal lecturer in English, and so began a second career.
Her wide interests, her humanity and her warm personality made her as loved as she was respected.
Her ability to achieve consensus in sensitive decisions was never at the price of individual promise or doctrinaire cost-cutting, and she was a resolute opponent of any moves to take books of quality out of the teaching of English.
When it was decided that the literature committee should take more account of the interests of readers, she chaired a committee to take soundings.
The resulting Readership Report set the guidelines for making reading a less esoteric activity and for actively canvassing the pleasure of good books in the face of hyped and ephemeral competition.
Her interests were wide.
She spoke fluent Italian and spent part of each year in Bari, in the south of Italy, where she had lectured in English at the university for ten years.
She also sang with Lothian Gaelic Choir and coached disabled horse riders.
Born in Gorebridge, Midlothian, in 1932, Deirdre was educated at Loretto Junior Secondary School in Musselburgh and St Catharine's Convent School in Edinburgh, taking her MA (Hons) in English at Edinburgh University with teaching and education diplomas from Craiglockhart College and Edinburgh University.
After graduating, she taught briefly in Dalkeith before taking up her lectureship in Bari.
As part of her Arts Council responsibilities, Deirdre Keaney chaired the Writers' Bursaries Panel.
She was also a former member of the Scottish Library and Information Council.
She will be sadly missed by her many friends and colleagues.
Loki left out of Lincoln field
BOOKMAKERS were spared a potential six-figure payout yesterday when Loki, one of the first ante-post gambles of the new Flat season, was inadvertently left out of tomorrow's William Hill Lincoln.
Trainer Geoff Lewis was caught out by a special 48-hour deadline introduced this year so that a consolation race, the Spring Handicap for horses who miss the Lincoln cut, could be staged at Doncaster today.
The declarations for both races were made yesterday but, when the final list was released, three horses — Loki, Pay Homage and Cool Luke — were not in the Lincoln line-up.
Two teams battle to beat the drop
WHEN Stirling County and Glasgow High-Kelvinside embarked on their league campaign six months ago, their aspirations were high.
Now, after 16 hours of play and endless training sessions, the final 80 minutes tomorrow will determine whether they remain in Division I of the McEwan's National League.
They, at least, have their fate in their own hands.
Victory against Boroughmuir and Currie respectively will condemn Selkirk, on nine points, to take the drop next season with Dundee HSFP.
Since both Stirling and GH-K, on eight points, boast a vastly better points differential, minus 56 and plus 38 respectively, to Selkirk's minus 122, a draw would enable them to retain their premier position.
GH-K are no strangers to such nail-biting circumstances since they only retained their position this season when they found themselves with a better points differential to Stewart's-Melville, who have subsequently won promotion.
They have Alan Watt and Shade Munro in the engine room, but will have to be alert against a Currie outfit which has grown in style and stature throughout the season.
The Malleny Park side has yet to decide on its final line-up but will relish the opportunity to end the season in a flourish at home and push themselves into third position.
Boroughmuir go to Bridgehaugh without Murry Walker and Derek Stark — on duty with the Scotland seven in Hong Kong — but new British Lion, Peter Wright, lines up at tighthead in a pack which will give Stirling a testing time.
The home club welcome back Kenny Logan and Ian Jardine from duty with Scotland A, but the composition of their back row remains in doubt until David McVey, Jim Brough and Brian Ireland prove their fitness.
While the senior Scotland seven attempt to redeem themselves in Hong Kong, a second seven will be turning out at the Kilmarnock tournament on Sunday.
United Parcel Service is to invest more than £15,000 in Langholm this year, most of it in the sevens, which will be played on 1 May (2pm).
Scotland too slow to pick up run rate From Harry Pincott, Cape Town
HAVING done all the hard work in bowling out for 158 a Bellville XI bolstered by four Western Province players, Scotland failed to score quickly enough in going down to a second defeat, by 13 runs, on their South African tour yesterday.
The Scots finished their 50 overs on 145 for five, with Donald Orr not out 32, off 54 balls, and Jim Govan unbeaten on 31, off 43 balls, figures which compare more than favourably with Alastair Storie, whose 25 took him 82 balls.
It was this inability to up the run rate that coach Jim Love blamed for the defeat, though it has to be said that Storie had done well to repair a bad start when the Scots lost both openers, Bruce Patterson and Iain Philip, on 17.
If Storie, and possibly captain Bruce Russell, who made 20, had gone on the attack a couple of overs earlier, the Scots might have been celebrating their first victory on South African soil.
However, the bowling of the Springbok internationalist Meyrick Pringle, who also made 33 but was dropped by Russell when 3, and Eric Simons — who was man of the match in Western Province's exciting 20-run victory over Omar Henry's Orange Free State on Wednesday evening — was very tight.
Pringle's ten overs cost only 17 runs.
You need only compare the scores after 25 overs to see what went wrong for the Scots, Bellville being 91 for three and Scotland 54 for three.
However, there was high praise from Pringle for the Scottish bowlers.
Keith Sheridan took four for 34, a fine performance by the Poloc spinner, and he had the honour of taking top scorer Kenny Jackson's wicket, thanks to an excellent catch by David Cowan, only two balls after the Freuchie bowler had dislocated a finger which he put back in himself.
Cowan claimed three wickets to add to the two he took on Tuesday, while fellow pace man Andy Bee had three for 24.
Wicketkeeper Donald Orr had two catches plus a stumping, to take his tally to seven over the two matches.
For today's game against the University of Cape Town, Patterson, Ian Gavin, Orr, Govan and Cowan drop out and are replaced by George Reifer, Ian Beven, George Salmond, Stuart Kennedy and Love, with Philip keeping wicket.
£250,000 target set for Games appeal
By Sandy Sutherland
THE first shots in the campaign to raise cash for the Scottish Commonwealth Games Appeal were fired in Edinburgh yesterday — though the official appeal committee has not yet been set up.
The Scottish Commonwealth Games Council has set a £250,000 target to send a record team of up to 160 to Victoria, Canada, next year.
The appeal is already off to a flying start with around £100,000 already guaranteed, over £80,000 from a major sponsor, Walter Scott and Partners, and £15,000 from local authorities.
The owners of the Balmoral Hotel in Edinburgh, Rocco Forte, are to hold two fund-raising dinners in the next 12 months, one in Glasgow and one in Edinburgh, to help the appeal.
Colin McEachran, the council vice-chairman and himself a former Games shooting silver medallist, said: ‘We're aiming the appeal at the whole spectrum of Scottish life.
We're looking to local authorities, business and commerce, the professions and the armed forces.’
He added: ‘We feel there is a great groundswell of support for Scottish sport.’
The sponsor, Walter Scott, commented: ‘We're hoping to bring back a fistful of medals and hoping that this will give the youngsters at the grass roots of sport an achievement to emulate at future Games.’
He added: ‘It's a tartan army going forth to bring home gold.’
The appeal target for the last Games in Auckland in 1990 was also £250,000 and, significantly perhaps was not reached, £195,000 including sponsorship from McEwans of £100,000 being raised.
A team of 123 competitors and 22 officials made the long trip after much media criticism of the small size of the original allocation of places, particularly for athletics.
This time, thanks to the more ‘open government’ of the council chairman, David Webster, all the sports have known their allocations for some time and make their own judgment on merit without interference from the council.
Webster himself commented yesterday: ‘This is the biggest-ever Scottish team going abroad and we aim to bring back a sporranful of medals.
Jeffrey back in harness with the Survivors
SCOTLAND's assistant coach, John Jeffrey, donned his playing kit in Hong Kong yesterday, but only on a one-off basis.
He had agreed to register with Scottish Survivors — a team mostly comprising erstwhile internationalists — in the Carlsberg ten-a-side tournament.
His coaching duties with the Scotland sevens squad concluded for the day, he duly appeared for the second half of the semi-final against the relatively fresh-faced youths of White Hart Marauders — inspired by England internationalists, Dewi Morris and Jeremy Guscott, and B caps, Damian Hopley and Justyn Cassell.
Jeffrey — who was watched by most of his sevens charges — spent some of the tie on the wing, but there was a customary rumbustious downing of Cassell, and the scriptwriters had the perfect finale as he notched the Scots’ sole try, courtesy of a pass from his ‘not so old’back-row pal, Finlay Calder.
Simon Scott converted, but the Scots, tired after an extra-time victory over the Hong Kong national side, lost 26-7.
The 15-12 quarter-final passage was attributed to a Jim Renwick drop goal after tries by Douglas Wyllie and Jim Hay — the latter's converted by Simon Scott — had ensured the Survivors' fightback from 0-12 adrift.
Earlier in the day, Jeffrey had been far from happy to learn that the Scotland seven to be chosen from a pool of ten — Hong Kong have increased from nine to remain consistent with the World Cup format — would have around five hours between their ties tomorrow.
Their first outing against Romania is at 12:40pm local time, while the Tonga match will not kick off until 6pm.
Jeffrey and his senior counterpart, Douglas Morgan, have had to contend with the vagaries of pitches and climate as they have piloted the sevens squad through Australia and Fiji, but their problems seem miniscule in comparison to Romania's coach, Mircea Paraschiv, the former international scrum-half, whose side won the bowl competition last year.
In the interim he calculates his players have been involved in perhaps four club tournaments.
He began his planning in January but found practice curtailed two weeks ago by a heavy snowfall.
The Tongans, meanwhile, bring the same squad to Hong Kong as performed in Fiji, where their best result was a 14-12 win against Australia.
Manager ‘Ila Tapueluelu, however, disclosed that five younger players had been drafted in for the Fiji event after a disappointing showing in a tournament in Western Samoa.
He also insisted: ‘For Tonga, XV-a-sides is more important.
We play sevens but not as seriously as Fiji or Samoa.’
Not as well, either, if last week's evidence is to be believed — they lacked pace and invention, though had an abundance of straight runners with the habitual powerful frames, so Scotland will be stretched.
The Scots will not now name their squad until today but nothing should be read into the delay.
‘We've done a lot of work with them over the past three weeks.
It's now about what's in here,’ said Morgan, pointing to his heart, ‘and what it means to them.’
Reading between the lines, Doddie Weir and Michael Dods look likely to be left out.
The Scots had a visitor when they trained at Fort Stanley yesterday — their international stand-off, Craig Chalmers, who is here on holiday, a guest of a local architect, Jimmy Gibson, who hails from Ardrossan.
Typically, Chalmers did some running, his first such stint since he sustained a double fracture to his right forearm in the Calcutta Cup match earlier this month.
Of the squad, Mark Appleson was moving much more freely after his back problems but both Tony Stanger (blistered feet) and Gregor Townsend (groin) did not complete the session, though that was deemed a precaution.
The final of the Carlsberg Tens was won by Aliens from Japan, who accounted for White Hart Marauders 24-12.
In the bowl final, European Exiles, including Jeremy Richardson (Edinburgh Acads) and Andy Purves (Melrose), lost to another Japanese club, Acorn, 22-7.
Sherborne moves quietly into lead
ANDREW SHERBORNE, the quiet man of British golf, shot a five-under-par 67 to lead the field after the first round of the Kronenbourg Open at Salo, near Verona, yesterday.
The Bristol-born player is one ahead of Switzerland's Paolo Quirici and two clear of six players — Sam Torrance, Ian Spencer, John Bickerton, Russell Claydon, Italy's Costantino Rocca and Domingo Hospital, of Spain.
Sherborne said: ‘I've certain targets I would like to make in golf, but I'm keeping them dark.
‘If you make them public and fail to make them, you give people a good laugh and I don't want that.’
He went round the 7,114-yard Gardagolf course near Lake Garda without a bogey on his card, despite damp and chilly weather.
Sherborne made a dream start when he holed out from 45 yards with a sand wedge at the eleventh hole — his second — for an eagle 3, and two holes later sank a 20-foot putt for a birdie 3.
Torrance, who has played in the last six Ryder Cup matches and badly wants to figure in the next at the Belfry in September, shot his 69 despite having a nose bleed for the first time in his life early in the morning, then again on the course.
He said: ‘I don't why it happened, but it didn't affect my golf.
I had a lovely round.’
— PA 
Andrew Sherborne: keeping his targets under wraps
Top Welshman falls to in-form Meddings
DANNY MEDDINGS continued his run of form with a surprisingly easy victory over Welsh No 1, Adrian Davies, in last night's opening round of the Daily Express British Players' Championship at Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, writes Elspeth Burnside.
A semi-finalist in last month's Canadian Open, Meddings totally dominated Davies and ran out a comfortable 15-12, 15-10, 15-10 winner in just over half an hour.
John Ransome, who had been expecting a first-round tie against Mark Maclean, gratefully accepted the benefit of the Scottish No 1's withdrawal by ousting fellow Englishman Paul Johnson.
Johnson, the former European and British champion, never seriously threatened to cause an upset and Ransome claimed his quarter-final place 15-11, 15-4, 13-15, 15-8.
The 28-year-old Londoner should have an even more straightforward task in going through to the last four when he meets either Tim Garner or Hadrian Stiff, whose appearances in the main draw came as a result of the withdrawal of Del Harris and Tony Hands respectively.
Stephen Meads made it three straight wins for the English contingent when he beat Darren Webb 15-6, 15-12, 15-7.
Hay faces Brown in semi-finals
KIRSTY HAY will play Erika Brown's US team this evening in the semi-finals of the World Junior Championships at Grindelwald, Switzerland, having beaten Norway yesterday in only seven ends.
This will be a repeat of last year's final when Gillian Barr, playing third for Hay here, defeated the same United States line-up in only nine ends.
Hay, in finishing clear of her opponents, will have last stone advantage at the first end.
In the men's event, the Wilson team overcame Garrett Paine's US quartet in a dour struggle which they should have won comfortably.
So far, only Canada and Scotland are certain semi-finalists.
Germany will play France tonight for the third semi-final spot to play Scotland, while the losers will play Switzerland tomorrow morning for the final place.
Two sides banned by SRU
CUMBERNAULD have been banned by the Scottish Rugby Union from playing until next season after a match against Earlston earlier this month was abandoned by the referee, writes George Barton.
A disciplinary panel imposed the ban on all the club's senior players after a hearing earlier this week was told that during the Division IV match, two Cumbernauld players had been sent off.
The Earlston players who took part in the match have been banned from playing until 10 April.
Both clubs were meeting last night to discuss the implications of the ban.
The immediate affect on the clubs will be to forfeit their places in the Castlemaine XXXX competition, while Cumbernauld will also have to forego their Dunbartonshire Cup matches and cancel an Easter weekend visit from the French club, Lyon.
Alastair Croall, Earlston club secretary, said last night the SRU had informed them that the only appeal was to the union's annual general meeting in June.
‘I feel somewhat disappointed and disillusioned by the decision’ he added.
The referee, Malcolm McEwan (Hawick Harlequins), took no action against the Border club's players and apparently abandoned the match on the grounds of safety.
Under the laws, the referee is the sole judge of fact and laws during a match.
While the ban on the Cumbernauld club affects all senior players, a separate hearing will determine the action to be taken against the two players ordered off.
Gregory ends Nicol's spectacular run
THE Scottish champion, Peter Nicol, failed to repeat his recent league victory over the former British champion, Paul Gregory, and suffered a disappointing 3-0 defeat in yesterday's first round of the British Players' Championship at Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, writes Elspeth Burnside.
The 19-year-old from Inverurie has won seven world ranking titles and suffered only four defeats in the past ten months.
However, his spectacular run came to an end in a 15-12, 15-7, 15-13 defeat from the 24-year-old Londoner.
Gregory, clearly intent on revenge for the league loss, was always in command in the first two games, but did trail 1-6 and then 7-12 in the third.
However, Nicol failed to capitalise on his lead and went out on the second match ball.
For Gregory, the reward is a match against the World No 5 and British No 1, Peter Marshall, in today's quarter finals.
For Nicol, the next test will be the French Open next week.
The championships were reduced to an all-English affair when Adrian Davies, the Welsh No 1, joined Nicol as a first day exit.
The former world top ten player, who played for Aberdeen in last year's Scottish Cup final, went out 15-12, 15-10, 15-10 to Danny Meddings.
A semi-finalist in last month's Canadian Open, Meddings totally dominated Davies and ran out a comfortable 15-12, 15-10, 15-10 winner in just over half an hour.
John Ransome, who had been expecting a first-round tie against Mark Maclean, gratefully accepted the benefit of the Scottish No 1's withdrawal by ousting fellow Englishman Paul Johnson.
Johnson, the former European and British champion, never seriously threatened to cause an upset and Ransome claimed his quarter-final place 15-11, 15-4, 13-15, 15-8.
The 28-year-old Londoner should have an even more straightforward task in going through to the last four when he meets either Tim Garner or Hadrian Stiff, whose appearances in the main draw came as a result of the withdrawal of Del Harris and Tony Hands respectively.
Stephen Meads made it three straight wins for the English contingent when he beat Darren Webb 15-6, 15-12, 15-7.
Knox eases into last four
BRITISH ABA flyweight champion, Keith Knox, recorded a comfortable points win over Sparta's Paul Shepherd in the Scottish Amateur Boxing championship final at Grangemouth last night.
The Bonnyrigg battler constantly pressurised his Edinburgh challenger to secure a unanimous decision and book a place in the ABA semi-finals at Gateshead on 13 April.
Angry Rangers abandon fight for more Marseille tickets
By Hugh Keevins
RELATIONS off the park between Rangers and their European Championship League rivals, Marseille, have deteriorated amid reports from Ibrox that the French side reneged on an agreement over tickets for the tie on 7 April that will decide which club goes forward to the European Cup final.
A statement was issued from Ibrox yesterday detailing the unsatisfactory nature of the dealings with Bernard Tapie's club, while expressing regret that there was nothing more Rangers could do on behalf of their now disgruntled fans.
‘Four weeks ago, Marseille agreed on an allocation of up to 4,000 tickets for our supporters,’ said Rangers' statement.
‘Last week, they reneged on that agreement and settled on an allocation of no more than 1,000 tickets.
All further talks have failed to improve on that figure.’
Rangers initially were of the opinion that their share of the tickets for the Velodrome in Marseille was so unsatisfactory as to be more trouble than it was worth.
However, the club will now ballot the 3,000 supporters who travelled with the club's official travel agency to Bruges for Rangers' last Champions league tie on foreign soil.
‘Every  conceivable avenue has been pursued and while Rangers strongly regret what has happened, we have done everything in our power.
We would now strongly appeal to those supporters who do not get a ticket to stay at home.’
FC Brugge were fined £118,000 by UEFA for their supporters' part in crowd disturbances inside the Velodrome earlier in the Champions League.
Rangers retain reservations about the security arrangements for the visit of even a reduced support.
Meanwhile, Rangers will find out this morning if Mark Hateley is to miss any more than the one game, against Marseille, that will be his automatic punishment for being sent off in the match with FC Brugge.
A meeting of UEFA's Control and Disciplinary Committee was convened yesterday afternoon but no findings will be announced until lunchtime.
If Hateley is found guilty of violent conduct, the disciplinary committee are empowered to extend the player's ban.
Hateley was one of several players banned from Ibrox until yesterday in the wake of last Saturday's defeat from Celtic that brought to an end Rangers' run of 44 games without loss.
Walter Smith told his players before they left the dressing room at Celtic Park that he appreciated they had given him all they could since the start of that run in August.
The first team squad were then told to get out of Glasgow for a few days, prompting a rush for the airport.
A team with recharged batteries will therefore face Dundee, the side who beat Rangers in August, at Ibrox tomorrow as Smith's players concentrate on securing the championship and removing Hearts from the Scottish Cup before they go to the south of France.
‘Four weeks ago, Marseille agreed on an allocation of up to 4,000 tickets…
Last week they reneged on that agreement and settled on an allocation of no more than 1,000’ Rangers' statement
‘Outside’ help for Parrott
JOHN PARROTT needed divine intervention as well as mortal perspiration to reach the Benson & Hedges Irish Masters semi-finals at Goffs, County Kildare, yesterday, writes Trevor Baxter.
‘I think the Good Lord was looking over me today,’ said the 28-year-old Liverpudlian after a 5-3 victory over Thailand's James Wattana.
‘I certainly had some luck but I don't feel guilty about it.
I've been on the receiving end enough times this season.’
When Wattana effortlessly opened up a 2-0 advantage, Parrott looked in trouble again.
However, aided by an outrageous fluke in frame four from which he made 75, Parrott levelled at 2-2.
A break of 83 put him in front for the first time adding a 70 clearance in the sixth after Wattana led 58-0.
Wattana secured frame seven with 55 but the world No 2 won through with another run of 44.
Leighton on Wembley alert
JIM LEIGHTON (above), the goalkeeper Manchester United once dropped from an FA Cup final, was yesterday put on Wembley alert by semi-finalists Sheffield United when they signed him on loan from Dundee.
On probably the quietest-ever day of transfer-deadline dealing — Bournemouth striker Efan Ekoku commanded the biggest fee when joining Norwich for £500,000 plus possible increments — veteran Leighton figured in the most intriguing move.
Scotland's most-capped goalkeeper, with 54 appearances, is needed at Bramall Lane because Dave Bassett's side, who face Sheffield Wednesday on 3 April, have nobody else eligible for the FA Cup to cover for first choice Alan Kelly.
Leighton, who returned to Scotland via Reading and Arsenal, has been languishing in Dundee's reserves after a loss of form.
Queen of the South chairman, Willie Harkness, 74, looks set to resign from the Second Division side and be replaced by Bill Jardine, a club director for 17 years.
Harkness, 74, reached his football peak as president of the SFA during the ill-fated Argentina World Cup campaign.
He has held a strong grip over all matters at the club, from choosing the team to financial dealings.
Aberdeen's bid to stage a re-run of their European Cup-Winners' Cup Final win against Real Madrid has failed because the Spanish club priced themselves out the market.
Real demanded £200,000 to participate in a pre-season match to mark the opening of the new Richard Donald stand at Pittodrie on 10 August.
Bayern Munich, beaten by Aberdeen in the quarter- finals, have been invited to supply the opposition.
Port Vale have signed Morton striker Alex Mathie on a month's loan.
Two teams banned after game abandoned
By George Barton
CUMBERNAULD have been banned by the Scottish Rugby Union from playing until next season after a match against Earlston earlier this month was abandoned by the referee.
A disciplinary panel imposed the ban on all the club's senior players after a hearing earlier this week was told that during the Division IV match, two Cumbernauld players had been sent off.
The Earlston players who took part in the match have been banned from playing until 10 April.
Both clubs were meeting last night to discuss the implications of the ban.
The immediate affect on the clubs will be to forfeit their places in the Castlemaine XXXX competition, while Cumbernauld will also have to forego their Dunbartonshire Cup matches and cancel an Easter weekend visit from the French club, Lyon.
Alastair Croall, Earlston club secretary, said last night the SRU had informed them that the only appeal was to the union's annual general meeting in June.
‘I feel somewhat disappointed and disillusioned by the decision’ he added.
The referee, Malcolm McEwan (Hawick Harlequins), took no action against the Border club's players and apparently abandoned the match on the grounds of safety.
Under the laws, the referee is the sole judge of fact and laws during a match.
While the ban on the Cumbernauld club affects all senior players, a separate hearing will determine the action to be taken against the two players ordered off.
McManus ousts admiring White
By Trevor Baxter
ALAN McMANUS last night showed Jimmy White the exit door at Goffs, Co Kildare, as he marched into the Benson & Hedges Irish Masters semi-finals.
McManus's 5-2 victory was only his second in eight meetings against the Londoner who sportingly tipped his 22-year-old Scottish rival for the title.
‘From what I've seen so far, Alan looks favourite,’ said White, beaten at the first hurdle again.
McManus said: ‘I'd love to reach the final because the crowd and the atmosphere are great.
I feel quite at home.’
However, before he can contest Sunday's best-of-17 frames showdown, World No13 McManus must account for John Parrott, in what is his ninth semi-final appearance this term.
The 28-year-old Merseysider battled back from 2-0 down to finish a 5-3 victor over Thailand's James Wattana.
McManus's own hot streak brought him four frames in a row including a vital 39 clearance in the fifth.
‘That was probably the turning point,’ said the former champion, White.
‘Alan played a brilliant shot when he needed to open up the last two reds.’
Ahead for the first time, McManus wrapped up a revenge win for last week's 5-4 Nescafe Asian Open defeat with further runs of 94 and 75.
Ferguson thrust firmly into the limelight
By Hugh Keevins
ANDY ROXBURGH may have tried manfully to build a protective shield against hype around Duncan Ferguson yesterday but Dundee United's forward will play for Scotland against Portugal in next month's World Cup qualifying tie for one simple reason — there is no-one better.
While the national coach sat upstairs in a Glasgow hotel fretting over the pressure that media attention can bring on young players, Ferguson's agent, Denis Roache, sat downstairs in the foyer no doubt planning the next stage of his client's future and acknowledging that there is, given the the player's performance against Germany, no such thing as bad publicity.
A three-man delegation from Bayern Munich — the team coach, Erich Ribbeck, general manager, Uli Hoeness, and club vice president, Karl Heinz Rummenigge — travelled back to Germany yesterday after watching Ferguson and having received further information from the last Scot to have played for them, Allan McInally.
McInally's agent just happens to be Denis Roache.
Ferguson's market value, definitely enhanced by his showing against Germany, is in the vicinity of £3 million.
That sum was the Bundesliga transfer record as recently as last season and has only risen to £3.3m since Mattheus Sammer left Italy for Borussia Dortmund.
Rummenigge said on German television on Wednesday night that he considered Ferguson to be a better player than Ally McCoist but wondered if so much money could be spent on such a relatively inexperienced player.
Roxburgh's point on the subject of Ferguson's fledgling status was well made, too, but even he finished up with the impression that nobody was listening to him at yesterday's press conference.
‘Last month, it was Eoin Jess who hogged the limelight after his display against Malta and look what happened to him.
He broke his ankle and the season ended abruptly on him,’ said the coach.
‘We have to remember that Ferguson was in the under-21 side the day before that match and that Ibrox on Wednesday night was his home debut at full international level.’
Roxburgh's observation that high expectation can be dangerous might have carried more weight were it not for the fact that nobody appears to have a loftier opinion of Ferguson than the 21-year-old himself.
The breathtaking scissors kick that was denied a goal only by a superlative save from Germany's goalkeeper, Kopke, was, according to Roxburgh, Ferguson's party piece at every training session before the match.
Ferguson is a singular talent inside a unique personality.
He has already told McCoist, for instance, that he would get the number of goals Rangers' top scorer has if he were playing at Ibrox.
Ferguson also assured Roxburgh on Wednesday morning that, such was his aerial ability, ‘I haven't lost a ball in the air for five years’.
He is yet another in a long line of Scottish internationalists whose generous gifts on the park were matched by an outrageous streak when they went out to play in the recreational sense.
Even Roxburgh had to admit that over the last year, during which Ferguson has flirted with letting the latter trait get the better of the former, has brought the player an ‘awareness of the tough, competitive business he is in.’
The reformed character's level of co-operation in training and responsiveness to advice has been noticeably improved along with his dress sense.
Roxburgh and Craig Brown, his assistant, who once sent Ferguson home from an under-21 squad gathering because of a refusal to toe the line over uniform, remarked on the absence of unsightly bicycle shorts and socks rolled down to his ankles against the world champions.
Sartorial elegance, though, is not so important as the playing style which makes Ferguson the natural partner for McCoist in Lisbon.
Roxburgh is undeniably aware of this but unwilling to name his side one month in advance or bestow on Ferguson the title of the finished article.
‘He does add a different dimension to our play and Duncan does have a natural instinct for football but we have still, with Jim McLean's help at Tannadice, to develop his knowledge of the game.
‘If Ferguson is a world beater in one match and not so good in the next, what will people say then?’
The answer, and it applies to Hearts' Alan McLaren at centre back too, is that it is not possible to think of anyone who could be chosen in front of the pair.
They are better off, therefore, learning the game at the possible expense of Scotland's full international opponents than being too good for everybody else in the under-21 sphere.
McLaren is, in Roxburgh's estimation, ‘an old man in his head’, which makes him the temperamental opposite of Ferguson.
‘You look at McLaren's face in the dressing room before a match and you know you are looking at a winner,’ Roxburgh remarked.
McLaren keeps his own counsel, being as reticent as Ferguson is gregarious.
Both players, though, are part of a generation coming along that must augur well for Scotland's future.
In the 21 to 24 age group, Roxburgh can number Ferguson, McLaren, Jess, Scott Booth, Stephen Wright, Gary Smith, Billy McKinlay and David Robertson.
While Scotland's qualification for the 1994 World Cup finals hangs in the balance, what happens after that has a more substantive look to it.
Duncan Ferguson: ideal partner for McCoist in vital World Cup tie against Portugal