

Reeling over a savage blow Writer Chapman Pincher marvels at the wonderful salmon rivers of Scotland — but he is outraged by their depletion because of English drift-netting.
Here he urges Scots to wake up and fight to protect a fragile yet valuable asset Telling Scots to take a stronger line: Chapman Pincher is incensed by English-based drift-netting.
The practice has robbed Scottish rivers of much of its spawning stock to the great detriment of the whole Scottish economy
THOSE Sassenachs, like me, who make regular pilgrimages to your magnificent country to fish inevitably become lost in admiration for the scenery and for its inhabitants.
What draws us primarily, of course, is the fighting spirit of the Scottish salmon, which can express its determination so powerfully in your fast, rocky rivers.
Some of us, however, are beginning to wonder about the legendary fighting spirit of the Scottish people.
I say this in the context of a situation which should have your whole nation incensed; because of a terrible insult which is to be perpetrated by the Westminster Government for a further 30 years in the interests of a few Englishmen.
For the past 31 years, Scottish-bred salmon returning to your country's most famous rivers, the Tweed, Forth, Tay, Dee, Don, the Esks, Spey and many others, have been intercepted at sea in enormous numbers by a few English boat fishermen.
In the last 20 years they have been using invisible nylon gill nets half a mile long and more.
This practice has robbed your rivers of much of its spawning stock to the great detriment of the whole Scottish economy, for wild salmon bring money into the country in many ways and provide direct and indirect employment for many through anglers who fish for them in your rivers.
Because of the obvious danger to stocks, your own authorities wisely took action in 1962 by prohibiting the capture of salmon in the sea off the coast of Scotland by drift-netting, but the London government did nothing.
As a result, the Scottish-bred salmon have been consistently savaged by about 200 fishermen — mainly part-timers — licensed to drift-net off the Northumberland and Yorkshire coasts.
They have been taking up to 100,000 salmon and sea-trout a year and probably many more if the truth were known.
Scientific studies have established that 80 per cent of the salmon they have been systematically killing were returning to your rivers and should have laid your golden eggs.
Why the Scots in general, and the sea-fishermen in particular , should have put up with this monstrous injustice is hard to understand, but the insult has now been compounded to a degree which surely demands some national response.
Having finally admitted that the English drift-netting is damaging to Scotland's rivers and needs to be phased out, the Government is proposing to accomplish it over the next 30 years.
In other words, an English bonanza which has contributed to the tragic decline of the salmon in so many Scottish rivers — and to the consequent decline in your economy — is to be allowed to wreak further, and possibly terminal, damage.
Government authorities blandly suggest that it may not be quite that long because there may soon be so few salmon to net that the sea fishermen will pack in their licences as they will be uncommercial.
Next to the thistle, the insignia which represents the spirit of Scotland in the minds of many foreigners who are potential visitors are the grouse, the red deer and the salmon.
I suspect that too few Scots are aware of what is happening to the latter.
There are now so few to be fished for in most rivers that more and more people who spent a lot of money in Scotland, as I have over the years, are going to Russia, Iceland, Alaska, Canada and Norway.
A diminishing few of us will continue to come out of sheer love but many will not, especially the young.
What should make the situation even more galling for you, is the fact that a great deal of Scottish money has recently been invested in Scotland's salmon streams in buying-off river nets and setting up fish hatcheries.
The extra fish resulting from these measures are among those being intercepted by the English fishermen who contribute nothing.
The prime wild salmon which they catch sell for low prices — estimated to average £20 per fish — because of the impact of farmed salmon on the market.
Yet the few fish which manage to return to Scottish rivers are estimated as being worth several hundreds of pounds each to your economy because of the revenue they create.
Scotland's position has been fully exposed recently by peers of both parties in the House of Lords where the Government, represented by Earl Howe, confirmed its determination to avoid causing ‘unnecessary hardship’ to the few part-time English drift-netters.
Imagine the uproar if these drift-netters had been intercepting salmon going to France or Germany.
How quickly the London Government would have acted as ‘good Europeans’.
Maybe they have not appreciated that Scotland is part of Europe.
Or, perhaps, as successive Westminster governments over many years have allowed England's once great salmon rivers to die, this one is unlikely to care much about yours.
South of the Border many of us consider the predicament of the Scottish salmon to be an international disgrace; there is such world-wide concern for Atlantic salmon stocks that drift-netting for them is banned everywhere save off England, Ireland and Greenland, where action is being taken.
Even the voracious fishermen of France and Spain have been prohibited from using drift-netting.
So, when British representatives attend international conferences to conserve salmon they are treated as pariahs and are impotent because of the continuation of nylon drift-netting off the English coast.
The only solution lies north of the Border — with you.
After all, it is a noble part of your heritage which is being destroyed.
With the Westminster Government's small majority, its situation is precarious and especially so in Scotland, where it is supposed to be doing all it can to mend its battered fences.
Ministers never know when a sudden by-election may be forced by death, sickness or resignation.
So, right now, they are more than usually concerned about your votes.
All those connected with salmon fishing, the hotel business, the tourist industry and those who just feel incensed by this cavalier treatment from London, should make it clear to their own MPs that they will do all they can to make the Government's position even more precarious.
Your prime target is John Gummer, the minister who presides over fisheries.
He is a great advocate of ‘set aside’ and as far as the salmon is concerned, this principle would seem to apply to Scotland's interests.
Subsidiary targets are Earl Howe, Gummer's spokesman in the Lords, your own Scottish Secretary, Ian Lang, the environment ministers, Michael Howard and Lord Strathclyde, John Major himself and all Scottish Tory MPs.
THE Tory politicians have talked about the need for action on the drift-netting problem but achieved nothing for, as is par for Westminster course, when they say something they delude themselves into believing that they have done something.
The least they should be required to do, without further reluctance, is to announce a firm decision to phase out the drift-netting within five years.
Only if the Westminster Government and its back-benchers are made to believe that this continuing insult to a noble and valuable aspect of Scotland's heritage will cost them crucial votes will they even begin to take serious notice.
You have them over a barrel on this issue, with all the right on your side.
Wake up Scotland!.
Test heading test heading test heading
By Joan McAlpine
THE VAST majority of Scots believe moral values and the behaviour of young people have deteriorated in the last decade.
They blame youth crime on unemployment and lack of respect for the law.
The findings, contained in an exclusive ICM Research poll for The Scotsman, are further evidence that the country's current moral panic is not a media invention but a widespread social concern.
The poll reveals lack of confidence in leading social institutions.
The standing of both the monarchy and the law has plummeted.
Asked if moral values have got better, worse, or stayed the same over the past ten years, 82 per cent said they had got worse.
Discontent is highest among 35- to 64-year-olds, 86 per cent of whom feel standards have slipped.
A similar proportion, 83 per cent, believe the behaviour of young people today is worse than ten years ago.
An equal number, 76 per cent, blame this on unemployment and lack of respect for the law.
One explanation for the ethical crisis comes when people are asked about the standing of leading institutions over the past ten years.
Royalty heads the list of fallen idols.
Of those questioned, 85 per cent thought its standing had declined.
Next to suffer in the public perception comes the Government (76 per cent), followed by the law (65 per cent ) the church and journalists (59 per cent ), and the police (57 per cent ).
People generally dismiss the fashionable view — favoured by the Government — that one-parent families cause society's ills.
Although the poll shows deep-rooted concern about declining values, 77 per cent think a single parent can bring up children as well as a couple.
Respondents are less than convinced by the Government's assertion that unemployment is not linked to a breakdown of law and order — 75 per cent disagree with the statement ‘unemployment has nothing to do with crime’.
The Rev James Weather-head, principal clerk to the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland, said yesterday he was not surprised by the poll's findings.
‘Jesus laid down moral standards, such as in the Sermon on the Mount.
If the church that is teaching these standards is declining in public standing, then it is not surprising that there is a moral decline.’
Father Tom Connolly, the spokesman for the Roman Catholic Church in Scotland, blamed any decline in young people's behaviour on adults.
He said the Sixties generation had failed to teach children self-discipline and those children were now parents themselves whose marriages were breaking up.
He added: ‘Before pointing the finger, remember the thumb is pointing back at yourself.
Young people's behaviour is a direct reflection of adults, both parents and educators.
It is not unemployment.
We had terrible poverty in 1930s, but also strict discipline.
‘I blame people like myself, who in the 1960s curried popularity at the expense of self-discipline.’
The results were greeted with some scepticism by Donnie Munro, lead singer of the rock group Runrig, rector of Edinburgh University and regarded by many young Scots as a spokesman.
‘I remember reading a passage about young people's declining morality and lack of respect for their parents and elders — it was written by a seventh-century monk,’ he said.
If there had been a decline, it could be blamed on social factors: ‘We have witnessed a diminishing of collectivist morality because of the promotion of this nonsensical notion of the individual.
‘Also, young people will get frustrated with the system if the institutions around them don't give them a means of expressing themselves,’ he added.
The poll is based on the responses of 1,016 adults in 52 randomly-selected  constituencies throughout Scotland.
Interviews were conducted face to face.
‘I didn't feel bad about slashing him, scarring him.
Didn't lose sleep over it’ Frank is 19 and serving a 21-month sentence for assault and robbery.
He spoke to Joan McAlpine
I LIKE violence.
You've beaten somebody and YEEES!, it feels brilliant.
I first felt like that when I slashed somebody.
I was all excited.
I was 15 or 16.
There was a crowd of us at the dancing in Panama Jax, a disco just down by the Clyde.
A bridge goes across the river.
There was this wad of guys from Govan.
We waited for them coming across the brig.
Set about them.
Battered them.
I didn't know them personally.
But they were fighting with a couple of my mates.
You don't need to have a personal grudge against someone to slash them.
It's an everyday thing.
They might look at you the wrong way, say something that annoys you.
I didn't feel bad about slashing him, scarring him.
Didn't lose any sleep over it.
It's all about trying to impress.
You've got to show you've got a bit of power.
Got to show people they cannae f*** you about and get away with it.
Everybody's jumping about with knives anyway.
If someone draws you, you've got to do them, man.
Taking the face off someone is a serious crime, I admit that.
Shoplifting isn't a serious crime.
That's how I started, at about 13.
I'd take carriage clocks and videos.
I was hanging about with older people at that time.
They started selling me temazepam, so then the shoplifting paid for drugs too.
I still made sure I had the best of claes.
Sixty-pound jumpers, £100 track suits.
You can't walk about dressed like a tramp.
When you've hundreds of good stuff you feel good, don't you?
After I turned 16, I got heavily into everything.
I was taking 40-50 jellies a day — £75 worth.
I overdosed one night and ended up in hospital.
I'd take acid, speed, hash as well.
Then you're going to the dancing at the weekend, spilling all sorts of Ecstasy, taking jellies after the dance.
I was a mental case.
One night I went into a petrol station to buy Pot Noodles and ended up robbing the place.
That's why I'm in here.
My ma and da have been divorced ten years.
But I don't think that's affected me.
Anything I wanted I always got.
We weren't poor or anything.
We had holidays in Spain every year.
Always had good claes, jewellery.
Nice house.
Food in the fridge.
My father's a mechanic.
He tried to discipline me.
Got me over to stay with him.
Started all this ‘in for a certain time’ stuff.
But my parents couldn't control me.
Nobody can control you except yourself.
I'm not frightened of my parents.
But I respect them.
They've always done good for me.
If I had children myself they'd get the best of gear.
They'd be trendy as.
They'd go to good schools.
I always hated school.
My first school expelled me at the end of second year.
I never went.
Then I moved to Queens Park.
Got expelled.
Went to Cathkin High.
Got expelled.
Went to Johnstone Secondary.
Got expelled.
Went to a day centre.
Got tossed out of that.
I ended up in Kibble List D. I just abused the teachers.
Always carrying on.
Smashing things up.
My head was full of temazepam.
I hated sitting in a classroom all day.
I liked fitba'.
Got medals for it.
But I'd have gone nowhere if I'd kept playing.
Anyway, I've done all right.
There's always money in my pocket.
If I could get exams just now, I would.
Not for a job, but for my own sake.
I'd like to have a good head on me.
A bit of brain.
My older brother got all these O- levels.
He didn't get a job for years.
That proves a point, doesn't it?
If they don't get more jobs they should open more jails.
Who do I look up to?
Not teachers.
Not the police — I've never looked up to them.
It's all a big game.
It's us against them
I look up to one particular drug dealer.
I like the way he's gone about things and set himself up.
It's all contacts and organisation.
He drives all sorts of cars.
Jeeps.
BMWs.
But he never throws his money about.
I like Mafia films.
In the Godfather, Michael Corleone starts off as a good guy.
Then he gets his act together.
He shoots the police captain 'cause his dad got shot.
By the second film he's started to use the heid.
You can talk about crime, but there's lots of crime in business.
Knocked off stuff getting sold cheaper.
It's the same everywhere.
Just think of the businesses that take on people who are on the social.
That's crime right away.
Everybody's dae'n' it.
There's billions made in crime.
It's the quickest way to make a bit.
Why graft your arse off for a full week to make £130, when you could make £150 for one day's shoplifting?
That says it all, doesn't it?
I think it's worth it if you just get a good run.
You get out for three months before getting the jail again.
That's a good run
What will I do when I get out of here?
Go to the dancing!
But I'll leave off the temazepam.
In the long term, I don't know.
It's all down to money.
If you've got no money you've got no future.
If I could get away somewhere, away from Glesca, somewhere quiet where I didn't know anyone, I'd be able to get a job and settle down, no bother.
But it's just Glesca.
It's an everyday thing: crime, crime, crime.
Taking drugs.
Getting full of it.
I would like to stop it all.
Get a future.
But I couldn't move from Glesca.
It's like an addiction.
MOST Scots disagree with government claims that unemployment has nothing to do with crime.
The Scotsman ICM poll on moral values found 75 per cent either disagreed or disagreed strongly with the government line that there is no link.
Neither do Scots accept the fashionable view that fatherless families are to blame for juvenile delinquency.
The majority, 77 per cent, agree or strongly agree with the statement that: ‘A single parent can bring up children just as well as two parents.’
But the poll shows 82 per cent feel moral values have declined and 83 per cent think young people's behaviour has declined in the last decade.
Lack of respect for the law and unemployment were blamed by 76 per cent for poorer standards of youthful behaviour.
Half thought sex and violence on television had caused young people's behaviour to get worse.
Exactly the same proportion of 18-34 year olds, 83 per cent, believed young people's behaviour had deteriorated.
This age group were more inclined to blame unemployment and housing conditions for the decline.
They were less likely to blame declining church attendance or on-screen violence.
Asked what they thought responsible for declining behaviour among young people, 43 per cent of all those questioned blamed the  breakdown of the family — the same number who pointed the finger at housing conditions.
Standards set by people in the public eye were only blamed by 39 per cent.
Even less, 22 per cent, thought declining church attendance a factor.
Sixty per cent disagreed with the statement ‘politicians not ordinary families set moral standards’.
Seventy-seven per cent think the youth of today are not taught proper standards of behaviour and 76 per cent thought parents allow their children too much freedom.
Seventy-eight per cent agreed with the statement ‘more discipline in schools would mean fewer problems with young people’.
Violence on television was blamed for real life violence by 67 per cent.
Most Scots are unimpressed by the behaviour of leading institutions.
The monarchy fared worst — 85 per cent thought its standing had decreased in the past ten years; 76 per cent thought the Government's standing had decreased, followed by the law (65 per cent), the church (59 per cent ), journalists (59 per cent ), the police (57 per cent ), the family (55 per cent ), teachers (50 per cent ) and social workers (49 per cent ).
‘The drunk one pulled a 9mm automatic’ It's an urban jungle out there and Brian Pendreigh went exploring Pictures by PETER DEVLIN
EDINBURGH'S Lothian Road is an odd area.
There are the discos and pizza places that stay open until 4am, and there is its terrible reputation for violence.
But it also contains two of Edinburgh's top hotels, a couple of cinemas, the Usher Hall and the Lyceum and Traverse theatres.
It's a tourist and cultural centre as well as a centre for violence.
On a Friday night the street fills with the cross-section of society that inhabits this cultural mix.
There are only five pubs and a couple of discos in Lothian Road itself, though there are others in neighbouring streets.
The clientele ranges from young revellers to local residents, culture vultures to sober-suited lawyers reluctant to go home.
Drinking in the Bull and Bush, are 25-year-old Edward Galley, an electronics engineer, and a couple of friends.
They've seen trouble before in Lothian Road.
‘There was a fight outside one night involving casuals and police and another night there was a shooting,’ says Galley.
‘Well, we heard there was a shooting.’
They've also seen minor incidents in the Bull and Bush, which stays open until 2am.
But Galley maintains he feels safer in Lothian Road than he does in Glasgow city centre, a point which others reiterate during the evening.
Neither Galley nor his friends have ever been caught up in any incidents in Lothian Road.
They say they go out of their way to avoid trouble, having left a bar in Haymarket earlier in the evening because there was a group that seemed intent on a fight, swearing and pushing their way through to the bar.
‘It could happen any place,’ says Galley.
‘I come originally from Forfar and I got jumped one night there by a lot of casuals.
That's in a place with a 10,000 population.
I think if you think about it too much you won't go out.’
They all agree violence is on the increase.
Galley thinks television is partly to blame.
He feels the amount of money a lot of young people have to spend on drink is one cause, while on the other hand, unemployment and social deprivation are factors for others.
Glen Tennant, 26, has been assaulted twice, not in Lothian Road, but in Edinburgh's Rose Street.
On one occasion his attacker was one of the bouncers, he says.
He admits he had been cheeky.
His response was just to laugh.
He reckons that defuses the situation.
Tonight he's smartly dressed in shirt and tie, baggy trousers and leather jacket, but says he often wears the kilt.
‘They think you're totally crazy and don't bother you.’
The only bother he's had in Lothian Road has been hostile looks from casuals in the Burnt Post bar.
‘If they don't know the face and you're dressed as a casual they look you up and down.
When I see things like that I leave.’
There's no sign of casuals in the Burnt Post tonight.
Tennant and his girlfriend, Mandy Simpson, 21, are not headed for the discos but to top up their tans at the Electric Beach instant tan centre.
She says she's never seen any violence that pub bouncers couldn't sort out.
She feels safe with Tennant, but would not walk the streets alone.
The bouncers at Lord Tom's disco bar maintain they have little trouble.
Black jackets, broad shoulders, slicked-back hair, they don't look like they would have much trouble.
One says the main problems are rival groups of casuals coming out of the discos and restaurants at about 4.30, and the crowds that gather round the kebab shops.
Lothian Road is well patrolled by police, he says.
It's a similar story round the corner at the Citrus Club.
Young adults there seem unconcerned by the risk of violence.
‘Haven't seen anything; haven't thought about it,’ are the most articulate replies.
At the Snack Shack, chef Kevin Polson, 24, admits to having seen a fair bit of violence, ranging from someone pulling a gun on him to rugby fans forming a scrum in his shop and going through the glass counter.
That was the weekend of the Welsh rugby match.
The glass had not long been replaced after a fight between two customers.
‘They were pissed,’ says Polson, ‘and they were still here when the police arrived about five or ten minutes later.
They were waiting on their food.
‘I got a gun pulled on me a couple of years ago in here.
These two guys came in.
One was pissed and one was sober.
The drunk one pulled a gun.
It was like a 9mm automatic pistol.
He said ‘I want my f***ing pizza.’
I was crapping myself, but I said ‘Away you f***ing go’.
‘The guy that was sober told him to get a grip and pulled him out the shop.
I don't know if it was real or not.
I should have reported it but I never bothered.’
At the moment, the Snack Shack closes at 2am but there are plans to keep it open until 5am.
That worries Polson.
He reckons the violence is getting worse.
But, like most people to whom we spoke, he does not know why.
Snack attacks: chef Kevin Polson has seen a fair bit of violence, ranging from someone pulling a gun to rugby fans forming a scrum in his shop and going through the glass counter
Problem solved: bouncers at Lord Tom's disco bar — black jackets, broad shoulders and slicked-back hair — insist they have little trouble.
One says some trouble comes from rival groups leaving the discos and restaurants at 4.30
‘Unfortunately Paul…didn't come back’ Brian Pendreigh met a family coming to terms with murder
IN a quiet, residential street in the suburbs of Edinburgh, a family argues over the state of society today, as families have done for generations.
Cherry Tree Park, with its white-harled villas and tidy gardens, seems far removed from the inner-city horror and violence under discussion.
Barry is a modern parent in jeans and cowboy boots.
He doesn't shrink from displays of affection for his wife, Glennis, or his boys, John, a 22-year-old London civil servant, and 18-year-old Peter, who works for his father's microelectronics company.
Peter's hair is cropped on top and at the sides, but cascades over his floppy jumper at the back.
They seem like a fairly ordinary, well-adjusted, middle-class family, perhaps a little more articulate than most, with a healthy appetite for debate.
The phone rings.
It's a girl looking for the middle son, Paul.
His picture sits on a little wooden cabinet in the lounge, a young man wearing a denim jacket and a hint of a smile.
But Paul is not here anymore.
A month ago he went into Edinburgh for a night out and in the small hours was stabbed to death.
The Sheldon family have spent the past month wondering why.
They all agree society is in a mess.
‘As parents, when your children go out at night you just worry yourself sick whether they're going to come back,’ says Glennis.
‘Unfortunately Paul…
He didn't come back.’
Peter admits his looks make him a target for casuals, the designer thugs who constitute one element in urban violence.
John saw more than his share of violence as manager of Wilkie House, Edinburgh University's function room in the Cowgate.
‘There were numerous instances involving knives, one instance involving a shotgun.
It was just crazy,’ he says.
‘Nothing ever happened in terms of stab wounds.’
Does he think weapons are carried for effect?
‘It may start out like that — I'm going to take this knife because when I produce it they're going to crap themselves and run away.
But the thing is, they're going to meet someone who doesn't run away.
What are they going to do then?
You carry any weapon, whether it be a knife, baseball bat or gun, and in the end you'll use it.’
Peter says there are some areas which are simply no-go areas on Friday and Saturday nights, especially Lothian Road.
His father says more than once that he has seen men his own age outside the Century 2000 club in Lothian Road, punching and kicking wives or girlfriends.
Barry can remember horrific violence when he was at school — a Teddy boy inserting bits of razor into a bicycle chain and then wrapping it round someone's face.
But he feels the shock factor has lessened.
‘I would say there's a cultural acceptance of violence simply because there's so much of it being fed to everybody.’
He believes television is partly to blame, not only for the acceptance of violence but also for undermining traditional family values.
Barry contends the two-parent family remains the best structure for bringing up children, but that single-parent families and other minorities seem to get an inordinate say in society.
Peter responds that the fact that someone is a single parent doesn't mean they're not a decent person.
The Sheldons do agree that there has been a loss of community values within society at large, although they were heartened by the support of the local community in Balerno after Paul's death.
The room is full of sympathy cards.
John says government has promoted the message that people should become more self-sufficient and rely less on the community.
Barry reckons we've become very self-centred and that money now means everything.
John stresses the importance of spirituality, but not necessarily Christianity.
He is agnostic and argues that the churches have failed society with their inflexibility and their refusal to embrace homosexuality and, in the case of the Roman Catholic church, contraception; though Glennis feels they might be accused of accelerating moral decline if they approved such things.
Glennis and Barry are Christians though not regular church-goers.
John believes there should be tougher sentences for violent criminals, rather than clogging up the jails with those who object to the poll tax.
He has not paid it.
But isn't selective observance of the law a dangerous course, the tip of an iceberg of social decline?
John does not see it that way.
But his parents disagree.
‘We've seen politicians of every political party advocate a breaking of the law,’ says Barry.
He believes politicians, church leaders, the judiciary and royalty have to question whether they are setting the right example.
At other times, the Sheldons might enjoy a debate such as this.
‘We've always got round the table and discussed things,’ says Barry.
‘We've always put a great emphasis upon communication.
Our boys are always turning round and saying, ‘Dad, that's the old view’.’
For the Sheldons, the family unit is very important.
‘That's why,’ says Glennis, ‘we all went to the morgue together.’
No one could blame them if all they felt was rage and all they wanted was revenge.
But they refuse to follow the flock in calling for the return of the death penalty and reject the idea that the killers on the street, the people with the knives, are inherently evil.
John says they are a product of environment.
He believes we need tougher sentences as a deterrent, but we also need a cure.
He and his father agree that alienated youngsters need to feel part of society again.
They need moral guidance, they need security and they need jobs.
Maybe young people carry knives for effect, without considering possible consequences.
Peter says: ‘I would like them to think if it was their brother, if it was them that had to sit there and watch their brother die in their arms, see how they would feel.
Because I tell you I wouldn't wish that on anybody.
I wouldn't even wish it on the person who did it to Paul.’
The Sheldons do not want revenge.
They want justice, not just for themselves, but, as Glennis says, for society.
She would be prepared to go into schools and talk to young people about violence and the danger of carrying knives.
Sometimes her eyes fill with tears and Barry slips her hand into his.
Sometimes Peter's voice fills with anger.
John seems a tower of strength and reason.
They are all angry, they are desolate, but they have made a rational decision not to be bitter.
Barry says he has had phone calls from people he doesn't know, supposedly offering sympathy, but full of venom.
‘We don't want to become like that,’ he says.
Glennis's voice falters, but she is determined to be positive.
‘We have two sons and we've got a future but our lives will be different because we were five.
We will always be five, but there's only four here.’
Demand for democratic control
How very kind of the Prime Minister to concede that Scotland entered the Union voluntarily (though just how many of the population of the time actually volunteered is not  mentioned ) and that they remain members voluntarily.
How reasonable of him to admit that Scotland is, as it always was, a separate and distinct nation.
How interesting to note that in his opinion the Labour Party's influence in Scotland is on the wane and that the Conservatives are poised to increase their representation north of the Border.
How significant that his response to the overwhelming evidence that the people of this nation want to have some form of democratic control over their own destiny is to propose anything other than a democratic solution.
If he believes all that he says he does, surely he has nothing to fear from offering the Scottish people a multi-option referendum.
He has already taken the trouble to obtain the opinions of a carefully selected group of North Britons; what then can be his objection to ascertaining what the ordinary Scot in the street thinks?
I regret to inform him that, as things stand, he gives the impression that he intends to cling, right reason or none, to his position of power over a people who have consistently told him and his party that they want no part of it.
Old scores and opened sores
IT GROWS ever harder to see the decision by the three SNP MPs to support the Government in last week's key Maastricht vote in the Commons as anything other than a tactical blunder of pretty hefty proportions.
If the party at large is grateful for their actions, it shows little evidence of it.
Cool retrospection leaves the deal they struck with Ian Lang over membership of the proposed committee of the regions looking no more watertight in its assurances and no less ambient of shifty Westminster backstairs bargaining.
A turbulent and closely-fought weekend meeting of the party executive suggests that the best Alex Salmond and his colleagues can hope for is grudging acquiescence from the majority within the party.
What is more of a worry for them is the damage that may ensue from a significant and hostile minority which now feels entitled to speak its mind.
Mr Salmond undoubtedly has a point in arguing, as he did over the weekend, that any demonstrable gain which may ultimately emerge from the deal with Mr Lang was achieved without serious risk of saving the Government from a Commons defeat.
That, no doubt, was central to the MPs' reasoning last Monday night.
Mr Salmond has also sourly noted the welcome accorded to a similar deal for Wales by the Welsh media.
But Scotland is not Wales.
The politics are quite different, and if the SNP MPs really expected to be hailed as conquering heroes, then it can only fortify the impression that they were either negligent or culpably naive in thinking through the consequences of their actions.
These fall into two categories: internal to the SNP, and external.
Within the party, the vote has brought back to life a dormant distaste for Mr Salmond and his strategy.
It is partly a matter of personalities, but only partly.
The dissidents who resigned from his ‘cabinet’ look ominously like a vanguard of the fundamentalist persuasion which has been in some abeyance since the defeat of Jim Sillars.
Since the weekend, there has been ample sign that they and those who share their views are little inclined to let the matter die down.
Already, there is talk of a more collective leadership, of possible challenges for office-bearers' posts, if not for Mr Salmond's own position.
It is an old fault line and the other parties can be relied upon to do all they can to keep it open.
Mr Salmond may well be right in supposing that Labour's Scottish high command was looking for an excuse to wriggle out of its reluctant commitments to constitutional co-operation.
The point is that he has provided one; and one which even Labour's nationalist wing is little equipped to dispute.
Besides, his own party's do-or-die tendency will now be vigilant against any hint of gradualism.
Meanwhile, Mr Lang is at his cockiest.
If he fails to deliver his artfully-worded undertakings to SNP, it will be their gullibility rather than his deviousness that sticks.
If he does deliver, he will say it was always planned to be so.
From Mr Salmond's perspective, last Monday was a sorry night's work.
‘That doesn't mean you should forget about other people’ Here is a generation living on the cusp of contradiction, says Joan McAlpine.
Which way will they fall?
SCOTTISH teenagers are not amoral hedonists living for the next  ecstasy tab.
Social disintegrationists will be surprised to hear a group of typical 16–17-year-olds say they have confidence in the police and believe the courts should be tougher on offenders.
They respect their parents and believe lack of discipline can lead to juvenile crime.
And far from silently resenting the city fat cats, they believe top businessmen deserve success.
The 14-strong group of fifth years all attended Port Glasgow High School, the sole non-denominational comprehensive in a town with a strong working class identity, and high long-term unemployment.
But the teenagers only echoed Tory tabloid views when asked general questions about values.
They responded differently to moral dilemmas they were likely to encounter themselves: they were reluctant to report drug dealers and did not think shoplifting a serious crime.
Violence was something to be avoided, not sought out.
Most said they would not go into the town centre alone at night.
But fear did not encourage the group to embrace blades.
When two well-groomed girls suggested: ‘there is only a problem if you're going to use it’, the boys went on the verbal attack.
‘Carrying a knife makes you feel big, you'll eventually want to use it,’ said one.
A curly-haired boy from one of the reputedly rougher schemes was adamant.
‘You shouldn't confront anyone who approaches you — they could have a big sword in their bag.
People use knives when they are scared.’
Nine out of 14 believed parents should be more strict to stop their offspring developing such criminal tendencies.
Officers from the local X Division can congratulate themselves.
Thirteen out of 14 youngsters said they had confidence in the police.
Only one dissented — again, he was from a deprived area of this deprived town.
‘Where I stay the police don't do enough to stop crime.
They come in and follow it up rather than preventing it.
They don't stop people getting stabbed.’
This law-abiding young man was also most likely to be targeted by the police.
‘Sometimes they see you in the street and start searching you for no reason.
It happened to me last week.’
The statement: ‘Is British justice the best in the world?’ provoked confusion.
‘We'd need to know more about other countries to compare.’
No gut patriotism here.
Only one pointed to miscarriages of justice such as the Birmingham Six.
Most were more concerned with the courts being ‘too lenient’.
‘Look at that guy in England who raped the girl and was told to pay her £500 for a holiday.
That's disgusting.
How could that help the lassie?’
The treatment of the schoolboy rapist was raised in anger by several pupils, both male and female.
Others talked about community service orders being ‘a waste of time’.
‘I know a guy who has been fined three times and he's done the same thing again and got another fine.
It doesn't put people off.’
But their anti-liberalism turned on its head when they were asked if shoplifting was a serious crime.
Only two agreed.
Everyone knew someone who had been involved.
‘There's much worse things than shoplifting — though it can lead to more serious crime.
Once you're in the thieving habit…‘
‘Younger kids shoplift because they see things they can't afford.
Young girls will steal make-up if their parents don't give them the money for it…‘
‘A lot of people stop when they start earning money.
But if you don't have any money…?’
They clearly distinguished between stealing from shops and stealing from houses.
A number might buy a personal hi-fi they suspected ‘came off the back of a lorry’, but would never purchase goods burgled from a family.
Drug dealers elicited sympathy: ‘They're not bad.
Just young boys of 19-20 who cannae work.’
Everybody knew of at least one dealer or ten.
These dealt cannabis, ecstasy, or sulph (an amphetamine).
Asked if they considered telling the police they laughed: ‘It's just something you don't dae.’
‘I'd be scared of them coming after me with a big shotgun.
‘You'd be severely unpopular.’
Ten out of 14 believed that poverty and crime were linked.
Personal experiences made them reject the new truism that the children of fatherless families become delinquent.
‘It depends on the individual case.’
‘If the father is in regular contact then it shouldn't matter.’
‘My dad left when I was very young and that's worse.
I don't want my kids going through that.’
They were generally happy with their own parents' child-rearing.
Most were allowed to stay out till 11.30 during the week and as late as they liked at weekends.
‘As long as they know where I am and who with.’
Asked who they respected, most said their parents.
Their conservative streak by-passed the crumbling pillars of the establishment.
The majority (eight out of 14) were republican, only one respected the Royal Family, the rest said the Windsors should get their act together.
‘Fergie on the plane with the paper bag over her head.
We were paying for that plane.
She should know how to behave.’
Politicians were the least respected group ‘They're all talk.’
‘They always break their promises.’
‘They bicker like children instead of getting us jobs.’
Only five said religion played a part in their lives.
Three said they knew the Ten Commandments and 11 could say the Lord's Prayer.
The majority felt Christianity had set a poor moral example.
One said he had spent some time in South Africa: ‘The whites used their Bible to do down the black people.’
Others blamed religion for wars and conflicts closer to home.
‘If I walked into a Catholic school they'd all look at me funny and shout ‘Proddy!’
Even though they don't mean it.’
Success was measured in terms of climbing the career ladder.
‘My uncle is the most successful person I know because he started at the bottom and now has his own business.’
‘Kenny Dalglish was really poor and look at him now.’
‘John Major started from nothing.’
The work ethic is alive and well and living in a town where the official male unemployment figure is 15 per cent.
All said top businessmen deserved their success, ‘as long as it's not inherited’.
But rampaging materialism was not evident in Port Glasgow.
Ambitions were modest.
A job they enjoyed and a good family life.
Enough money to be comfortable and have a holiday.
S5 are children of their time.
They assimilate media messages: on entrepreneurial role models and the need for stringent social order.
Yet these attitudes conflict with their own observations of life in a town which the market has let down.
Occasionally the ethical schizophrenia bursts out.
All but one agreed with the statement: ‘You must look after number one.’
But each tempered this unfettered individualism with a hasty: ‘But that doesn't mean you should forget about other people.’
Here is a generation living on the cusp of contradiction.
Which way will they fall?
‘You're not to have an affair with someone who's not your wife or husband’ Right or wrong?
Nothing's simple, even at an early age, writes Douglas Fraser
‘YOU know the right things to do,’ says one primary school girl.
‘But when you get outside, it's really hard to keep to them.’
Yes, an inbuilt sense of justice is as healthily evident as ever; but it is ‘out there’, in the moral battlegrounds and school playgrounds that choices become tougher.
‘Those of us working with children are just glad we're not growing up now,’ says the youth worker in this working class Lothian town.
‘It seems like it was so much simpler then.’
Primary schools devote much of their time to discussion.
A central part of the new curriculum is about talking and listening, as well as reading and writing.
Feelings and emotions are examined in depth, and it is then that pupils can be seen struggling to come to terms with right and wrong.
If, for instance, you are pushed over in the playground, would it be all right to push the aggressor in return?
‘If you run away, you're just a sap,’ is the consensus from those who have something to say.
Turning the other cheek is not an option here — until the children begin to work through the logic and consequences of two wrongs making a…
On most issues, pupils in this primary class know the ‘right’ answers, but in other rooms there are reminders that the reality can be different.
One boy has been caught pinching his classmates' property; stealing to impress his pals.
In another class, a boy is being cross-examined on complaints by both girls and boys in the class that he has been groping them; it emerges through class discussion that this has been going on for two years.
Just another morning in just another primary: just another crop of emotionally scarred children.
In primary five, children are developing a strong sense of responsibility to each other in relationships.
When pressed, they see little point in this except to avoid punishment.
‘You've got to make friends,’ says one.
‘Then they won't hit you.’
Teachers are seen in a more positive light, ‘because they're nice to us — because they're learning us’.
In the staffroom, they talk of trying to strike a balance between children seeing teachers as friends, and being over-familiar.
So who do the children respect?
‘Respect?’ they puzzle, ‘what's that?’
The head teacher explains: ‘Respect involves more distance between people than we have here.’
There are no strong feelings about teachers being too strict, but four out of 20 pupils think teachers should be stricter ‘to do more work’ and ‘to stop bad people being badder.’
It is the work that is the most important thing to learn at school, with arithmetic being favoured by a three-to-one margin over being good.
By a two-to-one vote, a good teacher is seen as someone who has control over a class.
What about parents?
Are they too soft?
No-one thinks so.
Twelve are allowed to say when they go to bed and four are told when to go, while half the class have parents working in the evening.
Three are never hit by their parents.
By primary seven, the class of around 25 is more confident about relationships, but find themselves torn in a discussion of loyalties.
What would they do if a parent had grounded them, for instance, and yet they had arranged to meet friends outside?
A large minority — all boys — would slip out of bedroom windows, parental authority there to be subverted for more important loyalties.
‘Parents say you can't get your hair cut the way you want.
But it's your hair.’
‘And they tell you to tidy your room.
But they shouldn't.
It's your room.’
‘But it's their home,’ replies a classmate.
‘They pay the mortgage.’
Four felt their parents were too strict, while many others' parents were not strict enough.
‘They let their children do what they like.
They don't have that much discipline.’
‘Parents give in to the moaning, and sometimes ignore you, giving you the silent treatment.’
And there's also the awareness of danger outside.
‘Parents can be over-protective.
They don't want anything to happen to you.’
‘You're a target yourself.
But if there's a big bunch of you, you've got more chance.’
The message has been stressed throughout primary that pupils should avoid strangers who could abduct them.
‘They've got something wrong with them, or sometimes it's anger,’ explains one pupil.
‘Maybe they're divorced and hurt, so they just take a child.’
‘Or they've been a bully before, and they just go downhill.
If you're a bully, people just don't want to know you.’
A class member brings up the subject of drugs.
Around half know of someone who uses drugs.
So what would they do if they knew there was a dealer on their street?
Thirteen would tell an adult, their parents, or the police.
Four would do nothing and two would go to the dealers to try to counsel them.
One girl whispered that she couldn't tell anyone at home, because they used drugs.
At this age, there has been little hassle from the police: only an awareness that crime scars their neighbourhood.
‘I want police like they are on television, like The Bill, where they get stuck right in,’ says one boy.
‘Here, they're just sitting in the station, waiting for phone calls.’
And what has God got to do with this authority thing, with right and wrong?
Er, only four can remember being in a church.
One goes to church regularly, others think its ‘crap’ or ‘Sunday school isn't cool’.
Five believe in God.
‘He just forgives folk.’
‘And heals them.’
‘And He gives us rules — the Ten Commandments.’
They break into an anarchic chorus of instructions about coveting, swearing and murder, and then subside.
‘And you're not to have an affair with someone who's not your wife or husband,’ adds one girl belatedly.
Why do we have such rules?
‘So you can break them,’ suggests the class jester.
‘If you lived by them, it would make the world a better place.’
And if you break them?
‘You just go on living anyway, partly to overcome Scots' shortcomings with presenting and expressing themselves.’
‘Parents see behaviour at home and school as separate — as if there's no connection’ The art of teaching has become almost incidental as the role of social worker has increased, says Douglas Fraser
HIS mother and her boyfriend had rowed and split at the weekend.
That was traumatic enough, but it left the ten-year-old having to get himself up and out to school in the morning.
A neighbour had made sure he was awake; there was no alarm clock at home.
Breakfast was an apple bought on the way to his primary five class.
When he arrived, getting down to work was the last thing on his mind.
‘Their heads are somewhere else,’ says his teacher.
‘What they're dealing with at home is so important to them, it's hard to concentrate.’
Every Monday morning at this primary school, serving one of Lothian's former mining communities, teachers have to mop up the trauma and emotional debris from the weekend.
Without it, language and maths lessons are useless.
Values education is largely bound up with behaviour, and teachers blame the lowered expectations in behaviour on the emotional troubles imported from home — and on parents who have failed to draw the line on behaviour for their offspring.
In one class, almost half the pupils had spent Saturday and Sunday away from home — visiting grans, aunties, estranged fathers and mothers in far-off towns.
As they shift from one adult to another, teachers say it is the video which keeps them under control — a new binge of blood and guts each time they are shuttled past the rental shop.
Pupils boast of having watched up to eight videos in a day.
At least it keeps them from the dangers which await them on the streets.
‘My regret is that parenting has changed,’ says one teacher.
‘Everybody wants to give their child the very best.
They think that if you're buying things for your child — the computer, video and TV — you're doing well by them, and they don't need a cuddle.
‘They have a basic need to know that someone loves them, but some of these children are not secure about who they are and who loves them.
The well-adjusted children are the ones who know someone loves them — but then it's those children who don't get the attention.’
This is the teacher-as-social-worker: providing emotional support, attending case conferences, subject to physical and verbal assaults, on the lookout for signs of physical and sexual abuse, no longer able to assume standards of behaviour — and, as if incidentally, also intended to teach, with the upheaval of a new curriculum and its accompanying paperwork.
Some of them even have to be parents when they get home where they see at first hand the pressures to supply children with fashionable merchandise.
‘I have to take off my teachers’ hat when I get home,’says one.
‘Parents expect schools to sort out a lot of problems which are not school problems,’ says one.
If there's no control at home, they come to the teacher and require the teacher to discipline their child, in the hope or belief that perhaps the teacher has the desired authority.
But other parents come to the teacher to complain if their child is in trouble at school.
‘We don't get the same back-up.
When I was at school and I got a row, my mother and father would assume I was in the wrong.
Now they don't.’
‘Parents see behaviour at home and in school as separate — as if there's no connection,’ adds another.
‘School tries to teach that it's bad to fight.
But they go home and their Dad says ‘If someone hits you, hit him back.’
Every parent thinks their child is the most important being in the world.’
The school's values can be reduced to one rule, says the head; do to others as you would have them do to you.
But the suggestion that this basic Christian principle might be extended to a more explicit set of Christian values makes them uneasy.
‘My values are different from those of my colleagues,’ says a Christian class teacher.
Although she talks openly and confidently in the staffroom about her faith and salvation, ‘religion has connotations of indoctrination.
My views affect me as a person.
Children should see that from the way I act, not from what I tell them to think’.
This staffroom's experience is supported by research findings, published last year by the Scottish Council for Research in Education.
Surveying 1,000 teachers in 112 schools and every secondary head in Scotland, they found that extreme incidents of indiscipline, such as physical or verbal abuse of teachers, were rare.
Instead, it was minor but repeated acts of indiscipline, such as pupils talking out of turn or hindering the work of the class, which teachers found wearing.
Very few of those surveyed wrote positively about parental and home influence, with a high degree of concern that home and school values were out of step.
‘Pupils’ attitudes to work and common politeness in a group situation are decidedly unhealthy in this school,’said one.
‘At home, children expect to come first in the life of the family and in school many of them behave in a selfish, uncaring way with no idea of consideration of others,’ wrote another.
One teacher said feuding between girls was directly linked to tensions from home.
And from one-eighth of head teachers came frustrations with education authorities: ‘The surprising thing is that many teachers and schools cope so well,’ said one.
‘Certainly the education authority and society in general do nothing to help us resolve this problem.’‘
Planning the assault on the boardroom NEIL FITZGERALD listens as a strategy for women to aim for the top is hammered out
IF they thought they were breaking new ground by having the Institute of Directors host a discussion on the lack of women in the boardroom, then Donald Hardie, its Scottish director, and Henry Fairweather, Scottish & Newcastle's personnel director who put the idea forward, were right — in more ways than one.
With a full house of 185 at last Tuesday's event in Edinburgh University, part-funded by Lothian and Edinburgh Enterprise, it is arguably the first held by the IoD, that predominantly male organisation, where the overwhelming majority was female.
High-powered females, at that: these were company directors, partners, owner-managers and senior civil servants.
And, along with their male counterparts, they were ready to carry out the purpose of the meeting which, in the words of Douglas Kinnaird of PA Consulting, brought in as one of the UK's top headhunters to chair it, was ‘not to provide answers but raise comments, views — even whether or not it is a concern?— and pick out perhaps one or two opportunities.’
Such a modest objective perhaps seemed prudent given the way the issue of how to increase the proportion of women at the very top already seems to have run into so many brick walls.
Almost as proof, Kinnaird and Marie Steele, lecturer in Strathclyde University's department of human resources management and one of the four opening speakers acting as ‘catalysts’ for the discussion, set the dismal scene: the unbelievably low number of female applicants for top jobs, the discontinuity between the high rate of female academic achievement in secondary, tertiary and professional education and career patterns, the patchiness of those career patterns in various sectors where they did break through.
Anne Harper, until recently a senior executive with BP, heightened the feeling that there is a real and all-too-close-to-home problem when she compared her experience of working with the group's local company boards in Scandinavia, where partly due to the existence of worker representatives the woman board member is not an unusual phenomenon, and in the machismo-oriented ‘southern Mediterranean countries of Portugal, Spain and the Republic of Ireland’ where it is — and promptly included her experiences in Scotland with the latter.
Alan Murdoch, personnel director of NCR, cited the problems which even this unusually enlightened engineering company had come up against in trying to tap this under-used management resource — an apparent lack of ambition that drives women into ‘support’ roles, the fact that child-bearing age co-incides with that age-span when the potential top manager is just getting up to speed, the lack of female engineering-oriented managers from which to select.
Not that that was the end of it — NCR had simply had to open up opportunities for people lower down the ladder to develop, backed up by formal systems of career planning, appraisal and psychometric testing to mine the required resource.
It was for Lesley Bale to be the living proof that there was a way through.
Managing director of Aberdeen Airport at 33, she had not met any barrier to career progression.
On the other hand: she'd fortunately made the right career choice and been encouraged by school and family at an early age, got a qualification (chartered accountancy) that proved a useful passport, and had had the same supportive bosses any man would expect to get.
And the pressure remained at the top: no access to the old boys' clubs or men's rooms for deal-making, and the constant reminder that ‘if a man fails it's because he's inadequate, but if a female does it's because of her sex.’
In the ensuing wide-ranging discussion a lot of attention was given to child-care problems but these were rapidly relegated to being a  symptom of something far more fundamental affecting women's progression to the board: attitude.
The attitude of men — not just the middle-aged grey-suits at the top but increasingly of young grey-suits who put their career above that of their partners' — came in for some stick.
But the attitude of women content to stay in their middle-level comfort zones came in for a lot too — not only from a male chief executive who had seen one of his recruits retreat from the fast track, but from senior female executives as well who felt women ‘should take their share of responsibility for low applications for senior jobs.’
Comparisons were drawn with the US where, in spite of more severe child-care obstacles, women were making their mark because of the ‘can-do’ attitude that marked out anyone destined for the top.
A hopeful counter to the hierarchical Scottish culture that prevented mobility was the increasing spreading over here of flatter, networked structures brought in by US multinationals.
Also brought in by at least one US multinational — NCR's new parent, AT&T, was the notion of quotas of women in top jobs within a certain time span.
A danger was raised: mishandled, these could be deemed illegal in the UK.
Nevertheless, quite apart from their value as a temporary measure to kick-start a move to overcome corporate cultural stereotypes, it was argued convincingly that at an operational level they worked as a performance standard on managers, making them work harder to find, encourage and develop female high-fliers.
It was pointed out that there are also models already for external methods for developing women for future senior roles.
The Scottish Office's ‘bridging’ scheme, placing mid-career civil servants in company non-executive directorships, was put forward as an ideal means to broaden the skills of women in functional roles or to refresh those of women nearing the end of a career break.
(Indeed, the public sector was seen to have a number of initiatives, such as registers of candidates for work on health trust and other boards, that could profitably be replicated in the private sector to the same end.)
In the absence of the proverbial golf course, the lack of networks through which to find suitably experienced women for senior board appointments could be construed as the final obstacle — were it not, it was pointed out, for the rapid proliferation of alternatives in the form of Network, set up all of 12 years ago as a meeting point for women managers, the Scottish Women's Enterprise Group and Businesswomen's Clubs.
Seek and ye shall find.
The same motto could have been applied to the meeting itself.
Out of it came an imperative on women, as well as men, not to be swayed by traditional culture and educational choice into seeing only obstacles to advancement.
There was the application of quotas, and additional opportunities for training and development that may involve, by employers to be seen to be more encouraging and therefore more attractive to female hopefuls — wrenching the market, even, into a more equitable and efficient way of operating.
Then came the idea of encouraging participation in external part-time roles, as preparation.
Finally, the emergence of pools where the fully-fledged candidates could be identified was raised.
Put together, they could be said to constitute more than the ‘perhaps one or two opportunities’ the discussion set out to find, but an outline strategy for reclaiming a grossly under-used source of much-needed brain-power in the boardroom: a strategy that now calls for sharpening and refining.
Cancer case starts in doomed man's home
By Susan Dean
EVERY breath a struggle, his speech punctuated by a gurgling cough, Alfred McTear held court in his living room yesterday to give evidence in a £500,000 damages action against a tobacco company.
Breath, energy and time are precious commodities for Mr McTear.
The ravages of lung cancer have left him so little of them that his evidence in the pioneering case against Imperial Tobacco had to be given in advance of the full hearing which is still possibly two years away.
He is expected to be dead by then but his action could open the way for thousands of similar cases worldwide.
He is claiming that Imperial Tobacco failed to issue warnings about the health hazards when he started smoking 30 years ago.
As the living room of his end-terraced council house in Cherrywood Drive, Beith, Ayrshire, became a court, Mr McTear admitted that even the awful price of his former 60-a-day habit could not rid him of the temptation.
‘It sounds terrible to say that you are still looking for cigarettes,’ he said.
A group of ten lawyers and court officials, including Sandy Borland QC, the presiding commissioner, crowded into the small front room to hear evidence in private from the thin and fragile father-of-three.
Mr McTear's wife, Margaret, 47, and his daughter Sandra, 26, stayed in the kitchen while his tale unfolded over four hours in total.
Mr McTear, 48, claims that he would not have started smoking in the mid-1960s had there been the present-day health warnings.
By the time they were in force, he was addicted.
Although he had had a smoker's cough for years, it was not until last April that inoperable lung cancer was diagnosed.
Housebound and often in severe pain, Mr McTear says that it can take him 30 minutes to recover his breath from the simple act of walking downstairs in the morning.
In a faint and rasping voice, at times straining to make himself heard, Mr McTear told reporters that he could not understand why the Government had permitted cigarettes to be sold.
He had thought that because the Government allowed them to be on sale ‘they must be OK’.
The court action would continue after his death because of his desire to stop others — including his four young grandchildren — from following his example.
‘I know it sounds old-hat, but it's for the children.
To think that they could end up like me,’ he said.
‘I have no future but my children and my wife will take it as far as it goes.
If I can manage to get it into court…think of the thousands who will have a chance, will have some redress for the loved ones they have lost.’
Alfred McTear during the hearing in his home
Amber signals only in green push Too little energy has been expended on turning Britain green, says AUSLAN CRAMB, Environment Correspondent
THE low energy solar residence at Strathclyde University, one of the most energy efficient buildings in Scotland, is a source of great pride to those involved in its development.
But Swedish visitors laugh at it.
The reason is simple — the insulation used in the warm building is 150mm thick, which is twice the building standard required in Britain.
In Sweden, the standard is 220mm.
And therein lies the key criticism of Mr Lamont's move towards an energy efficient Britain.
The introduction of VAT on domestic fuel and power supplies — which brings the UK into line with the rest of Europe — is one part of a large jigsaw.
Key pieces are, however, still missing.
The Scottish Office, for example, has not moved to higher building regulation standards.
So there is no significant push towards energy efficiency when houses are built or rehabilitated.
And the consumer cannot be expected to do it all on his own.
Adding VAT to fuel and power is justified as a means of taxing pollution, but it would have been equally effective to remove VAT from insulation materials which, after all, reduce pollution.
On the plus side, the arrival of VAT on domestic supplies should encourage people to think about saving energy in the home, thereby reducing the demand on coal, oil and gas and, therefore, cutting emissions of carbon dioxide (CO) which are pushing up the global temperature.
But the Chancellor's move gives no clear ‘get green’ signal to commerce and could leave the country open to accusations of dragging its heels.
Why?
Because Mr Lamont specifically rubbished the idea of a European Community-wide ‘carbon tax’.
There is a great deal of support in the EC for such a discriminatory tax, eventually rising to as much as $10 a barrel.
It would be imposed at source, on fossil fuels, and would not hit the development of renewables — wind, wave and solar power, in particular.
In the same vein, the US president, Bill Clinton, has outraged the oil and motoring industries with his plan for a carbon tax, again hitting fossil fuels and nuclear power, but exempting renewables.
The Chancellor said the VAT decision would take Britain two-thirds of the way to its Rio target of stabilising CO at 1990 levels by 2000.
The Association for the Conservation of Energy estimated that the tax would at best reduce CO emissions by two million tonnes a year, compared with an annual output of 160 million tonnes.
‘We all know that these measures exist,’ said the ACE director, Andrew Warren.
‘But they are not being introduced.
Where is the encouragement for these?
There are no energy saving signals in this Budget for industry.’
The most important aspects of the ‘green Budget’ are that it will encourage people to act, and it recognises the environmental mantra that energy has for too long been too cheap.
Yet it was hardly surprising that Greenpeace insisted that Mr Lamont was still a red box Chancellor, not a green box Chancellor.
‘There are no energy saving signals in this for industry.
Where is the encouragement?’
Why all the furore over the ‘support’ given by the SNP MPs to the Government during the recent Maastricht debate?
The SNP exists  primarily to achieve Scottish independence.
However, an important secondary aim is to promote and protect Scottish interests.
Can anyone tell me how, if at all, Scottish interests would have been damaged by having increased Scottish membership on the committee of the regions?
I would have thought that the opposite was the case.
The Labour Party seems to think that the SNP has some sort of duty to oppose the Government whatever the issue.
However, it is important to remember that there is little to choose between Labour and Tory attitudes to Scottish independence.
Indeed, some Scots Labourites are more fervently Unionist than some Tories!
So much so that they would rather live in a UK which seems set to have permanent Tory government than an independent Scotland which would almost certainly be Socialist.
The SNP is not per se anti-Labour or anti-Tory.
It is, however, pro-Scottish and when the Labour Party has a tiff with its Unionist bed-fellows in the Tory Party it should not expect the SNP's automatic support.
Crucial issue in euthanasia debate
Dr Callum Henderson (Points of View, today) makes a thoughtful and reasoned case against the legalisation of euthanasia by relying on two main arguments, first, the familiar ‘slippery slope’ argument and second, that life is sacred because it is created by God.
The slippery slope argument should never be dismissed as irrelevant; it would be totally irrational to reach policy decisions without consideration of their likely consequences.
On the other hand, once the consequences have been fully assessed, the argument loses its importance.
The argument based on the sanctity of life is essentially a matter of religious dogma.
If we are asked to believe that all human life is given by God, then what about animal life?
And are we to think that this loving God really wants us to linger on in pain and without dignity when, according to the same dogma, He is in any case calling us to a better life?
The crucial issue, as the philosopher, Jonathan Glover, explained in his book, Causing Death and Saving Lives, is how much the person can get out of life.
Where the person ‘is not in a position to express a view, the least unsatisfactory test is to ask what one would choose for oneself: would I choose death rather than have that sort of life?’
Whingeing
I am heartily sick of reading letters in Points of View from folk whingeing on and on about how nasty the English are and how they are colonising Scotland.
As an Anglo-Scot, with a Scottish father and an English mother, I suppose I'm in both camps.
Nevertheless, I feel that people in Scotland would do well to consider the fact that many Scots have made their home south of the Border.
It is testimony to the decency of the English that people like my own family, and our many Scottish friends, were made to feel welcome and were accepted.
We tended to stick together too, although no-one accused us of being colonists.
We should extend the same decency to English people who come to live in Scotland, the vast majority of whom want to integrate into the community while retaining their own distinctive national identity.
This is just what Scots folk do in England!
Falsely accused
Further to a letter forwarded to me by my colleagues in the Orkney Seven Action Group, I have now confirmed to my local MP, Jim Wallace, that such representations as he can make on my behalf most assuredly have my consent.
It would be as well for me to clarify what I trust he will now achieve.
My children have been quite improperly denied their home, family and friends for nearly two and a half years, and I, and others, have been falsely accused of abusing them.
I seek the following:
1,
my children's immediate and unconditional return home;
2,
a public inquiry into the full circumstances of their original removal and detention;
3,
disciplinary action against those found guilty of incompetence;
4,
complete exoneration of my older children and myself, from the taint of accusation of abuse, whether from the ‘Chinese whispers’ of social workers, or by dint of allegations obtained, parrot-fashion, from my children, by the heavy-handed verbal duress of the Royal Scottish Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Children, and police interviewers; and
5,
full written apologies from Orkney Islands Council, its social work department, the RSSPCC, and the Northern Constabulary.
A cursory rebuke for ‘poor judgment’ in ‘failing to follow guidelines’would hardly seem proper redress for what my children have undergone.
Orkney Islands Council abdicated all responsibility to its social work department: my children were made to suffer accordingly.
Matters should be taken further, and examples made, to ensure that such a fiasco never happens again.
Thumbs up to dank Fridays and a broken guitar
They always break their thumbs.
A dank Friday night in Fort William and at least three Pizza-munching punters in the Harvester Restaurant have their thumbs in slings.
Skier's Thumb, it's called, the most common injury on slopes from Aonach Mor to Aspen.
Fort William is not Aspen.
It is not even open, as far as I can see, apart from the Harvester, which does a decent pizza featuring almost enough stretchy Mozzarella to provide make-up foundation for Elizabeth Taylor.
Even the sore-thumb-ski-bums are subdued, probably due to the horrific death of a Liverpool schoolboy on the hill earlier in the week.
As for me, I am drinking bad coffee, gazing at the rain and cautiously pondering my imminent return to the glamorous world of Highland rock'n'roll.
I have stripped off the patina of almost-respectable journalism, put back the earring, parted my hair in the middle to hide my own personal recession, exchanged the Marks and Spencer's cords for 501s, the Oxford shirt for a Lloyd Cole cast-off black polo.
I am at least a stone overweight and my haircut is not sharp.
It is not even blunt.
It is not even a hair cut.
I try to suck in my cheeks like all those Donnie Munro pictures, but the jowls still wobble alarmingly.
What am I doing?
I'm 37 years old.
I drive a Peugeot diesel.
I could be at home playing with my computerised banking system or working out how my new pocket modem works over a glass or two of fermented Bulgarian Ribena.
I could be bathing the children, watching that Thomas the Tank Engine video for the 100th time…
Why am I in this position?
Well, it's all because of the legendary Rob Ellen, who first invited me down from Shetland to tour in the Highlands oh, five years ago.
At that stage I was up to my sticky-out ears in Shetland's music scene, and still harbouring a yearning to make a living from being a boring-but-sometimes-funny singer-songwriter.
On joining The Scotsman and moving to the mainland, I bowed to public demand and retired.
There was a brief support tour with Capercaillie, notable for the BCCI affair blowing up simultaneously.
When I went on stage in Tain, the Western Isles had lost £8 million; when I came off, there were 14 messages on the pager, and they'd lost £23 million.
I had to cancel a live radio performance and head for Stornoway, home of the Calvinist hits, where the black puddings come in square boxes in case the ministers think they're too phallic.
Then there was a disastrously lubricated performance at the Highland Press Ball which persuaded me it was time to stop for good.
I still had the guitars, though.
I couldn't get rid of the black Martin, purchased in a moment of island madness instead of a car.
Or, come to think of it, the Fender, or the Gurian or the umm, other Martin.
Then, one day last year, I dropped the blond Martin through the front of the black one.
I was literally in shock for a whole day.
I decided to get it fixed, and swore that was it.
It was a sign never to play again.
Three weeks ago, the black Martin was at Jimmy Moon's workshop in Glasgow being restored (‘It will be perfect’ said the redoubtable Jimmy.
It is.)
Rob phoned.
Did I want to support Newcastle singer Martin (no relation to the guitar) Stephenson on his Highland tour?
For £30 a night?
Of course I did.
Male menopause?
What's that?
At the Lochy Bar in Caol (pronounced cool) just outside Fort William, Martin and I meet for the first time.
With his group the Daintees, he was a high profile act with a major record company until quite recently.
Now he's delighted to be solo and deal-less, playing support spots to the likes of Bob Geldof and low-key acoustic gigs like this one.
Unlike 99 per cent of all known pop persons, Martin is friendly and absolutely genuine.
He is also without any doubt at all by far the most talented and charismatic singer-songwriter-storyteller in Britain.
No question.
It's me first, though.
The bar's busy but not packed, there's one completely legless drunk, harmless and humorous, and a lot of apparently interested, relatively sober listeners.
Will I remember the words?
The chords?
Will I panic?
Will I forget how to speak to the audience?
Have I lost whatever talent for this kind of thing I might once have had?
Not entirely is the answer to all questions.
I settle to a large Lagavulin in relief, and watch Martin Stephenson illustrate just why he is a full-time professional and I am a dilettante moonlighting journalist with the eternal excuse that there might be a column in it.
He combines wonderful playing and a unique, infinitely flexible voice with elusive songs which flirt sometimes with John Prine, sometimes Leonard Cohen, sometimes just himself.
It is not a performance.
He strides about the bar, playing unamplified right into individual's faces, interrupting songs to tell pungent and hilarious tales of Tyneside, making contact, making fun of himself, the rock business, people's clothes, haircuts, conversations.
Yet it's inclusive, celebratory, never pretentious or offensive.
Snatches of poetry, other people's songs, whiplash put-downs of people like Lenny Kravitz (‘bet he's got 1970s Vymura wallpaper at home’) Lloyd Cole's golfing and an unfortunate brace of policemen who enter during his set (‘All right lads, get the spliffs out!’).
The enormous warmth of the Stephenson personality permeates his own intensely personal songs, which really come alive off vinyl.
It's great to be there.
Late abed in a sumptuous local B&B, then Martin is off at 6am, to drive to Inverness for a flight to Heathrow.
He's playing at Southampton University, then flying back up on Sunday for a Sunday afternoon gig at the Aultnamain Inn, high above Tain on the mountain pass called the Struie.
Run by the redoubtable Cheryl, the wonderful Aultnamain (along with the Cluanie Inn, the only pub I know with its name on even the most basic Highland road map) is a Sunday mecca for musos and the merely thirsty from all around.
By 4.45pm, though, Martin has not arrived, and I'm getting worried.
In the nick of time, fresh as a daisy despite the punishing schedule, he arrives, the gear is set up, and I'm on.
Everything is too loud: The amplification, my guitar, the crowd's cheery conversation.
It's not easy.
Martin takes them on unamplified, and after about an hour's struggle, wins the day handsomely.
Two and a half hours later, as I left, he was still playing.
Monday night, straight from work, and I'm in Ullapool, still wearing my cords but with a half-decent haircut.
I'm not so embarrassed about myself now, the crowd is small but totally enthusiastic and suddenly I'm right into it again, being a musician, the privilege and the absolute wonder of a millisecond's absolute communication with a whole bunch of strangers.
Martin plays a great set, we encore, duetting on Teenage Kicks, Blank Generation and Can't Buy Me Love, and I'm lapsing into rockspeak: Great vibe.
Cool.
Happening.
Worse, I mean it.
Back at the wordface next day, Highland dentists are revolting; holiday homes may be attacked; bad vibe, man.
Never mind though.
On Friday in Forres and on Saturday at Inverness, everything's gonna be fine, fine, fine.
As long as I don't break my thumb.
Spirit of harmony soon dies
By Joy Copley PARLIAMENTARY CORRESPONDENT
THANK heavens for a dram of Scotch.
It can lighten even the most leaden of social occasions.
Mine Host Norman raised his glass of Highland Park whisky yesterday and for the first time managed to raise a smile from the assembled guests.
The news that the Shetland born Chancellor had decided to freeze the duty on spirits this year got the nervous revellers into the mood.
They laughed along when Norm theatrically sipped his Scotch and said he was sure that would be welcomed on all sides of the house and especially in Scotland.
As on many occasions when drink is taken, it ended up in tears and in a finger-wagging shouting match with the Labour leader, John Smith, accusing him of a stark betrayal of promises.
Then there were also those infuriating guests who never manage to loosen up.
 Surprisingly , most of them were on his own front-bench.
When Norman walked in all dressed up with his hair slicked back, he got a muted response and one wag shouted ‘on that count you've got about three supporters!’.
Studying the body language of cabinet members showed that could have been an over-estimation.
Squeezed like despondent sardines, they looked as if they were huddling for warmth.
The Prime Minister had his head down for the vast majority of the speech, assiduously following the whole of the 57 pages either to avoid the accusatory, glaring eyes of the Opposition or to check that his Chancellor did not deviate from the text.
Mr Major fidgeted, and took an ever-so sneaky glance at his watch at 4:00pm to find to his dismay that only 30 minutes of the one hour, 53 minute-long drone had passed.
Three contenders for Mr Lamont's job looked on clearly wondering what timebombs on tax they might be landed with in the years ahead.
John MacGregor, the transport secretary, chewed anxiously at his glasses.
Young Michael Portillo, the chief secretary to the Treasury, struck a permanent frown, and Kenneth Clarke, the Home Secretary, stifled a yawn or two and when he thought no-one was looking.
It was all too much for Sir Patrick Mayhew, the Northern Ireland Secretary, who appeared to take more than 40 winks with the tell tale sign of a  rhythmically nodding head giving him away.
At one stage a bleeper went off in the press gallery which woke up one or two slumbering hacks.
The mood changed dramatically when Mr Lamont announced his  extension of value added tax to domestic fuels, which ignited Labour shouts of: ‘Resign!’ and: ‘Cheat!’.
Later John Smith made Messrs Lamont and Major visibly squirm and reduced the Tory back-benchers to silence when he read out quote after quote from the Conservatives pledging not to extend VAT.
Jokes were thin on the ground but when Mr Lamont spoke of a new form of do-it-yourself income tax form for the self employed one MP raised a titter when he shouted: ‘At least that'll suit one person — John Birt (the BBC director general)’.
Cold comfort for a family that can only shiver at the gas bill
FIONA was aghast at the Chancellor's plan to tax fuel and power in the home.
She is unemployed, and bringing up two young daughters on benefits.
She followed her last winter gas bill with a decision to turn off several heaters.
The VAT charges of 8 per cent next year and 17.5 per cent in 1995 will, she fears, place even greater burdens on her over-stretched budget, in spite of the Chancellor's promise that the cost will be met by benefit increases.
Fiona, who has been out of work for six years, lives in Abbeyhill, Edinburgh, with her daughters, aged 22 months and six, on a weekly income of £68.15 from income support.
Her weekly child benefit of £17.45 is automatically put towards clothes for the girls.
Both have already learned that their few toys come only at Christmas and on birthdays.
At least £30 a week is put aside for food.
Her last quarterly gas bill, one which covered the winter months, cost her nearly £60, £5 per week.
‘When I got it, I actually went round the flat and stopped some of the radiators and turned them off,’ she said.
The electricity bill is due soon, and she expects it to be about £70, much of which came from her washing machine working through the day cleaning her daughters' clothes.
Under yesterday's Budget, Fiona and her family will be relatively lightly hit since she doesn't smoke, drink or drive.
The threat of VAT on children's clothes or food did not emerge.
However, it did absolutely nothing for her.
The Chancellor's announcement of extra money for allowing the long-term unemployed help for full-time higher education or return-to-work schemes would have been ideal.
But there was nothing in the Budget towards child care, without which such opportunities are meaningless.
Severin Carrell
‘I don't give my children a lot of sweets.
But my best friend gives her wee boy chocolate all the time and doesn't see anything wrong with it.
Obviously, she has different values from me’ At home or school: where should values originate?
Douglas Fraser asks parents
A MOTHER stands, exasperated, watching her seven-year-old son swinging from a railing on top of a wall and ignoring her instruction to come down.
She can't think of what values she would like him to grow up with, as there is a more immediate concern.
‘I just wish I could control him,’ she says.
‘It's lack of discipline at school and in the home.
I think they should have the belt still.’
Would she use a belt at home?
‘Oh, no.
A wee smack now and then, mind.
I'll ground him, or send him to his room.
Or his computer is taken away from him.
But it doesn't seem to make any difference.
I wish they'd just learn to take discipline or punishment.
But he doesn't think there'll be any discipline for not doing what he's told.’
Jeanette Hamilton works in the video shop in an ex-mining town on the East coast, and has daughters aged 17 and 12.
‘The most important rule is to respect their elders.
Most parents do try and teach their children values.
But it's changed.
Young people don't listen to you as much.
They're allowed to do what they want and find out for themselves.
Mind you, my elder daughter takes a lot more responsibility for herself than I did at that age.’
The teaching of values is up to the school, she argues, as it is the teachers' opinion that children respect.
‘They listen to you until they're five and then they start coming home from school, telling you what the teacher says.’
Christine Bain is appalled at the stories with which her ‘one-in-a-million’ 12-year-old daughter comes home.
‘Parents are to blame.
It all depends on how you're brought up.
If you're dragged up, it's only natural the children turn out like that.
‘In this district, it's just pubs, gambling, smoking and dope.
The majority of mothers just couldn't care less.
My sister just lets the bairns roam.
She's never there for them.
‘And the neighbourliness is not the same.
They criticise me for getting a new curtain or taking a holiday.
They're on unemployment and don't realise I saved for that.
I've got five jobs, see.
I'm from a family of five, and none of the rest of them work.’
Parents on the streets of the town know there is something badly wrong, that the issue is control of their children, and it is often to the school that they look.
‘You tell him,’ is the refrain they often take to the local schools, in admission that authority and control has been exhausted at home.
An in-depth study of parental opinions about values in schooling found parents have strong opinions, but what was striking was the lack of willingness to become more involved in how the school goes about dealing with the issue.
The work, led by Pamela Munn and Julie Allan of the Scottish Council for Research in Education, involved detailed interviews with a focus group of 20 parents, picked to represent a cross-section of Scottish life.
They found only one parent objected to schools dealing with values, as this would harm academic work.
Another thought the balance was wrong.
‘Schools claim too much responsibility,’ it was said.
‘They have to draw the line where their authority over pupils begins and ends.
The problem for the schools is that not all parents accept their share of the authority.
I'd like to see schools claim less responsibility for the shaping of the citizen of the future.’
The group understood values as meaning attitudes and views, being broader than the faith linked to religious belief.
‘It's about how you live and how you want your children to live, having certain attitudes, such as that it's important to be polite and respect your elders and that you should want to work hard at school,’ was one typical comment.
But they recognised schools had a problem dealing with diversity.
‘Everybody has different views on what they think is right.
It might be quite acceptable for somebody to have three packets of sweets a day, whereas I wouldn't.
I don't give my children a lot of sweets.
But my best friend gives her wee boy chocolate all the time and doesn't see anything wrong with it.
Obviously, she has different values from me.’
EIGHTEEN of the 20 identified ‘behaviour and discipline’ as one of the most important values for their children to learn, far ahead of‘working hard’with eight.
Developing self-worth, racial and religious tolerance, caring for oneself and others and sexual awareness were recognised as key values by between four and seven parents.
Four, all of whom sent their children to Roman Catholic schools, gave strong emphasis to Christian values.
And none chose the environment or anti-sexism as a value.
Four thought Christianity should not be seen as the prevailing ethic.
‘We no longer live in a society which we can claim is founded on Christian belief,’ said one, favouring instead an education which teaches children to accept people have fundamentally different beliefs which are neither wrong nor right.
By contrast, a parent of Pakistani origin with a child at an RC school accepted it would treat Christianity as the basic doctrine.
Teachers were seen as key role models, with parents believing they should dress appropriately and not be seen smoking by pupils.
Their treatment of pupils was seen as important, not making pupils look foolish in front of classmates, not swearing and not being overbearing or sarcastic.
Those with children at RC schools expected the highest moral standards.
And for at least one parent, there was an awareness that sometimes children's sense of justice can be hurt by parents not taking some of the blame: ‘If a kid arrives late for school, or is not properly dressed, then that's not the kid's fault, it's the mother's fault, or whoever got them out in the morning.
It's wrong to blame the kid.’
Doubts on grading ethnic-minority pupils Gary Duncan looks at the background to the flawed assessment system for ethnic minority children
NEWS that an investigation has been started into the possible mis-assessment of ethnic minority children in Strathclyde has highlighted an issue which for years has been simmering in Britain's classrooms and education departments.
The prospect that perhaps hundreds of black and Asian children may have been wrongly consigned to special schools because of a failure properly to understand their needs is one which education authorities have been reluctant to confront.
But as Scotland's ethnic minority population expands, it is one which urgently needs to be addressed.
The problem is simple.
Ethnic-minority children who are thought by their teachers to be having difficulties at school are being assessed with tests which are thought to be fundamentally flawed.
The methods used, it is argued, fail to recognise their different cultural background, nor do they take account of the different needs of children who at home speak languages other than English.
The result is that needs and problems are wrongly diagnosed.
Some examples of how tests may be failing to take account of cultural biases are so obvious that the errors might appear crass.
Nonetheless they reflect the reality facing these children.
In one test, for example, children are asked to identify a traditional English beer tankard — an object unlikely ever to have been seen by a child from a Muslim background in which alcohol is proscribed.
Such difficulties are compounded by the complexities of dealing with children who are bilingual.
According to John Landon, senior lecturer in multicultural education at Edinburgh's Moray House College, a child who appears to be fluent in English in spite of its not being his or her first language may still be unable to cope with testing in English.
The apparent English fluency of bilingual children may be dependent on the use of words in a social context.
When that context is removed — in situations like testing — the child's understanding may be reduced.
In practice, this may mean a child being tested does not understand the wording of a question.
Their poor score will fail to recognise that they might well fully grasp the concepts behind the question — which is what they are being tested on.
Mr Landon also argues that the problem goes much deeper than just testing but begins when children are first identified as having a problem.
In many cases, he says, there is too little recognition of the impact of minority children's bilingual and bicultural status.
‘The problem is that once you make a mistake in deciding the child needs testing it can set up a chain of events that can lead to severe problems for the child,’ he says.
Tackling those complex issues is not easy.
In some American states, testing has been banned because the methodology is thought biased.
Here, John Landon and others believe, a more sophisticated response is needed: relevant in-service and pre-qualification training for teachers and educational psychologists, a greater number of bilingual teachers, and a thoroughgoing revision of tests where they need to be used.
In Britain only a small start has so far been made.
But if the nation's children are to get the education they deserve, concerted action may be needed.
Well down the road to a reappraisal The tortured debate on society's values is nothing new for Scotland's teaching profession, reports Douglas Fraser
SCOTTISH educationists rarely disparage the ‘trendy, progressive’ teaching methods so maligned south of the Border.
There is a quiet pride that the profession avoided the extremes in adapting to modern ways.
However, Cameron Harrison, chief executive of the Scottish Consultative Council on the Curriculum, admits one unfortunate legacy.
‘There was a time that the response ‘that's a value judgment’ would have demolished any argument in the educational field,’he says.
‘People are gaining confidence in the profession to make assertions about the importance of values and ethical judgments.’
Unprovoked by media hysteria, the last two years have seen the issue of values emerge in the staffroom.
This is partly through pupil behaviour forcing teachers to consider whether they can or wish to be merely amoral dispensers of knowledge and exam technique.
It may also reflect a deep-seated concern in society that values are in decline, and that schools are the place to start doing something about it.
But Harrison sees the recent rise in awareness of values as following from the realisation that they are the key to a good, effective school, with strong exam results and happy children.
‘There is a recognition that the climate or culture of an organisation is a strong determinant of whether the organisation is going to be successful.
So there is also a recognition of values in determining the ethos of a school, and of the very powerful effect that has on children's achievement.’
The more recent stress has been on identifying values in the curriculum, and not limiting them to religious or moral education classes.
It can mean clear policies on relationships within the school community, on race or gender, or a common commitment to the environment.
This reflects the balance for which schools strive, between pursuit of knowledge and the introduction of young people into society and co-operation with others.
But it can also strike on the potential for tension between bringing out individuality and creating conformity.
That, however, need not be a tension, according to Colwyn Trevarthen, professor of child psychology at Edinburgh University.
Introducing young people to society and encouraging them to express themselves should not create conflict, as long as there is a co-operative understanding within the family or community.
He points to research which shows children are eager to belong to their culture from infancy.
‘There's a fantastic spirit in pre-school children putting work into finding cultural values,’ he says.
‘They look to be part of a community and picking up the rules of the culture.
That means, of course, that if they learn it's right for a man to kill or steal, they'll be very good at it.’
The problems arise, he says, when neglect and deprivation of children leads to violent behaviour, or when values are imposed in an authoritarian way, as can be convenient for governments looking for quick answers to youth disaffection.
‘Human life, particularly with children, is a matter of negotiation,’ says Trevarthen.
That is why schools increasingly take immense amounts of classroom time to work their way through rule systems with children, so that the end result is a matter of agreement, towards which everyone has contributed and on which everyone has agreed.
The boy who kicks his football close to windows can be reprimanded more easily if he was one of those to draw up the rule against doing so and if he agreed on the appropriate punishment beforehand.
One of the key elements in the debate was the publication, in 1991, of an SCCC position statement on values in education.
It included:
The appreciation of learning: including its life-long nature striving for a person's full potential, self-discipline, independent thinking and aesthetic sensitivity, as well as respect for other cultures and freedom of expression.
Caring and respect for oneself: including a sense of responsibility, motivation and assessment of personal strengths.
Respect and caring for others: valuing racial, ethnic and religious diversity, the value of others as individuals and how to express respect and care.
‘Teachers should recognise that the values they reflect are most powerfully expressed by how they relate to learners; in how they talk and communicate; in how they share knowledge, skills and ideas: and in the expectations they indicate to the learner,’ suggested the council.
Those responding to the position statement were wary at first of the authoritarian connotations of value systems, and that this would leave schools open to hi-jack from left, right or religious groups.
But teachers faced with increasing behavioural problems have come round to seeing that values in education could work to their advantage.
In Dundee's Northern College, the Values Education Project developed a methodology through which a school could identify the values it already holds and set targets to grow from there.
Through setting goals with priority areas, and through involving both staff and pupils, it suggested each school could take its own path to becoming ‘the considerate school.’
But Alex Rodger, director of the project, joins in the warning about imposing from outside: ‘One of the pressures is from authorities within a society who, seeing problems increasing, say we need to do something to re-establish the foundations on which our society can work.
We're not short of people who want to mount crusades.
But while concern should motivate people, it shouldn't encourage them to switch off the reasonableness which they apply in other areas.’
The spreading awareness of values within Scottish schools is subtle and deliberately slow, according to the curriculum council.
It contrasts somewhat with the wishes of John Patten, education secretary for England and Wales, who wrote last year: ‘Dwindling belief in redemption and damnation has led to loss of fear of the eternal consequences of goodness and badness.’
Discuss.
Anne T Paterson: pioneer in child guidance
THE DEVELOPMENT of child guidance in Scotland owes much to the pioneering work of Anne T Paterson, who died on Sunday at her Edinburgh home.
Anne Paterson, MA, MEd, FBPsS, was a graduate of Edinburgh University.
She held posts in Northumberland and Dundee before being appointed as the first educational psychologist in Dumbarton.
Her next appointment in 1942 was as the first educational psychologist employed by the education committee of the city of Edinburgh.
As principal psychologist, Miss Paterson led and developed the Child Guidance Service until her retirement in 1966.
She was also responsible for the development of such services in the counties of Roxburgh and Selkirk.
During this period she fostered, in association with the Child Guidance Service, the establishment of a team of teachers to provide extra help in Edinburgh primary schools for pupils with learning difficulties: a pioneer concept which was to become more fully implemented in the years following the publication in 1978 of the Warnock Report on Pupils with Special Educational Needs.
In 1955 Miss Paterson was invited to lecture and conduct courses for teachers in Montreal and at Yale.
In 1961 she served on the Secretary of State's working party on Standards of Ascertainment for Scottish School Children (Degrees of Mental Handicap).
She was awarded her fellowship of the British Psychological Society in early recognition of her distinguished work for child guidance in Scotland.
Many who later held responsible psychological posts throughout the United Kingdom had their early experience of child guidance as members of her staff.
A Highland conflict that could spill over into war The struggle for Scotland's biggest council area is intensifying.
David Scott previews the region-versus-district arguments that Ian Lang will hear today.
CONFLICTING views over the future of Scotland's biggest local government area, Highland Region, will be put to Ian Lang, the Scottish Secretary, in Inverness today.
Whether Highland should remain as a single-tier region or be divided into smaller units is likely to be one of the most difficult decisions Mr Lang faces as he reaches an advanced stage of drawing up his plans for local government reform.
At separate talks with regional and district leaders, he will hear both sides of an argument that is causing deep divisions in the area.
While similar region versus district confrontations elsewhere in Scotland are deliberately being kept low-key, particularly in Labour-dominated areas, there are signs of open warfare in Highland, where the political parties have only limited influence.
The districts' case will be put by the Association of Highland District Councils.
The association represents all of the eight districts which include councils like Caithness and Sutherland in the region's most northerly extreme and Lochaber and Badenoch & Strathspey in the south.
Mr Lang wants to bring local government closer to the people it serves.
A decision which would produce an all-Highland single-tier authority covering 10,000 square miles may seem contradictory to that objective.
But the regional representatives will try to convince Mr Lang that Highland is a unique area, with a strong community identity which lends itself to region-wide treatment.
The regional council leaders will argue that it can fulfil the twin aims of overall strategic planning for Highland and making local government more local by producing a scheme of decentralised decision-making and management.
It believes that a region-wide authority is required to provide enough spending power for the benefit of the entire area.
According to the region, removing the existing districts would save about £4.4 million a year, which is equivalent to a cut of £62 in the council tax.
So much is at stake at today's talks that the region's vice-convener, Peter Peacock, who will make a presentation to Mr Lang, was reluctant to say much about it in advance.
When asked about the row between regions and districts, he said: ‘We have made our points known and we await the outcome with interest.
We are entirely confident that our figures are correct and we would be happy for the Secretary of State to be the judge of those.’
Alternative plans put forward in the Scottish Office consultation document on council reform would result in the region either being retained as a single-tier unit or being divided into two or three councils.
A region-wide council is thought to remain a strong option.
The districts' association will tell Mr Lang that a single council would be too big and remote.
Even a decentralised arrangement, it says, would fail to provide the kind of accountable local government that would be possible only by the provision of smaller unitary authorities.
The association has avoided naming the number of councils it considers to be feasible.
At local level, however, individual councils have their own plans.
Inverness District Council has suggested linking up with Nairn and Badenoch & Strathspey to form one authority.
Ross & Cromarty has proposed joining up with Skye & Lochalsh.
Sutherland, stressing that it is the largest land-based district council area in Britain, is one of the Highland  authorities that believes it should remain on its own.
Rory Mair, the chief executive of Ross & Cromarty and a spokesman for the association, believes that a decentralised region would not work.
He said that Mr Lang appeared to have a vision of a local government closely identified with communities.
That vision could not be put into practice if Highland were to be governed by an authority the size of Belgium.
Convincing arguments are likely to come from both sides at today's talks.
Decisions are due to be taken soon so that a white paper can be published at the beginning of June.
As one council official remarked: ‘It is a make-or-break situation.
It may be our last chance to influence the Secretary of State's thinking.’
‘If it's you, it's you…
But you just do your job’ Severin Carrell recalls his visit to The Royal Scots in Ulster during which he met the young Scottish soldier who on Wednesday became the province's 3,045th victim
SOLDIERS step in a stooped position through the narrow steel door placed a foot off the ground in the concrete wall.
On the other side are uneven fields of pasture, scrub and hawthorn hedgerows.
The high grey wall has a lip trimmed with razor wire.
It has all the ugliest characteristics of a state institution, a prison perhaps.
Beyond it, the countryside — grazing land, cottages, lines of trees — is peaceful in its appearance.
The troops, however, treat the grey walls of Forkhill, a joint Royal Ulster Constabulary and British Army base a few hundreds metres from the Irish border, as their refuge.
South Armagh, once known as bandit country, is notorious for the operations of arguably the most effective and committed members of the Provisional Irish Republican Army.
For this reason, soldiers on yet another emergency tour in Ulster with the 1st Battalion The Royal Scots approach their frequent foot patrols with perhaps an extra edge of caution and respect.
Even over Christmas, when the IRA declared a unilateral ceasefire, that caution could not be relaxed not even for the sake of a rare party and a couple of cans of beer.
Hangovers can be killers, said L-Cpl Lawrence Dickson, four days before Christmas.
‘We want to go home in March,’ he said, ‘We're not going to take the risk.’
C Company of The Royal Scots has lived at Forkhill as part of the regiment's six-month tour which began last October.
The young soldiers who pass each day through the steel door, laden with 50lb packs, armoured vests, bullet pouches and their stubby semi-automatic rifles, treat the fields with the suspicion and distrust some observers would reserve for their base.
Most days have been taken up with the unreported routine of minor incidents  occurring twice or three times a day: suspect devices, random gun shots and the like.
There could be other events, like the flamethrower attack on an observation post farther along the border.
Three Royal Scots escaped, only singed.
At Forkhill, some of those events may pepper the daily cycle of wearying patrols, weapons cleaning, physical training and sole dependence on satellite television for entertainment.
The Scotsman visited Forkhill to find L-Cpl Dickson acting Jack the lad.
A humourous man with a face which might have developed in later age into the kind described as craggy, he threw jokes at many questions, answered others with disarming bluntness.
It was approaching Christmas Day.
Another one away from home, away from his wife, Silke, and his 18-month-old daughter, Roxanne, over on the mainland in army married quarters in Inverness.
Silke and he met when the regiment was at Werl, near Dortmund, in the late 1980s.
‘Christmas has been postponed this year.
It's off.
It isn't happening,’ he said cheerfully, as if that settled it.
‘You get a wee bit romantic and a wee bit depressed about it, but it's not going to affect your job.
But, then, you're going to get extra pay for it.’
He appeared to speak on behalf of others in his platoon, young men who had just left boyhood behind, as they crouched hunched over cleaning rags and oil, stripping down their SA-80 rifles and machine guns in the cramped confines of their bunk room.
Perhaps two tours in Northern Ireland, a war in the Middle East, and ten full years in the army lends a 26-year-old lance corporal a certain stature with rookies still in their teens.
But then perhaps few have the nerve to speak up with their unit commander and two captains looking on.
After the sometimes neutral statements of some senior officers on the role of the army in the province, L-Cpl Dickson enjoyed speaking with candour.
‘It would be a successful tour if you get one thing: to put a terrorist away.
If that's all you've got for the whole battalion, that's a success as far as the tour is concerned,’ he said.
A similar success for the IRA or any Loyalist terrorist was, he said, ‘something that is on the back of your mind constantly, but it doesn't always affect you.
If it's you, it's you.
But you just do your job’.
Early next week, The Royal Scots fly home to Inverness, another tour over, a month's leave ahead.
Two days ago, on St Patrick's Day, L-Cpl Dickson was killed by a single sniper's bullet, 500 metres from Forkhill.
Soon he will become another statistic, the 3,045th death of the Troubles.
Doing his job: L-Cpl Lawrence Dickson, seated centre right, with his men in their quarters
Muddled thinking at heart of Edinburgh's traffic policies underlined
Your report of 9 March (‘Green route plan unveiled’) described a Lothian Regional Council plan for controlling traffic in Edinburgh between Bristo Place and The Mound.
Unfortunately these proposals only exemplify the muddled thinking which seems so often to lie at the heart of Edinburgh's traffic policies.
The aim is to ‘calm’ or, apparently, slow down and make passage more difficult for all traffic on these trunk routes through a busy part of the city.
Logically there are three alternative objectives for controlling traffic in any specific zone.
These are:
1, To prohibit traffic altogether, ie pedestrianisation.
This is a good idea for narrow streets and for some shopping areas.
2, Calm down or slow the traffic flow.
This is a good plan in residential areas where through traffic should be discouraged;
3, Speed up and facilitate the flow of traffic.
This is appropriate and necessary on major roads if traffic is to be permitted at all.
In addition to these plans, each of which would be appropriate for different zones, there should be an overall plan to limit the total amount of traffic in the city as a whole.
This can and should be done by greatly improving public transport, by providing outer city park-and-ride facilities, by increasing charges for central city parking, by preventing, much more rigorously, uncontrolled parking on major routes and near busy junctions, and perhaps by road pricing.
There is no point in disjointed, piecemeal proposals like this so-called green route plan, which will simply increase congestion and force motorists to stop and start and travel more frequently in low gears.
This will increase rather than decrease pollution.
This plan gives the impression that Lothian's transport specialists were uncertain whether to allow traffic to flow along George IV Bridge and its extensions, or not; so the decision was taken to make the traffic flow more difficult and see what happened as a result.
The plan would make a lot more sense if  pedestrian crossing lights were introduced, but co-ordinated with other existing traffic lights from Teviot Place to the bottom of The Mound so as to reduce the number of stop-start cycles required by through traffic.
Light-controlled pedestrian crossings should obviate the need for central islands, which have the disadvantage of obstructing traffic flow by forcing cars to stop behind stationary buses.

In the final article in our series, Richard Holloway reflects on conclusions that can be reached on modern society from the attitudes and opinions revealed in the course of the week Fighting the good fight
I'M normally very cautious about participating in moral crusades, especially when they are orchestrated by newspapers in their eternal quest for a good story that will run and run.
Group behaviour is rarely patient of simple explanations.
Analysing the moral status of a whole society calls for clear thinking and a certain coolness of mind, elements conspicuously absent from most of the pronouncements of public figures in recent weeks, aptly if unintentionally encapsulated by the Prime Minister himself when he exhorted us all to try to understand less.
Nevertheless, The Scotsman's impressive survey of values among young people this week has produced some interesting if not particularly comforting facts.
William Golding's Lord of the Flies reminded us some years ago that children are far from immune to the virus of cruelty and irrationality that is latent in all human beings.
Theologians call this original sin.
Though the term can be misleading, the reality it attempts to define is obvious enough.
Original sin is probably the only empirically verifiable doctrine in the church's library and it's easily stated.
Humanity, which has an obvious predisposition towards goodness, has an equally strong predisposition towards evil.
We are creatures in whom good desires compete with evil desires, altruism struggles with selfishness.
And the struggle never ends in a single life, let alone in the life of a society.
A wise society is one that limits and controls our evil tendencies while encouraging and reinforcing our good desires.
This is why, if it ever comes to a fixed choice between freedom and order, wise societies prefer order.
It is easier and safer to free up an ordered society than to re-order a chaotic one.
Bosnia is a classic example of what happens when the conventional restraints on human cruelty are removed.
And Bosnias can happen anywhere, at any time.
Anyone who's had a child bullied at school knows the depth of children's capacity for cold, organised cruelty.
That is why sensitive societies and wise families create structures that control and redirect negative tendencies and reinforce and develop positive desires.
The most important element in this process is clearly the family unit, however it is configured.
It is here, in the crucial early years, that patterns of discipline and co-operation are set, and the security or insecurity of the self is established.
The Scotsman survey seems to suggest that in significant sections of our society this function is no longer being fulfilled by the family.
There is a strong sense from the surveys that the responsibilities of parenthood are being repudiated or not even understood.
One gets the sense of many families as being gatherings of children, some older than others, with no core of authority at the centre, however lightly handled.
On the whole, the new families seem to be quite affectionate units and through them some elements of the moral tradition are being handed on.
But there are two dramatic weaknesses in the new model family as revealed by these surveys.
The first is that little attempt seems to be made to monitor the leisure time of children, particularly in the evenings.
In the class of primary school pupils interviewed, only four children were told by their parents when to go to bed.
Half the children had parents who worked in the evening, anyway, and the other half left their children to decide for themselves.
This offers a snapshot of an emerging social structure in which children increasingly control their own timetable, especially in the  evening .
It probably means that the average family is a much more relaxed affair than the traditional Scottish household used to be, but it goes some way towards explaining the numbers of children at risk in our society from adults outside the home, as well as from their own undisciplined emotions.
The vacuum of leadership in the family makes the second element revealed by The Scotsman surveys even more alarming.
This is the easy familiarity of school children of all ages with the drug culture.
At least half the children interviewed claimed to know people on drugs.
But the most startling fact revealed in the survey even had an element of quixotic honour attached to it.
Drug dealers elicited sympathy from secondary school pupils, who laughed at the suggestion of reporting them to the police.
Of course, there is a lot of hypocrisy in public attitudes to drugs, but these surveys do paint a picture of a youth culture in which the regular use of drugs, including alcohol, has been normalised.
We already know from Frank's testimony on Monday how violent and conscienceless he became on temazepam.
Scotland has never been a stranger to drug-related violence, though our favourite drug of choice has been legal for centuries.
The new element in the situation seems to be the regular access that young people have to drugs, including illegal ones.
You don't have to be an anthropological genius to see a spiralling behaviour pattern here.
If young people, as yet unformed in their disciplines and unconfident in their values, are left largely in control of their own leisure time and the adults to whom they are closest are either absent or benignly indifferent to their activities, then a moral vacuum is created.
If this vacuum is filled, however episodically, by the use of disinhibiting substances, then whatever hold the child had on disciplined, co-operative behaviour is likely to be undermined.
If there has been no solid social formation there in the first place, it follows that the child can very easily be completely out of control at an early age and almost impossible to reclaim.
It is at this point that society looks for scapegoats and searches for panaceas.
Scapegoats are always abundant, solutions are rarer.
What we probably have to settle to is the long haul, in which we rethink our attitudes to a number of complex issues, including the role of the family unit in the moral formation of the human community.
Each generation has its own moral tendencies, its strengths and its weaknesses.
Recent generations have prized the values of freedom and individualism above the values of order and the common good.
Living is never an exact science and we invariably over reach ourselves and destroy the balance of things.
The fright we've given ourselves in recent months will have done us some good if it helps us adjust society back in the direction of common purposes and co-operative disciplines.
It will, sadly, be too late for many young people, whose lives have already been ruined; but it could set the agenda for future generations who might even get society better organised than we did.
Small-town solicitor takes lid off global scams Audrey Gillan meets the man with an eye for a con and finds the Salvation Army is one of a long list of potential fraud targets
THE FAX machine in George Hann's office continually hums.
When his telephone rings the call could be from anywhere — London, New York, Tokyo, Zurich or Frankfurt calling downtown Annan, Scotland.
In spite of being a small-town solicitor, Mr Hann is tuned in to information on many of the world's financial deals.
It would be no surprise if he too had clocks set for different time zones.
George Hann has his own world intelligence network — he knows the scams from the schemes, the cons from the deals.
Through that network Mr Hann discovered that the Salvation Army was probably being defrauded of millions of pounds.
The deal was all too similar to others that he knew unscrupulous businessmen had perpetrated in this country and others.
Mr Hann worked in the financial services industry before becoming a lawyer.
He now carries out, on behalf of clients, investigations into the players involved in those deals.
From his small office, the solicitor explains that deals similar to that offered to the Salvation Army — where they invested $10 million in a deal that promised high interest returns — are kept secret among high-ranking individuals in the world of finance.
Consequently some people become sucked into what they see as an exclusive club which will eventually pay them a hefty financial dividend.
The conmen use baffling jargon when they talk about those deals, to confuse their victims.
Very soon the intended victim is ensnared and the ‘you too can be part of it’ line is swallowed whole.
In the town of Newton Stewart, not too far from Annan, a solicitor, Giles Davies, lost £1.8 million from his clients' accounts because he became embroiled in a similar deal.
‘Before you understand the frauds, you must understand the technicalities of these secretive deals,’ Mr Hann explains, pushing his back into his chair.
Aware that the world of standby letters of credit is confusing, he explains that they are often used in the import and export business.
The exporter does not expect to get paid for his goods for 12 months so he is given a credit note — a standby letter — from the importer's bank.
Payment is delayed in case there are any problems with the goods.
In theory the exporter can present the letter to the bank for payment at the end of 12 months.
Often the banks sell those letters at a discount to be traded for cash.
The discounts can be 13 per cent or more, a good return for whoever buys them and recovers the full face value a year later from the issuing bank.
This is where the buying, selling and conning comes in — and the fraud.
Many standby letters of credit are forgeries: often the issuing bank does not even exist.
As more and more frauds emerge it becomes apparent that conmen are trying to dupe vulnerable people.
Investors have been offered ‘programmes’ claiming to provide annual returns of 40 per cent.
One broker was found to be operating from a telephone box at Heathrow airport.
Whatever the deal, the fraudsters offer returns that are not available anywhere else.
Faxes are constantly being sent to dealers, accountants and solicitors across the country offering investment prospects in anything from:
English football clubs.
Hotels in Russia.
Old people's homes.
AIDS hospices.
A one million acre wildlife park in South America.
Docks, airports and bridges schemes in the Far East.
Police are now investigating some of those deals, including the circulation of a forged $5 million standby letter of credit supposedly issued by Deutsche Bank and a £20 million swindle in Derbyshire.
The British Bankers Association has sent a letter advising people to be on the alert ‘if the money in a deal purports to come from a miscellaneous offshore source or if the intermediary is a small company in the suburbs.’
A spokesman told The Scotsman that the letters are just a simple way of making funds available to people.
It is what people do with them after they have been issued that's the problem.
‘The odds are that there is some sting going on,’ he said.
‘These kinds of fraud are quite regular.
A favourite a couple of years ago was a letter issued from an American bank that had been issued three years previously.’
George Hann says that in the years he has known about the business he has been approached on many occasions by people who ‘come over as being very convincing but who turned out not to be genuine.
‘They need solicitors and accountants to legitimise the scam.
I have heard stories where such people will offer you something that appears to be ‘too good to be true’.
‘When you expect a deal to happen they may tell you there has been a last minute problem and the people either providing the funds or the guarantee either require a non-performance bond to be put up or require some kind of payment up front to prove you really mean business.
The money, however, always disappears — leaving the professional high and dry and minus a considerable sum of money.
‘A little bit of knowledge is dangerous,’ concludes Mr Hann.
‘These fraudsters will give you enough information to make you greedy and that's when you are ready to be scammed because you are expecting to make a fortune.’
French Socialists prepare to feast on crumbs of comfort The Socialists have been told so often that they are heading for total rout in tomorrow's election that they will be relieved if they manage the 20 per cent predicted by the polls, writes Diana Geddes in Paris
FRANCE'S 37 million voters go to the polls tomorrow knowing in advance the outcome of their two-round general election: the right will win and, in all probability, with a thumping majority.
Yet there is unlikely to be much dancing in the streets.
Most people do not want to vote in a right-wing government so much as to get rid of a discredited and deeply unpopular Socialist government.
The latest opinion polls, published last weekend (no polls are allowed to be published in the final week before an election), predict that the conservative alliance of the neo-Gaullist RPR party and the centre-right UDF party will win over 70 per cent of the 577 seats in the National Assembly.
Yet they are credited with only around 40 per cent of the vote — exactly the same as their score in the 1981 general election in which the Socialists were swept to power.
In other words the mainstream right has gained nothing from the rejection of the Socialists.
It is the smaller protest parties, such as the Greens, who have benefited.
Six weeks ago, some polls were putting the green alliance of the Verts and Generation Ecologie actually ahead of the Socialists with nearly 20 per cent of the votes.
Since then, however, their predicted share has slipped back to around 13-15 per cent.
This is in line with their previous best score of 13.7 per cent achieved in last year's regional elections, but it will be seen as a setback after their earlier high expectations.
The National Front, also, has failed to make the breakthrough for which it had been hoping.
Jean-Marie Le Pen's extreme right party is now expected to get only 12-13 per cent of the vote, slightly down from its 13.6 per cent in the regional elections but up on the 9.6 per cent it won in the last general election five years ago.
The Communists, in contrast, are likely to see their share of the vote fall from the 11 per cent they won in the last general election to around 8-9 per cent.
They are nevertheless pleased not to see a greater erosion of their support after the collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe and the virtual disappearance of Communist parties in the West.
Furthermore, because of the concentration of the Communist vote in certain traditional strongholds, they have high hopes of holding on to some 20 of their present 26 parliamentary seats, whereas the National Front and the Greens may not win any, or at best only a handful.
As for the Socialists, they have been told so often that they are heading for a total rout that they will actually be relieved if they manage to get the 20 per cent which the last polls were predicting.
This might enable them to hold on to around 100 of their present 270 seats.
Much will depend on what happens between the two rounds of voting.
The second round is due to take place on 28 March.
Under the French system of voting, a second round is held if no one wins more than 50 per cent in the first round.
Any candidate who obtains more than 12.5 per cent of the registered number of voters (which means around 18 per cent of the actual vote cast if there is a 70 per cent turnout, as is now being forecast) is eligible for the run-off.
The Socialists have long had an electoral pact with the Communists (which is still in force) to withdraw whichever of their candidates is the least well placed in the second round.
The Socialists have been unable to to clinch a similar deal with the Greens but they have now announced that they will unilaterally pull out their candidates in favour of better placed Green candidates in the second round.
They clearly hope the Greens will respond, at least in those key constituencies where Socialist leaders like Michel Rocard and Lionel Jospin would otherwise be under serious threat.
On present estimates, the right could win as many as 80-90 seats straight off in the first round and the Socialists none.
No one knows what effect this would have on voters.
It could prompt a big swing to the Socialists in the second round or it could push left-wing voters to give up altogether.
Moral fabric in need of repair
OVER the past few days, The Scotsman has been examining the evidence for a so-called ‘moral crisis’ in Britain.
Some encouraging signs have emerged — Glasgow teenagers with a clear social code, and confidence in their parents; primary school children with a keen sense of right and wrong, despite the fading of religious values.
But there has also been disturbing evidence, particularly on the family front.
As Bishop Holloway pointed out in our pages yesterday, the contemporary family seems increasingly to exist in a moral vacuum, with too many children left in control of their own leisure time while their elders are either absent or indifferent to their activities.
Their lives are conditioned by what they encounter in the street or on the playground, and can be ruined, the bishop contends, if they fall victim to drugs.
It is not a heartening picture, but it has some validity as a profile of our times.
Simple exhortation, however, offers no cure in these days when many of the country's institutions are seen to have foundations built on sand.
This is not confined to those that have a direct moral influence, like the monarchy and the church, but also touches other structures, like the Stock Exchange and the City, which previously drew their strength from adhering to a strict code of honour and trust.
In those dispiriting circumstances it comes as no surprise to find politicians trying to offer a means of escaping from the encircling gloom.
Because people generally hold the professional political classes in low esteem, they may question whether that is a proper role for them.
John Smith, Labour's leader, is in no doubt about the answer.
For him, political action always has a moral purpose.
Revulsion at injustice, poverty and denied opportunity, he says, impels people to work for a better world.
An individual, he maintains, is best fulfilled in the context of a strong community bound together in fellowship.
But these sentiments are not the sole property of democratic socialists.
The Prime Minister, who himself believes that the moral lead should be given by the church, would happily subscribe to these ambitions for British society.
Yet the means he employs seem to contradict these aims: reconciling his removal of benefits from 16 and 17 year olds, for instance, with his expressed support for the family, is an exercise to test even the wisest.
It is no greater help, on the other hand, to suggest, like the Archbishop of York, that the Government is to blame for feeding the competitive streak in British society.
It is this conflict that Mr Smith, and his shadow secretary for employment, Tony Blair, have been quick to recognise.
That they have lent their party a distinct moral glow as a result may be greeted cynically by some.
But there have been worse political crusades, and their timing is sound.
The evident squabble over the country's soul is bound to offend those who stubbornly express the wish that religion and politics should be kept in discreet compartments.
Even they realise, however, that the real world makes that an increasingly forlorn hope.
They have to look no further than today's headlines about Bosnia or Sudan or Iran to appreciate that.
Politicians are bound to try to find solutions.
That is why they are there.
A new regime behind bars The prison system in independent Latvia was in disarray so it called in a troubleshooter from Scotland to help.
Alan Hutchison reports
LIFE in a Latvian prison can be cold, spartan and almost always overcrowded.
As an inmate you are shut away in a jail without a name and escape is an option rarely considered with armed guards carefully positioned at the perimeter fence of some of the prisons.
But, with the help of the Scottish Prison Service, an improvement in conditions for Latvia's 8,000 prisoners could soon be under way.
Latvia, in common with other former republics of the now defunct Soviet Union, is looking to the West not only for help but ideas as it tries to rebuild its shattered economy and create a better way of life in a society which has not been used to making decisions for itself.
The crumbling of the Soviet empire brought immediate joy as states sampled the heady atmosphere of independence from the iron grip of Moscow.
But now only the grim reality of a rebuilding task, which could take at least a generation, occupies the minds of those struggling to put their newly independent countries on their feet.
A chance meeting at an international conference on prison security in Stockholm led to Latvia getting the blessing of a Scottish Office minister for assistance from the Scottish Prison Service towards reform of their penal system.
The ideas and concepts of the prison structure in Scotland — outlined in a speech at the conference by Alan Walker, the deputy chief executive of the SPS — so impressed a Latvian delegation that they wrote to Scotland's Minister of State, Lord Fraser of Carmyllie, asking his permission for Walker to visit the country.
In agreeing, Lord Fraser told Walker: ‘I can't overstate the value I attach to such assistance and support.’
Walker, who has just returned from a two-week fact finding mission, is now preparing a detailed report for the Latvian authorities.
He told The Scotsman: ‘I think we have a moral responsibility to help these countries.
I will be exploring with my senior colleagues ways in which we can give direct help in addition to advice.’
He said: ‘The new government is trying to set up a new country but they have no natural resources and they are desperately short of everything.
But they so much want to help themselves.’
Walker found that the Latvians were keen to shrug off the secrecy which surrounded prisons under Soviet rule.
There is no public record or listing, by name, of a Latvian prison.
The buildings which hold the inmates are simply referred to by letters and numbers.
They also want to adopt the Scottish system on security classification of prisoners.
In Latvia, a rigid system prevails with the court sending a prisoner to one of four different types of regime, from which there is little chance of being moved.
In Scotland, once sentence is passed by the court, the prison service takes over, deciding which type of prison the convicted person should go to.
And it has the power to move an inmate — for example to a more relaxed regime — if the individual's behaviour merits it.
Latvia locks up a high proportion of its population of 2.6 million people.
The 8,000 prisoners are housed in 15 prisons.
Scotland, by comparison, with a population of five million, has 5,800 prisoners in 21 prisons.
Another difference Walker found was that untried prisoners, who can be held for up to a year, are rarely allowed visits.
The concept of short-term visits is almost unknown although convicted Latvian prisoners — unlike their Scottish counterparts — are permitted conjugal visits.
The prisoners, some of whom refer to themselves, as ‘gangsters’, have to pay for their own food.
And the shortage of money in the country means that repairs often remain undone.
‘If a rusty water pipe bursts it takes an enormous amount of time to find the money to carry out the repairs.
They need clothes for the prisoners as well as paper, pens, paint, in fact anything that we might find to be surplus in this country they could use,’ he said.
Walker made suggestions on training of prison staff and told the Latvian prison administration about the successful setting up of incident command teams in Scotland to deal with hostage incidents.
He found his hosts also receptive to his account of how the Scottish Prison Service had improved its relationship with the press.
He said: ‘Latvian prisons were secret places under the Soviet system and there was no media questioning.
I told them how some years ago we in Scotland had not co-operated with the media.
In short, we were not helpful.
What happened was that we allowed our critics to feed in information about prisons which was to our detriment.
We never rebutted those charges and we lost every time.
We learned to be open, honest and frank with the media and now we find that we are treated fairly.’
WALKER, who said he was greatly impressed by the determination of the Latvian prison administration and staff to improve their service, expressed admiration for the excellent relationship which he found existed between staff and prisoners.
He said that was not based on fear but on mutual respect.
The Latvians, in common with other former Soviet republics, are still afflicted by a preponderance of forms.
Form-filling is almost a way of life in these former Soviet republics and Walker, not surprisingly, recommended a streamlining of this practice.
The new states, however, have been quick to remove other traces of the old regime and Walker has returned to Scotland with a unique memento.
Senior prison governors in Latvia were equivalent in rank to Red Army colonels.
One of their smart uniforms, which are no longer worn in the country, now occupies a proud position in Walker's office in Scottish prison headquarters in Edinburgh.
Soviet memento: Alan Walker with an old Latvian prison governor's uniform — the governor was equivalent in rank to a Red Army colonel
Plus a change…
IF, AS predicted, a right-wing coalition looks set to sweep the Socialists from power after the first round of France's parliamentary elections on Sunday, the most interesting statistic will probably be the number of people who failed to vote at all.
Although Jacques Chirac's conservative Rally for the Republic (RPR) and Valery Giscard d'Estaing's  centre -right Union for French Democracy (UDF) are expected to capture from 390 to 450 seats in the 577-member National Assembly with something around 40 per cent of the vote, the turn-out figure will give an important indication of voter  dissatisfaction with the political establishment.
And disillusionment certainly exists — there have been too many scandals involving politicians.
Indeed, it appears that in terms of its expected percentage vote the Right has failed to capitalise on the electorate's wish to punish the ruling Socialists.
That means that a degree of caution is probably wise in predicting a right-wing landslide.
The unhappiness with the main parties also shifts the balance in favour of the smaller groups such as the Green parties and Jean-Marie Le Pen's extreme right National Front.
Support for the latter  appears to be ebbing, with the Green alliance the likely recipient of much of the protest vote.
That is a good sign, and it could expect to do quite well — but the Greens and Ecologists face the problem under the French electoral system of turning votes into seats.
It is reasonably safe, nevertheless, to assume that there will be a right-wing government of some sort, whatever its majority and precise complexion.
In terms of domestic policy there will not be any radical changes.
Although there are those who are calling for France to withdraw the franc from the European exchange rate mechanism and reduce interest rates to stimulate the economy, the likely candidates for prime minister all agree that the present policy of keeping the franc aligned with the German mark is the right one.
Indeed, one of the leading contenders for the post, Edouard Balladur, has specifically dissociated himself from the British government, which pulled sterling out of the European currency grid last year and substantially cut interest rates.
The Franc fort policy, then, means continuing to cultivate close relations with Germany.
It thus looks as if the traditional Paris-Bonn axis will continue to operate.
The French economy is fundamentally sound, with the exception of high levels of unemployment.
Bringing that down will be one of the main tasks facing the new government.
President Mitterrand, of course, will remain in office, and cohabitation will once again enter French politics.
It will be personalities rather than policies, however, which determine how successfully that can be made to work.
A tepid Euro-soup Films that try to please all of Europe's nations will inevitably end up pleasing none of them, says William Parente
THE inane antics of our domestic political parties during the Maastricht debate have rather overshadowed the equally peculiar attitudes prevalent among our European partners.
Of these the most disturbing has been the tendency of the European centralists to dismiss as treasonable any attempt to debate the precise form of a united Europe.
A sort of low droning chorus of ‘Conformity good, diversity bad’ is clearly audible beneath the public pronouncements from Bonn, the Elysee, the Bundesbank and the Commission, and the client states of Europe, the Portugals, the Italys and Greeces, who see themselves as having much to gain, obediently take up the cry.
This dogmatism has inculcated, on the continent, an enthusiasm for things Euro,(symbolised by the gleeful, klaxoning reaction of Parisians to their referendum results), that is lacking over here.
Culturally, however, things are on the move.
International co-productions are every year more common; we have a script development fund with a pan-European bias, and all manner of film and video production companies, from the blue chip to the simply blue, have set up offices in Brussels, Luxembourg and The Hague.
The motive force for this enthusiasm is not internationalism or an overdose of brotherly love, but the size of the market.
It's pretty obvious that American producers, catering to a market which buys 950 million tickets a year, are going to find it a lot easier to raise money than British producers, who are, by comparison, making films for a tiny coterie.
But if one could aim films at a European market of 300 million people, that would be a very different story.
The question is, how to do it?
The more self-consciously ‘European’ productions are, the more vacuous they seem to become.
When they ignore the whole idea of pandering to a European market, they can be quite good, as in Tarkovsky's Italian-funded productions, where he just carried on making the same film that had obsessed him for the past 30 years, only a bit more slowly.
This is inevitable, since film, like any art, works best when artistic form is the overriding priority, rather than the necessity of satisfying diverse national requirements.
(Will Binoche pull in the French market?
Is the English class system comprehensible in Piraeus?)
At its worst this results in a sort of tasteless Euro-soup, which by trying to be all things to all men, ends up being nothing to anybody.
The catalyst for these gloomy thoughts was the magazine produced jointly by the Independent, El Pais, La Repubblica and Le Monde to celebrate Expo ‘92 in Seville.
On the surface, it all seems very distinguished.
Four standard-bearing newspapers; lofty themes like ‘Europe at the crossroads of history’ and ‘The future of religion’; eminent contributors like Nestor Almendros and Hans Kung.
The thing is glossy, weighty, handsomely produced: the advertisers include banks, Moschino and Saint Laurent.
Its name is Leonardo.
Why?
The explanation, if you can call it that, gives the flavour of the enterprise.
‘Five centuries have passed since the discovery of America, a focal point in the history of discoveries.
It has also been five centuries since the time of Leonardo Da Vinci, a critical figure in the development of human imagination.
Throughout history, both that point and the example of Leonardo's inquisitive mind have led mankind towards heights unknown even in the realms of fantasy…
’ And so on.
This passage is the purest Euro-soup.
Its orotund style marks a horrible dishonesty of thought.
In what sense exactly was the discovery of America a focal point in the history of discoveries?
Is there really any connection between Leonardo and Columbus apart from the sort imagined by flatulent film producers?
What part precisely did Leonardo play in developing the human imagination?
What is the ‘point’ referred to in the third sentence?
And who on earth dares utter the cliche that mankind has ‘reached heights unknown even in the realms of fantasy’?
Yet the whole magazine is like this, an expensive, well-meaning, worthless blast of hot air.
Not only does it hamstring itself by trying to please all nations, it also attempts to appeal to a mythical European consciousness that cannot exist in the continent whose countries have spent centuries ever more jealously defining their national characteristics.
If European co-productions follow the example of Leonardo they are doomed: like Antaeus, they will lose strength as they lose contact with the soil of their birth.
Conversely, the more rooted in a particular reality they are, the more chance of success they will have: for as Blake noted, great thoughts are always particular.
We should perhaps stop promoting European films and promote local ones instead.
Tarkovsky: although Italian-funded, his films never pandered to the vacuous pan-European market
Taking a healthy interest in policies As the chairman of Greater Glasgow Health Board comes up to retirement, Susan Dean looks at the man behind the reforms
SWIMMING two to three times a week has helped Sir Thomas Thomson to perfect the art of keeping his head above water.
Metaphorically it has been an undoubtedly useful skill for the man who has, for the past six years, been chairman of Greater Glasgow Health Board.
Sir Thomas retires from the post at the end of the month.
The job of supervising health policy for Scotland's largest heath authority has not been without its difficulties.
Shaping the health care of around 900,000 people living in and around Glasgow has been something of a challenge.
In one of Europe's sickest countries — Scotland's heart disease and cancer rates cluster round the top of the league tables — Glasgow's health record remains among the worst.
But alongside tackling the very substance of health care, Sir Thomas, who will be 70 next month, has been the figurehead at the helm of reforms which have seen sweeping — and often bitterly opposed — changes in the machinery governing delivery of the health service in the city.
Since he took up the position in 1987, closures of geriatric hospitals, partnership with the private sector, nurse regradings, NHS trusts and a review of maternity and acute services, which will cut over 1,000 hospital beds and possibly lead to a closure of a number of hospitals, are among the controversies which have raged.
A former consultant gastroenterologist at Stobhill Hospital Sir Thomas has enjoyed personal popularity.
But observers question whether the board's taciturn general manager, Laurence Peterken, was not the man in the driving seat.
‘Sir Thomas was just a public relations front.
He was a great doctor, a super man but he never stamped his authority on the board,’ said one former colleague.
‘He let Peterken run the board.’
It is a charge Sir Thomas vigorously denies, along with the assertion that non-executive members of the new, smaller, stream-lined boards no longer have a role to play.
‘Great credit is due to Mr Peterken and the team he has gathered around him for their initiative and vision about finance.
But make no mistake about it, nothing happens without the approval of the board.
‘I have the ultimate authority as chairman, and the non-executive board members employ Mr Peterken.
So if Mr Peterken wants to bring in something which we think is bad for Glasgow we will say, ‘you are not on’.’
The implementation of reform and change have, according to Sir Thomas, been significant but he admits there have been great difficulties over the years getting the PR message over.
He blames the media partially for this, with its concentration on issues with populist emotive appeal and its failure to publicise low-key developments which will benefit people on a day-to-day basis.
The controversial closures of old geriatric hospitals and the transfer of the patients to units elsewhere run in partnership with private firms is one success story, he claims.
‘We took a lot of stick from the public but not from the relatives.
Once they saw the set up they thought it was wonderful,’ he said.
One of the criticisms levelled at the board has been that it fails to consult properly or listen to objections to proposals.
Sir Thomas denies this vigorously, claiming as an example that the board will now look at ten options in the acute strategy review instead of the four announced publicly last November.
This increase has been as a result of consultation with clinicians, he said.
‘People have suggested to me that changes have been coming more rapidly than they would like but that brings me back to the feeling that people intrinsically don't like change.
Once a decision has been made, then quite honestly the sooner it can been done the better.’
The end of his second term of chairmanship — shortened to two years at his request — comes as Glasgow faces the prospect of most of the city's major hospitals being devolved to trust status.
He believes trusts will lead to improvements for patients, but that the calibre of that management will be all important.
In the swim: Sir Thomas Thomson practises the art of keeping his head above water during his regular swimming session in Glasgow
The daily flight in Georgia that saves room for the war dead and the dying The departure from front-line Sukhumi to the capital of Tbilisi is heavily patronised, but the passengers are rarely concerned about anything as mundane as corporate business, James Meek in Georgia discovers
THE six o'clock Sukhumi to Tbilisi plane waited on the tarmac for hours.
It was probably the only aircraft flying the 250 miles to the Georgian capital that day and it was going to be busy.
Its engines were running when I arrived at about four.
It had taken three cars to get the ten miles from the city to the airport; Georgians get uncharacteristically ruthless about transport in times of war, when petrol is scarce.
Armed soldiers and refugee families were crowded round the foot of the steps leading up to the entry hatch.
Airline officials agreed to let us on board and we climbed the gangway into the plane.
The aircraft was the standard workhorse of Soviet medium-haul routes, a Tupolev 154 jet, six seats abreast.
As in all ex-Soviet passenger aircraft, the seat backs are designed to flop forward and lie horizontal if no-one is sitting on them.
I used to think this was for safety.
Now I see there is another reason.
When we entered the aft passenger compartment, it was divided in two.
Towards the back were tired soldiers in Soviet and American fatigues, bestubbled, many wearing dark glasses, automatic rifles between their knees.
Towards the front, the seat backs were down, making room for stretchers.
We were going to be travelling with the wounded.
The wounded took a long time to arrive.
Meanwhile a succession of battered Ladas and trucks sped up to the plane, delivering fleeing women and their bundles, and more soldiers.
At one point a refrigerated lorry drew up.
There were dull thuds from the cargo hold.
The previous day we had visited the city morgue.
In the half hour we were there, they had brought in two soldiers from the front along the river Gumista, to the north of Sukhumi.
Very big and brave they must have looked in their new NATO camouflage suits, and absolutely dead they were when they were taken out of the vans.
Their arms were held out stiff, crosswise, as if they had been crucified, and down the cheeks of one ran thin lines of blood.
While we sat on the plane waiting for the injured I noticed the dog.
You do not want to be anthropomorphic about animals when people are dying needlessly around you, but there was a sad aimlessness about this beast, limping around the tarmac on three legs, moving  hesitantly towards people, then thinking better of it, or standing motionless for minutes on end, staring into the bushes on the perimeter.
It had joined the growing ranks of creatures with odd numbers of limbs in Georgia.
The wounded were walking wounded mainly, with bandaged heads and arms in slings, a few of them trying to crack jokes as they trudged on board.
There were three stretcher cases.
Two arrived in military ambulances.
They had head wounds.
The third came in one of the airport buses, accompanied by an elderly woman doctor.
He seemed the most serious case.
I did not get to ask what was wrong.
His eyes were very bright and wide and he was acutely thin.
They slotted them in as best they could on the flat seat backs.
Half an hour went by, for no apparent reason.
A few soldiers ran down the steps for a fag.
The others were mostly quiet, eyeing the men on the stretchers in fear and fascination.
Then we got under way.
The pilot did not do much to soften the trip.
He almost missed the turning off the taxiway to the runway and had to brake hard at the last minute.
After the takeoff the turns were steep.
The doctor and another younger medic, a small, calm, confident woman, began to check the dressings of the casualties.
Out of the window the setting sun lit up the perfect whiteness of the Caucasus mountains; a party of Austrian holidaymakers was down there somewhere, getting in some good skiing.
The man with the bright eyes needed a saline drip.
They connected him up, but there was nowhere to hang the bag of saline solution, and they did not want someone blocking the aisle holding it.
As the plane dove and rose in turbulence, the young medic improvised a sling for the bag out of a strip of bandage.
They looked around for somewhere to hang it.
There was a broken light fitting overhead which seemed to present a good fixture.
They could not reach it.
A civilian with the grey wool skull cap of the Svan people, from the high glens of Georgia, jumped up to help.
Stretching the drip-feed dangerously, he struggled to fix the bag to the light.
I looked round.
The entire plane was watching in silence, transfixed by the patient determination of the medics, willing the man's recovery, obsessed with the thought: That could be me.
The bag was securely attached.
The Svan sat down.
Catching my eye the young medic grinned and gave a thumbs-up sign.
But there was plenty more where that came from.
Earlier that day we had been in the yard of a house near the front line, among groves of frost-damaged mandarins, where a unit of some 50 Georgians was preparing to ‘clean’ a group of Abkhazians (or Russians, as the Georgians claimed) from their side of the river.
We left before the attack began.
While the plane was waiting to go, the unit commander, David, a former professor at the Tbilisi Philosophy Institute, turned up.
He does not talk about philosophy any more: he has got too many grenades in his pockets.
He said both sides had suffered heavy casualties.
The six o'clock Sukhumi-Tbilisi run was going to be busy again.
Lang plots new era of council co-operation The Scottish Secretary believes that moving to single-tier all-purpose authorities will improve democracy at local level.
Ian Lang tells David Scott, in an exclusive interview, that he is confident progress can now be made
AFTER a decade of conflict between councils and the Government, Ian Lang, the Scottish Secretary, believes it is time to call a truce.
In the week that council leaders meet for the annual conference of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities in Dunblane, he has made a further appeal for a less confrontational relationship, and one which puts people and the quality of services before politics.
Yet Lang intends to go ahead with radical council reforms which local government does not want.
COSLA remains convinced that no case has been made for a shake-up on the scale proposed.
It will later this week reiterate its opposition to the break-up of the two-tier structure of regions and districts which are to be replaced with single-tier councils.
It will also issue further warnings about the widespread opposition the Government will face if it goes ahead with the privatisation of water.
Lang insists that the planned reforms were designed to be in the best interests of local government.
He said he had already made it clear to the convention that he wanted to establish a good relationship with COSLA and local government, and to make a new start after a period of expenditure difficulties.
‘That remains my purpose and I believe what we will come forward with for the future of local government will lead to the kind of strong, robust single-tier authorities that will enable them to fulfil their important democratic functions and deliver quality services to their local residents.
And that's what I want to see happen.’
Lang said a number of people both in and outside local government had quietly welcomed the Government's proposals.
Many had their own special case to advance and inevitably, once specific plans were produced, some would be disappointed.
Everything that had emerged from the reaction to the two consultation papers it had produced ‘confirms our view that we are on the right track.
I hope and believe there is a growing will to work with us to achieve a successful outcome.’
He described as ‘absolute nonsense’ suggestions that local government was being reformed for political reasons and in order to remove the big Labour battalions of Strathclyde and Lothian.
Also rejecting the contention that no case for change had been made, he declared: ‘Party politics is not on the agenda of reform.
I simply don't agree with the contention that no case has been made.
The case has been made and the case has been very widely accepted.’
A white paper containing a plan for single-tier local authorities is to be published in June or July according to the present timetable for council reform.
Lang would not be drawn on the exact number of authorities, saying that the 3,300 responses received following publication of the latest consultation paper were still being studied in great detail.
The proposals, are expected to result in 25-30 councils, around half the present number.
It is understood that certain regions, like Highland, Fife, Borders, and Dumfries & Galloway may survive the shake-up, while some districts, notably Eastwood in the constituency of local government minister Allan Stewart, could also become unitary councils responsible for most of the main council services.
City councils for Edinburgh, Glasgow, Aberdeen and Dundee, remain front-runners for single-tier status.
But Lang insists that a final blueprint has yet to be prepared.
‘We have a lot of interlocking decisions to take,’ he said.
‘You can't take one decision on a particular area of reform in isolation because everything relates to some other aspect, so we are carrying the study of the different components of reform forward on a broad front.’
Cost, efficiency and local accountability would be considered in preparing the proposed reforms and there had to be a trade-off between the two, Lang asserted.
He did not believe in imposing a common blueprint across the country; local circumstances would be taken into account.
‘It may be that in some parts of the country the trade off will emphasise accountability more and cost less.’
He agreed that certain regions, even those as large as Highland could be retained.
Having heard differing views during a visit to the region on Friday, Lang said difficult decisions would need to be made.
He would now discuss these with colleagues.
He believes the new councils should exist to to provide a service ‘not to run an empire’.
Creative and productive thinking was taking place in many authorities right across the political spectrum, while the relationship between councillors, officials and the public was changing.
Lang confirmed that a report due to be produced soon by a Scottish Office-COSLA working party on the internal management of councils is likely to include initiatives like American-style elector mayors and cabinet-style management for the new authorities.
The local government changes, he said, would fit in well with his ‘taking stock’ plans to devolve more powers from London to the Scottish Office.
‘Just as I believe that the taking stock initiative improves the quality of government at national level so I believe that moving to single-tier all-purpose authorities will improve it at local level.
I think we shall have at both levels a robust and vital democratic process.’
Lang expects to reach decisions on the even more contentious issue of water privatisation before the summer.
While the Scottish Office is thought to favour a compromise franchising option, with continuing public sector involvement, Lang emphasised that detailed and technical analysis of the options was still needed.
He said interesting and constructive submissions on franchising had been received from the private sector and these were being examined closely.
He stressed he was still some way from reaching a clear view and that he was anxious the options should not be narrowed at this stage.
However, it was an area which was less familiar than the systems presently operated north and south of the border at present.
BUT had John Major already let the cat out of the bag on privatisation last week?
Lang said: ‘None of the media listening at Westminster took that view.
He was speaking in shorthand in a sense and made it very clear that Scottish circumstances would be taken fully into account, and that I will be reaching a decision in due course.’
As the future shape of local government and the issue of water privatisation threaten to bring big political problems for Lang in the months ahead, he can at least breath a sigh of relief that the long-running saga of the poll tax is about to draw to a close.
Its replacement, the council tax, comes into operation on 1 April and, so far, its birth is looking less painful than that of its predecessor.
Lang is keeping his fingers crossed that there won't be a massive outcry when the bills drop through letter boxes during the next two weeks.
So far, he has been encouraged by what he describes as the responsible way councils have handled the introduction of the new tax.
He is also pleased they have drawn up budgets which will not require him to use his new, tougher capping powers.
Councils believe they have been squeezed to the point where services will suffer and jobs are threatened, and that the Scottish Secretary has now virtually taken control of local government expenditure.
But from Lang's point of view, a decade which has seen councils take their spending protests to the brink of illegal action appears to have drawn to a close.
He hopes the new local government system may bring a new era of co-operation rather than confrontation.
‘If we had really wanted to take over control of local government we could have done it years ago,’ he said.
‘We would have avoided all the horrors of the high spend, high tax history of recent years.
But it would have damaged local democracy.
I believe that local democracy was not very responsibly exercised by some people in the years that have just gone by.’
How rich it is to hear the Scottish Labour leader impugn the integrity of the SNP when the integrity of Labour Party policies in the last year has been stretched so far as to be invisible.
Labour has stampeded to the right, leaving a policy vacuum for the SNP to fill.
During the Thatcher years Labour ditched one left-wing policy after another in an attempt to convince the voters of the southern region of England that it had ‘moderated itself’.
After the 1992 election, this process continued with Labour overtaking the Liberal Democrats in a rush to the right.
It is SNP policy that electricity, gas, water, rail and a number of key industries, such as forestry, should be in the Scottish public domain.
The SNP gives a high priority to boosting public sector provision in health, education and housing and is fully committed — unlike a sizeable number of Labour MPs — to the European ideal.
As a measure of the way British politics has strutted to the right over the past decade, the policies of the SNP are now considered radical, although they are broadly similar to those of the Heath school of one-nation Conservatism!
The SNP, if it maintains its principles, need change nothing to collect the electoral windfall left by Labour's rush to the right.
Negotiating with the Government to secure a place for Scotland in the EC committee of the regions was a sensible act which should be applauded, not railed at, and is fully consistent with the SNP's main policy of placing Scotland first.
Offensive
Having been present at the weekend of events held in the City Chambers, Edinburgh earlier this month to celebrate International Women's Day, I was ‘shocked and appalled’ to see a letter from Alexandra Wallace (12 March) on the content of the weekend.
Indeed, I wondered if we had attended the same event.
In the first instance, her comment that ‘ethnic and sexual minorities were pandered to’ I found to be blatantly racist and most offensive.
Edinburgh District Council has a strong commitment to equal opportunities and I am only too happy to support an event at which the many different cultures, religions and experiences of women in Edinburgh today were represented.
I see this as a cause for celebration, not concern.
On the remarks that women's contributions in the field of business, finance, religion, charity work, etc, were totally ignored, I can only assume Alexandra Wallace overlooked the extensive exhibitions on the work of the Church of Scotland Woman's Guild, Oxfam in Scotland, Amnesty International and the Scottish Refugee Council (I could go on).
The weekend was, in fact, a relaxed, lively and informative occasion supported by over 30 local groups and organisations and attended by over 600 women.
On a more cultural note, the Chinese and Asian fashion shows and song and dance were enjoyed by all and complemented the many important issues such as safety, women's health and violence against women which were addressed during the weekend.
The exhibition presented by the Irish women's group focused on Irish women's lives in Ireland and Scotland in the last century, not on ‘promoting and peddling pro-Irish Republican publications and propaganda’!
When it's time for a recharge on the retreat It can be a break from stressful routine or the pursuit of inner calm, says Aileen Little
FOR Shirley Valentine, the key to self-knowledge was a trip to Greece and a spot of skinny-dipping with the delectable Tom Conti.
Not everyone is so fortunate.
Church of Scotland deaconess Lynda Wright has met plenty of Shirley Valentines in her time.
As a programme leader of seven years at Iona Abbey, plus three years more as centre warden, she has welcomed, entertained and talked with hundreds of people in pursuit of inner calm.
Along with housewives whose personal needs were swamped by the family, there were recovering alcoholics grateful for acceptance.
There was the Glasgow woman with serious marriage problems, whose son had just committed suicide in prison.
A nurse travelled to Iona from England, in search of some ‘balance’ to her work with AIDS patients.
And a vicar arrived, suffering from a sense of isolation within a parish unable to minister to him.
Split families came — and still do — from inner cities nationwide.
Many who stay at the abbey do so at the suggestion of members of the Iona Community, of which there are some 200 scattered throughout the UK.
Wright applied in 1978, committing herself to the five community rules which include monthly meetings with other (local) members, donating one-tenth of one's income to the church — and allocating time for others.
This last requirement is about to loom large in Wright's life.
At Easter, she opens the doors of an ecumenical retreat attached to her own cottage in the village of Falkland, Fife.
During a career which spans teaching (including a spell in Kirkwall) and ten years as a deaconess in such areas of social and urban deprivation as Irvine and Muirhouse, Wright has come to realise her strengths lie in forging informal relationships.
The ambience Iona Abbey aims to provide in terms of welcome and acceptance is one she hopes to recreate in her own home: ‘When people live together, they share life-stories over the washing-up,’ says the woman poised to play hostess to up to eight guests, for a possible five days every week.
As in Iona, where island beauty contributes to spiritual renewal, the Tarbor Retreat (named after the mountain where Christ sought solitude) comes complete with an outlook on the hills and a view of Falkland Palace orchard.
Iona members have donated to this independent project which is registered as a charity.
Guests are urged to do as they please.
Scenic walks are included in the modest daily rate.
For some, a break from stressful routine is all the therapy required.
But leave your Walkman at home, advises Wright: ‘People have lost touch with silence as a way to relieve stress; I'm offering a balance between activity and quiet.’
Should anyone feel the need for a sympathetic ear, a time can be arranged.
To a large extent, however, Wright thinks people tend to refresh each other.
Retreat centres — places offering care in a hospitable environment — are scarce commodities in Scotland.
Lynda Wright is convinced of the need: ‘The recession shows there's no security in possessions,’ she maintains.
‘People are looking for values which have nothing to do with success.’
She cheerfully accepts that, soon, life won't be her own.
When the going gets tough, where will the hostess retreat to?
Wright replies that built into her schedule will be visits to a favourite retreat house in Edinburgh —‘to recharge my batteries’.
Healthy living by numbers A low cholesterol level means reduced risk of heart disease, say doctors.
But American research suggests a low level clears the way for other health horrors.
Jane Fowler reports
CHOLESTEROL not calorie, appears to be the watchword of the 1990s but how do you know what your cholesterol level is?
‘Eat less fat,’ is the general advice and many probably follow it.
You may have forsaken chips in favour of baked potatoes but what about that weakness for crisps?
You sometimes try to eat more fruit but the secret store of chocolate goes down just as fast.
When a high cholesterol level is one of the main causes of heart disease, are you confident your level is within the limits?
Recently, Boots the Chemist started selling home cholesterol tests.
The Family Heart Association charity launched a special Cholesterol Countdown week and now the pharmaceutical companies are offering GPs testing equipment which gives immediate results.
Dr Anthony Ayles, of the Hermitage Group practice in Edinburgh, is one of several GPs who offer this service but only to patients he considers are at risk from heart disease — those with a close relative who developed coronary problems before 50, those who smoke, have high blood pressure, are overweight, diabetic or take little exercise.
These patients are invited to attend the coronary heart risk clinic already in existence at the surgery and after a simple blood test, an exact cholesterol reading is obtained.
Cholesterol, an important compound in the composition of cell membranes, hormone production and the digestion of dietary fat, is measured in millimoles per litre, or mmol/l.
If the level is below 5.2 mmol/l, that is considered low risk.
Between 5.2 and around 6 is an intermediate zone which is fine provided the patient has no other risk factors.
Above 6 and the level is described as raised, regardless.
(The average middle-aged British male has a count of 6.)
Each additional risk factor raises your chances of heart disease very substantially.
As Tom Sanders, reader in nutrition at King's College, London, and nutritional director of the Family Heart Association, puts it: ‘If your blood cholesterol level is above 6.5-7.5, you have a three times higher risk of heart disease.
If you smoke and have high blood pressure as well as high cholesterol, your risk of heart disease is eight to ten times higher.’
As physician in charge of screening at Murrayfield Hospital, Dr Ayles is well versed in this particular area and stresses he is anxious to prevent unnecessary alarm.
‘If a patient is old, say over 65, their cholesterol level makes little difference to their life expectancy.
On occasion, older people do come to me and expect to be told their cholesterol level.
One likes to be reassuring when one can.’
An appointment at his NHS practice may last up to 20 minutes when he discusses not simply cholesterol but other aspects of a patient's lifestyle.
If cholesterol is raised, a cholesterol-lowering diet is recommended and a diet sheet offered.
An improved diet may lead to a 15-20 per cent reduction.
In the case of a patient with a very high level, say 9, that would bring it down to 7 but then the level will probably remain static.
‘At this point,’ says Ayles, ‘the drug companies recommend prescribing pills.
Yet does a patient really want to be on medication all his life?
I allow the margin to be a bit higher.
There is a great deal of debate about when to start medication; the official recommendation is between 7-8.
We tend to hold back until the level is over 8, if I consider it safe to do so.’
But is testing actually necessary or helpful?
The British Heart Foundation is sceptical.
Its director, Professor Julian Desmond, states: ‘I don't think a cholesterol count is a terribly useful thing to have and we don't approve of people testing themselves at home.
I would certainly not encourage women to have their level tested since cholesterol is not a strong predictor of coronary disease in females.
For a given cholesterol level, women are four times less likely to develop coronary problems than men.
For older women, there is a question of whether it has any relevance at all.’
The British Heart Foundation does believe that cholesterol is one of the risk factors for heart disease in men, particularly younger men.
But they recommend that only patients at risk of heart disease should be tested.
The concern of many is that not all GPs will be as thorough as Dr Ayles and his colleagues.
‘Some may find it easier and quicker to give out a simple number rather than spend time asking about diet and so on.’
Critics claim that a cholesterol test is only a single snapshot of lifestyle and can be misleading.
Take the example of a very overweight woman with high blood pressure and angina whose cholesterol level is normal.
She might be reassured by a test yet is obviously in the high-risk category.
‘Yes,’ says Ayles, ‘you can get surprising results.
Fat people occasionally produce a low level, thin people sometimes a high one.
But they are the exceptions and it has to be stressed we are looking at the patient in a wider context.
Once a patient has his magic number, does it have any effect?
A study carried out in Alloa by Professor Hugh Tunstall-Pedoe, in charge of epidemiology at Dundee University, concluded that it did not.
Levels for patients tested and then re-examined on a subsequent occasion remained the same.
A study in Luton produced similar results.
Dr Ayles accepts that many people tend to ignore suggestions to change diet.
‘That's simply human nature, especially in the west of Scotland, sadly, but it doesn't mean you stop giving advice.
Many others do take it on board and a doctor must always remain an optimist.
It also depends on the doctor's approach.
If you give a list of absolute negatives, people wonder what pleasures they have left.
If, on the other hand, you can say, ‘Well, you take a fair bit of exercise, that's good.
Maybe you could try to get your weight down a little…’ there's a far better chance they'll listen.’
Cholesterol is moved round the body bound to special proteins, two of which have very different effects.
Put simply, low-density lipoproteins (LDLs) are considered ‘bad’ because they deposit cholesterol in the blood vessels.
High-density lipoproteins (HDLs) are ‘good’ since they latch on to the LDLs and absorb them through the artery walls to be disposed of by other organs in the body.
What matters is the ratio between the high and the low density cholesterol.
Thus, the aim of the healthy diet is to replace animal fats (which contain LDLs) with polyunsaturated vegetable fats which help lower cholesterol, and mono-unsaturated fats, such as olive oil, which may also have a beneficial effect.
But recent studies from around the world have well and truly put the fat in the fire by suggesting that low cholesterol brings other problems in its wake.
It may reduce deaths from heart disease but it is associated with an increase in other types of mortality.
An American study examined the causes of more than 68,000 deaths and concluded that for both men and women, low levels were linked with an increased risk of dying from lung cancer, digestive disease, stroke and trauma — the latter including accidents and suicide.
Where men with no history of heart problems were given cholesterol-lowering drugs, similar results were produced.
The doctors based at the Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Centre, Washington, and at the University of California conclude: ‘We need now to put on hold well-meant desires to intervene while we await convincing evidence that the net effects will be beneficial.’
Strong words when you consider the market in cholesterol-lowering drugs has expanded by 34.4 per cent a year for the last five years.
How to explain such results?
Some attack the methodology of the American research, yet other observational studies have produced similar results.
The cynics say you can only die once and either heart disease or cancer are likely to get you in the end.
But what about the apparently bizarre link with an increased suicidal tendency?
The answer to that may be that lowering cholesterol influences the level of serotonin, a neurotransmitter which affects mood.
And the increased risk of cancer?
Some cancers do cut cholesterol levels.
An individual may have a low cholesterol level for years before the cancer is discovered.
As Anthony Ayles comments: ‘It appears the cart is going before the horse on this one.’
The controversy surrounding cholesterol is enormous: there are even those who deny its link with heart disease.
But research soon to be published, collating all articles published on the subject, comes down strongly in favour of the view that high cholesterol causes atheroma, the fatty lining of the arteries which is a cause of early heart disease.
And what is undeniable is that heart disease remains by far the biggest killer in the western world, particularly Scotland.
What is not yet known, according to Anthony Keech, a cardiologist at the clinical trials service unit, Radcliffe  Infirmary , Oxford, is whether the hazards connected to low cholesterol arise from low cholesterol itself or from the act of lowering it.
Further trials need to be done to resolve that uncertainty.
Taking the plunge, I tried the Boots home testing kit which consists of a lancet, a small plastic counter to hold a drop of blood and a measuring scale and indicator.
A reformed chocoholic and one who turned her back on butter only a few months ago, I was interested to see if my attempts to live more healthily had borne fruit.
In fact, my level was under the lowest measurement given, which is 3.1.
So the greens and the fibre have proved victorious after all!
Before reaching for a celebratory pack of full-fat peanuts, a question strikes me: perhaps my level is too low?
Not really.
The level of the average British male may be 6 but given the incidence of heart disease in Scotland, perhaps the average is not to be desired.
Perhaps, as one specialist puts it, ‘if we are to reverse the epidemic, we should be aiming to reduce that average’.
DR Ayles adds that it is vital to keep a sense of proportion.
‘You can eat a certain amount of so-called ‘bad’ foods, just eat less of them.
Do what seems best for you.
And, by the way, don't give children a low-cholesterol diet.
Certain vitamins can only be absorbed through fat and children should always receive full-fat milk.’
For adults, it's the same old message: less fat overall, and especially less saturated fat, more fibre, and more fruit and veg.
The latter are particularly helpful since cholesterol becomes harmful when its chemical structure is changed through oxidisation.
Fruit and vegetables act as anti-oxidants which explains why those in the south of France have similar cholesterol levels to Scots yet only a quarter of the heart disease.
A final crumb of comfort.
According to yet another study, this one published in the Lancet, red wine in moderation is thought to protect against coronary disease because it contains substances known as phenolic flavonoids.
It is now believed these these also act as anti-oxidants.
There is one caveat.
According to the researchers, this cheering finding calls for further studies.
CHOLESTEROL — SAFE LEVELS Cholesterol is measured in millimoles per litre, or mmol/l.
A level of below 5.2 mmol/l is considered low risk Between 5.2 and around 6 is an intermediate zone which is fine provided the patient has no other risk factors Above 6 and the level is described as raised, regardless.
(The average middle-aged British male has a count of 6.)
If your blood cholesterol level is above 6.5-7.5, you have a three times higher risk of heart disease.
If you smoke and have high blood pressure as well as high cholesterol, your risk of heart disease is eight to ten times higher
Priced out of justice?
Graeme Wilson reports on how reforms to the legal aid system may  exclude thousands of people from seeking justice
A THICK pall of injustice will creep over Scotland when the legal aid system is reformed at the start of next month.
Thousands of people will be effectively priced out of the system, no matter how strong their cases may appear.
In short, access to justice is about to be denied in grand fashion.
That is the litany which has been heard from solicitors throughout Scotland over the past months — from the spacious offices of the big city firms to the modest surroundings of rural practices.
Though not normally noted for their philanthropy, lawyers say they are standing up for the common man and woman by condemning the Scottish Office plans to change civil legal aid and to a lesser extent legal advice and assistance.
Criminal legal aid is untouched.
This morning leading figures from the Law Society of Scotland will congregate in Westminster to tell the Scottish Affairs select committee why the reforms should not go ahead.
Lord Fraser of Carmyllie, Scottish Office minister for home affairs and health, will be there to defend the plans.
His argument will pivot on the spiralling bill for legal aid, which has doubled in the last five years, reaching £83 million last year.
The reforms aim to cut the bill by making more people pay bigger contributions towards civil legal aid, which mainly covers matrimonial and compensation cases.
Lord Fraser contends that the reforms will ‘ensure the continuation of reasonable access to legal aid for the most needy, while at the same time taking action to control the rate of growth in legal aid expenditure.’
The society president, Brian Adair, and his colleagues argue that legal aid is too important to be the target of such economising.
Legal aid, in the words of The Laws of Scotland: the Stair Memorial Encyclopedia, is society's response to the criticism that there is one law for the rich and one law for the poor.
‘It's a matter of policy for the Law Society to oppose savings on legal aid because it is so vital,’ said Mr Adair at the society's offices in Edinburgh.
‘We feel that to fund people who could not otherwise go to court is a very correct use of taxpayers’ money.
This year they estimate the whole legal aid bill will be around £100 million and I say: ‘Well done’ on spending that money so efficiently and economically in order to let people have justice.’
The Law Society is already claiming a part-victory in forcing the Scottish Office to backtrack on its plans for legal advice and assistance — the advice a solicitor offers on individual problems in civil or criminal law.
In 1991/92 it was granted in about 270,000 cases.
Initially, the plans said no-one with a disposable income of more than £42 per week would get advice and assistance.
That was changed in February so that anyone earning under £61 gets the service free.
Those between £61 and £147 have to pay contributions on a sliding scale.
There has been no such rethink for the changes planned in civil legal aid in court, which was granted in more than 23,000 cases in 1991/92.
Under the present system, those with a weekly disposable income of under £58 get civil legal aid free.
Those between £58 and £130 pay a quarter of their disposable income above that lower level.
From April the baseline drops to £44, meaning about 11,500 more people will now pay contributions.
At the same time, contribution levels have gone up to one-third — meaning everyone pays more.
For Gerry Brown, a Glasgow solicitor, the combination of a drop in the bottom limit and an increase in contribution spells disaster.
He handles numerous legal aid cases and, as a member of the Law Society's working party on the proposed changes, has observed the changes more closely than most.
‘Access to justice is in peril, of that there is no doubt.
What is the point of having laws and courts if large numbers of people cannot use them because of the price?
‘Those worst hit will be people like nurses, teachers, police officers and local government employees — people who pay their taxes and work hard but will only get legal aid if they pay huge amounts.’
His concerns are echoed by legal academics throughout Scotland: Prof Robert Black of Edinburgh University has described the proposals as outrageous, while Prof Douglas Cusine at Aberdeen said they are a sad reflection on our society.
Strathclyde University's Prof Alan Paterson has attacked the reforms as savage and ill-directed.
A range of other organisations is distinctly uneasy as well, including Citizens Advice (Scotland), the Scottish Council for Single Parents, the Scottish Association for Mental Health and the Scottish Council for Civil Liberties.
Martyn Evans, chief executive officer of Citizens Advice (Scotland), questions whether the estimated savings of about £3 million really justify the impact on Scottish people.
‘In our view the legal aid proposals could discourage large numbers of people from pursuing their legal rights through court action,’ he said.
Among those large numbers of people are the physically and mentally handicapped on invalidity payments who now face the prospect of much larger contributions.
The Scottish Association for Mental Health estimates that someone making a contribution of £89 currently will be forced to pay £300 from April.
And he or she will have to find the money from an invalidity benefit of £65.70 a week.
Hilary Patrick, the association's legal adviser, is particularly concerned that if an application is made to section someone with mental health problems they may not be able to afford representation.
While the core objections to the reforms are founded on points of principle, the anger of solicitors and others has been fuelled by the fact that civil legal aid has not caused the rise in the total bill for legal aid.
Over the last five years criminal legal aid has soared from £25 million to £47 million while advice and assistance has gone up from £5.9 million to £15.4 million.
In the same period, civil legal aid has moved from £15.7 million to £16.5 million, a fall of nearly 20 per cent in real terms.
The Scottish Office says civil legal aid has shown a sharp rise during the current financial year which justifies the changes.
In spite of that, there is still a feeling in legal circles that an innocent party is being blamed for a problem others have created.
In the final analysis the full impact of reform will be felt most keenly by the thousands of Scottish men and women whose income falls the wrong side of the line.
Brian Adair paints a pessimistic picture of the new regime.
‘There are cases of possible miscarriages of justice for people on the borderline of legal aid at the moment.
This situation can only deteriorate once the reforms are in place.’
‘The worst hit will be people who pay taxes and work hard but will only get legal aid if they pay huge amounts’‘What is the point of having laws and courts if large numbers of people cannot use them because of the price?’
‘We feel that to fund people who could not otherwise go to court is a very correct use of taxpayers’ money'
The designer timelords are using runways everywhere to present a vivid meltdown of fashion through history.
John Davidson reports
HERE we have the judgment of Paris.
And Milan.
And London.
Twenty days of tightly timetabled designer runway shows have sealed the forward fate of fashion.
And even if you're more likely to favour M&S than Montana, Mugler or Miyake, don't imagine for one moment that what has been shown on these mammoth runways won't affect what you buy next winter.
Designers everywhere are in broad agreement on the key colour and fabric choices for next autumn: bitter chocolate brown…and velvet in every possible variety — panne, printed, devore, even knitted  chenille .
Otherwise, they'd love to dress you in plum tones.
There is now absolutely no debate about hemlines; skirts are completely eclipsed by trousers.
Softer layer-dressing, with a new emphasis on knits, replaces the recent dominance of tailoring.
Historical fantasy has been an underlying theme in fashion for some time, but it is now being interpreted in a fascinating variety of ways from the totally hysterical to the perfectly wearable.
Take, for instance a designer like Montana, whose particular skill is in sculptural tailoring.
How does he approach the forward season, aware that the suit is no longer a viable fashion idiom?
He strips the silhouette down to a jacket which snakes into and flares out from a neatly fitted waist, teamed with the leanest leggings and matching over-the-knee boots.
Step forward Robina Hood and Deirdre Whittington.
Britain's Vivienne Westwood has been taking the historical fantasy tablets for some time.
At her show in Paris, she avoided any temptation to stand and redeliver her own original swashbuckling New Romantic look, which appears set to bubble back into fashion favour.
Instead she advocated a return to elegance…dressing-up in the widest, and often wildest, sense.
What Scotsman would not be captivated by the extraordinary vision of Linda Evangelista trussed up as the supermodel-from-Brigadoon?
Dolce e Gabbana were caught raking through Marie Antoinette's closet for their collection presented in Milan.
These habitual leaders of such attempts at stylistic intrigue as the Italian market currently stages continued to show their love of the Seventies in the darkly romantic plum velvets and feather boas that will somehow seem for ever Biba.
And just in case any trend of the moment was missed, they also gave a strong showing for their mode masculine retake on the Dandy theme.
Later, this was echoed at Romeo Gigli's show in Paris.
The beautiful three-piece suits which dominated his collection combinations of a narrow shouldered jacket with a cropped waistcoat and lean, cuffed trouser — clearly evoked the attire of every well-dressed Edwardian gentleman.
All beautifully accomplished…but transmitting strange and confusing messages about sexual politics and preferences.
One of the great unanswerable questions of modern fashion must be what Coco Chanel would make of Karl Lagerfeld's efforts in her name.
His Chanel show blasted the audience to the backs of their seats with 20,000-volt fashion and hyperactive disco music.
Madonna was singing ‘Deeper and deeper’, the show was moving faster and faster, and Lagerfeld's message was getting clearer and clearer.
Chanel isn't timeless; under his direction, it's relentlessly and uncompromisingly modern.
Beneath the fur-trimmed rucksacks, though, the whimsical sunglasses (complete with false eyelashes embedded in their frames), outsize shopping bags and enough chain jewellery to put the catwalk under serious threat of collapse, there were wonderfully beautiful clothes.
The familiar tweed jackets appeared in fresh fruit pastel shades enlivened with a spattering of matched sequins.
Colourful layers of contrast-trimmed cashmere knitwear looked both definitively Chanel and definitely 1993.
More difficult to swallow was the murky medievalism pervading Milan's Prada, celebrated originator of the fashion cognoscenti's favourite nylon handbag.
The collection could have provided the costumes for any blood-curdling remake of The Name of the Rose, but it certainly will not be offering its bewildered clients the perfect festive frock next season.
Medievalism is a significant inspiration in forward fashion; and elsewhere it appeared rendered with a rather lighter touch, proving that not all aspects of the Dark Ages were dreary and dull.
In London, Nicholas Knightly threaded ribbons through the bodice of his softly draped gown in midnight georgette, while Ghost had the perfect flowing robe for every latter-day Lady Guinevere.
The greatest designers can sway with the prevailing mood of the moment, but remain fundamentally true to their own spirit; Issey Miyake continues to delight audiences at his beautiful shows by determining his own uniquely futuristic fashion logic.
A glorious bright turquoise liquid jersey pantsuit is the ultimate garb for travel by space shuttle.
However, his distressed natural fabrics are an eerily beautiful choice for the contemporary aesthete, proving that it's not always necessary for fashion designers to be timelords too.
Barbara: waiting to afford a divorce
IN 1991 Barbara and her husband separated after a private detective she had hired discovered he was having an affair.
Two years later she still cannot afford to get a divorce.
Barbara, 33, lives with her 13-year-old daughter Carolyn in Kilmarnock.
Their total income each week — from a part-time job, family credit and child benefit — amounts to just over £150.
All her savings have been spent on unpaid bills left behind by her husband.
If Barbara is to take her case to court she would currently have to pay a contribution of more than £700 towards her civil legal aid.
From April that figure would rise to almost £1,000.
‘It's a case at the moment that I cannot go ahead with the case because I cannot afford £700,’ said Barbara.
‘We appealed to have the contribution lowered and that has just been rejected so I'm going to have to meet with my solicitor about that.
‘But if the contribution goes up again then I don't know what I will do.’
Barbara expected to pay something towards her court costs but had estimated £200 at the very most.
She even acknowledges she was tempted to give up her job at one stage and go on to social security as she would then have been entitled to free legal aid.
She adds: ‘I've worked since I was married 15 years ago and I couldn't imagine just sitting around the house all day.
I'm angry because I was told it would be relatively straightforward to get a divorce and I didn't  foresee any of this.
‘I'm also angry because my husband isn't working so he will be able to get his legal aid for free.
‘Meanwhile I'm up here scrimping and saving and keeping his daughter when it's not really my fault that we're having a divorce.’
‘I'm angry because I was told it would be relatively straightforward to get a divorce’
Elizabeth: fearing worst for compensation claims
ELIZABETH dreads to think what life would have been like if legal aid had not opened the door to court action after her husband was seriously injured in an industrial accident.
In July 1988 William, 52, was working at an engineering firm when the motor from an overhead crane toppled on to him, fracturing his skull, damaging his neck and breaking his collar-bone.
He spent more than ten days in the neurology unit at Glasgow's Southern General before being allowed home.
Seven months later he was back again for an operation to drain a build-up of fluid on his brain.
His regular visits to the hospital for treatment finally ended in 1991 but a psychiatric nurse still visits him every fortnight to help him with the bouts of depression he suffers.
Civil legal aid allowed the couple to set in motion their quest for compensation, though in the end their case never reached the Court of Session.
William, who has been on invalidity benefit since the accident, accepted a settlement of £70,000 a few days before the case started.
‘The money has made such a difference,’ Elizabeth, 52, acknowledges.
‘We have been able to put in double glazing and central heating, which makes things more comfortable for William as he doesn't get out too much — just for a little bit of gardening when the weather's better.’
As it was, the couple from Dunbartonshire had to sell their Mazda car to meet the contribution of more than £600 demanded under the old system.
The equation is simple: no contribution, no legal aid; no legal aid, no court case.
Under the new system Elizabeth and William would have had to pay a contribution of more than £1,000 even though they earn only about £7,200 between them.
‘If the accident had happened after April we would never have been able to afford it,’ said Elizabeth, who is a part-time school cleaner.
‘In a way it's quite lucky it all happened when it did — but it's a shame for other people who will be bringing cases forward in the near future.’
A case of child sex abuse that won't go away Tom Morton reports on a mystery group behind an Orkney mother's fight for her children
THE LATEST comment from the Orkney Seven Action Group is strong.
The removal of seven children from the W family because of sex abuse was ‘the most cruel and grotesque social engineering experiment since the Second World War,’ it claims.
Orkney Islands Council is compared to Himmler.
‘Even the Gestapo would have admired the techniques employed to wring confessions,’ the group says.
Shaken social workers and child care specialists are now considering their response to what has become an almost daily litany of press releases, television interviews and newspaper articles centred on the W family in Orkney.
The Royal Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children is at a loss to explain this sudden deluge of publicity.
‘Our concern is quite simply the welfare of the children,’ said a spokesman.
‘This case has been through the due process of law, has been carefully considered at every stage and reviewed at frequent intervals.
Nothing has come to light to occasion the removal of these children from care.’
The action group says that the children must be returned home, that there was no abuse in the W household once the father was imprisoned, that all is well in South Ronaldsay.
The success of their campaign in gaining publicity has now raised the possibility that hitherto unseen medical evidence could become public.
However, the man penning the ferocious press releases from his antiques shop in Flebridge, Sussex, has never met Mrs W or any of her children, has never been to Orkney and until last October felt ‘dreadful revulsion’ for the alleged child abusers in Orkney.
What changed all that was a book Suffer Little Children by a St Andrews doctor, David Reid, who runs his own Medical Institute for Research into Child Cruelty from his home and is known for controversial views on the causes of child abuse.
‘Briefly, it described systematic state child abuse,’ said Mr Fenton.
Subsequent meetings with Dr Reid convinced him that a grave injustice had been done to both the parents of the nine children subject to the dawn raids of 1991, and to Mrs W and her children, removed in November 1990 and whose disclosures while in care led to the later social work action.
How the action group started remain unclear.
‘It was suggested we start this action group with three or four others,’ said Mr Fenton.
Then he added that it ‘is formally myself, Dr Reid and Mrs W’.
Asked if it would not benefit his campaigning work to meet Mrs W, Mr Fenton replied that he had met people who had met her.
‘I've spoken to her and her family many, many times on the phone.’
Dr David Reid has met Mrs W many times, although he is somewhat coy when asked if he has examined the W children.
‘We have to be careful about what we say here,’ he said, eventually explaining ‘I was asked to examine the situation’but not the children.
Dr Reid is also the author of the Constancy of Cruelty, which contends that child abuse is the result of misdirected aggression within the family context.
‘It's partly related to my theory of human behaviour which I've had since I was at Fettes in Edinburgh,’ he said.
‘In Africa there's very little child abuse that is caused by intention because there's an outlet in the parts I've been to.
For instance, it's the custom to beat the wife.
Nobody for a moment is going to suggest we have that here, but that is an outlet.’
Yesterday, both Mr Fenton and Dr Reid were preparing a further assault on the media.
That will be an attempt to discredit disclosures made by one of the W children as the ravings of a psychotic who, Dr Reid claims, ‘is now in a mental home in Invergordon’.
Teasing by schoolmates and pressure from social workers has, in the eyes of Dr Reid and Mr Fenton, ensured that the child, who can only be referred to as OW, is ‘away with the fairies’.
Dr Reid said: ‘I think what the children have suffered since social workers took them into care in November 1990 has been a lot worse than they had from their father.’
The fact is, however, that OW was given a supervised work training placement, helping care workers in a centre for the mentally handicapped for two days a week.
That is now over and she is being looked after by foster parents.
Dr David Reid: known for controversial views on abuse
In his lecture to commemorate RH Tawney on 20 March, John Smith laid claim to the moral high ground for the Labour Party.
I am surprised that he did not cite as evidence in support of his case the moral philosophy of his own Monklands District Council.
There, if the admirable local newspaper is to be believed, both religion and the family are accorded great importance!
Immigration
Christopher Glen's complaint against whingeing Scots (Points of View, today) is understandable, but in an overcrowded world the consequences of large-scale immigration must be faced.
Numbers are all important.
Fifty million can colonise five million, but not vice versa.
There are several instances where immigrant minorities have eventually taken over control of the host community either in whole or in part, Palestine and India being two examples in this century.
Then there is the tragedy of Tibet, where large population transfers from China are being deliberately used to subvert the will of a brave people.
If any country wishes to preserve its identity it must have control of immigration.
There is surely a lesson for Scotland here and for Britain too, not that any of our politicians will be interested.
Drunk drivers
My 16-year-old son, Louis, was killed by a drunk driver on 13 July, 1992.
In Dingwall Sheriff Court, A E Ballantine was found guilty of contravening sections 1 and 5 of the Road Traffic Act.
He had already pleaded guilty to section 3a of the act.
This new law was put into practice two weeks before my son's death, and carried with it a maximum sentence of five years' imprisonment.
The procurator-fiscal insisted on pressing the more serious charge of killing someone by dangerous driving, while being drunk.
Mr Ballantine received a prison sentence of 18 months (of which he will probably serve a year or less), and a five-year driving ban.
The time and considerable effort that the fiscal exerted was in vain.
This sentence certainly will not act as a deterrent to other drunk drivers.
I believe that if somebody kills another person while drunk and at the wheel of a car, then that person should be disqualified for life.
My son was nearly 17, and an all-round sportsman, having won several golfing cups and trophies.
My husband died 11 years ago, and I brought my son up by myself.
I believe I did a good job, as Louis was a kind, caring and considerate young man.
I am not writing this as a need for revenge.
I do not want another family to go through what I have been through.
It could have been your child, your parent, or your friend who was killed that day.
Drunk drivers must not be allowed to get off so lightly.
New villages
Peter Clarke, in his Monday column (15 March), raises some ideas worthy of debate in proposing that new rural villages would be better and more popular than improving urban areas.
Mr Clarke's grasp of reality fails when he suggests that our most popular buildings pre-date architects and planners.
Scotland has a wonderful tradition of well-planned and designed urban and rural development, Inverary and Edinburgh's New Town being but two examples.
In proposing models for the future Mr Clarke should study the facts about the past.
Baseless
You published (19 March) a letter from Tej Singh.
It had the dubious merit of illustrating the spirit which has pervaded his campaign against Daniel Stewart's and Melville College in Edinburgh since last June.
On 17 March the rejection by the Commission for Racial Equality of the case brought against the school was reported.
We are happy to abide by that judgment.
We were not surprised by it.
Stewart's Melville is a school committed to its values.
These, as parents and pupils would tell you, include the equal treatment of all pupils regardless of race, religion or gender.
The school has an outstanding and deserved reputation, which will stand or fall by the testimony of its pupils.
There is, nevertheless, much hurt in the school at the wholly unwarranted campaign against its good name.
Mr Singh's letter compounded this.
His comments on Paul Caton, the deputy principal, were gratuitously offensive.
Mr Caton's record as a schoolmaster is second to none.
The impartiality and fairness with which he has carried out all tasks during many years on the school's management team have been beyond reproach.
All boys have been served with great competence and total dedication.
Underlying Mr Singh's campaign has been an implication that boys receiving awards and honours have not really been deserving of them.
This was made explicit in his letter through a particularly unpleasant charge, that a top appointment at Stewart's Melville was made only to protect the school from the impending action by himself.
It goes without saying that this charge is baseless and that the boy in question was selected entirely on his very considerable merit.
Racial awareness, in this matter as in the other, is not the school's problem, but it is clearly troubling Mr Singh.
I can only repeat that we esteem his son's achievements, that we wish him well in his future and that his family has good cause to think kindly of a school which has provided an excellent education, many opportunities and much success.
School trips with an element of risk Four English teenagers are the latest pupils to die in the course of ‘outdoor education’.
But what are the chances that something might go horribly wrong?
Brian Pendreigh investigates
EVERYONE remembers those school trip tragedies which have claimed the lives of youngsters far from home.
The time when four Berkshire boys fell to their deaths in the Austrian Alps in 1988.
The four boys swept into the sea off Land's End in 1985.
And in 1971, the five teenagers from Edinburgh's Ainslie Park school who died in a blizzard in the Cairngorms, along with an instructor.
Now four English teenagers are dead following a canoeing accident off the Dorset coast, intensifying the concerns of parents all over Britain as they watch their children set off with their mates, while wondering what the chances are that something might go horribly wrong.
It's no consolation to those involved in Monday's canoeing tragedy, but British school trips have an impressive safety record and schools are keen to assure parents that they do everything in their power to ensure the wellbeing of pupils in their care.
There are thousands of school trips each year and few serious accidents.
Tom Sanders, the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents' water and leisure safety adviser, says: ‘They tend to be one-offs.
You can almost remember them on the fingers of one hand.
There was Land's End and the skiing one.
They're very few and far between.’
He says there's no shortage of guidelines from educational and sporting bodies.
They are continually monitored and updated.
There are no central statistics on the number of fatalities on school trips, though obviously individuals have been killed in accidents less newsworthy than the Land's End and Cairngorms tragedies.
However Scotland's largest education authority, Strathclyde Regional Council, was able to say yesterday that there had been none at all in its area since the establishment of the council in the mid-Seventies.
Every Strathclyde pupil is expected to go on a school trip involving an overnight stay at some point during their schooling, though their parents would have to give their consent to this.
Local authorities have a legal duty to ensure safety of pupils on trips.
Strathclyde's spokesman says that they are acting in loco parentis, in place of the parent, but whereas many parents will happily take children hillwalking or boating without training, the council insists on trip leaders having proper qualifications.
National guidelines were drawn up after the Cairngorms tragedy.
They have been updated and supplemented by local authorities' own guidelines, covering procedures, training and pupil-teacher ratios, ranging in Strathclyde's case from 10-1 for easy hillwalking to 5-1 for walking on difficult ridges.
The ratio is 8-1 for canoeing in inland waters and 6-1 for canoeing on rivers.
Teachers' leaders have expressed concern in the past at the risks to which teachers are exposing themselves if things go wrong, not just the risk to life and limb, but in terms of the extent of their legal responsibility for doing work which is outwith paid requirements.
Although the local authority would be responsible for any damages in cases of negligence, it could in turn take disciplinary action against teachers.
The National Association of Schoolmasters and Union of Women Teachers advises members against going on school trips, while recognising many continue to choose to do so.
The teacher involved in the canoeing accident is one of its members.
However that expedition was organised not by school teachers, but by professionals at an adventure centre.
The question has been raised over their qualifications and whether the Coastguard should have been informed of the expedition in advance, but it seems there was nothing exceptional in the fact that a school party was canoeing in the open sea.
The introduction to the Scottish Office handbook begins: ‘Traditionally the term ‘outdoor education’ has been applied to activities out-of-doors which involve some degree of physical challenge and risk.’
Judith Gillespie, convener of the Scottish Parent Teacher Council, says: ‘I think many people accept you cannot put into practice measures that will prevent all accidents.
The best you can do is be as careful as it's possible to be.’
She believes Scottish schools do take their responsibilities seriously, but that all outdoor activities carry an element of risk, depending on the nature of the activity.
‘People have to accept that, if they want their children to go on them.
If they go skiing they might break their leg…
Parents have to be aware that not absolutely every accident is preventable and if they're not prepared for their children to run that element of risk then obviously they have the choice of not letting their children go.’
There will always be an element of risk attached to activities such as hillwalking, skiing, abseiling and canoeing.
It can be kept to a minimum by proper safety guidelines, of which there seem to be plenty.
The question in this latest tragedy would appear to be whether those guidelines were followed.
A snapshot of the Hitler years Sixty years after the Nazis came to power, David Jackson Young talks to a woman who was a child at the time of the Third Reich
LAST September a 56-page typescript arrived on my desk at the BBC in Edinburgh.
It was headed ‘Growing Up Under Dictatorship’, and was about the childhood and young adolescence of its author, Sibylle Kaufmann, in Nazi Germany.
It's hard to resist the malevolent allure of the Third Reich, and when I telephoned Sibylle one evening a week or so later, the sound of her rich, Teutonic voice eloquently describing its owner's activities in the Hitler Youth movement made the hairs stand up on the back of my neck.
We arranged to meet.
Mrs Sibylle Alexander (as she now is) turned out to be a tall and handsome woman in her late sixties.
As we sat discussing her script in the BBC canteen, her determined manner and the intensity of her gaze occasionally reminded me — though she won't thank me for the comparison — of Margaret Thatcher.
There was no halo of blonde hair, however, but a tightly-drawn grey bun: no nonsense, very practical, very hausfrau (albeit in Galashiels).
On the table before us, incongruous among the polystyrene coffee cups, were the old-fashioned cloth-bound photograph albums she'd brought with her.
Inside, meticulously labelled in pencil, Kaufmann family snapshots from the Hitler years.
There was Sibylle's older brother Georg in the peaked cap of the German army officer — as darkly glamorous as in a war movie.
And Sibylle's father, Dr Hannes Kaufmann, also in that terribly familiar uniform.
Then, like a still from a Leni Riefenstahl documentary, Sibylle herself, the only dark-haired girl in a group of Aryan blondes, joyfully doing their ‘work duty’ in the middle of the Austrian countryside.
Such cinematic comparisons came all too easily.
Images of Nazism and the war appear so often on the screen that it took some effort to realise that these were real people inside those costumes; that the peaked cap and leather boots weren't on hire from the wardrobe department.
Even then, the photographs only told part of the story.
These may have been real people, but they weren't real Nazis.
The Kaufmann family background was a liberal one.
So well known were Dr Hannes Kaufmann's left-of-centre views that when the Nazis seized power he immediately lost his job as a civil law court judge in Hamburg — because, as Hitler said: ‘The Liberals are more dangerous than the Communists: they can think!’
By the end of the war a desperate regime had put him in charge of an anti-aircraft battery in Belgrade; hence the uniform.
Georg Kaufmann wanted to follow his father into the legal profession.
Instead he was conscripted, and in September 1939 actually took part in the invasion of Poland.
Five years later he was reported missing in the fighting around Leningrad and the family never saw him again.
Sibylle herself was only eight when Hitler came to power, and so was exposed to the intrusive influences of the Nazi state during her most formative years.
Like all young Germans she was compelled to join the Hitler Youth organisation.
As the local group leader approached to attach the symbolic necktie to her shirt at the enrolment ceremony, Sibylle whispered to her: ‘But Annemarie, I don't like Hitler.’
The reply came back: ‘Neither do I, Sibylle.’
This subversive exchange represents one of the ‘pockets of freedom’— Sibylle's own phrase — that were to be found in every stratum of a superficially homogeneous Nazi society — not just in one branch of the Hitler Youth, but in the army at the battlefront and, of course, at home, where Sibylle's mother shocked her tea guests by referring to her ‘dear Jewish friends’ abroad, and her father listened to the forbidden BBC with the volume turned up full.
All very well, but couldn't people like the Kaufmanns have done rather more to undermine the evil regime that had their country in its grip?
Perhaps, but Sibylle — who admits that she positively enjoyed much of her time in the Hitler Youth — believes that the ordinary man and woman in the street wasn't by inclination a resistance fighter.
She is nonetheless scathing of the intellectuals in the Hamburg legal establishment who ‘didn't raise a finger’ when the Nazis dismissed her father from his job.
Sixty years after Hitler's Enabling Act of 23 March, 1933, finally consigned German parliamentary democracy to the dustbin and consolidated the Nazis in power, Sibylle Kaufmann believes that the most important thing she gained from growing up under dictatorship was a heightened sense of spiritual awareness: ‘Materialistically, everything looked so fine, on the outer side.
‘And I believe that I began then to train myself to listen in the voice of somebody, or look through the outer facade.
There could be a man in a uniform, but what was his inner being?’
The history of the German people between 1933 and 1945 can sometimes read like a particularly nightmarish Gothic fairy tale.
Sibylle Alexander describes her experience as a protagonist in this story with grace and eloquence.
It's no surprise to learn that she numbers among her ancestors the Brothers Grimm.
Real people: Sibylle Alexander as she is today and pictured with the Kaufmann family at Christmas 1942.
Brothers Justus and George stand with their father behind Sibylle (right), mother and sister Margaret
Old soldiers remember fallen comrades Alan Hutchison meets a dwindling band of Scots who fought against fascism in the Spanish Civil War
THEY belonged to another age: a more troubled time when jackboots and fascists dominated the headlines.
They were all young men.
There were John Berry, Robert Bridges and John Mason…
Harry Fry, John Ross and Jimmy Rutherford, ordinary Scots who went off to fight for a cause in Spain and who were not to return.
Yesterday, as the sun broke through on the peaceful setting of Princes Street Gardens in Edinburgh they and others who fought with the International Brigades against General Franco and made the ultimate sacrifice, were remembered.
The gathering was small but that did not diminish the effect of the occasion as two of only 12 remaining Scottish survivors — out of 500 Scots who fought on the republican side in the Spanish Civil War — gathered with district council representatives to pay their respects at a simple ceremony.
For John Dunlop, 78, from Edinburgh, who read out the names of some of those who died, the memories came flooding back.
He declared with deep conviction: ‘These men should not be forgotten…
They must not be forgotten for they gave their lives in defence of values which are under more bitter attack now all over the world than ever before.’
Mr Dunlop swopped the safety of a chartered accountant's apprenticeship in Glasgow for the battlefields of Spain.
He was only 21 when he answered the call: a young man from a comfortable background who only months earlier had taken an interest in politics for the first time.
He said: ‘I considered it my duty to get informed about politics because I had a vote.
I found out all I could about the various parties including the Fascist party.
I threw their anti-Semitic rubbish in the bucket.’
He started going to ‘Aid Spain’ meetings and after listening to a medical student who had returned from the country he decided to help in the most direct way.
He did not tell his parents because he knew they would try to change his mind but he confided in a colleague at work.
Word reached one of the partners and a late attempt was made to stop him.
He recalled: ‘The partner and my uncle went to the six o'clock train for London to try to head me off.
But I had left on the five o'clock train.’
It was May 1937.
His family, friends and colleagues were not to see him again for 19 months.
The young CA apprentice travelled from London to Paris and then put himself in the hands of the International Brigades organisation for the final leg of his journey to Spain.
He said: ‘The most wonderful experience of my life was the day I went into Spain.
There was quite a group of us, people from all over Europe.
We were taken into a small chapel and some Spanish border guards gave us hot coffee and bread.
All of a sudden singing started up.
Young men from all over the world started singing the Internationale, all in their own languages.
It was the most marvellous moment.’
He was also to experience some awful moments and he was badly wounded in one battle by a splinter from a shell which killed two men immediately behind him.
Now Mr Dunlop and the only other Brigades survivor in Edinburgh, Steve Fullarton, 73, who also attended yesterday's commemoration ceremony, want today's generation to be ever vigilant.
Mr Fullarton, who was also wounded in the civil war, said: ‘Don't think Fascism can't rear its ugly head again.
It can.’
The three-year war in Spain, from 1936-39, claimed heavy casualties.
More than 2,000 British volunteers flocked to fight the Fascists but 500 of them died and nearly all the survivors were wounded.
Now age is taking its toll, with Mr Dunlop and Mr Fullarton part of a dwindling band of veterans, numbering only about 50 in Britain.
But yesterday as they gave the clenched fist salute of the Spanish republican army and planned another ceremony next year, they smiled a smile of inner satisfaction at having taken part in a fight which they had no doubts was well worth fighting.
Special needs
Your paper has reported the Commission for Racial Equality's formal investigation into the assessment for special needs of children in Strathclyde whose first language is not English.
The controversy that has arisen over this issue in recent days emphasises the importance of proceeding with this investigation with all possible speed and effectiveness.
Research published by the Scottish Education Department reveals distorted representation of children from ethnic minorities living in Glasgow, in special educational needs categories.
The commission has had the significance of this research confirmed by independent analysts, which leaves a serious problem to be explained and solved.
I welcome the commitment of Strathclyde's education department to co-operate fully with the commission's investigation.
That co-operation will be vital in getting to the bottom of this matter as soon as possible.
Californian dreamer Tom Bradley, the retiring mayor of Los Angeles, flew in to Britain to promote his city as a wonderful location for trade and tourism.
But he neatly sidestepped the questions about riots, crime and gang warfare, says David Wallen
‘So come to Los Angeles, it is a city which is safe,’ says Tom Bradley.
‘It is a city which can entertain the public from all over the world.’
TOM Bradley sits motionless, looking bored listing his achievements as mayor of Los Angeles.
He smiles at the rate of two slight elevations of the edges of the lips every half hour.
The first black mayor of the city once represented progress, enthusiasm and verve.
Today it is a different image he proffers.
He stands down this summer looking tired and weary after 20 years in office running a metropolis of ten million people which has a world-wide reputation for its crime, its gangs, its murders, its drugs, its violence, its riots, its burning streets.
Oh yes, and Hollywood, movie stars, freeways, Baywatch and smog.
But Bradley still drawls with an irritating arrogance.
Given his time again, he wouldn't change a thing.
‘I'd change nothing, nothing.
I have been very pleased with my performance, with my success and the achievements which I have enjoyed over the past 20 years.
Under my leadership we have transformed the city of Los Angeles from a quiet, sleepy little town to the point where it is the second largest city in the United States.’
He says a new museum is added once a year, the size of the Convention Centre has doubled and the LA International Airport has been transformed.
‘I am proud of these things,’ says Bradley, evidently a believer in the view that political mayors should be judged by the size of their convention centres.
The riots?— well let's not speculate whether there will be any more following the retrial of the officers involved in the Rodney King case.
The new police chief has said there won't be.
Bradley is touring Europe trying to convince trade and tourists that there is nothing much wrong with LA.
His statements sometimes defy credibility.
‘Every country has, from time to time, these kinds of disasters, whether they are earthquakes, floods, blizzards, fire or a rioting situation.’
So what happened in LA last April, causing $6 billion of damage, prompting 1,500 civil cases against a city already burdened with a budget deficit of $120 million was really nothing out of the ordinary?
This dirge is delivered with such programmed monotony surely he can't believe a bit of it himself.
There is a hollow ring because Bradley is largely discredited in LA.
Now he is sitting in a plush suite in London's newest five-star hotel.
He has been on nearly two dozen foreign trips on behalf of LA in the past few years and some of his questionable financial dealings have been investigated.
With the 74-year-old mayor is his entourage of city slicker LA types — the kind of people who smile and say thank you while they rudely interrupt your conversation.
Bradley explains that of the 70,000 visitors in LA at the time of last year's riots not one was injured.
They may have been scared out of their wits as the mob moved towards their hotels but they were not harmed.
‘So come to Los Angeles, it is a city which is safe,’ appeals the mayor, without a hint of conviction or real enthusiasm.
‘It is a city which can entertain the public from all over the world.’
‘I am by no means suggesting that there is no crime or no violence, obviously that is not true.
But the same thing can be said of any major city in the world.’
Well, that is rather an  exaggerate .
The 56 people who died during the riots are around 3 per cent of the total expected to die from violent crime in the current 12 months.
If you asked Bradley, he says he doesn't know what the crime rate is at the moment, which seems a little politically unsound for a mayor.
Had the police department, under former Chief Darryl Gates, carried out its duties properly last April there would not have been such a spread of violence, he said.
(Arguably had they carried out their duties properly when they first came across Rodney King the same would have applied).
In April the officers in the downtown area arrived at the riot scene but for whatever reason withdrew back to their command posts ‘instead of staying there to control the illegal activity’.
But last December, with the new chief of police, Willie Williams, in position, there was an attempt at a repeat riot.
Williams quickly deployed his officers and regained control.
‘You have to have a massive show of force to contain or control any riotous situation,’ says the mayor.
Surprisingly, LA has only about half the police force of London for a city of ten million.
‘We have the best trained, the best qualified law enforcement officers that can be found in any major city in the world so we have always been able to maintain solid protection for our community without having the comparable size departments that other cities have,’ he says.
But this again is a piece of PR whitewash.
Bradley admits he has tried to increase the size of the LAPD by 1,000.
What happened?
The white middle class voted the proposition down three times because it would put $13 on their tax bills.
It is on the ballot again for next month.
He has no comment on why they won't pay more — except that he is certain that the city is not becoming ungovernable.
Many of his problems seem to come down to cash, but even as he bows out Bradley remains the political populist, unwilling to criticise.
Only now, for instance, is LA getting an underground railway which might have avoided the need for all those smog-producing cars.
‘It came down to a willingness to pay for it.’
People in the city had voted for the metro but others in LA county had effectively vetoed the project.
Bradley has been a lifelong Democrat and it shows.
The Clinton administration understands the cities, he says.
The Republicans cut inner city programmes.
But Bradley will not place blame.
It is obviously too painful to talk about it — especially when fingers point in the direction of City Hall.
‘There is enough blame to go around to everybody.
We don't accomplish anything by placing blame.
I am telling you what we have done and what we hope to do.’
He had started the ‘Rebuild LA’ programme before the fires were out.
He talks of grand schemes ‘Rebuilding the Spirit’, ‘Hands Across the City’.
Twenty thousand leaders recruited to ‘come together in prayer and a peaceful harmonious spirit’.
It is almost biblical.
‘We have seen that spirit all over the city since April last year.’
HE talks of jobs, of companies committing millions of dollars to the rebuilding scheme — which is has an impressive ring to it.
‘Jobs, jobs, President Clinton has offered us 50,000 jobs this summer.’
Would you believe a politician who can find so many jobs out of his back pocket?
Bradley won't say whether he was surprised by the riots — it might indicate he was out of touch.
He had been concerned that there could be violence, anger and outrage if the verdict was not guilty.
Every possible scenario had been played out and evaluations made of how the community would react.
‘I don't think  anybody predicted the level or the spread of the violence that we experienced.’
Los Angeles remains governable, the next mayor, whatever ethnic or interest group he or she is from will find acceptance as he had.
‘If I failed in some aspects it was Tom Bradley who failed.
It was not Tom Bradley the black mayor who failed.’
The spark which ignited a city: a video tape showing a group of police officers beating up black motorist Rodney King in March 1991.
The acquittal of four white officers in April last year led to rioting in LA
Aaron Hicklin, in Mostar (left), learns how a beautiful mountain region in Bosnia-Herzegovina is co-existing with war after generations of rural tranquillity Centuries of peace go up in smoke
UNTIL the Serbs came, history had barely touched Milkovici.
Centuries of European upheaval have skirted its white stone and red tiled houses.
The Habsburg and Ottoman empires, Hitler and Tito all came and went, but Milkovici remained.
Until last summer that is, when the relentless Serbian onslaught pounded its homes into the ground.
Theoretically, Milkovici still exists.
You can find it on the maps of Bosnia-Herzegovina, hugging the road that crawls around the mountains between Medjugorje and Mostar.
But its white walls and red roofs are now charred a uniform black, and its vineyards destroyed.
Barely a dozen homes remain, clinging to the brow of a hill.
In one house a family of six sit down to a meal, using three-legged chairs and chunks of masonry for seats.
A woman chatters excitedly and points to the rubble that carpets the floor.
There is no reason to look at the ceiling because it no longer exists.
In any other country in Europe the family might now be rehoused, but Bosnia has too many homeless people to cope with Milkovici.
After all, these people are lucky — they still have two rooms intact, and their lives.
Southern Herzegovina could be Italy, with its unassuming villas and family vineyards sloping across the rocky horizon; with cars swerving around mountain roads and cows straying off the verges in ignorant abandon.
It could be Italy, but it's not.
As the road slithers around Milkovici and into the regional capital of Mostar the illusion is crushed under the weight of ruins.
Against this background of craters and devastated buildings people sit in the sun at cafes open again for a town which has nothing else to do but drink coffee and wait for the future.
Croatian and Bosnian forces recaptured Mostar from the Serbs last June, but the shells still fall sporadically from the mountains, and no-one here believes the Serbs are finished yet.
At the Neretva River, where the road ends abruptly and without warning, Muslim soldiers wave their guns threateningly from the other side — a salutary reminder that the Muslim-Croat alliance which won back the city is deteriorating rapidly.
In a cafe I find an army officer, Irena Protic, lighting up a cigarette of the ubiquitous Croatia brand.
She does not believe in the Vance-Owen plan for the division of Bosnia into ethnically-defined regions and says the UN peace keeping forces are failing the country.
‘Since they arrived there have been thousands of deaths.
I don't expect politicians from Britain and France to understand, and I don't expect their politics to bring peace here.’
Tranquillity is a fragile thing.
Even if the Serbs cease their shelling, there is no guarantee that Croats and Muslims will not contest this region.
Ljubic Peric, my Croatian guide, believes that Bosnia's Muslim president, Alija Izetbegovic, is stalling over the Vance-Owen plan in anticipation of violence here between Muslims and Croats thus proving the plan impractical.
The Muslims, for their part, have good reason to be suspicious of the Croats.
This region has long been a spawning ground for Croat hotheads who dream of annexing this area to Croatia.
The word Hrvatska (Croatia) is liberally spray-painted on walls and road signs all around Mostar.
For the moment, Serbia's megalomania rages unabated in the north-east, a world away from Mostar's streets.
Returning from Mostar, hardly anything feels strange.
Not the bomb craters in the road, not the checkpoint guards who wave us on.
Like the people drinking coffee in Mostar's post-apocalyptic streets, one soon learns to adapt to new circumstances, however terrible they at first seem.
When I pass Milkovici the woman sitting in front of her roofless house waves a greeting.
I wave back.
Ridiculously, the sky seems too blue not to imagine that perhaps this might be Italy after all.
As the Cabinet prepares today to set out Britain's energy strategy, Frank Frazer looks at the implications for the nuclear industry, sparked by efforts to save coal jobs All aglow for heat of the moment By a curious paradox, the nuclear lobby has a vested interest in ensuring maximum coal burn in UK power plant
CONTROVERSY over pit closures has created some strange bedfellows.
Since the full extent of British Coal's rationalisation plans became apparent, the Government has faced the combined opposition of an uncanny alliance between Arthur Scargill, the miners' leader, and rebel Tory MPs with constituencies in mining areas.
The issues have formed an even stranger bond between the coal and nuclear industries which were previously in direct competition for shares of the electricity market.
The new chumminess has extended to Scotland, even though the only remaining deep-mining complex at Longannet is not on BC's hit-list for closure.
A few weeks ago, Robin Jeffrey, chief executive of Scottish Nuclear which operates the Torness and Hunterston power stations, and other white-collar staff from the East Kilbride headquarters, donned overalls and hard hats to descend 1,300ft at Longannet in a gesture of solidarity with men and management in uncertain times for both industries.
By a curious paradox, the nuclear lobby has a vested interest in ensuring maximum coal burn in UK power plant as an alternative to stepping up output from the new generation of gas-fired power plant.
This is because of the higher levels of carbon dioxide emissions from coal-fired stations compared with natural gas.
If the review of energy policy opts for a high coal burn, it will have to be balanced by maintaining ‘clean’ nuclear power plant which might also be under threat if the dash for gas is allowed to go unchecked.
The nuclear lobby's case is based on the UK's commitment to stabilising carbon dioxide emissions by the end of the century at a level no higher than in 1990.
Output from nuclear power plant, along with mild weather and the effects of recession on energy demand, contributed towards a 3 per cent fall in levels last year, putting the UK on course to meet the commitment.
But nuclear industry officials doubt the prospects of emission targets being achieved if the present review leads to early retirement of older Magnox stations, providing about 10 per cent of electricity in England and Wales, to accommodate a more concentrated mix of coal and gas stations.
Though nuclear stations give off minute quantities of carbon dioxide, their effects on global warming are negligible compared with coal and gas which also produce pollutants contributing to acid rain.
Scotland has already phased out its only Magnox plant which occupied part of the Hunterston site and won acclaim as the world's most efficient nuclear reactor when it was operating.
The newer advanced-cooled gas reactor there, along with the similar plant at Torness, will continue contributing 50 per cent of Scottish power needs for the foreseeable future.
But there are fears among the management of the Government-owned Scottish Nuclear that the business could become moribund if the energy rethink forced by the coal controversy results in a swing against nuclear power ahead of the more comprehensive review of the industry due next year.
Because of the ten-year lead time involved in planning and commissioning new stations, thought is already being given to the eventual need to replace the remaining Hunterston plant.
Signals from the Scottish Office indicate that there will be no funding from the public purse, leaving the company to go to the City for finance like any other large-scale enterprise.
The company recently appointed Charterhouse as merchant banking advisers which will help it identify the options.
There has been speculation that the move might be the first step towards privatisation of the business formed as a state-owned entity in 1989 when the Government decided to withdraw the nuclear power sector from plans to privatise the rest of the electricity industry.
Dr Jeffrey does not rule out the possibility that privatisation might be the end result of the exercise.
But both he and James Hann, the Scottish Nuclear chairman, are campaigning at present for priority to be given to defining the role of nuclear power within an overall UK energy strategy.
Hann believes that the coal controversy presents the ideal opportunity for the Government to determine the proportions of total UK electricity supply which could be derived from various sources within emission level targets.
The scenario favoured by Hann would result in coal burn settling at between 50 and 55 per cent, mainly from UK pits, compared with 63 per cent last year.
This would allow the contribution from gas to rise from 1 to about 15 per cent of the market.
IN those circumstances, the nuclear element could remain between 20 and 25 per cent— based on a programme of replacing the older Magnox stations as they reach the end of their useful life — while the balance would be taken up by renewable energy.
For its part, Scottish Nuclear has also embarked on a programme to reduce the cost of electricity it produces for the Scottish power companies from 3.2p per unit last year to a target level of 2.5p to ensure the operation remains financially strong and profitable for whatever the future might hold.
Para Handy raises a new head of steam Nan Spowart reports on the re-creation of a West coast legend.
THE new crew of that colourful Clyde puffer, the Vital Spark, gathered yesterday for the first time aboard the vessel made famous in the Neil Munro tales.
Gregor Fisher, who stars as the ship's wily West Highland master, Para Handy, is joined by Rikki Fulton as the glum engineer Dan Macphail, Sean Scanlon as Dougie, the Mate, and Andrew Fairlie as the ship's boy, Sunny Jim.
The tales of the vessel's outrageous life on the coastal trade became a highly-successful series starring Roddy McMillan and John Grieve.
However, the producer of the present £3million series, Colin Gilbert, was quick to point out that they were not filming a remake.
‘This won't be a half-hour sitcom but a 50-minute comedy drama which will be based more on the original tales of Neil Munro,’ he said.
‘It will be set very firmly in the 1930s, as this is 1993, and we can't suggest these things are still happening.’
Gregor Fisher is undaunted in having to follow Roddy McMillan and the star of the original black and white 1959 series, Duncan Macrae.
‘I haven't even seen the original series — I must be about the only guy in the western hemisphere who hasn't,’ he said as the cast walked up the plank in Irvine, Ayrshire, to inspect the Vital Spark for the first time.
Rikki Fulton also admitted he had not seen much of the first two series.
‘I was too busy in the theatre in those days,’ he said.
‘I am looking forward to playing Dan Macphail though — he's irascible, pessimistic, abrupt, rude, with an enormous chip on his shoulder.’
He said he was also looking forward to sailing up the West coast when filming begins next month.
‘I'm an ex-Navy man actually, although sea legs are not something you acquire and never lose,’ said Mr Fulton, who survived the sinking of HMS Ibis off North Africa during the Second World War.
The ships to be used in the series are being restored for the programme at Irvine's Maritime Museum.
The new Vital Spark is, in real life, Auld Reekie, built in 1946, which used to ply the Clyde.
Six 50-minute episodes of The Vital Spark will be broadcast on network BBC early next year.
Pictures by ALLAN MILLIGAN Chust sublime: Para Handy at the wheel of the Vital Spark with Macphail the engineer All aboard: from left, Sean Scanlon as Dougie the Mate, Rikki Fulton as Macphail, Gregor Fisher as Para Handy and Andrew Fairlie as Sunny Jim
Slim victory for school over boy's beating Allan McLean on the impact of the European court's decision on corporal punishment
A MOTHER lost her appeal to the European Court of Human Rights against corporal punishment in school yesterday, but the judgment is not expected to lead to a reintroduction of that form of disciplinary action in Britain.
The judges in Strasbourg split 5-4 on the issue.
However, the five who rejected the appeal over the beating of a seven-year-old boy in an English boarding school stressed that that did not mean they condoned corporal punishment in principle.
They pointed out in their judgment that they did not wish to be taken as approving in any way the retention of corporal punishment.
They emphasised that it was the circumstances of the individual case which led them to reject charges of degrading or inhuman treatment.
Wendy Costello-Roberts, who brought the case, said she was disappointed, but added: ‘The fact that the vote of the judges was only very slightly against us does show that we were taken very seriously.’
Martin Rosenbaum, the family adviser, added: ‘This very narrow decision by the court shows that the Government can hang on to its defence of corporal punishment only by a hair's breadth.’
Jeremy Costello-Roberts received ‘a slippering’ at Barnstaple, Devon, for notching up five demerit marks after talking in the school corridors and, on one occasion, being late for bed.
His mother, from Newquay, Cornwall, complained to the police and the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children but was told they could take no action.
She withdrew Jeremy from the school in January 1986 and began legal proceedings, claiming breaches of the European Convention on Human Rights which safeguards against inhuman or degrading treatment and protects the ‘right to respect for private and family life’.
Campaigners in Scotland against corporal punishment welcomed the clear indication that this form of treatment of children was frowned upon, even though this case was lost.
Corporal punishment was abolished in state schools in the United Kingdom in 1987 after two Scottish mothers, Grace Campbell and Jane Cossans, had their cases upheld by the court.
But the punishment was still permitted in some fee-paying schools, provided that was not against the parents' principles.
Howie Armstrong, Scottish co-ordinator of the EPOCH campaign, End Physical Punishment of Children, said the organisation would continue to press for an end to all forms of corporal punishment against children.
He called for a change in the civil law, rather than criminal statute, to make it an offence for a parent to beat a child, as in Sweden.
Gordon Ackerman, headmaster of a primary school which is believed to be the only one in Scotland still allowing corporal punishment, said this was available as the ultimate stage of disciplinary action, if the parents agreed.
Mr Ackerman stressed that in the five years the 20-pupil day school had been run by the Mannafields Christian Education Association at Carberry, near Musselburgh, East Lothian, no pupil had been punished in this way.
He did not think one ever would be, though the sanction was permitted.
The four dissenting judges thought the ritual nature of the three-stroke ‘slippering’ was degrading, with a three-day wait between sentence and punishment and without adequate consent of the mother.
The other five judges ruled that there was no evidence of any severe or long-lasting effects.
Editorial, Page 10
Reacting with a positive touch Peter Jones weighs up the prospects for the Lib Dems, who meet in Dunoon this weekend
WIDESPREAD discontent with politics means significant opportunities for Liberal Democrats to make progress, their leaders, Paddy Ashdown and Jim Wallace, will tell the Scottish party conference this weekend.
Mr Ashdown intends to make a keynote speech in Dunoon today, dwelling on the lessons he has learned from his private tours round Britain since the election.
His address will be a significant statement of what the Liberal Democrats stand for in the 1990s and how they can offer new directions for people disillusioned with the political system.
‘People are disillusioned, not just with the Government, but with politics itself — that was very much the message he found on his travels round the country,’ a colleague said.
‘People saw politics as adding to their problems rather than solving them.
Therefore our belief that you need to change politics and make it more responsive and acceptable to people is very relevant.’
Mr Ashdown's message will be reinforced by the Scottish leader, Jim Wallace, whose standing in the party is high after his efforts to achieve a united opposition front over constitutional reform.
Mr Wallace believes that the failure of the three opposition parties to achieve unity after the big pro-democracy demonstration in Edinburgh last December creates exactly the kind of disillusionment found by Mr Ashdown.
But he intends to ram home the message that the blame should be attached to Labour and the Scottish National Party.
He said yesterday: ‘The message is: don't blame us and, moreover, if you thought what we were doing was right, give us some backing.’
Mr Wallace expects to get support for his view that the Scottish Constitutional Convention should go into cold storage, not just because it has little relevance but also to expose Labour as uninterested in cross-party co-operation.
He has little sympathy with those in his party who want more radical action.
He is opposed to a call to be made tomorrow by Galloway and Upper Nithsdale Liberal Democrats for MPs to withdraw from Westminster ‘as part of a co-ordinated and Scotland-wide campaign to allow the people in Scotland the right to choose their form of government’.
The parliamentary group is opposed, with Mr Wallace noting: ‘When the Ulster Unionists withdrew from Parliament, nobody noticed any difference and they had to come creeping back.
‘I do have some sympathy with the message that MPs should do more campaigning as MPs around Scotland and in the constituencies — that is something we shall certainly take very seriously.’
A call for opposition party pacts to put up single candidates against Conservative MPs and seek the ‘total defeat’ of the Tories as the only way to ensure a Scottish parliament is also likely to get short shrift from the leadership.
As well as the absence of a common opposition policy for home rule making such pacts unachievable, Mr Wallace is anxious that the party does not lose sight of its objective of a federal United Kingdom.
He said: ‘We as Liberal Democrats should make this point: that people in England are also being governed by a party that a majority of them didn't vote for.
It is just that in Scotland it is far more obvious.’
The conference will open with a call for the use and sale of cannabis to be decriminalised.
It was last debated 12 years ago when, after a recounted tied vote, the conference chairman cast against the motion and uproar ensued.
Unequal share-out of education cash in S Africa
Stanley Macleod (Points of View, 6 March) honours the intelligence of all South Africans.
Evelyn Pelosi (2 and 16 March) ignores the consequence of Verwoerd's Bantu education act of 1954: 70 per cent of the black community is illiterate.
In 1990, an average of R3,082 was spent per white pupil, contrasting with R764 per African pupil.
All white and coloured children are educated to the age of 16, Indian pupils to 15, but there is no compulsory education for African children.
In June 1991, a draft welfare charter was drawn up at the University of Witwatersrand recommending that ‘free and compulsory education until the age of 16 be introduced’.
The mismatch of resources per child at primary, secondary and tertiary level is a major task of an incoming government of national unity.
Mrs Pelosi might like to know that one former all-white library is insisting on a £5 downpayment per book, to discourage black students from using it.
And now for the Zulu nation (O A Cleary, 1 March, and D A Smith, 5 March): journalists in 1991 exposed the clandestine funding of the Inkatha Freedom Party by the National Party, dubbed ‘Inkathagate’.
It is estimated that 40 per cent of Zulus support chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi.
Happily, the IFP joined 25 other parties at the recent round table discussions in Johannesburg.
In any forthcoming election for a constituent assembly, all parties should have access to all parts of South Africa, including the ten ‘homelands’, without intimidation.
This is particularly necessary on white farms where bonded labour has a notorious history.
The international community, and journalists in particular, could be of great assistance in ensuring that elections are free and fair.
At present the South African Broadcasting Company is appointed by the state president and controls all TV and 23 out of 25 radio stations.
The SABC board has a majority of  Afrikaners among its members, most of them men, and only one black member.
A new SABC board will be appointed on 31 March and it is vital that it is independent of both government and party political interests.
Almost all newspapers are white, owned by one of four companies, which also control print-shops, distribution, advertising and paper supply.
Ill-timed
On behalf of the Kirkcaldy Women Writers' Group, I should like to express my amazement that a university town like Stirling is soon to axe the now well-established post of writer in residence.
We have recently had the good fortune to spend an afternoon with the present writer in residence, Joy Hendry, as our visiting speaker, and have savoured but a taste of the feast of enviable experience that she in particular, and others of similar calibre, must have afforded to those lucky enough to live in the Stirling area.
In a time when there is an obvious and ever-increasing need to find leisure opportunities, an ever-growing thirst for expression and knowledge, and in the light of testimonies from those who have passed through the door, the decision to close that door seems as ill-timed as it is incomprehensible.
Patronising
May I come to the aid of your correspondents who have been so severely maligned for daring to question the divine right of the English to claim the whole of these islands as their own?
I refer in particular to the arrogant, insulting and patronising letter written by Helen Bews (18 March), whose controversial doctrine sounds like a dangerous cross between manifest destiny and Lebensraum.
Nobody had mentioned the myth of racial purity in your columns until Helen Bews intervened.
Such an absurd notion is entirely irrelevant to the debate, which is about colonialism and the right of small nations to exist, not ethnic purity or any other kind of purity.
I would venture to suggest that it is Helen Bews and her like who should accept that their world view went out with the Empire!
Plan delays
I am writing to protest at the discrepancies between the public statements and the actions of the Scottish Secretary in his dealings with local government.
These discrepancies have been made particularly clear in the comparison of his statements concerned with local government reform and his treatment of the draft structure plan for the Borders region.
The drafting of the structure plan was initiated three and a half years ago and a feature of the drafting was the wide and thorough consultation process undertaken by Borders Regional Council.
This process not only involved the careful and prolonged consideration of elected councillors, but also detailed submissions from community councils and feedback from public meetings.
This was followed by public presentations and exhibitions, based on the early draft by the council, throughout the region, and criticism received was considered prior to submitting the draft structure plan to the Secretary of State.
He sat on the document for fully 12 months with no communication with our elected local councils.
He has recently issued amendments that overturn key policies concerned with assessment of housing need and demand, development in Tweeddale, and housing for local needs.
In his response, he also indicated that no public examination was necessary.
In contrast to the 12 months taken to draw up the amendments, he allowed a mere six weeks for the councils and people of the Borders to comprehend, communicate and respond to them.
Borders Regional Council has sought to listen and to respond to its electorate and has succeeded in drawing up a document that is widely supported in the area.
Fundamental policies have been overturned by a remote headquarters (ie the Scottish Office) in a fashion that is neither accountable nor responsive.
In the circumstances, in accordance with the basic tenets of the Citizen's Charter, I demand a public inquiry, to be held in the Borders, on the issues raised by the draft structure plan.
Quality of life
I find it surprising that Nigel Bruce, in his letter today in support of euthanasia, should use as an argument the character and actions of a God in whom, as a humanist, he does not believe.
Further to compound my mystification, he does not seem to realise that according to Christian dogma, God is not only loving but also just and that He may be calling Christians to a future life which is not necessarily ‘better’ than the present.
Again, Christian doctrine does not differentiate between the physical, biological life of animals and man.
They are all God's creatures.
Man, however, differs categorically from all other animals in that he is a partaker of a quality of life which is intimately related to, but independent of his physical body.
However, to return to the physical, biological life of animals and man which ends in physical death pertinent to the practice of euthanasia.
We do not know what that ‘life’ is.
Let me quote Professor Adolf Butenandt, Nobel prize-winning biologist: ‘Even though modern biology provides us with a new outlook and a deeper insight into the nature of many living phenomena, it does not answer the question of what life itself is.’
So, we are ignorant of the true nature of life.
We certainly cannot create it and thus, in view of our ignorance on one hand and our inability on the other, what right have we to terminate this gift of a  beneficent Creator?
Fordyce Maxwell
Kiss of death to life-saving?
A SURVEY by the St John Ambulance Brigade came up with the remarkably interesting finding that the man most women would prefer to give them the kiss of life, assuming it was necessary or even if it wasn't, would be TV doctor Hilary Jones.
Never heard of him, one of those embarrassing admissions the best of diarists have to make at times.
But he's on GMTV.
Strictly speaking, as the first aid instructor on my course pointed out, it's not the kiss of life.
It's the breath of life, forcing air into unwilling lungs when neither taking part is in any state to appreciate who is doing what to whom.
So put any idea of Sophia Loren — he was an older instructor — needing the kiss of life out of your mind, he advised.
Think more along the lines of it being an unshaven, unwashed, alcoholic who's choked on a fragment of fish supper.
Then decide if you still want to learn how to do it.
You are allowed to try to pump breath into the patient through a handkerchief, if that helps.
Put that way, who would be high on the list of people women wouldn't like to get the kiss of life from?
Kilroy Silk?
Could any TV presenter or politician stop talking long enough?
For the record, the St John survey found that the preference among men for a kiss of life would be from Catherine Zeta Jones, of The Darling Buds of May.
What!
No Zoe Wanamaker?
NAME of the game: Radio 5 commentator: ‘Now Wright's limped off.
And on comes Limpars.’
Ever wondered if you're in the right job: Alloa Athletic's goalie is called Butter.
Only the unfeeling, like fans, could link it to fingers.
Keeping good company
RON Brown, the former MP with a career behind him which makes the words ‘chequered’ and ‘roller coaster’seem understated, may be gone from Westminster.
But he's not forgotten.
A message from the Libyan Peace Committee, with which Mr Brown had connections in his political heyday, makes that clear.
He's mentioned in dispatches in a message to seven MPs, including George Galloway, Bernie Grant and Tony Benn, addressed by the committee as follows: ‘Dear Friends: Thank you for your interest in the Geneva conference arranged for 3 and 4 April, but we regret that this has been postponed to allow discussions to take place elsewhere.
Mr Brown in Scotland has also been informed.
Again we apologise for the inconvenience.
Kind regards — Libyan Peace Committee.’
It's nice to know he's keeping his hand in, and in such good company.
ROMANCE has died, or is at least sickening, in Galashiels.
See the ‘for sale’ ad in the local paper: ‘286 Mills and Boon romances, £30.’
Dear at the price I would have thought.
The last laugh
YOU never know who's listening when you're making your big pitch.
Prof Chris Turner, professor in the Department of Applied Social Sciences, Stirling University, made his at this week's  Children's Panels conference at Peebles:
‘For 20 years the Childrens’ Hearing system has progressed very positively and we are doing much better than our brethren south of the Border in looking after the interests of children in Scotland.’
A slight pause for impact was extended as, through the slightly open doors, loud, long — and naturally absolutely unconnected — laughter was heard from a four-year-old playing in the corridor.
Coffins just in case THE ‘shop till you drop’ pre-Christmas syndrome has been adapted by a mortician in California.
We say undertaker, they say mortician.
This one, in Alameda, confuses the story further by having the name Al Carpenter.
Anyway, this undertaker who's a Carpenter, or put another way this Carpenter who's an undertaker wants people to shop before they drop.
For slightly less than $10 he offers to mail customers the plans for a do-it-yourself coffin which, until required, doubles as a bookcase.
Use better quality wood and you can turn it into a coffee table.
Carpenter/mortician is also a former Baptist minister who claims: ‘Building your own casket is therapeutic.’
Not to mention estimating how long you'll be around to enjoy setting your coffee mug down on it.
A GALLUP poll on meat-eating habits claims to show that vegetarianism is rampant and on the increase.
No wonder the country is in trouble, but a) we don't believe it and, b) we won't quit.
A Meat and Livestock Commission spokesman summed up this bulldog spirit: ‘If Gallup got it right, we would now have a Labour government.’
This remark clearly proves that a red-meat diet makes you argumentative, quite unlike a vegetarian diet which makes you right about absolutely everything.
A BOOTS product, cough relief for children from one to 12.
Good stuff, but be careful what you let them do after a spoonful or two.
The warning on the bottle is clear enough: ‘May cause drowsiness.
If affected do not drive or operate machinery.
Avoid alcoholic drink.’
There goes the day job and the night out.
An outspoken innings
THE rumbustious Aussie — is there any other kind?— Cec Pepper died this week.
A top class bowler, he was never picked for his country because, allegedly he wrote quickly, of comments made to Don Bradman during a state match in 1946 when Cec thought, several times, he had  dismissed The Don.
Bradman and the umpire disagreed and Cec came to play in the Central Lancashire League where he became a legend for his fiery bowling, lusty hitting and astonishing turns of phrase.
He seldom apologised in a tough league, but felt moved to once after a particularly loud, prolonged and slanderous outburst against a small, bespectacled umpire who had turned down an appeal: ‘Sorry, umpire.
I get carried away.’
‘That's all right, lad,’ said the umpire.
‘I don't mind a man as speaks his mind.’
Next ball, Cec bawled out another appeal at full bore.
The umpire turned to look at him mildly and murmured: ‘Not out, you fat Australian bastard.’
Mauling for selectors
PAUSE to think that if Ireland hadn't beaten England 17-3 in last week's rugby international they might not have had any players at all in the Lions squad of 30 to tour New Zealand.
As it is, they have two and have come up with various suggestions as to what selectors do their thinking with.
They've also come up with an amendment to the English battle hymn of recent years: ‘Swing low, sweet chariot, coming for to carry me home — wards to think again.’
IT'S the Boat Race tomorrow.
Why is it always the same two teams in the final?
Come to that, why is it at all?
First skip of spring Builders' skips are a hazard to all, and ugly with it, says Anne-Marie Kane
IN my local high street recently a huge builder's skip sat on the road outside a shop for two weeks.
Some days workmen threw debris into it — the shop was being renovated; other days it lay redundant in all its rusty ugliness.
It displayed no owner identification marks and was without benefit of either warning traffic cones or night lights.
This, scarcely 10yd from a busy crossroads and on a bustling thoroughfare.
The skip was a hazard to pedestrians and motorists.
These giant dustbins, some the size of a small garage, appear to have multiplied beyond count in recent years.
They are, variously, blots on the landscape, despoilers of the smartest streets, traffic hazards, attractors of vermin, shady characters in the night, and, most peculiarly, status symbols.
In the cities, caught up in the renovation, remodelling and refitting obsession, they are in season all the year round.
In suburbia, however, the scourge of the skips tends to descend on the public highway in spring and summer.
It's baffling why some householders allow skips to languish on the road outside their homes, often for weeks and months on end.
If they left an old rusty car on the road or a new car without road tax, they would soon have a visit from the police and the offending vehicle would have to be removed.
Similarly, anyone who wants to change the appearance of the outside of their house, by the addition or removal of some feature, is obliged to notify their planning department and their immediate neighbours of their intentions.
Yet, dump a skip on the road outside your house, leave it there as long as it pleases you, subjecting your neighbours to its unlovely sight, and no-one seems too concerned.
So just what are the rules, regulations and guidelines governing the depositing of skips on the public highway?
The Regional Council Roads Department staff are the people you must contact if you want to leave a skip on the road for any length of time.
Contractors and skip firms should not deliver skips to customers unless the customer (whose responsibility it is) has obtained a permit from the roads department.
The permit, which is free, also has an information sheet which states 11 separate conditions concerning the use of skips.
Among these conditions are that the skip must be fitted with vertical red and yellow fluorescent/ reflective markings and should be clearly marked with the owner's (not the hirer's) name and telephone number or address.
Also it should be lit at night and have traffic cones placed in an oblique line on the approach to it.
The permit holder must state how long the skip is expected to be on the road.
Offenders who exceed the terms of their permit can be fined £100.