

DNA structure influences sequence specific cleavage by bleomycin
ABSTRACT
We have examined the cleavage of several synthetic DNA sequences by iron(II)-bleomycin.
We find that, although bleomycin cuts mixed sequence DNAs with a preference for GC = GT>GA>>GG, it efficiently cleaves regions of (AT)n cutting exclusively at ApT, not TpA.
Isolated ApT steps show very little cleavage while blocks of three or more contiguous ATs are cut as efficiently as GpT.
This cleavage is specific for (AT)n , since sequences of the type (TAA)n .
(TTA)n and (ATT)n .
(AAT)n are hardly cut at all.
No cleavage is observed at ApC or CpA within sequences of the type (AC)n .
(GT)n ; regions of A n .
T n are also not cut.
Although the cobalt-bleomycin complex (which binds to but does not cleave DNA) yields good DNase I footprints at GT and GC sites, no footprints are observed within (AT)n , suggesting that although the cleavage reaction is efficient, the binding affinity is relatively weak.
We propose a model in which bleomycin cleavage is determined by local DNA structure, while strong binding requires the presence of a guanine residue.
INTRODUCTION
The antitumour antibiotic bleomycin acts by degrading DNA in a reaction requiring the presence of Fe 2+ and molecular oxygen [1-3].
The activated iron-bleomycin complex generates free radicals which attack C4' of deoxyribose [4]leading to DNA cleavage.
This occurs via several chemical pathways; either by direct strand cleavage or by liberation of free bases generating alkali labile sites [5-7].
Several studies with natural DNA fragments have shown that the most frequent cleavage sites are at G-pyrimidine sequences; cleavage decreases in the order GpC = GpT>GpA>>GpG [8-10].
Other sites are cleaved with much lower efficiency.
Footprinting studies with the cobalt-bleomycin complex, which binds to DNA but does not lead to strand cleavage, have shown that the ligand binds best to those sites which are efficiently cleaved [10].
This suggests that the cleavage pattern is largely determined by the binding selectivity.
Several models have been proposed to describe the interaction of bleomycin with DNA including intercalation [11], partial intercalation [12]and minor groove binding [13].
Since all the preferred cleavage sites contain a guanine base it is tempting to suggest that the specificity arises from the formation of hydrogen bonds to this base, possibly involving the 2-amino group [13].
However it is evident that bleomycin can interact with other sequences which do not contain guanines.
Indeed some NMR studies have examined its interaction with poly(dA-dT) [14,15].
The metal binding domain is also implicated in determining the sequence specificity since the DNA cleavage pattern is not affected by its distance from the bithiazole portion [16,17].
Variations in the metal binding domain also alter the cleavage specificity [18,19].
Other studies hint that DNA structure itself influences the cleavage efficiency.
Firstly bleomycin does not cleave double stranded RNA [20]; in DNA/RNA hybrids only the DNA strand is cleaved [21].
A single site is cleaved in one tRNA molecule [22].
Secondly the cleavage efficiency at each site is affected by the surrounding sequences so that a T residue before the GY site increases cleavage whereas an A reduces cleavage [8,23].
Thirdly it has been shown that some sequence selective ligands induce bleomycin cleavage at novel sites [24,25].
We have previously shown that, in certain sequence contexts, Fe 2+ -bleomycin can induce cleavage at ApT [26].
In this paper we examine bleomycin cleavage of a series of cloned synthetic DNA fragments, containing regions of (AT)n as well as other repetitive sequences, in order to understand the origin of its cleavage specificity.
The cleavage data are compared with DNAse I footprints of the cobalt-bleomycin complex to assess the importance of binding strength in the cleavage pathway.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Drugs and enzymes
Bleomycin was purchased from Sigma and stored at -20°C as a 1mM solution in 10mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 containing 10mM NaCl.
This was diluted to working concentrations immediately before use.
DNase I was purchased from Sigma, dissolved in 20mM NaCl containing 1mM MgCl 2 at a concentration of 7200 units/ml and stored at -20°C.
DNA fragments
The preparation of the plasmids containing the synthetic fragments has been described elsewhere [27-29].
Each sequence was cloned into the Sma I site of pUC19, except for the (TA)10 and (GC)9 G inserts which were cloned into the Sma I site of pUC13.
Plasmids pRW1008 and pRW1009, containing the sequences (CG)5 TATA(CG) 5 and (CG)5 TATATA(CG) 4 [30]were obtained from Dr M.J. McLean, Cambridge Research Biochemicals.
Labelled DNA fragments were prepared by digestion with Hin dIII, labelled with α-[ 32 P]dATP using reverse transcriptase and cut again with either Eco R1 or Sac I. Since the insert A 9 GCT 9 contains an internal Hin dIII site it was labelled at the Eco R1 end followed by cutting with Pst I. The labelled fragments of interest were separated from the remainder of the plasmid on 7% polyacrylamide gels.
Bleomycin cleavage
Bleomycin cleavage was obtained by mixing 2µl labelled DNA (approximately 1µM base pairs) dissolved in 10mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 containing 0.1mM EDTA with 3µl of a freshly prepared solution of 2nM bleomycin dissolved in 10µM ferrous ammonium sulphate containing 100µM dithiothreitol.
The reaction was stopped after 3 minutes by addition of 4µl 80% formamide containing 10mM EDTA.
DNase I footprinting
DNase I footprinting reactions were performed as previously described [10, 27-29].
All bleomycin footprinting reactions contained 200µM CoCl 2 to prevent cleavage by the antibiotic.
Gel electrophoresis
The products of bleomycin cleavage and DNase I digestion were separated on 40cm long 9% polyacrylamide gels containing 8M urea.
These were run at 1500V for about 2 hours.
Gels were then fixed in 10% acetic acid, transferred to Whatman 3MM paper, dried under vacuum at 80°C and exposed to autoradiography at -70°C with an intensifying screen.
Autoradiographs of bleomycin cleavage were scanned with either a Joyce Loebl Chromoscan III or a Hoefer GS300 microdensitometer.
RESULTS
Cleavage of AT-rich sequences
Figure 1 presents patterns of Fe 2+ -bleomycin cleavage of several synthetic DNA inserts containing various AT-rich sequences.
Quantitative data derived from densitometer traces of these and other cleavage patterns are presented as histograms in Figure 2.
Looking first at the traces for the insert (TA)10 (Figures 1a and 2a) it can be seen that there are nine cleavage products which have a similar intensity to that at the sequence CGC on the 5'-side (above) of the insert and which are about twice as strong as that at the AGC site.
It therefore appears that long stretches of (AT)n can present good bleomycin cleavage sites.
Similar studies with shorter blocks of (AT)n (n = 5 and 6.5) in the same location also showed efficient cleavage at each of the ApT steps.
In order to determine whether this cleavage of (AT)n is peculiar to isolated regions of alternating AT we have studied the cleavage of several other fragments containing canonical bleomycin cleavage sites (GY and GA) flanked by blocks of (AT)n .
Figures 1b-1d present bleomycin cleavage data for these inserts, which are shown as histograms in Figures 2b-2d.
In each case the ApT sites are cut efficiently, though their relative cleavage efficiency varies according to the surrounding sequences.
With [(TA)5 GC(TA) 5 ]2 (Figures 1c and 2c) each of the ApT sites is cut with equal efficiency, about half that at the two GC sites.
With (AT)5 GC(AT) 5 (Figure 2e) all the ApT sites are cut at about 20% of the central GC, except for the ApT on the 5'-side of the centre which is cleaved at 60% of the GC.
The lower relative cleavage of most ApT steps in this sequence reflects the difference in cleavage efficiency at TGC and AGC since, as previously noted, a preceding pyrimidine increases the rate of digestion.
For the sequence T(AT) 8 CG(AT) 15 (Figure 1b and 2b) the ApT steps are cut much better than the single central GA site.
The ApT sites on either side of the central CG are cut less well than the other ApT sites, while cleavage is increased at the second ApT on the 3'-side.
In the centre of this insert are two adjacent cleavage sites, i.e. GpA and ApT in the sequence GAT; the GpA site is cut better than the overlapping ApT.
Figures 1d and 2d show iron-bleomycin cleavage of the insert (AT)10 CCGC(AT) 10 .
The best cleavage is found at the central GpC; all the ApT sites are cut at about 25% of this rate, except for the first ApT on the 5'-side which shows no detectable cleavage.
A similar effect is seen with the sequence (AT)15 GG(AT) 6 (Figure 2f) in which the first ApT site on the 5'-side of the central GG is cut less well than most of the other ApT sites.
The three potential cleavage sites at the centre of this insert in the sequence GGAT are all cut very poorly.
These studies reveal that ApT sites can be efficiently cleaved by iron-bleomycin and that the precise cleavage efficiency depends on their sequence location.
We have therefore examined the cleavage of ApT sites within other AT-rich sequences.
Figure 1e shows iron-bleomycin cleavage of the insert [(TAA)4 CG(TTA) 4 ]2 in which the only cleavage products correspond to the central GT steps.
Although this sequence contains several ApT steps, located in the sequences AATA, TATT and TATA, none of these are cut by the antibiotic.
The insert (ATT)4 CG(AAT) 4 is also uncut by the antibiotic, even at the central GA step (not shown).
Figure 3a presents iron-bleomycin cleavage of the dimeric insert T 9 GCA 9 .
It can be seen that the A n .
T n regions are not affected by the antibiotic and that the major cleavage products correspond to the two GC steps.
There is weak cleavage of the TpT sites on the 5'-side of the two GC residues.
The single ApT site at the interface of the two halves of the dimer is not cut by the antibiotic.
Experiments with the insert A 9 GCT 9 (not shown) reveal cleavage only at the central GC step.
Cleavage at (GC)n and (GT)n .
(AC)n and (GC)n 
Since the results presented above reveal efficient iron-bleomycin cleavage within (AT)n sequences we have also investigated the digestion of other repetitive DNA sequences.
Figure 3b presents iron-bleomycin digestion of a fragment containing a dimeric insert of (CA)5 CG(TG) 5 ; the data from this, together with (AC)5 GC(GT) 5 are presented as histograms in Figures 4a and 4b.
It can be seen that the only cleavage products correspond to GpT and GpC steps, no cutting is evident at any of the ApC sites.
It is interesting to note that the GpC step is cut less well than any of the GpT steps and that cleavage is greatest towards the centre of each (GT)n tract.
Since ApT, GpT and GpC are cut with similar efficiency in both (AT)n and (GC)n sequences we have examined the cleavage of two fragments containing both types of sites.
Figure 3c presents iron-bleomycin cleavage of the sequence (CG)5 TATA(CG) 5 .
This is presented as a histogram in Figure 4c, together with data for the insert (CG)5 TATATA(CG) 4 in Figure 4e.
Within these sequences all the GpC, GpT and ApT sites are cut efficiently with the strongest cleavage evident at the GpT steps.
The ApT sites are cut with similar efficiency to many of the GC sites, though the second ApT in (CG)5 TATATA(CG) 4 is cut less well than the first.
Weak cleavage is also evident at the ApC steps.
Figure 3d presents iron-bleomycin cleavage of the insert (GC)9 G; these data are presented as a histogram in Figure 4d.
It can be seen that, as expected, each of the GC sites is cut well, though the first GC site is cleaved with slightly lower efficiency.
A similar effect is seen with a shorter (GC)n insert [(GC)4 G), data not shown]for which the first GC step is cut with lower efficiency.
DNase I footprinting
The results presented above show that bleomycin can efficiently cleave DNA at sites other than GY, especially at ApT.
However, since bleomycin cleavage is catalytic, this need not necessarily correspond to strong binding.
Previous studies with tyr T DNA and cobalt-bleomycin, which binds to DNA but does not cause strand cleavage, showed that the antibiotic produces footprints which are centred around its cleavage sites [10].
However other studies with a bent kinetoplast DNA fragment revealed some sites which were efficiently cleaved, yet which failed to produce a DNase I footprint [31].
Other sites produced DNase I footprints and enhanced reaction with diethylpyrocarbonate but were refractory to cleavage.
We therefore examined whether these novel bleomycin cleavage sites were also good binding sites by DNase I footprinting.
The results for several DNA fragments are presented in Figures 5 and 6.
Figure 5a presents DNase I digestion of the insert T(AT) 8 CG(AT) 15 in the presence and absence of 100µM cobalt-bleomycin.
A clear footprint is evident around the centre of this insert, which must correspond to ligand binding to the GA (TC) sites.
Surprisingly, even though the (AT)n tracts are good substrates for bleomycin cleavage, DNase I digestion is unaffected by the antibiotic.
The alternating pattern of DNase I products, in which ApT is cut better than TpA, is retained in the presence of the antibiotic.
It therefore appears that the poorer cleavage site (GpA) represents a much better binding site than ApT.
Experiments with other fragments containing (AT)n tracts also showed no changes in DNase I digestion throughout the AT-rich regions, with protections evident only at GC, GT and GA sites.
A further example is shown in Figure 5b for (AT)5 GC(AT) 5 in which the only reductions in DNase I cleavage are located around the central GC.
Figure 5c shows DNase I digestion of a fragment containing the dimeric insert of (TAA)4 CG(TTA) 4 in the presence and absence of bleomycin.
Clear footprints, extending over 6 base pairs, can be seen around each of the GpT (ApC) steps which represent good bleomycin cleavage sites.
The cleavage pattern of the remainder of the insert is unaffected by the antibiotic.
In contrast no clear footprints are evident with the sequence (ATT)4 CG(AAT) 4 , though there is some alteration in the cleavage pattern around the central GA.
It therefore appears that the weak bleomycin cleaage of this central GA step is at least in part determined by the low affinity of the antibiotic.
Figure 6 presents DNase I digestion of fragments containing the inserts [T 9 GCA 9 ]2 ,(GC)9 G and [(CA)5 CG(TG) 5 ]2 in the presence of cobalt-bleomycin.
Each of these show clear footprints located around GC and GT.
With (GC)9 G (Figure 6a) a single large footprint is evident which extends throughout the GC-rich region.
This is not surprising, since other studies with natural DNAs have shown footprints around GC and GT sites, but confirms that the inability to produce a DNase I footprint in (AT)n is not merely due to the close proximity of the overlapping bleomycin cleavage sites.
In the absence of bleomycin DNase I cleavage of T 9 GCA 9 (Figure 6b) is restricted to four or five base pairs around each of the TGCA sites as previously reported [28]; the A n .
T n tracts are refractory to enzyme cleavage.
In the presence of bleomycin clear footprints are observed in the vicinity of the GpC steps which are accompanied by enhanced rates of DNase I cleavage in the surrounding A n .
T n tracts.
These suggest that bleomycin distorts the DNA structure around its binding site to a form which is more readily cleaved by DNase I. This effect has been noted with natural DNA sequences [10]and may be related to the ability of the antibiotic to unwind and extend the DNA helix.
Figure 6c shows the effect of bleomycin on DNase I digestion of a fragment containing the dimer insert of (CA)5 CG(TG) 5 .
Bleomycin produces a single large footprint which covers the entire insert.
The (AC) and (GT) tracts are protected to the same extent, even though bleomycin shows no cleavage of the AC regions.
This is simply explained since both bleomycin and DNase I cleave double stranded DNA; bleomycin cleavage of GT on one strand must therefore lead to protection of AC on the opposite strand.
DISCUSSION
Cleavage at (AT)n 
The results presented in this paper clearly demonstrate that bleomycin cleavage is not restricted to GY sequences; within blocks of (AT)n ApT, but not TpA, is efficiently cleaved.
This effect is peculiar to regions of alternating AT since previous studies have shown that cleavage of isolated ApT sites in natural DNAs is poor [8-10]and we have shown that ApT sites are not cut within blocks of (AAT)n .
(ATT)n or at the junction between A n and T n .
It therefore appears that this unusual cleavage depends on the precise structure of the cleavage site.
Regions of (AT)n are known to adopt an unusual alternating B -DNA configuration in which the helical twist at TpA is larger than at ApT [32].
Previous models for bleomycin cleavage have postulated that selectivity is achieved by the formation of hydrogen bonds between the antibiotic and the 2-amino group of guanine [13].
The results presented in this paper demonstrate that this can not be the sole criterion for selective cleavage, since we observed good cleavage at some sites (ApT) which lack the crucial guanine residue.
We therefore suggest that bleomycin cleavage is, at least in part, determined by some structural feature of the dinucleotide step so that cutting is facilitated by regions of alternating purines and pyrimidines.
The model involving hydrogen bonding to guanine also does not account for some features of cleavage at GpN sites.
Firstly GpT and GpC are cut better than GpA, though both contain the required guanine.
Secondly the preceding base is known to modify cleavage efficiency; pyrimidines increase cleavage efficiency while purines decrease cleavage [8,23].
If we assume that bleomycin cuts best in regions of alternating purine and pyrimidine by virtue of their structure, then this explains why GpT and GpC are cut better than GpA and GpG, and also explains why a 5'-pyrimidine increases the rate of cleavage at these sites.
However DNA structure can not be the sole determinant of cleavage efficiency since (AC)n tracts are very poor cleavage sites.
It therefore seems that both DNA structure and hydrogen bonding to guanine contribute towards sequence recognition.
Although ApC may be a potential cleavage site on account of its structure, the asymmetric drug molecule will always bind so as to cleave the opposing (GT) strand by virtue of its ability to form a hydrogen bond with guanine.
Cleavage of (AT)n is then achieved solely by structural recognition.
Since this is not stabilized by the formation of additional hydrogen bonds we would expect the binding to be weaker (see below).
This model does make a few untested predictions.
Firstly cleavage of (IT)n .
(AC)n should be equally strong at IpC and ApC; cleavage at ApC will not be occluded by the presence of a hydrogen bonded molecule in the opposite orientation.
Secondly (DAP-T)n .
(AT)n (DAP = diaminopurine) should be preferentially cleaved on the DAP containing strand, since this contains an additional hydrogen bonding site.
Binding to DNA
Previous studies have shown that, with natural DNA fragments, bleomycin produces DNase I footprints in regions surrounding its cleavage sites [10].
However these data were difficult to interpret rigorously because of the large number of overlapping binding sites.
The results presented in this paper with synthetic DNA fragments reveal clear footprints around GpC and GpT sites as well as at GpA in T(AT) 8 CG(AT) 15 .
A weaker protection is produced at GpA in (ATT)4 CG(AAT) 4 suggesting that the weaker cleavage observed in this fragment is due to a lower affinity of the antibiotic for this site, presumably as a result of the structure imposed by the surrounding DNA sequence.
However, although (AT)n sequences are efficiently cleaved by the antibiotic, DNase I footprinting failed to detect any binding of cobalt-bleomycin.
Although it might be argued that this difference is due to the nature of the complexed metal ion (iron in the cleavage reaction, cobalt in the footprint) an alternative explanation is that bleomycin does not bind tightly to (AT)n sequences, and that these are efficiently cleaved during a transient interaction.
Since the catalytic cleavage of DNA by bleomycin occurs by a free radical mechanism it may not require a long residence time on its binding site.
The transient nature of the binding may be because this sequence is recognized on account of its structure without additional hydrogen bonding contacts.
We presume that, when bound to (AT)n sequences, the antibiotic is in rapid exchange with free solution and that the residence time of the antibiotic on DNA is insufficient to produce a clear footprint.
Although the binding to GC-rich sites may be much stronger, this need not necessarily lead to efficient catalytic cleavage.
Since bleomycin degrades DNA in a catalytic fashion, and all our cleavage experiments are performed at very low antibiotic concentrations (nanomolar), it must dissociate from its first binding site before a second cleavage event can occur.
The sequences cut most efficiently will therefore be those from which the ligand can easily dissociate (and will therefore not yield good footprints).
Sites to which bleomycin binds too tightly will trap the antibiotic and will not lead to efficient catalysis [31].
In this regard bleomycin behaves as a typical enzyme.
DNase I footprinting and various physical studies suggest that bleomycin covers three or four base pairs on DNA [10,11,13].
This probably corresponds to location of the metal binding domain over the scissile bond, with the bithiazole and terminal amine aligned in either the 3'- or 5'- direction.
Although DNase I footprints can only provide a crude estimate of ligand site size, the footprints with sequences such as(TAA)4 CG(TTA) 4 give some clues as to the orientation of the drug molecule.
This sequence contains two bleomycin binding sites (GT/AC), which are probably too close to permit simultaneous binding of two ligand molecules.
The observed footprint (6 base pairs) therefore represents the time averaged sum of the occupancy of the two sites.
If we assume that the DNA bound bleomycin covers three base pairs two of which correspond to the cleavage site then the molecules must protrude by one base pairs in either direction.
If it extends in the 3' direction then the two molecules will together occupy 6 base pairs (i.e. each one bound to GTT) whereas if it extends in the 5'-direction only 4 base pairs will be covered by the two drug molecules (i.e. drug is bound to CGT).
Since the observed footprint is only 6 base pairs, and DNase I is known to overestimate the actual ligand binding site size we tentatively suggest that the bleomycin molecule is bound with the bithiazole oriented in the 5'-direction from the cleavage site.
Figure 1 .
Bleomycin cleavage of DNA fragments containing various inserts a )(TA)10 ;b )(AT)8 CG(AT) 15 ;c )(TA)5 GC(TA) 10 GC(TA) 5 ;d )(AT)10 CCGC(AT) 10 ; e)(TAA)4 CG(TTA) 42 .
The square brackets reveal the position and length of the insert.
The central guanine residues are indicated by the arrows.
Tracks labelled ‘G’ are Maxam-Gilbert dimethylsulphate-piperidine markers specific for guanine.
Each pair of lanes corresponds to digestion by bleomycin for 1 and 5 minutes.
Figure 2 .
Histograms showing bleomycin cleavage of several DNA fragments, derived from densitometer traces of the autoradiograms. a )(TA)10 ;b ) T(AT) 8 CG(AT) 15 ;c )(TA)5 GC(TA) 10 GC(TA) 5 ;d )(AT)10 CCGC(AT) 10 ;e )(AT)5 GC(AT) 5 ;f )(AT)15 GG(AT) 6 .
In each case the ordinate shows the relative cleavage at each bond, presented on an arbitrary scale.
Figure 3 .
Bleomycin cleavage of DNA fragments containing various inserts a )[T 9 GCA 9 ]2 ;b )[(CA)5 CG(TG) 5 ]2 ;c )(CG)5 TATA(CG) 5 ;d )(GC)9 G. The square brackets reveal the position and length of the insert.
Tracks labelled ‘G’ are Maxam-Gilbert dimethylsulphate-piperidine markers specific for guanine.
Each pair of lanes in a-c corresponds to digestion by bleomycin for 1 and 5 minutes.
Figure 4 .
Histograms showing bleomycin cleavage of several DNA fragments, derived from densitometer traces of the autoradiograms. a )(AC)5 GC(GT) 5 ;b )[(CA)5 CG(TG) 5 ]2 ;c )(CG)5 TATA(CG) 5 ;d )(GC)9 G;e )(CG)5 TATATA(CG) 4 .
In each case the ordinate shows the relative cleavage at each bond, presented on an arbitrary scale.
Figure 5 .
DNase I digestion of several DNA fragments in the absence (C) and presence (B) of 100µM bleomycin. a ) T(AT) 8 CG(AT) 15 ;b )(AT)5 GC(AT) 5 ;c )[(TAA)4 CG(TTA) 4 ]2 ;d )(ATT)4 CG(AAT) 4 .
Each reaction was performed in the presence of 200µM CoCl 2 to prevent cleavage by the antibiotic.
The square brackets reveal the position and length of the inserts.
The central guanine residues are indicated by the arrows.
Tracks labelled ‘G’ are Maxam- Gilbert dimethylsulphate-piperidine markers specific for guanine.
Each pair of lanes corresponds to digestion by the enzyme for 1 and 5 minutes.
Figure 6 .
DNase I digestion of several DNA fragments in the absence (C) and presence (B) of bleomycin. a )(GC)9 G;b )[T 9 GCA 9 ]2 ;c )[(CA)5 CG(TG) 5 ]2 .
The bleomycin concentration was 100µM in b and c.
For (a) the following bleomycin concentrations were used a) control, no antibiotic.
b) 1µM, c) 5µM, d) 25µM, e) 100µM.
Each reaction was performed in the presence of 200µM CoCl 2 to prevent cleavage by the antibiotic.
The square brackets reveal the position and length of the inserts.
Tracks labelled ‘G’ are Maxam-Gilbert dimethylsulphate-piperidine markers specific for guanine.
Each pair of lanes in b and c corresponds to digestion by the enzyme for 1 and 5 minutes.