

6
‘You take too much on yourself,’ Ballater told his granddaughter.
‘If I want you to act as my emissary, I shall tell you so.
And stop antagonising Craddock.
It's not your place to give him orders.’
It was lunch-time.
An hour after Rose had returned from the cottage.
The meal was laid in the large, cold, timber-ceilinged dining-room; a joyless room filled with oil paintings of rural scenes yellowed by age.
Ballater fitted the environment.
He wouldn't have described himself as landed gentry — or if he did it would be with irony.
He had retired early as lieutenant-colonel on inheriting the farm and wished the local people would drop the title.
Craddock was the most persistent user.
‘We're both civilians,’ he had told him crisply when he first took him on.
‘Any warring we do here is with the Ministry of Agriculture.’
And although Craddock's warring with his granddaughter was usually out of earshot and not spoken of, today he had complained.
Rose shrugged.
To argue with the old man was pointless.
These meal-time confrontations always took the edge off her appetite.
She would have preferred to eat in the kitchen at the large scrubbed table with the farm-hands and Mrs Hopkins, the housekeeper.
This sort of segregation was feudal.
She passed her grandfather the courgettes.
The vegetables, not well-cooked, lay hard but neat in the Crown Derby dish.
He declined them.
‘Sensible,’ she said, trying to turn the subject.
‘The  only edible concoction Mrs Hopkins can produce is stew.’
Too late she realised that she had let her defences down.
Now he would invite her to do better — after a course of Cordon Bleu cookery, perhaps.
He resisted the temptation.
She was idle, at times insolent, and rarely co-operative.
Always a worry.
If past events could be regarded more calmly he would handle her better.
He knew this and tried, though never successfully.
That he had a deep affection for her no one knew, certainly not Rose.
He had always hidden his feelings admirably.
‘What's Marshall like?’ he asked.
She wasn't sure how to answer.
A physical description was easier than an emotional assessment.
If you were groggy on speed you behaved a bit like Marshall — your feet weren't solidly stuck to the ground — there was a look in your eyes that wasn't lust — and wasn't all purity, either — amazed recognition summed it up, but didn't make sense.
‘Tall, dark, rather ill-looking,’ she said finally.
‘Is his arthritis obvious?’
She was surprised.
‘How did you know about it?’
‘My dear girl, I may be moronic as far as modern music is concerned, but I have attended classical concerts in my time.
I haven't seen Marshall perform, but I've heard his records.
He had remarkable talent.
His reason for quitting made news.’
‘His hands are swollen, yes,’ Rose said.
‘Then what's all this nonsense about re-building a wall?’
‘It's what he wants to do.’
Ballater looked at his granddaughter with quite unjustified irritation.
What had she said to Marshall, he wondered, to needle him into such a ridiculous response.
He asked her.
Rose pushed her plate aside.
She tried to speak  levelly and control her temper.
‘We had a normal conversation.
I wasn't aggressive.
Neither was he.
He's doing what he wants to do.
That's all.’
‘So you keep saying.’
And perhaps correctly, he thought.
Marshall's hands had once made music — now they couldn't — so he was perhaps punishing them with hard labour in a sort of brutal compensation.
It was either that, or she had upset him.
He decided to go down to the cottage during the afternoon and find out for himself.
It didn't take Lowell long to realise that the bull hadn't unearthed any pieces of urn.
His disappointment was mild.
The urn represented a bridge with the past, but a careful piecing together of shards to make the bridge perfect wasn't necessary.
Rose had walked it.
Or he thought she had.
Two voices spoke to him in his head.
The first told him he was irrational, that the obsession was dangerous.
The second told him to question nothing.
To wait passively and accept.
He felt good.
Even his hands were better.
But they weren't capable hands.
He was carefully trying to place one stone on top of another when Ballater called on him.
‘It's not as easy as it might appear,’ Ballater commented, and then introduced himself.
Lowell, thrust into the present day and onto solid ground, agreed that he wasn't much good at it.
A light rain began to fall, drawing up a sharp smell of weeds and grasses.
Ballater, advancing into the garden, noticed a heap of uprooted dead cannabis tangled with chickweed on the small cleared area.
He was both startled and dismayed.
Obviously it hadn't been planted by Marshall; the weed was the remains of a previous year's crop.
Lowell, aware that his visitor's attention was deflected from him and onto the compost heap, was  puzzled.
The old man was wearing a plastic raincoat but was hatless.
His bald head filmed with rain.
He invited him to come into the cottage out of the wet.
Ballater appeared not to hear him.
‘You'd better burn that,’ he indicated the compost, ‘or bury it.
It's fortunate the police haven't found it.’
Lowell was puzzled.
‘Found what?’
‘Cannabis.
Tinkers were camped in the field just across the wall last year.’
A lie went against the grain, but was necessary.
‘The old woman's garden was convenient, or at least her fertile cabbage patch.
It's the only explanation I can think of — no one else would plant it.’
Lowell remembered the pungent smell in the cottage.
He had recognised that, but not the leaf.
He told Ballater that someone had been breaking in.
‘The fire has been lit and allowed to die down a couple of times — and I once smelt the stuff.’
Ballater looked at him sharply.
‘You're sure?’
‘Oh, yes.
The last time was two or three weeks ago.
The intruder, whoever it was, seems to see the cottage as home from home.’
He could sense that the old man was deeply troubled.
For his part, he wasn't too bothered.
It was disconcerting, nothing more.
Illegal seeds had been sown in the cabbage patch when the cottage was empty.
They wouldn't be sown again.
‘I'll get rid of it,’ he told Ballater.
‘And get the lock on my back door fixed.
That should be the end of the matter.’
He suggested again that they should retreat inside before they got wetter.
The last time Ballater had been in the cottage was just before Miss Marshall had been forced out of it by her rapacious relatives, backed up by the insensitive local general practitioner who agreed she couldn't cope.
Ballater had, on that visit, thought the place  loathsome — it still was — but he had felt a degree of sympathy with her for wanting to stay.
The middle-aged tended to become power-happy if they had geriatrics in the family.
They uprooted them, as Marshall had uprooted the cannabis, and watched them wither.
He had intended making an offer for the cottage, but the old woman's distress at leaving had made him change his mind.
She hadn't been sufficiently strong mentally, he believed, to will the money away from her destroyers.
He had been wrong.
Marshall, according to some discreet enquiries he had made, was innocent of trespass — of any kind.
So the time to buy the place could be now.
He broached the matter carefully while Marshall put a match to some logs in the grate.
The flames curled slowly, sending flickers of light onto the walls.
The cottage, he told Marshall, had been built the same time as the farm.
The Ballaters, in those days, owned it.
Later it was sold.
He didn't tell him why.
These days the property itself had no value unless you happened to have a farm over the hill.
A second means of access would be possible if the cottage were gutted.
The geological nature of the land precluded access from any other part of his property.
A track wide enough for a tractor could be taken down to the road.
Useful in a bad winter.
Snow tended to pile up and block access to the road on the other side.
Lowell sat back on his heels and watched the flames.
This man wanted to buy his cottage and demolish it.
The idea was so outrageous it was unbelievable.
Ballater, too keen a businessman to throw his money around, proceeded to try to persuade Marshall into a satisfactory deal.
‘One has to be realistic about these places.
I imagine you came here with the intention of doing it up and then realised the enormous extent of the work needed to put it right.’
He looked around the  room.
Obviously Marshall, apart from daubing one of the walls and putting up a piece of cork-board, hadn't done anything.
‘If you want to sell and get as far as enticing a buyer, whoever it is will have the place surveyed, and any surveyor knowing his job will condemn it out of hand.
It hasn't even any so-called old world charm, and the site is too low to command a good view.’
Marshall's continuing silence was beginning to bother him.
‘Well,’ he prompted, ‘wouldn't you agree?’
Lowell stood up.
He needed a drink.
Politeness forced him to offer one.
‘Whisky?’
‘What?
No.
I mean, thank you, but I don't indulge.
Coffee, perhaps, or tea?’
Oh, Christ, Lowell thought.
He went out to the lean-to make it.
The mug he had used in the morning was still unwashed and his two spare mugs had been smashed during Zoe's last visit.
That time it had been tea.
This time he made coffee in cups and put whisky in his.
This time he wasn't so angry.
Rose's grandfather had made a stupid suggestion but he had also thrown some light on the history of the cottage.
It was interesting that it had once belonged to the Ballaters.
The Rose of the photograph might have been Rose's great-grandmother, perhaps.
It would account for the strong resemblance.
He was tempted to ask Ballater about it and then decided not to.
It would be unwise, he guessed, to speak of Rose to the old man.
And he no longer had the photograph.
Ballater was crouching in front of the fire warming his hands when Lowell returned.
There were brown age marks on them like a scattering of large freckles.
But they looked supple, nevertheless.
‘It's extremely difficult to heat this sort of place in the winter,’ he continued, taking the coffee from Lowell.
‘The only kind of central heating possible  would be solid fuel and to install it would cost more than the cottage is worth.’
The offering price he had in mind was four thousand pounds.
He would have given more to the old woman, but Marshall, despite the way he looked, was probably well heeled.
‘I use logs,’ Lowell said.
He hadn't thought about the winter yet.
The winter didn't matter.
Ballater sensed obstinate refusal rather than a willingness to bargain.
He wondered what Marshall's wife thought about it.
‘Had you and Mrs Marshall planned to use it as a weekend retreat, perhaps?
Surely, if you had, you would have discovered the drawbacks by now?’
Lowell had no intention of discussing Zoe.
He was glad she wasn't there to listen.
Off load it, she would tell him.
Let the abominable place go.
‘The drawbacks,’ he said, ‘I can cope with.’
Ballater reassessed his offer in the face of resistance.
‘I'd take it off your hands for four and a half thousand.’
Lowell smiled.
‘The price of your Charolais bull?’
Ballater couldn't see any connection.
Anyway, the bull was worth more.
Quite a bit more.
But this man wasn't haggling with him.
The musician, for some reason he couldn't understand, didn't want to sell.
So don't press him.
Wait.
The winter would force him out.
‘The bull is a valuable asset,’ he said smoothly, ‘and only occasionally a liability.
If you should find the cottage more a liability than you had envisaged then we can perhaps talk business in the future.
In the meantime I'll make sure that the bull doesn't make a nuisance of itself again — and I'll get the wall re-built.’
A thought struck him.
‘Get rid of the cannabis before my men come.
They're unlikely to recognise it — presumably you didn't — but you can't take chances.’
Lowell said he'd dig it in.
He was aware that Ballater  was looking at his hands and assured him that he could wield a spade perfectly well.
Ballater, in the last few minutes of his visit, praised his performance as a pianist and the atmosphere became more cordial.
The old man was knowledgeable about music.
It didn't occur to Lowell to wonder how he had also familiarised himself with drugs.
Back at the farm Ballater called Rose into his study.
It was a summons, not a request.
A court martial rather than a discussion.
He accused her of planting the cannabis.
She denied it.
He accused her of smoking it in Marshall's cottage.
She denied that, too.
He threatened to hand her over to the police if she had any more of it.
She spoke truthfully for the first time and said she hadn't any more of it — which was a direct admission that she had had it in the first place.
He despaired of her and wished to God she wasn't his responsibility.
The generation gap here was too wide.
She was, he supposed, typical of her contemporaries.
She hadn't been the only one to be quietly expelled from the eminently respectable boarding school after being caught smoking cannabis.
What was the matter with the young of these days that they were in such haste to destroy themselves?
Was their inheritance that bad?
He thought of Rose's lineage where the power to hurt — and be hurt — was strong.
She was waiting for him to rant on — her face coolly patient.
He could tell by her eyes that she had closed her mind to him.
As she had learnt to do.
Communication was impossible.
He was no good with soft words, gentle phrases.
But she was his son's child and he cared for her.
He wished she could understand that without having to be told.
‘Leave Marshall alone,’ he warned.
‘Any business that needs to be done with him, I'll see to.’
‘The musician,’ she replied, and with a degree of amusement in her voice, ‘is of no interest to me.’
On the morning the men came to re-build the wall, Lowell was still in bed.
Rose, ignoring her grandfather's orders, came briefly to watch them.
Lowell, hearing her voice through the bedroom window, dressed hastily and splashed his face with cold water, but by this time she had gone.
It was ten thirty.
His backsliding into sloth had happened so slowly that he hadn't been aware of it.
He looked at himself critically in the small mirror on the window ledge in the lean-to.
No wonder she hadn't stayed.
He needed sprucing up.
A hair cut — a decent shave.
And the cottage was filthy.
His upward swing of mood since meeting Rose was like a glider flying above the clouds where all was serene.
He was quite sure she would visit him again.
And when she did the cottage would have a shine on it.
No cobwebs in corners.
No linen that wasn't sweet.
No rat droppings — or were they mouse droppings — under the sink.
He needed to do some shopping for cleaning materials and other basic necessities and decided to go.
The van was reluctant to start but he coaxed it patiently.
A few days ago an unco-operative van would have sent him back indoors in a state of deep despair.
Had his depression lasted much longer he would have become agoraphobic.
Until Rose came he had reached the stage of not wanting to go out.
Everything out here — the fast road — the wide fields — the sweep of the sky — had been oppressive and inimical.
Today it was stimulating.
Pleasant.
His hands were much better and could grip the steering wheel without pain.
He felt rested.
Last night he had slept well — too well.
Next time she came…
He began fantasising and had to take avoiding action 81 when he took a corner too wide.
The outside world needed his undivided attention.
Today it was complicated, but not menacing.
The vibes generally were good.
He even managed to park near the centre of the town without trouble.
People were helpful, too.
Kindly.
Nice.
The woman in the launderette showed him where to put the coins.
The ironmonger explained how the mouse-trap should be set.
The trappings of death, he'd joked.
Not funny, but he'd smiled politely.
It occurred to him after he'd bought the cleaning materials and collected his laundry that his shirts would need ironing.
He hadn't an iron.
He went into one of the large stores and bought one, and then remembered there was no electricity in the cottage.
He was exasperated, but not cast down.
The shop assistant laughed with him and gave him his money back.
Drip-dry shirts were the answer, she said.
He thought he probably had them already, but bought three more in case he hadn't.
Immaculate cuffs and collars were Zoe's department.
He remembered her at moments such as these and felt a twinge of guilt — not a searing kick in the gut — which, he supposed, was something else to be thankful for.
Before leaving town he had a professional shave, shampoo and trim — not too much off — just the straggle of hair over his collar.
His appearance was rather more conformist now — he looked more like the Lowell of the old days.
And Rose looked like…
Rose.
He saw her face clearly, sometimes in the photograph, sometimes in the flesh.
And he didn't have to drink to see it.
At least, not much.
A drop of scotch during occasional periods of self-criticism helped him to become happy with himself, but most of the time he was happy anyway.
Since Rose had come.
She visited him two days later, just after he had cut his  thumb on the mouse-trap and was bleeding into the sink.
Had he arranged it, he couldn't have planned it better.
She had been uneasy about the visit; the cottage, as always, drew her, despite the fact that she wasn't sure of Marshall.
But a man who bled was vulnerable, and a wound caused by a mouse-trap showed a reassuring degree of incompetence.
She examined the cut.
‘It's not deep.
Where's your first-aid box?’
He hadn't one.
‘Cotton-wool,’ she suggested, ‘or lint?’
He hadn't any of those either.
She smiled.
He was helpless, hopeless, reassuringly normal.
What had she seen in him the other day that had been so disturbing?
He told her to look in the table drawer in the living-room — he thought there might be a spare drying-up cloth in it.
There was.
It was blue.
She warned him that the dye might come out and that he'd get blood poisoning.
He said he'd probably get it anyway, that he'd baited the trap with a piece of meat that had gone off.
Cheese, she told him, was more usual.
‘But you haven't any,’ she mimicked, and gently and competently dealt with the wound.
He thanked her and didn't know what else to say.
Nor did she.
Her fingers after bandaging his were stained with his blood.
She dipped them in the washing-up bowl and dried them on the towel behind the door.
He muttered something about the place being primitive.
But clean, she thought, you've worked at it.
And at yourself.
She observed that he had a funny-looking bath.
‘It's the sort of thing Miss Marshall would have kept coal in.’
‘I'm not reduced to that.’
But I'm reduced to verbal inanities, he thought.
This is a non-conversation.
This  is ridiculous.
You smell of clover fields.
Do you know how lovely you are?
She was aware that his attention was focusing too strongly and too disconcertingly on her again.
She said she couldn't stay, that she had just dropped in for a minute.
‘The village shop sells first-aid stuff.
And if you'll take my advice you'll throw that trap away.
What you need here is a cat.
I'll get you one.’
She went swiftly over to the door and had gone before he could answer.
7
Ben and Louise drove to the cottage on a Saturday afternoon.
Ben could think of better ways of spending his free day — a round of golf — even doing the garden — but according to Louise, and he had to agree with her, you didn't ditch a friend because a friend ditched you.
Lowell and Zoe were in a dead-locked situation — neither would budge.
‘So it's up to us to heal the breach,’ Louise urged.
Ben wasn't so sure of the wisdom of positive action; it could be taken as interference.
But Louise had already thought of that.
‘His hands need looking at,’ she reminded him.
‘It must be nearly a month since he called at the surgery.
He'll be out of tablets by now.
You can be calling professionally.
As for me — well — I'm just coming for the ride.’
It was an acrimonious ride, during which they had an argument about Lowell's sustenance and bedding.
Louise had baked a pie for him and was bringing a new pair of sheets from the airing cupboard.
Zoe had opted out of all domestic commitments.
She wouldn't go with them.
She had no message.
Yes, she agreed with Louise, quarrels could be mended by talking.
Most quarrels.
But not theirs.
She thought Lowell was sick in his head.
Her parting shot had been to warn them not to bring back his dirty washing.
‘If anyone is sick mentally,’ Louise stormed as they drove away from her, ‘it's Zoe.
Damn it, they had a row.
A bad one.
She needled him too much and  punctured his control.
He scared her.
But he didn't touch her.
And now what is she doing?
Spending like hell.
She spilt tea on her suit — and what does she do?
Have it cleaned?
Oh, no.
She buys another equally expensive model.
More expensive.
Is that rational behaviour?
She goes from one extreme to the other.
Parsimonious when he leaves his job — to make him feel guilty.
And now it's spend — spend — spend.
Of course I've made him a pie — why shouldn't I?
She won't.
But if it helps to get them together I'll say she made it.
And if he hasn't changed his sheets by now, he jolly well ought to have done.
And I'll wash the others for him.’
Ben forbade her to do any such thing.
Zoe had made her statement of intent — a withdrawal of domestic support.
Louise was to mind her own business and not queer the pitch.
Metaphors became mixed and feelings ran high.
In the end he capitulated to the extent of offering to hand over the sheets himself, but refused to say they were Zoe's.
The hazards of becoming embroiled in domestic squabbles — and he still saw this as one — were their repercussions.
Louise at the height of their row had called him a shit.
It was difficult to remember the route, but Lowell's van in the bottom field signposted them in the right direction.
Without it they might have driven past the track and searched on fruitlessly.
Ben parked his newly acquired BMW at the roadside and hoped it would be there when he returned, reassuring himself that in this place of utter solitude car thieves weren't likely to creep out of the hedgerows with duplicate keys.
Louise walked ahead of him up the path carrying the pie in a wicker basket.
He followed with the sheets in a blue plastic bag.
When they reached the cottage they both felt the need for unity.
Although  the sun shone on its ancient walls it looked cold and forbidding.
‘The anchorite's cell,’ Ben muttered.
‘Be kind,’ Louise warned him.
Lowell, hoping it was Rose, let his disappointment show.
But he masked it quickly and invited them in.
Louise kissed him and gave him the pie.
She didn't say she had made it.
Ben told him that she had.
He got rid of the sheets by putting them on a chair near the passage-way to the bedroom.
With luck they wouldn't be remarked upon.
They all sat down.
Lowell told them politely and falsely that it was good to see them.
These were his friends but he felt unnatural in their company, as if he were acting a part.
Louise, his warm-hearted, likeable, former neighbour was looking at him with obvious concern.
He wondered why.
If he had asked her she couldn't have answered.
No one was ringing a mourning bell here.
Lowell, a little thinner than usual, looked well enough.
He had an air of self-containment, bordering on contentment.
But he wasn't the Lowell she had known.
Ben had mentioned his withdrawal and she hadn't taken him too seriously.
Now she did.
Here in this macabre place, away from everyone, he had found affinity.
He hadn't wanted them to come and disturb his peace, that was obvious.
There was no ease in the relationship any more: he saw them as strangers.
She remembered with sadness all the neighbourly contacts they had had in the past — Lowell's anxiety when Edward had gone missing on his new bike during a November fog and his tireless search until he was found — his ham-fisted efforts to assist her in Ben's absence when the washing-machine had flooded the kitchen — his quiet piano-playing, when his hands were still capable, at the end of a noisy party when all  the guests had gone home.
Lowell's humour — unexpected — that could take the heat out of a fraught situation.
His edginess and irritable outbursts that could put it back in.
Lowell — very volatile — her one-time good friend.
Ben, less concerned with Lowell's psyche than with his physical well-being, examined his hands.
They were better, showing hardly any inflammation now.
He noticed, however, that he had cut his finger and that the edges of the wound had been slow to heal.
‘You could have done with a couple of stitches here.
What happened?’
Lowell told him about the trap.
‘I wasn't much good at setting it.’
‘You know how clumsy you are with anything mechanical — you'd be safer with a colony of rodents.’
Louise shuddered.
‘Why don't you get out of this place?’
It was a Zoe question.
He wondered if Zoe had sent her to ask it.
‘I'm never getting out of it.’
He spoke with emphasis and with complete conviction.
Louise looked across at Ben.
His eyes warned her to shut up, not to probe further.
She ignored him.
‘What about Zoe?’
‘What about her?’
‘Do you expect her to join you here?’
‘No.’
‘Do you intend going home to explain all this to her soon?’
He was silent.
‘Well — do you?’
Ben intervened, ‘Leave it!
This is Lowell's affair, not ours.’
Smiling awkwardly, he cast around for a topic of conversation that wasn't personal and had difficulty in finding one.
It was too soon to leave, the atmosphere was too tense, and it would have to  become calm again or to revisit wouldn't be possible.
For Zoe's sake it might be necessary for them to come back.
They were a link — if at the moment a tenuous one.
From where he was sitting by the narrow little window he had a view of the meagre garden and beyond it, in the distance, a huge white bull in a field of white heifers.
‘A dangerous-looking animal,’ he commented.
Lowell went over to the window, mainly to get away from Louise's accusing eyes.
‘It's safe in its own field.
It doesn't break out and go on the rampage when it's there.’
He explained about the garden wall and then went on to speak of Ballater's visit.
‘He wants to buy the property.
I'm not selling.’
‘And do we tell Zoe that?’
Louise asked.
Lowell shrugged.
‘Whether you tell her or not makes no difference.’
They stayed an hour — an endurance test for tact.
Louise, gritting her teeth against saying everything she wanted to say, spent part of the time making tea in the terrible little lean-to.
She had to concede it was clean.
There was bread and butter, both fresh, and an assortment of tinned food.
On the physical level, at least, he wasn't letting himself go.
They were taking their leave when they saw Rose walking down the field path.
She saw them at the same moment and hesitated, then she turned and began walking back the way she had come.
‘A young girl, long dark hair, ordinary looking.’
Louise described her to Zoe later.
‘She was carrying a kitten.’
She didn't describe Lowell's expression as he watched her go, nor the speed with which he'd followed her after he had abruptly said good-bye to them.
‘So that's how it is,’ Ben said when they reached the car.
He was both astonished and amused.
She told him he was jumping to conclusions.
Miss Marshall's black cat, according to Rose, had been called Midnight — like this one — Middy for short.
He could change the name if he wanted to.
He didn't.
Midnight, according to one's mood, conjured up romantic or macabre visions.
In his present happy state the former applied, but he was careful to keep his feelings in check.
The relationship that had been started by the bull was being carried on very satisfactorily by the comings and goings of the kitten.
It regularly returned to the farm and was regularly brought back by Rose.
Her confidence grew at each visit.
Today she wanted to know about his visitors.
Just friends, he told her.
‘Doesn't your wife visit any more?’
‘No.’
He didn't elaborate.
If he wanted to be cagey, she thought, that was okay by her.
The wife — temporarily — was off the scene.
Good.
She went to sit on the floor where the rush matting was covered by a rug and rested her back against the sofa.
The kitten clung to her shoulder, its small sharp teeth pulling at strands of her hair.
She lifted it away and put it on Lowell's knee.
It didn't want to stay there and came bounding back to her.
He leaned over and stroked it.
‘He will always follow you back to the farm.’
‘Have you tried putting butter on his feet?’
‘Yes, he licked it off, and then followed you back.’
‘What are you feeding him on?
Scraps?’
‘No — tinned stuff from the village.’
‘God, what a waste!
Dried milk too, I suppose?
I'll bring you down some fresh.’
He was pleased she hadn't suggested that he should fetch it.
He didn't want to run into Ballater again; his  wish to purchase the cottage put him in the enemy camp and threatened his peace.
He and Rose were better meeting here, on their own, in their own place.
That the cottage meant as much to her as it did to him was obvious, but it didn't occur to him that she might have been the intruder who had broken in.
Had it not been for the smell of pot he might have suspected it.
He had told her about the cannabis bed a few days ago when they had been walking in the garden and her eyes had widened in shock.
‘By God!’ she had said.
Despite what he saw as her sweetness — her innocence — he sensed at times that physical contact wasn't just a remote dream.
It had long stopped being a remote dream to Rose.
Now that Lowell had learnt to handle the relationship without being too intense — and was drinking less — she was finding him physically attractive.
A refreshing change from her usual, inexperienced escorts.
But how to make her feelings plain?
Her grandfather, she remembered, had expressed his feelings about Lowell very plainly indeed.
Which for Rose increased the appeal of forbidden fruit.
Any man with self-respect, he said, wouldn't tolerate such a squalid environment.
And the musician himself was as seedy as his surroundings — unshaven and obviously drinking too much.
His coffee had stunk of whisky.
He needed his wife's presence to spruce him up and to take both him and the cottage in hand.
Mention of Lowell's wife was, Rose knew, a repeated and none too subtle warning for her to keep away from him.
That Lowell and the cottage had been spruced up since her grandfather's visit — and in his wife's continuing absence — was something she wasn't supposed to know.
It had been difficult to remain silent, but she had.
Coming here, clandestinely, added spice to the visits.
‘I can stay a little while,’ she said.
Very prim.
Rather ambiguous.
The kitten was cradled in her arms and she ran her fingers gently up and down its stomach so that it purred with delight.
She looked at Lowell, her eyes narrowed so that the sexual invitation wasn't too overt.
She smiled.
Caressed.
Sighed a little.
He was getting the message, but wasn't quite sure She was seventeen.
A child.
The other one — the Girl — the other Rose — had excited him sexually.
A dream woman.
A photograph.
Invulnerable.
The kitten was dribbling with pleasure.
Rose's hand was small and freckled and it teased and rubbed.
Al1 the while she watched him covertly smiling.
Her tongue touched the edge of her teeth withdrew, appeared again.
He half turned from her.
For God's sake, just how innocent was she?
She said, ‘What's this?’ it didn't matter to her what it was — a piece of stone in the hearth — just something to talk about — an embarrassed need for words to cover what she saw as his rejection.
When he turned to her again he saw that she had put the cat down and was holding the piece of urn.
He felt both excited and claustrophobic as if the cottage walls were closing in on him and then receding.
He didn't know if he was back in time, or here in the present.
He spoke her name quietly.
‘It's all right,’ she said briskly, ‘I've done it before.
This time there was no ambiguity.
He undressed her in the bedroom in a ritual of tenderness.
Amused, she let him.
Her scarlet tee-shirt was innocent of graffiti and her jeans were neatly patched.
Her pants, a wisp of white cotton, had an edging of lace.
She had dressed with some care.
Now, undressed, she stood on her discarded clothes.
Her body, small, slim, was the colour of cream.
Lowell's love-making was both passionate and gentle.
He cared about her pleasure and she responded to him more strongly than she had with anyone.
Afterwards, sated and happy, they both slept while the afternoon sun crept into the room and lingered a while on the wall where the photograph had been.
Lowell, the first to wake, saw the splash of yellow on the empty cork-board and thought he still dreamed.
And then he felt Rose's warm body pressed up against his.
This was reality, whatever that might mean.
This was Rose — past, present and future.
She opened her eyes and smiled at him.
‘Let's do it again,’ she said.
In the weeks following his bedding of Rose, Lowell gave himself to her totally.
Not only physically and emotionally — but intellectually.
The nocturne began to grow again and the music was her essence.
He wrote it with delight and despair.
Delight because it brought her close to him when the cottage was empty — despair because his talent was in his hands rather than in his composing ability.
He wished it were better and deplored the imperfections.
That Rose herself was imperfect he refused to admit, refused even to contemplate, even though her love-making was surprisingly accomplished for one so young.
When half-asleep and off-guard her vocabulary was raunchy.
The fact that for a lot of the time she was on-guard disturbed him.
She had opened her body to him, but not her mind.
He wanted all of her.
Rose, within her careful limits, gave what she could, including a lot of make-believe.
She created a background which was only in part true.
Her father  had died in a car accident, she told him.
That he had been well over the limit, both speed and booze limits, following a blazing row with her mother, she had kept to herself.
A sad description of her mother's death shortly afterwards — from grief — was perhaps stretching his credulity a bit, but she chanced it.
Anyway, she wasn't sure of the facts.
It had happened when she was away at school and her grandfather had glossed over the whole sorry business to the best of his ability.
His one slip had been using the phrase ‘whole sorry business’.
‘Sad loss’ would have described heart failure — or whatever.
And she hadn't died in her own bed.
Extraordinarily embarrassing, Rose thought, for the owner of the bed.
She had wept at the death of her father, but for her mother she felt no grief.
The maternal bond had been cut with the umbilical cord — at birth.
Her father had cuddled her when she was a child; all the loving in her childhood had come from him.
Later, when she was in her early teens and beginning to look more like her mother, he had appeared to love her less.
To win affection, she discovered, you had to project the sort of image the other person wanted, and you only did that if the image appealed to you and if the other person was worth the effort.
Lowell, this strangely attractive, very intense man, was.
The image was still nebulous, she couldn't quite see it, though the cottage helped.
The acting she did within its framework was almost right.
And occasionally she didn't even seem to be acting at all.
Out of the cottage, away from Lowell, she became herself again.
Slanging matches with Craddock just for the hell of it.
Cold, fairly polite, differences of opinion with her grandfather.
Jokes with the younger farm-hands who were wise enough not to go too far with the granddaughter of the boss.
Her quiet periods were spent walking on her own avoiding useful jobs.
Her grandfather had suggested, without conviction, that she might be of some use in the farm office.
She had refused to disrupt an already smoothly running system and he hadn't pressed the point.
The farm was her prison until her inheritance from her father's estate freed her in three years' time.
Her grandfather's insistence that she was free to go out into the world now and take a course of training was so much nonsense.
There was nothing she wanted to train for.
Just as there was nothing Lowell wanted to devote himself to — other than music.
And she had the edge on him because there was money to come.
Money, obtained too easily, could finance disaster, her grandfather had warned her; it must be used wisely when the time came.
His idea of wisdom and hers differed.
It was wise to be happy, she believed, whereas he was complacent to be wise.
Ballater, had she but known it, was far from complacent.
Craddock had told him that he'd seen Rose visiting Marshall at his cottage.
To Craddock, Rose was an unexploded bomb ticking away in Ballater's green and quiet pasture at a time when the colonel should be enjoying well-earned peace.
It was unfair that circumstances should have placed it there, and until it was defused (unlikely, her nature was unlikely to change) or removed when she eventually took herself off, he watched it carefully.
Had the musician not been married, he wouldn't have reported back to his boss.
But he was and there might be trouble.
Ballater had had trouble enough.
Rose was grooming the Charolais bull when Ballater decided some plain speaking was necessary.
The animal was tethered in the byre, its hugely muscled body down on its knees like a sacred beast from Indian mythology — garlands around its horns would complete the picture.
She was brushing its neck with a long-handled brush soaked in soapy water.
He  thought the picture not only dangerous, but grotesque, and was angry.
‘That's a job for the men — I've warned you — get out from there.
Come out here.’
She was wearing pale green dungarees, soaked with muddy water, and looked like an untidy acolyte performing priestly duties in the priest's absence.
She put the brush back in the bucket.
‘He's safe.
I've reared him.
He knows me.’
‘Do as I say!’
She sighed.
There might be farming in her grandfather's blood, but the army was there more strongly still.
He treated her like an incompetent subaltern.
She stepped outside and secured the door.
‘Then who's to finish the job?
He can't be left like that.’
‘Craddock will see to it.’
‘Craddock and a couple of others.’
She was contemptuous.
Ballater saw one of the farm-hands going over to the shippon and told him to fetch Craddock and see to the bull.
‘And wear a suit of armour and carry a gun,’ Rose called out sarcastically, ‘he might hurt you.’
His granddaughter's anger, so like his own, took some of the sting out of Ballater's wrath.
He wished the quality of his care expressed his love for her more obviously — less abrasively.
But he didn't know how to reach her.
And didn't expect that he ever would.
‘You're eighteen on the twentieth,’ he said, ‘the day after tomorrow.’
‘And so?
I can't help it.’
‘I'm not accusing you of getting older.
I'm just stating a fact.
You're old enough to behave with some circumspection.’
‘In what way?’
‘I hear you're seeing a lot of Marshall.’
Craddock, she thought.
What did he do — lie in the undergrowth and watch?
She explained about the kitten.
‘It's taking time to settle.
Sometimes I stay and chat — not for long.
I can't see any harm in that.’
Put that way, it sounded reasonable.
But he wasn't reassured.
‘I think you should be careful — for your sake and for his.
I don't know why he's living in the cottage when he has a home elsewhere — and a wife.’
‘Nor do I,’ she said crisply, ‘but that's his business.
His wife is called Zoe — and she's Lowell's affair — not yours — not mine.’
He noticed the use of Christian names.
The chats, then, had been personal.
His anxiety grew.
‘It would be easy for her to become your affair, and that could be tragic for all of you.’
‘You have an odd idea of tragedy,’ she riposted.
‘What about the starving hordes in this wonderful world of ours?
What about the bloody bomb?’
He refused to be side-tracked.
‘Has he made advances to you?’
By God, she thought, how old-fashioned could he be!
‘No,’ she said.
‘You just go there and talk — what about?’
‘He's writing a nocturne.
We discuss music.’
He tried to believe it.
It was plausible.
Perhaps he was looking for danger where none existed, though his instinct told him he wasn't.
She needed the companionship of suitable young people, he thought, and here on the farm she wasn't getting it.
The previous year she had amused herself with Greg Farrel, one of the agricultural students who had come to help with the harvest.
He had lodged with Craddock and his wife in the village.
Craddock in a year or two would be retiring and he would need a replacement.
Later still, if his own health began to fail, the farm would have to be run by a competent manager.
There was scope here for a young  lad with ability.
Someone who could be trained.
It was a depressing prospect that the farm would one day be run by a stranger.
‘There are times,’ he said bleakly, ‘when I wish your father had sired a son.
Someone with farming enthusiasm and a lot of common sense.
Life would be easier for all of us.’
Rose, smiling wryly, apologised for her sex.
He cut across her.
‘I've something for you.
You might as well have it now.’
He took three twenty-pound notes out of his wallet.
‘Add that to your allowance and get yourself a birthday present.
Take the car into Cheltenham tomorrow and buy a dress — your clothes are appalling.’
She thanked him.
That he should tarnish the gift with a criticism was in character.
Ballater waited awkwardly for the perfunctory thank you kiss, giving her a few moments before turning away.
It now seemed that Rose couldn't even bear to touch him.
8
‘I have to call at the bank,’ Lowell told her, ‘so we'll do your birthday shopping in Bristol and we'll use the van.’
Rose had suggested Cheltenham and the Mercedes.
The duo sounded very up-market, distinctly more so than Broadmead and the van.
The farm obviously prospered.
His bank balance, he guessed, was being slowly eroded.
He needed a statement of his account.
He wished he didn't.
It would give him great pleasure to write a large cheque for something special for Rose's birthday —a particularly splendid piece of jewellery, perhaps —but he couldn't.
She wasn't a child any longer, or she wouldn't be after tomorrow.
His lovely, timeless Rose had come of age.
It occurred to him as they drove that a particularly splendid piece of jewellery wouldn't suit her anyway.
Today she wore a navy anorak (the morning had begun cloudy) and plum-coloured cords.
He had persuaded her to wear her hair tied back from her face.
As she had worn it before — long ago.
He was careful not to make the connection too often in his mind, the idea was bizarre, better not to believe it, certainly it mustn't be spoken of, but at moments such as now he couldn't push it away — and didn't want to.
Rose had died.
Rose was alive again.
Why not?
Mystical nonsense?
Many of the world's major religions believed in reincarnation —the on-going spirit — and belief was a gut feeling.
It couldn't be intellectualised.
The faithful went on believing despite all rational argument.
The Hindus, for instance…
She broke into his thoughts.
‘Did you remember to feed the cat?’
‘What?’
The van gave an erratic burst of speed as his foot prodded the accelerator.
He slowed down.
‘Sorry.
What did you say — the cat?
Yes, I did’ Hauled back to reality he wondered if he had.
He'd meant to.
He'd kept back a portion of corned beef for the purpose.
‘Good,’ she said.
She was glad he liked Middy despite his being a bloody nuisance at times.
Male cats usually were.
It had a habit of jumping on the bed when they were making love and clawing him.
All the love scratches should be hers, he once told her ruefully.
Another man would have kicked it to hell.
Lowell was gentle.
There had been power in his music, she discovered.
He had played his cassettes to her and she had begun to understand what he had lost.
His nocturne — her nocturne — had started out like ice over dark water, he told her, and then the ice had cleared d and there was warmth in the water, living things, beauty.
He hoped some day someone would play it — if it was worth playing.
She never knew how to respond to that sort of talk so stayed silent.
He made demands on her mentally and emotionally.
She had the odd feeling, at times, that she was being moulded like a lump of clay into the person he wanted her to be.
His will was at times stronger than hers — and that was something new.
He wasn't a dominant male chauvinist, he was tender and thoughtful — but he was something more, and what that something was she didn't understand.
Which was one of the reasons she kept coming back.
Even though at times he scared her.
But that was part of the excitement of being loved.
This was an Adult Experience.
Capital A — Capital E. Wasn't it?
Parking in Bristol was difficult, as usual, but Lowell managed to find a slot in a multi-storey car park near Broadmead, the city's main shopping centre.
She said she would shop for a couple of hours on her own, that she didn't want him with her while she mooched around dress departments.
Unlike Zoe, she disliked buying clothes.
They arranged to meet for lunch in a restaurant in Union Street.
He watched her making her way through the crowds on the pavement outside Lewis's already looking bored at the prospect of spending her grandfather's money.
He wondered how much of his own he had left.
half an hour later he knew.
Of the approximate one and a half thousand pounds from the sale of the Volvo, minus expenses, that he regarded legitimately as his, added to the four thousand in he and Zoe's joint account, there remained one hundred and seventy pounds.
He couldn't get an immediate break-down of where the money had gone so asked to see the manager.
The manager was unavailable, the clerk told him, would the chief accountant do?
Anyone would do as long as he was able to explain how that much money could be spirited away in under three months.
The talk with the chief accountant in his plush office wasn't at first revealing.
It was extremely easy in these days of high prices to spend that much money, he was told.
Hire-purchase contracts.
Mortgage.
Heating bills — etc., etc.
Lowell explained that they had no hire-purchase commitments and that the house was theirs.
He had paid off the mortgage with ease when at the height of his success.
As for heating bills — this was summer-time — what was his wife burning on the occasional days when it was cool — gold-dust?
The accountant realising he would not be fobbed off, tried harder and came up with some facts.
Mrs Marshall had opened her own personal account.
She was feeding it but not drawing on it.
Did that help to clarify the situation?
It did.
Zoe was bleeding the joint account dry.
Lowell felt like a soldier on a battlefield, stripped of ammunition.
This was Zoe's way of declaring war.
He couldn't blame her.
He was a selfish slob.
An unrepentant selfish slob.
He had no intention of changing his way of life, but how it was to be sustained now he had no idea.
He could, of course, join a few million others and draw the dole.
Eventually it might come to that.
It would mean a visit to his house to get his National Insurance card, and then going through the intricacies and humiliations of getting money from the State.
money he was entitled to, he reminded himself.
But he wasn't ready yet to go back to his home and rummage around for documents.
he wanted sight nor smell of the place.
In time he would have to, but not yet.
He was afraid of how he might react if he confronted Zoe now.
It was safer not to see her.
He wrote himself a cheque for one hundred and sixty pounds which left ten in the account, and took the money in tens rather than twenties; it looked bulkier, more reassuring.
There was still over an hour to go before his rendezvous with Rose and he decided to walk around the jewellers' shops to find something he could afford.
Rose, too, in her quest for a dress became money-conscious.
The stuff was either rubbish, or twee, or so boring it made you want to puke.
If you wanted style you paid hundreds for it — so blow the sixty quid on something else — but what?
She was wandering down an arcade when she saw the new Tissot boutique.
There was a pair of dark maroon button boots in the  window next to a lace fan and a parasol.
They were grouped around a la white metal table piled with gewgaws, hair ornaments, earrings, a necklace.
The necklace a small card stated, was made of butterfly wings.
If that were true, and she couldn't believe it, how many butterflies had been killed, and how had the wings been put into the glass balls?
Curious, she wandered into the shop, Once inside, she forgot the necklace.
This she discovered was her sort of place.
It smelt of camphor as if the old clothes hanging on the racks had just been taken out of ancient chests.
It was a good smell.
And the clothes felt good as she trailed her had along them — thin cottons — muslin's — fine wool's — nothing synthetic.
A large poster, spotlighted at the back of the shop, advertised the James Tissot exhibition currently showing at the art gallery.
She had never heard of him but liked the picture of the Victorian women on board the HMS Calcutta.
One wore a white dress with a yellow bow on her bottom.
Rose chuckled.
How would her grandfather respond to that?
A saleswoman came out from behind the counter and asked if she could help.
’ Just explain,’Rose said, ‘who's Tissot — what this place — what's it all about?’
Tissot the saleswoman told her, was a French artist of the mid-nineteenth century a contemporary of Degas.
He specialised in portraits of the ladies of the period and was particularly interested in there clothing.
His mistress modelled a lot of them.
Her name was Mrs Newton.
‘The exhibition,’ she went on will probably revive interest in the period so we grabbed some of the stuff from our theatrical costumes shop up in Clifton and added it to the mixture of period we have here.
All copies, of course.
The real stuff would cost a mint.
What period are you interested in?’
‘No period, just looking.’
‘If your mother was into flower-power in the sixties, these are the kind of clothes she would have worn.’
The saleswoman went over to a rack of ankle-length cottons in different colours.
Flowers never powered my mother,’ Rose said drily.
But she was interested.
One of the gowns made of dimity appealed to her, the dark blue rib was decorated with small green leaves.
she asked if she might try it on — and several more.
They weren't her sort of clothes, she kept telling herself.
What good was an ankle length dress on a farm?
And she wasn't the type of person to have frills around her neck, for God's sake!
Anything and everything was worn these days the saleswoman urged.
Knee-length — ankle-length — all were in fashion.
all it took was self-confidence.
And what was style, after all, but the courage to be yourself?
The clothes she assured her would look right on her.
It was sales-talk, but it was true.
Eventually she bought a maroon dress with a crocheted collar and a matching bolero which hid a small repaired split under the arm.
Superb quality and a good choice the sales woman enthused.
As it had been hired out for stage work a few times and wasn't perfect the selling price was thirty-five pounds.
Which left cash enough for a second-hand cloak in black wool and the button boots in the window — if they fitted.
They did.
Rose never interested in clothes before, tried the lot on and beamed at herself in the long mirror.
She looked fantastic.
Her grandfather would be furious.
Laden with parcels, she was half an hour late for her luncheon appointment, and Lowell seated at a table near the window, was already waiting for her.
drinking his beer as if it had gone flat, she thought, seeing him before he saw her.
What was the matter?
She was happy she didn't want gloom.
‘All my clothes are second-hand she told him by way of greeting.
‘I love them.
You'll hate them.
What have you been doing with yourself?’
Resisting making myself bankrupt, he nearly said, by not buying a gold locket I coveted for you — delicate — beautiful — too bloody expensive.
He told her he'd drawn some money from the bank.
Not a lot.
And bought her a birthday present.
That was second-hand, too.
And she wouldn't like it.
‘Try me.’
She pushed her parcels under the table and held out her hand.
‘It isn't you birthday until tomorrow.’
‘I can't wait.’
‘You can for this.’
He was depressed — suddenly ashamed of the gift.
Sensing it, she changed the subject and told him about the Tissot exhibition.
‘Lets go and see it after we've eaten.
I don't want much — a pizza of something will do.’
‘Damn it, I can afford to give you a decent meal.’
‘I'm not hungry now.
For God's sake — why argue about food?’
She picked up the menu.
‘If you don't want to go to the exhibition — say so.’
‘I've no objection to going — if thats what you want to do.’
‘I do — unless you have a better idea?’
He hadn't.
Lowell parked the van just off Queens Road, within a couple of minutes walk of the City Museum and Art Gallery.
The exhibition was set up in a room housing the work of early nineteenth century local artists, including Francis Danby.
The Frenchman's style was an interesting comparison.
For Lowell, twentieth century Rose was an even more interesting  comparison.
He followed a little bit behind her intrigued by her reaction to the various scenes.
The Social Climber amused her.
‘Just look at that mans lecherous eyes.’
She was bored by the girl in The Branch of Lilacs, but the portrait of Kathleen Newton appealed.
‘What do you suppose that book is under his arm — the Decameron?
She was his mistress, you know.’
Lowell didn't.’
Where did you pick up that piece of salacious gossip?’
‘In a shop earlier today.’
‘This conversation is unbelievable, elucidate.’
He was smiling.
She was glad he was happy again.
A concert in the Victoria Rooms, a little father up the road, was the next natural sequence in a day hat seemed planned.
The evening performance — a Mozart Symphony — didn't start until seven and it would mean a late return home.
She would have to phone her grandfather and tell him, she said, and she had to get into the van for her purse.
Lowell told her that he would finance the phone call, he had plenty of small change.
She declined There was something else she needed from the van so he gave her the keys.
He went ahead of her to the concert hall, bought the tickets, and stood waiting for her in the foyer.
Coming here — even with Rose — wasn't easy.
On his own — or with Zoe — it would have been impossible.
He had performed here many times in the past and the passive role was hard to take.
He wanted to make music — an angry torrent of sound — and was jealous to the gut of the young soloist who was going to perform at his piano on his stage tonight.
Edwin Leeson echoed his thoughts, startling him.
‘Hello, Lowell — at the wrong end of things aren't you?
How are you?’
The photographer and his wife Jane had been about to go through into the concert hall when Leeson saw Lowell standing on his own.
Lowell said his hands were protesting.
‘They're no better?’
‘Never better enough.’
Jane strolled over.
‘long time no see, Lowell.’
He agreed it had been.
Not seeing Jane, however, was no cause for regret; she had none of the kindly qualities of her husband.
Physically she resembled a smoothly groomed Pekinese with large lambent eyes, a silken haired little bitch.
Her curiosity now was obvious.
He hoped she wouldn't voice it.
She did, but in a roundabout way.
‘Zoe's not joining the craft class this Autumn, nor the keep-fit.
It's bad enough for one member of the family to hibernate — can't you persuade her?’
He didn't answer.
She coloured a little.
Had he ditched his wife, or had she ditched him?
His silence was chilling, but she pressed on.
’ I met her in town one day last week.
I didn't think she looked well.
Pale with shock perhaps; she'd just bought herself a mink.’
This time Leeson broke the silence before it froze over too hard.
‘I'm here on a photographic assignment; the camera is temporarily parked in the ticket office.
Do you know young Bennet the soloist?’
Lowell's brain was ticking over figures like a demented computer — so that was where the money was going — a mink jacket, or a mink coat — whichever, it was good-bye to a thousand plus.
He stopped thinking about his hands.
Leeson repeated the question.
‘Yes,’ Lowell said, ‘or rather — no.
I know of Bennet.
I haven't heard him play.’
‘Then you've a treat in store.
He has all the talent  you had at his age.
He's playing one of your favourites too — the C Minor.’
‘Good.’
She would have bought accessories to go with it.
Handbag.
Shoes.
‘He would be proud to know you were sitting in the audience tonight.’
Leeson's comment was honest it wasn't empty flattery.
‘I doubt it.’
And jewellery, possibly.
Something even more expensive that the gold locket.
‘Well very much on his mettle, certainly.
You're hard to follow.’
And damned hard to converse with — what the hell's wrong with you?
Leeson was looking around for inspiration, a topic that didn't rub salt into wounds.
But what he saw silenced him with shock.
The girl of the urn, he thought.
It couldn't be but it was.
Lowell had seen her too.
His heartbeat quickened as Rose approached.
at last the confirmation of something he had known for a long time.
He was stunned into silence as longing and relief surged through him.
Rose had changed into the Victorian clothes in the van.
And tidied her hair.
She wore no make-up.
She never did.
Lowell looked at her with deep loving awareness.
‘Yes,’ she said, ‘its me.’
She touched his hand with unusual gentleness.
‘If you have the tickets,’ she said’I suggest we go in.’
It was halfway through a brilliant performance that Lowell scarcely heard when he remembered the present he'd bought her.
The second-hand necklace he'd thought was wrong was suddenly right.
It was delicate pink coral and enhanced her maroon dress better than gold.
She leant over to him as he fastened it around her throat.
A few seats behind them Jane Leeson nudged her  husband.
‘Oh my, oh my,’ she whispered, ‘just wait till I tell Zoe!’
Leeson didn't respond.
He'd had a sudden sick recollection of the headline in the Illustrated Police News, dated 1870, which he had found in the library archives.
The atmosphere was rank with menace.
Needing air he got up abruptly — wishing to Christ that Lowell would take his thick ugly fingers off the girl's neck.
9
‘If it were Ben, ‘Louise told Zoe, ‘I wouldn't wage a long slow war of attrition, or whatever it is your doing.
I'd go to the cottage and raise hell.’
She watched Zoe's stooped figure as she cleared away some dead summer bedding.
It was a wonder she hadn't paid the part time gardener extra cash to do it foe her; perhaps the money in the joint account had run out.
Zoe had admitted her tactics in a weak moment, but sensing Louise's disgust hadn't referred to them since.
‘But its not Ben,’ Zoe stood and held her back which was beginning to ache, ‘and thats the difference.’
‘You not still afraid of him?’
Zoe dodged the question.
‘I see things differently thats all.’
She picked up the trowel and a bag of tulip bulbs.
‘I'll plant these later.
Come in for coffee?’
‘Better have it in my place, I have to watch the kids.’
A heart-to-heart in a domestic atmosphere which smelt of burnt rice pudding tended to lose some of its pain.
Clarissa was asleep in her carry-cot and Christopher was painting noisily at his easel.
Zoe tried to explain, keeping her voice low on account of the boy: she'd thought Lowell was in love with a Victorian photograph — and that was crazy.
She saw now that it was probably a photograph of the bitch he was going to bed with.
Jane Leeson had mentioned a girl infancy dress.
So he wasn't sick in his head — just  unfaithful — and that was a mild way of putting it.
She'd put it differently but certain little people might be listening.
l Louise looked at her young son and suggested he might like to take his easel on to the patio.
It was cold out there he protested, and why was Zoe whispering?
Didn't she know it was rude?
Ten minutes later, installed in the comparative quietness of the sitting-room.
Louise did some gentle probing.
Had Jane described her — not just the dress — the way she looked?
Zoe wasn't keen to talk about it any more.
That child had been impertinent.
Louise should bring him up better.
If she and Lowell had a child…she wouldn't let the thought form.
She shrugged.
‘Long hair worn in a chignon.
She had to lift up a few loose strands from her neck when Lowell fastened the beads.’
‘Beads?’
‘That's what she called them.’
The girl with the cat had long hair, too, Louise remembered, but it was worn loose.
It could be the same one.
The memorable part of the meeting had been Lowell's eagerness to be with her.
‘Did Jane tell you anything else?’
It wasn't what Jane had told her that had carried the conversation along as much as what Jane had implied.
Lowell had seemed interested she'd said.
And her lips had closed firmly while her eyes told Zoe the rest.
The bitch had knocked him cold.
Message received and understood?
‘She thought there was probably a friendship.’
Zoe smiled bitterly.
‘Lowell had walked off with her without introducing them.
I've told you all this before.’
‘It doesn't necessarily add up to going to bed.’
But it probably did.
Zoe's instinct could be right.
‘I still think you ought to go and have it out with him.’
Zoe was silent
Louise struggled not to say it — and lost ‘Ben and I will go with you if you want us to.’
She had already suggested this to Ben, and he hadn't been co-operative.
He'd gone the last time, he reminded her, because of Lowell's hands — well, partly.
He belonged to the medical profession not to the Sally Army.
If Lowell had another woman that was his business and Zoe's.
The affair had a different dimension now.
It wasn't just a case of depression and withdrawal any more.
So don't interfere.
‘I don't think there's any use in going to see him.’
Zoe said.
‘Not yet.’
She changed the subject.
Did he tell you how much the farmer had offered for the cottage?’
‘No, Apparently he wants access to the lower road.’
‘Did Lowell mention his name?’
Louise had a good memory.
Yes, Ballater.
He owns the farm over the hill.’
She took Zoe's mug and poured her fresh coffee.
‘But you can't do any thing about that, can you?
The cottage is in Lowell's name.’
No, Zoe agreed, she couldn't do anything about that.
But time would, she thought.
And the more presents he gave his whore, the shorter the time would be.
She wondered if she should hire a private detective to find out who the girl was.
But did it matter who she was?
Giving her a name didn't help the situation.
In a way it made it worse.
She took a sip of coffee from the thick earthenware mug.
Her last large expenditure had been on a Royal Doulton tea-service.
Very beautiful.
Had she been wise she would have bought the matching coffee cups.
It would have hastened the end.
Oh dear God, why did she want to laugh and cry at the same time?
Why was Louise looking at her like that?
‘I think it would be a good thing,’ she said stiffly, not meaning it, ‘if Lowell and I have a divorce.’
Louise was silent
And you want him there, Louise thought, you really do.
Zoe — uptight — prim — was throbbing away with hurt, anger loneliness.
Was it possible to feel that way without love?
Anyway who was she to judge?
There were many ways of fighting for your man — most of them nasty.
Rose came to him by night now.
Though he wasn't to know this, it was a gesture of defiance that was slowly becoming a sexual need.
Her grandfather's anger at her late return from Bristol — especially as she had gone there with Marshall — had been explosive.
He had expected her back by midnight at the latest, judging by the phone call and the length of the concert, so where had she been until two in the morning?
She told him that Cinderella's coach had broken down — a puncture.
They had, in fact, arrived at Lowell's cottage well before midnight and made love.
The September moon had sent its beams over the bed and into the corners of the bedroom so that everything seemed vivid, rather stark, a little ghostly.
He had walked her home afterwards, although she had wanted to stay.
If there was aggro she could handle it.
She was after all, eighteen.
Officially adult.
Her life was her own to live as she wished.
Lowell's conscience ebbed and flowed when he thought of Ballater and the old man's anxiety.
Rose stemmed the flow, encouraged the ebb, and he allowed it to be that way.
What harm was there in this strange delightful, mind-bending relationship?
He had never felt so fulfilled, so much at peace within himself.
Life had started dealing him aces again; the joker with the  twisted hands was now relegated to the bottom of the pack.
It began to re-surface when Greg Farrel walked into the cottage with the swaggering confidence of a man who had walked into it many times before.
It was seven o'clock in the evening and Lowell was mashing up cat biscuits in hot water for Middy.
Both men were equally startled.
Lowell saw a tall young red-head of about twenty-two dressed in motorcycle gear.
Before he spoke he knew he'd be brash and loud-mouthed; a son of a bitch.
Farrel sensed the antagonism.
‘Oh!’ he exclaimed ‘Who are you?’
‘I was about to ask you the same question.’
The kitten was clawing at Lowell's trouser leg and he put the food down on the floor.
It was extremely hot.
Middy, about to lick it delicately, took a leap backwards.
Farrel watched with interest.
Feeding a resident animal implied that the bloke with the food was resident, too.
‘The door was open,’ he explained, by way of an apology.
‘I thought Rose was here.’
‘It would help to advance our understanding of each other,’ Lowell retorted coldly, if you told me who you are.’
Farrel mimicked Lowell's pedantic voice inside his head, but he hadn't the guts to initiate a confrontation.
‘Greg Farrel,’ he said, and extended his hand.
‘How do you do, sir?’
The older generation, he had discovered, liked the courtesy title.
Lowell ignored the hand.
‘You still haven't told me why you've walked on my property — and what have you to do with Rose?’
His property?
Farrel had always thought that this was Ballater's place.
A farm cottage that Rose had commandeered for her own use from time to time.
‘So Ballater sold it to you?’ he said ‘I see,’He added, I think the kitten had burnt its tongue.’
Middy was licking his chest furiously.
Lowell explained that he'd inherited the cottage from a member of his family.
‘Why did you expect to find Rose here?’
He was alarmed at the possibility that this lad was from the village and that the village was rife with gossip.
Farrel explained that he was an agricultural student and had come to lend a hand with the harvest.
‘I was here last year.
It's a holiday job.
Rose liked to come down here when he old man got on her wick.’
He wondered if the new owner were a confidant of Ballater.
Possible.
So tell him nothing more.
Lowell felt a niggling sense of betrayal.
Rose had admitted coming here when Miss Marshall were alive.
Why hide from him the facts that she had been coming since?
Was this the yob who had planted the cannabis?
He suddenly remembered her carefully veiled amusement when he had mentioned the tinkers.
Things began fitting damningly into place.
Farrel decided it would be wise to lay new tracks through the forest — for Rose's sake.
He had blundered in here, and it would be necessary to withdraw by another route.
‘Colonel Ballater is a competent farmer.’
he said, considering he came to it late.
And he can't think too badly of me or he wouldn't of invited me back this year.
I'm staying at the farmhouse — last year I lodged in the village.’
He bent down and patted Middy.
‘Nice moggie.
Rose has a gift with animals.
Have you seen her handling that whacking great bull?’
He babbled on without waiting for an answer.
‘Most of the other agricultural students have to take holiday jobs away from farming — some of them prefer to.
I don't.
It'll be good to help get the harvest in — sweaty hard work — satisfying.’
Lowell sensed he was being diverted.
The honest  farm-lad building stoops of corn — or the modern equivalent.
It was a comforting diversion; he told himself not to question it too deeply and accept it for now.
Politeness, at this stage, demanded an introduction.
It was his turn to hold out his hand.
‘I'm Lowell Marshall, nothing to do with farming at all.’
But the name meant nothing to the visitor; obviously his fame had not penetrated the student community.
But when Farrel shook his hand he saw Lowell wince and realised he'd gripped too hard.
The bloke was arthritic.
‘Sorry,’ he apologised, ‘damned hard luck, sir,’It was the tone he adopted with Colonel Ballater — very Colonel Blimpish.
Not the right tone for this man, he sensed.
He hadn't his measure yet.
Why, for example, was he so interested in Rose?
’ What is it you do, then, Mr. Marshall?’
The obsession of the doers, Lowell thought, was always to push the non-doers into categories.
Marshall the ex-musician.
At the present time he told Farrel, he wasn't doing anything.
His expression warned him to leave it at that.
An academic on a sabbatical, Farrel wondered?
Rose would know.
‘It wouldn't be your van down by the bottom field would it?’
He clearly expected a reply in the negative.
Lowell said it was.
‘At a guess more comfortable than your motor-bike.
You came on one I think?’
Farrel said he had.
‘It's parked down by your van.
There's still no road access to the farm from here.’
‘No.’
Not while I hold on to my cottage, there isn't.
‘Then I'll have to drive over to Ballater's on the other road.’
Which you would have done in the first place, Lowell thought, if you hadn't been so sure that Rose was here.
This lad and Rose were of an age.
Some of the light was leaving the day.
10
It took Greg Farrel a few days to realise he was being vetted, both socially and professionally.
It was an uncomfortable experience.
Ballater ran the farm like a military exercise.
He was a good strategist, delegated carefully, and made full use of computers, working from his office most of the time.
Living in the house, Farrel soon discovered, was like being a very junior NCO in a senior officers' mess.
Evening meals, he guessed, would be hell.
Last year he had thought Rose was exaggerating when she described the experience.
‘You scrape around in your head for something to talk about,’ she'd said, ‘and you sip wine from Waterford crystal.
Your feet get hot in your bloody shoes and you want to go outside and walk through mud.’
That just about summed it up.
There were limits o what one could say about milk yields and the EEC.
The views of the tutors at the agricultural college weren't necessarily the same as the stern-looking old man's, and he didn't know enough about anything to enter into an argument.
Anyway, an argument was bad policy.
It was good policy to listen politely and say yes.
It was good policy to apologise, charmingly if possible, for not having brought more suitable clothes.
Jazzy tee-shirts and jeans were all he had.
He wondered how much the farm was worth.
Rose, watching him across the shining mahogany table, guessed what he was wondering.
That first evening they went walking up the hill  away from Marshall's cottage, to a small plantation of aspen trees.
There was a grassy hollow nearby, not a totally private place but well out of sight of the farm.
Here the chuntering sound of a tractor could be heard in the distance, and the gentle lowing of beasts.
Close at hand was the skittering of a small animal through the grass and the dry fragile sound of leaves turning.
Rose said: ‘I'm still me.
I hate it when my grandfather tries to plan my life.’
He understood her.
Even so, the plan might not be a bad one.
Archaic, of course, but it had its points.
His family couldn't afford to set him up as an independent farmer.
His father, annoyed that he hadn't followed family tradition and become a solicitor, had made the hoary old joke about marrying a rich man's daughter.
In this case — granddaughter.
And desirable.
He moved his hand gently over Rose's breasts.
She made it even plainer.
‘I hate farming.
One day ‘I'll leave here.
I'll never stay.’
Perhaps so, but she might be persuaded.
She moved his hand aside impatiently.
Compared with Lowell he was an amateur: clumsy and insensitive.
–‘Did you bring any pot?’ she asked.
He had, but in these new circumstances it might be unwise to admit it.
‘No.’
The hesitation before he replied had been a fraction too long.
She grinned at him.
‘Did you know that kif is Moroccan for peace and tranquillity?
I could do with both — so give.’
It wasn't on him.
It was in his luggage.
He might admit to having it later on, but he wasn't sure yet what he was going to do; it would be stupid to queer the pitch at this early stage of the game.
If you were protecting me for my own good, she  thought, I would be cross with you, but not this cross.
‘For God's sake,’ she snapped, ‘the stuff's harmless!’
‘Maybe — but it's not legal — and you got into trouble before.’
‘If you're going to start trotting out the right answers for the wrong reasons you'll go down great with my grandfather — what are you doing now — practising?’
She was beginning to annoy him.
And excite him.
There was something different about her this year.
She was, to a degree, indifferent to him — and even to the cannabis.
He guessed she didn't care all that much whether he handed it over or not.
So where was she getting her kicks?
It was only after several days of hard work harvesting, rounded off by celibate nights, that he discovered why Rose kept her bedroom door locked.
She locked it because she wasn't in it.
It was by chance that he saw her, close to midnight, making her way towards the bottom road.
At first he thought she might be sleep-walking.
Her long dress looked like an old fashioned night-gown.
But Rose wouldn't wear anything in bed.
And she walked as if she knew where she was going.
By the time he left his bedroom and took the path across the field she was out of sight.
He walked a little way along the road, past Marshall's van, and couldn't find her.
The only place she could disappear into in that space of time was Marshall's cottage.
He retraced his footsteps and stayed around for a while, but it was too cold to linger long.
The next night he wore his leather jacket and warm boots and positioned himself near the field where the Charolais cattle grazed — the vantage point that Rose had used to watch Lowell's cottage before she knew him.
She returned just after dawn.
In the early morning light he could see that she wore a black cape over a dark red dress.
He hadn't seen either before.
Her hair was messed up as if she'd come  straight from bed, and her cheeks despite the coolness of the day were flushed as if she'd recently made love.
She hadn't seen him, but she sensed someone might be there and glanced over her shoulder.
He moved backwards into the lee of the wall.
She shrugged and walked on quietly to the house.
The front door was ajar.
She knew now who it was and stood waiting in the hall until Greg joined her.
Abashed at being caught spying, his tone was aggressive: ‘Had a good time?’
‘The best ever.
’ Her eyes were mocking.
‘Does the old man know?’
‘Don't be ridiculous.’
She wondered what price his silence might be.
But he had no price.
He liked her.
His pride was hurt.
His body was young, strong; last year she had delighted in it.
Had her new lover been one of his pals it would be insulting — but not this insulting.
He said the first thing that came into his head.
‘He's weird.
The cottage is macabre.
And your dress looks like a bloody red shroud.’
She made a V-sign turned the wrong way — a silent expletive — and made for the stairs.
That evening at dinner Greg asked Ballater about Marshall's cottage.
‘I always thought the place belonged to you, sir.’
Ballater said he hoped that one day it would.
He sensed that the conversation must have a point, but he wasn't sure what it was.
Greg said he'd met Marshall briefly.
‘He says he has no farming connections.’
Ballater explained Marshall's background while Rose listened silently.
‘Does he ever come up to visit you, sir?’
Ballater answered smoothly that he hadn't invited him.
‘Remiss of me, but I tend not to socialise.’
He added drily, ‘Rose attended a concert with him.’
‘Classical music,’ Rose broke in.
‘Not really your kind of thing, Greg.
’ It was safer to guide the conversation in another direction.
‘He happened to be going to Bristol and drove me in.
I went shopping for clothes.’
‘And didn't get any,’ her grandfather observed, ‘or if you did, I haven't seen them.’
‘There wasn't anything suitable.’
The clothes were for Lowell.
For the cottage.
For the person she became when she went there.
Greg's jibe about the dress being like a shroud rankled.
He'd been talking shit.
‘I like rock music; something with a good thumping beat to it.’
Greg mimed it with his fingers on the edge of the table and looked at Rose.
‘You like it, too.’
She understood the sexual implications of the mime and hoped her grandfather didn't.
But her fears were groundless: the generation gap in this instance had him beached on a far shore.
The boy had stated a preference, that was all.
Rock music went on in discotheques, he supposed.
They were places of revolving lights and gyrating bodies.
Natural meeting places for today's moronic young.
He told Farrel he had no objection if he wanted to take Rose to a discotheque, provided they returned at a reasonable hour.
‘Use the small car,’ he suggested.
‘The Peugeot.’
When it had gone midnight Lowell knew she wasn't coming.
The cat, sitting on his knee, yawned and stretched voluptuously.
One of its paws gently brushed Lowell's neck, a feather-light touch, the claws neatly encased in fur.
Ash from the log whispered in the fireplace.
The room was lit by candles, as Rose disliked the smell of his paraffin lamp.
He focused his attention on them, concentrating on trivia, blocking out anxiety.
He remembered the tall thin red ones Zoe used to put in  the silver candelabra when she was entertaining.
Candles for effect.
It was difficult to read by candle-light.
Or to compose.
So he worked on the nocturne by day, mindful of the contradiction.
He tended to talk a lot inside his head when Rose wasn't there.
A dialogue with himself.
Controllable.
He told himself she wasn't coming — that there was a perfectly good reason for her absence.
She wasn't Iying dead in a field — mugged — raped.
She had always insisted that he wasn't to meet her, that she might come any time.
Or not come at all.
The dialogue tonight might be controlled and rational — but it gave him no ease.
He couldn't just sit here and do nothing.
He put Middy down, found the torch, and went walking up the field path.
The cat prowled after him, padding softly through the dark grass.
The night air had a rank sweaty smell like the distilled essence of anxiety.
There was no sweetness anywhere.
His torch made yellow arcs across the hedgerows.
Snaked through the undergrowth.
Probed.
Searched and found nothing.
The sky, dizzy with stars, made him vertiginous and he stumbled and fell.
Everything was too vast — too silent — too dark.
He sat crouching where he had fallen, his head resting on his knees, his hands over his eyes.
Not moving.
Disorientated.
Time seemed to have stopped.
He was aware of nothing other than the necessity to breathe.
Middy rubbed softly against him and the trance — almost cataleptic — was broken.
Bemused, a little frightened, he got slowly to his feet and looked around him.
He was here in familiar fields.
Everything was normal.
There was nothing wrong.
Just an odd reaction.
A queer mood.
It had passed.
He walked up the hill near the farm and then reaching the summit gazed down at the farmhouse.
A  few pale lights shone at the windows, but there was no sign of Rose.
Of anyone.
After a while he persuaded himself to turn back.
To look for her was an intrusion on her privacy.
She might be with that red-headed yob.
If he came on them in the darkness and they were…but she wouldn't…it was perfectly natural…she was eighteen and he…
He forced himself to say it and spoke aloud: ‘They might be making love.
Go back to your own bed.
Accept it.’
When he returned to the cottage he extinguished all but one of the candles and took it through to the bedroom.
The bed looked cold, uninviting.
For Christ's sake, he couldn't accept it!
He wanted her.
Needed her.
If she went from him permanently, he didn't know what he'd do.
There were times when Rose felt as if she were split in half — an interesting rather than a painful experience.
Two men wanted her.
Two men had her — in different degrees.
Sex with Greg was improving a little, he was learning to be less selfish, to think of her pleasure.
It was an easy, calm relationship — no hassle — no tension — no acting.
When she was with Lowell she was on a pedestal — she couldn't even swear — but his love-making was fantastic.
Together in the cottage, in bed, she felt like exploding with love for him.
Out of bed he was less perfect.
How could a man so intelligent in every other way be so obtuse when it came to ordinary everyday living?
She liked the cottage as much as he did, it cast its own peculiar spell, but it wasn't something out of Grimm.
It didn't have walls of gingerbread.
The larder wasn't magic; it didn't re-stock itself.
And he was running out of fuel for the fire.
The van, he told her, was an unexpected expense.
He had to have a new battery for it, and two of the tyres weren't legal.
Put  simply, the thrill of flouting grandfather's wishes was beginning to pall.
While Greg was living up at the farm she forgot to bring down milk for the cat.
When he went back to college she began to remember again.
In the meantime Lowell had made do with powdered milk for both him and the animal.
He saw the omission as a symptom of a temporary aberration.
When the milk began coming again he hoped the aberration was over.
Rose had had fun with a boy of her own age.
He had gone.
She would forget him.
It was the voice of reason.
Forced.
Necessary.
Unconvincing.
Rose thought she would forget Greg, too, but it wasn't so easy.
He wrote letters to her, funny ones with a few clumsy sentences about missing her.
He wasn't in residence at the college now and had a small flat in Gloucester.
If her grandfather removed the ball and chain, he wrote, would she visit?
She knew that he had an eye to the future, the farm was a desirable property.
He didn't love her as Lowell loved her, but he probably loved her as much as he was capable of loving anyone.
His shallow waters were becoming more comfortable to dabble in than Lowell's dark and turbid sea.
That it was becoming darker, more turbid as time went on, disturbed her.
He seemed to want to possess her, body and soul.
It was the soul she jibbed at.
She had her own thoughts and her own way of expressing them.
With Lowell a lot had to be edited out before she spoke.
But she couldn't control her dreams and sometimes she talked in her sleep.
Lowell, holding her, made little sense of what she was saying.
It was something about a child.
Once she woke up crying.
He stroked her hair back from her forehead.
‘What is it?
Tell me.’
‘I don't know.
I can't remember.’
The dream was fractured into a kaleidoscope of shapes that refused to form into a coherent whole.
There was a voice — accusatory, though unclear — a jumble of words inducing a strong feeling of guilt.
Fully awake she was able to block its message.
But it remained, mocking her, at the centre of the nightmare.
She sat up in bed, freeing herself from Lowell's arms.
‘What time is it?’
He lit the bedside candle and looked at his watch.
‘Twenty past one.’
Her maroon dress was flung over the back of a chair by the window.
The boots, neatly placed side by side, were near the bed.
It could be the stage setting of a period play, she thought, but it wasn't.
It was an Autumn night in the 1980s — and an Autumn night a hundred or more years ago.
The latter felt the more real.
It was ghostly.
Scary.
It was also inconvenient.
‘Lowell, I need to go to the loo.
’ The loo was bloody outside.
He got out of bed.
‘Wait until I get my torch.
I'll come with you.
—’
She was trying to shove her hot feet into her button boots.
It was all so damned stupid, so damned bloody fucking ridiculous.
‘It's raining — I should have wellies.’
She was crying again, this time with exasperation.
He hugged her — his gorgeous, beautiful Rose.
She pushed him away.
‘Don't!
I'm in a hurry.’
They went down the garden path shielded by his big black umbrella.
When they returned she didn't want to go back to bed.
She wanted to go home.
It was the first time she had left him before dawn.
The idyll was breaking.
He couldn't — wouldn't — admit it.
She was part of his life.
Part of the cottage.
Her destiny was here.
He tried to explain it to her, but she didn't know what he was talking about.
He was wise enough not to be too explicit.
He'd found a photograph of someone  like her, he said.
Some time in the past she had belonged to the cottage, as Rose belonged to it now.
Where was the photograph? she wanted to know.
His wife had destroyed it.
But why?
He shrugged.
‘It doesn't matter.
I have you.’
They were sitting in the firelight, the candles making little red tongues of flame in the dark corners of the room.
She fancied they were repeating what he said: I have you…
I have you…
I have you…
She had filched a bottle of claret from her grandfather's stock and they had been drinking it liberally.
Perhaps it was the wine speaking.
Wine made you a little light-headed — but it also soothed.
So why this persistent feeling of unease?
She had never looked more lovely, he thought, and told her so.
The soft fall of her hair over her shoulders gleamed red in places.
The dark pink of the coral necklace had trapped a tendril before curving downwards to the small swell of her breasts.
He leaned over and disentangled it.
‘You must never cut your hair.’
She moved impatiently.
She must never do this.
She must never do that.
‘If I were painting a portrait of you, I'd call it Rose by Firelight.’
‘Lowell, do you want to go to bed with me?’
Her voice was crisp.
‘Because if you do, you'd better start undoing all these goddamned buttons while the fire's still hot.’
He winced.
At the ‘goddamned’, she wondered?
Or at the way she'd said it?
Both, probably: she'd rocked the pedestal.
Later, in bed, she was back in character again.
He knew how to make her body come alive.
‘I love you,’ she told him, as she'd told him many  times before.
Three easy words that expressed her physical joy.
Words he wanted to hear.
Words she tended to forget when she was up and away from him.
The relationship, Lowell realised, had reached the stage when it needed to move onwards more positively.
Rose, despite their love-making, was becoming restless.
Impatient.
She deserved better than these clandestine meetings.
He hadn't thought of marriage before.
Now he did.
It was daunting.
A divorce from Zoe — if she could be persuaded.
The selling-up of the house.
If he and Zoe had half each, it would give him about forty thousand pounds' worth of capital.
If Zoe agreed.
But why should she?
The honourable thing would be to give her the house.
She hadn't transgressed, he had.
Odd word — transgressed.
Fornication — even odder.
He couldn't feel they related to anything he'd done.
But Rose might not want to marry him.
If she didn't, what did she want?
A tarting up of the cottage — an inside lavatory?
A few expensive gifts?
Holidays together?
A firm step into the twentieth century and all the comfort that money could bring…if he had any.
He couldn't believe it.
Zoe was the materialist — not Rose.
Zoe set store by the unimportant.
Rose had different values.
Rose was a girl to write music for.
To dream about.
To please.
But how?
What was he to do to hold her to him?
To stop the drift?
What course of action should he take?
He was like a traveller dithering at cross-roads, unsure which way to go.
Jane Leeson went into the photographic studio and told her husband that Lowell's girlfriend was in the reception area.
‘She thinks she can just waltz in and have her photograph taken now.’
Most people did.
Sometimes they were lucky.
Today Leeson had a free hour before attending a wedding.
To slot in a portrait was possible.
If he wanted to.
‘You do have the time,’ Jane pointed out.
But not the inclination she sensed.
Her husband's reaction to Lowell's bit on the side had been subdued.
He hadn't wanted to talk about her.
‘Lowell isn't with her,’ she said.
‘He's had the decency to keep away.
So, from that point of view, it's not embarrassing.’
Embarrassment wasn't the inhibiting factor.
Leeson was perturbed.
‘You can't mix business with friendship,’ Jane–urged, ‘and anyway the friendship isn't that close.
There's no reason why you shouldn't take the photograph.’
Leeson, by nature taciturn, had told her very little about the original photograph and nothing at all about the research he and the Bristol archivist had done on it.
Apart from anything else, history wasn't really her thing.
‘What is she wearing?’
‘Just the usual clobber kids wear these days — a yellow tee-shirt — bib-and-brace denims.
She has a  131 canvas bag, so perhaps there's something more suitable in that.
Shall I send her in?’
Rose, who hadn't any recollection of the Leesons, had been surprised by Jane Leeson's expression when she had walked into the shop.
On reflection she believed it was something to do with the way she looked — her casual dress.
The women in the portraits on the wall wore a sleek assortment of cashmere and pearls or simple expensive-looking dresses.
The photograph would, Rose believed, be a tactful way of hinting that she didn't intend being around so much.
She and Greg had exchanged snaps when he left.
No problem there.
No soul searching.
But with Lowell nothing was easy.
He was getting too intense.
Too serious.
It was time to cool it.
There was a dressing-room off the reception area, she noticed, and when the receptionist returned she offered to go and change.
But she was told to go straight in; Leeson's time was precious.
Leeson had hoped that his imagination had exaggerated the resemblance, but he saw when the girl walked in that it hadn't.
The woman in the Victorian photograph and this girl had ties of blood.
There had to be a relationship.
Though separated by several generations it showed strongly.
He observed the tilt of her chin and the curve of her cheekbones as she took in her surroundings.
Rose turned her attention to him, feeling a little disconcerted by the keenness of his gaze.
‘Well,’ she smiled, after the preliminary introduction, ‘do I pass whatever test you have?’
‘What do you mean?’
‘I guess you pick and choose.
Am I photogenic?’
She was.
Very.
Like her ancestor: an unlucky beauty.
He tried to find a compromise that would satisfy his artistic urge and quieten his conscience.
There was a  chair on a small platform in front of the screen.
He told her to go and sit on it.
‘You mean — just as I am?’
‘Yes.’
‘To try and fix a pose — or something?
I have to change before you take me.’
Lowell took you, Leeson thought grimly, into his bed.
It was macabre.
‘I just want to look at you for a moment or two.’
Her clothes were as different as possible from the Victorian get-up of the other one.
Her face was young and fresh and shouldn't be shadowed — but shadows would be necessary.
She would have to do something about her hair.
‘Have you ever thought of pulling your hair back-plaiting it?’
‘Not since I was in school.’
‘I think it would suit you that way.’
‘Well, I don't.
The way I wear my hair has to suit my dress.’
Rose left the chair and picked up the canvas bag.
‘It's in here.’
She took it out and held it in front of her, the deep rich red material glowing against her skin.
‘There's a coral necklace to go with it.
’ He commented brusquely that he'd seen her in it before — at the concert.
‘You were with Lowell Marshall.’
She thought she was beginning to understand.
These people were friends of Lowell — and perhaps of his wife.
They didn't approve.
‘That's right.
I was with Lowell.
The photograph is for him.’
‘Then you must let me take it my way.’
‘Your way?
What do you mean?’
He talked a little about artistic interpretation without much hope of her agreeing.
‘You're young — fresh — very much of this day and age.
I want to enhance that.
The clothes you're wearing now are just right.
I like the  way you look, apart from your hair.
It needs tying back.’
‘Lowell likes it arranged more formally, swept off my face, but not in a plait.’
‘It spoils the gamine look.’
‘But I'm not gamine.
He doesn't see me that way.
I have to pose in the Victorian dress and with my hair the way I told you.’
She ran her fingers through it in exasperation.
‘Not this untidy — I'll comb it.’
‘Please — it has to be my way.’
She realised with astonishment that he was actually pleading.
Then he added: ‘Or not at all.’
‘You mean — you want me to go somewhere else.’
‘No.
’ He had to give some sort of explanation.
‘If Lowell asked you to have your portrait taken in period dress, I think he was unwise.
He wasn't seeing you clearly.
I think he should appreciate you for what you are — an attractive young woman of today.’
‘But he sees me the other way — he spoke of another photograph — he was telling me that…’
He interrupted her.
‘Then you haven't seen it — the one Lowell had enlarged?’
‘No.
Why?
What about it?
Was it a nude or something?’
‘No, not a nude.
A Victorian woman posed by an urn.
She remembered the carved piece of stone that Lowell held in his hand sometimes — part of an urn, he'd told her.
‘What's wrong with that?
Why shouldn't I pose that way if it pleases him?’
He spoke unguardedly.
‘I think it's a bit sick.’
‘Sick?
What do you mean?’
He regretted the indiscretion and didn't answer.
She was getting worried.
‘Why is it sick to dress like someone from the past?
Who was she, anyway?’
‘It doesn't matter — just someone who lived a long time ago — best forgotten.’
‘But — why?
What happened to her?’
It was becoming increasingly difficult to prevaricate.
‘I suppose these days she'd be a called a victim of circumstances.
She lived not far from where I think Lowell's cottage is — somewhere in that area.
And then she moved to London with her child — a little girl.
I don't know the details.
Her ending wasn't happy.
But anyway, that's all in the past.
A photograph of you — here — today — should be happy.
That's why I want to take one of you as you are now.’
‘As I am now?
What do you mean?’
He didn't know what he meant — or rather, he did, but wouldn't admit it.
It was difficult to be rational.
‘I mean a photograph of you dressed as you are.
Not dressed the way she might have dressed.’
‘Do I look like her?’
‘As you are now — no.’
It wasn't convincing.
She knew he was being evasive and sensed that in some way he was trying to protect her.
From what?
From Lowell?
Lowell's behaviour — at times almost paranoid — was beginning to have a pattern, and the photograph of the other woman was at the centre of it.
Lowell had tried to form her in that woman's image.
He had been delighted to the point of euphoria when she had bought the Victorian clothes.
He had drooled over her — well, almost — when she wore them.
As yet she couldn't see the pattern clearly.
This photographer could.
Her hands were cold and there was a dryness at the back of her throat.
‘In what way was her end sad?’
He wished he could stop the conversation.
It should never have reached this stage.
‘It needn't concern you.’
She persisted.
‘Oh, but I feel it does.
Did she die naturally — violently — how?’
He began fiddling with the tripod and didn't answer.
‘Was she…murdered?’
It came out harshly.
He hesitated.
It was impossible to fob her off with vague statements — and perhaps unwise.
But it was extraordinarily difficult to tell her.
The spoken word was somehow too brutal.
And so was the written word — but perhaps less so.
He took the photostat copy of the Illustrated Police News out of the roll-top desk where he had kept it together with the original photograph; under a pile of old negatives away from his wife's prying eyes.
Before handing it to her he glanced at the photograph again.
It had been smudged by the photocopier and was by no means as clear as the original.
But that, he hoped, would diffuse the shock.
The similarity — here — wasn't so striking.
The paragraph under it, written in the archaic florid, pompous prose of the nineteenth century would have less impact, he hoped, than modern day reporting of a similar murder.
The whole sordid mess would be distanced by its style of presentation.
‘A tragedy of the past, ‘he said handing the paper to Rose.
‘It occurred more than a hundred years ago.
Lowell happened to find the original photograph — somewhere in the cottage, I believe.
It has no relevance to either you or him.
Read it if you must.
And then forget it.
It's not the sort of unfortunate affair to commemorate with a fun photograph — if that's what your trying to do.
Had Lowell known the story — what happened to the woman — he wouldn't have wanted you to have the photograph taken in similar style to the other one.
Obviously he didn't know its history.’
The studio was shaded with heavy blue curtains and as he drew them back so that she could see to read more easily, a shaft of sunlight struck across her hair.
He watched her, moved by her beauty, worried by her growing pallor.
He had tried to protect her from what could be a nasty piece of family history, he reminded  himself, and she had refused to be protected.
Perhaps instinctively.
It was better that she should know the truth.
An unpleasant truth.
But hers was an unpleasant liaison.
Possibly dangerous.
Certainly damaging.
Lowell should bed a woman of his own age and leave this girl alone.
After a few minutes Rose handed the paper back to him.
He had thrust her into a nightmare landscape.
It had to be walked through.
From where?
To where?
She didn't know.
Leeson waited for her to say something, but she was silent.
He asked if the woman's name meant anything to her.
‘Had you heard of her before?’
She gazed at him blankly, the question not penetrating, and murmured something incoherent.
Perturbed by her reaction, which even in these circumstances seemed extreme, he tried to calm her.
‘Don't let what you've read upset you.
It's past.
Finished with.
Today's pain is enough for all of us.’
Her eyes slowly focused on him as she became aware that he was mouthing words at her — trying to be kind.
‘Pain,’ she repeated the word.
And then repudiated it, making little pushing gestures with her hands.
‘No,’ she said.
‘No!’
It was some while afterwards when Rose realised that she had left the canvas bag with the maroon dress and necklace behind at the studio.
It didn't matter.
The dress was only fit for burning.
She imagined it on fire in Lowell's garden.
Red, the colour of a bloody shroud, as Greg had said.
He had been right.
Her footsteps had taken her to the car park — how, she couldn't remember.
An hour had gone by — somewhere — like dust in the wind.
People were coming and going.
Revving engines.
Slamming doors.
The air smelt of petrol.
The bonnet of the Peugeot was cold as  she leaned against it trembling.
It was impossible to drive home safely — to drive safely anywhere.
She needed to be on her own.
To sort things out in her head.
To rid herself of the nightmare voice that for the first time had spoken clearly and terribly in the full rational light of day.
Ballater received a phone call from Rose at seven o'clock that evening.
She wouldn't be returning to the farm for a while, she told him.
She wanted to be free to do her own thing — be independent — get a job, perhaps.
She would be in touch again when she had an address.
He wasn't to worry about her.
She was perfectly all right.
Quite capable of looking after herself.
The words had come out in a babble and by the time he had gathered his wits and been able to respond she had put the phone down.
Obviously she wasn't perfectly all right.
He had seen her briefly at breakfast and she hadn't seemed disturbed about anything.
She was going to Bristol to shop, she'd told him.
He had offered to top up the money he had given her before by another twenty pounds and she had accepted with polite reluctance.
There was enough money in her savings account to see her through for a while.
And she had the car — the small one.
From the practical point of view she could, as she said, look after herself.
But emotionally?
She was eighteen years old — but not eighteen years wise.
According to Craddock she still visited Marshall despite all his warnings.
He had received the information without comment.
Craddock's gratuitous spying, though well-intended, angered him.
After three days of no further contact from her and three sleepless nights of worry, he went down to the cottage.
Lowell, also stressed by Rose's absence, was working  on the nocturne.
The music reflected his mood and had lost its former tranquillity.
The night skies were sombre and starless.
The notes on the staves were reluctant to move, but they totally engrossed him.
When he went to open the door to Ballater's knock he greeted him without enthusiasm, annoyed by the interruption.
Ballater, relieved to see that he was there, asked if he might come in.
‘We need to talk.’
Lowell apologised.
‘Of course— I'm sorry.’
He gestured for Ballater to follow him into the living-room and indicated the chair by the empty fireplace.
Ballater noticed the sheets of manuscript on the table and his anxiety abated a little.
This talented, if washed-up musician wasn't harbouring Rose — though he might know of her whereabouts.
He wondered how to question him tactfully.
Lowell, in the real world again where music didn't impinge, was watching him keenly.
This wasn't a social call.
Growing anxiety overcame discretion.
‘Is Rose all right?’
Ballater was carefully non-committal.
‘I believe so — yes.’
An odd answer, Lowell thought.
He gathered up the music manuscript into a tidy pile and put his pencil slant-wise across the top.
Either she was all right— or she wasn't.
She hadn't been to see him for nearly a week, but that had happened before when the red-headed lout was staying at the farm.
It didn't signify that anything terrible had happened to her.
She could have a cold.
She could be growing cold.
Even colder.
And that would be terrible for him.
An exaggeration?
No.
He waited for Ballater to explain himself or to state the reason for his visit.
Ballater was trying to assess the situation objectively.
The musician had shown concern and that meant  involvement.
But he hadn't known of Rose's departure.
If — when — she returned, she might return to the cottage and not to the farm.
The place had an odd hold on her.
And on Marshall.
He seemed to be as much part of it as the cold stone floor he was standing on.
As that other man had been…over a century ago.
He suppressed the thought.
This was a present-day crisis.
An unsuitable liaison that must end.
To destroy the cottage in order to gain access to the road was desirable.
To be rid of Marshall was an even more pressing need.
‘I was wondering,’ he said abruptly, ‘if you've had second thoughts about selling up?’
Lowell sensed that there was something more to the question than a further sounding-out about a commercial proposition.
The old man wanted him out.
Primarily because of Rose.
He said he had no intention of leaving.
Ballater glanced critically around him.
The cottage now had a very real smell of poverty.
The day was chill and there was no sign of a dead fire in the grate or of fresh fuel waiting to be lit.
On his last visit he had been given coffee.
This time, he guessed correctly, he wouldn't be offered anything.
‘I need access,’ he reiterated.
‘Don't be afraid of naming a price, even if it seems exorbitant.
We can come to an agreement.’
‘At no price.’
It was emphatic.
‘Why?’
The question was sharp, the eyes keen.
‘I like being here.’
‘I find that impossible to believe.’
‘But it's true.’
Ballater shook his head.
A fox liked its lair — and this place was little better.
A man of Marshall's background wasn't used to squalor — a man of Marshall's background, if he were totally sane, would quit.
But the lair was — had been — conveniently near to Rose.
‘I'm prepared to double the offer I made last time.’
‘Sorry — no.’
It was time to cut through to the heart of the matter.
‘Rose has gone.
She's no longer at the farm.
’ Lowell picked up the pencil without being aware of it.
It snapped between his fingers.
He put the two pieces carefully down on the table.
The old man was regarding him as if he were a strange species behind bars.
It didn't matter.
Let him look.
Don't play games with me.
Say what you mean.
‘Gone — where?’
‘Bristol initially — she might still be there — I don't know.’
Lowell drew out his chair from the table and sat down.
A low, ominous buzzing had started inside his head.
‘Explain.’
It was peremptory.
Ballater-deliberately waited a moment or two before replying.
‘The excuse was a shopping trip, but obviously with the intention of not returning.
She probably wanted to avoid confrontation by not telling me until after she'd gone.
Her phone call was brief — just that she'd contact me when she had an address.
That was three days ago, and I haven't heard from her since.’
‘Have you informed the police?’
‘No.
She's of age.
Free to do as she likes.’
‘For God's sake, how can you be so complacent?’
Lowell's voice was shrill.
‘Anything could have happened to her.’
Whatever had happened to her, Ballater thought bitterly, this gaunt, nerve-ridden, middle-aged man had something to do with it.
He could have made her pregnant.
‘You may accuse me of anything you like,’ he  answered stiffly, ‘but not of complacency.
I stopped being complacent when Rose was delivered into my care.’
He glanced towards the window that overlooked the garden.
Should he tell Marshall the truth about the cannabis bed?
No, there had been no trouble of that sort recently.
Family troubles, and God knew his own had had plenty, were better not discussed.
Even so a few hints about the frailty of Rose's nature might not come amiss.
He phrased it carefully.
‘Had my wife — her grandmother — been alive when Rose was orphaned she would have given her what she needed — and never received from her own mother — stability — a moral code.’
It sounded old-fashioned, but he didn't care.
Her mother's drug addiction had wrecked the marriage.
‘Rose came to me when she was fifteen — a difficult age.
I sent her to a boarding school — not a very well chosen establishment, I'm afraid, but I wasn't to know.
Some of the friends she made there were undesirable.’
A mild way of putting it, he thought.
Heredity, in Rose's case, had never been well balanced by environment.
Even here, in the environs of the farm, there were snares.
He looked coldly at Marshall.
‘She's immature and lacks judgement.
And she won't accept my guidance.
I'm concerned only for her good.
If she would only realise that she would have confided in me now.’
He moved uncomfortably and his chair scraped against the dusty edge of the grate, dislodging a small carved piece of stone that had been propped against the hearth.
Lowell bent down and picked up the fragment of urn, wiping it with the palm of his hand.
And then sat holding it.
The question Ballater had to force himself to ask underlined his own failure and it came out gruffly.
‘I know she has been friendly with you — perhaps spoken freely to you.
Can you throw any light on why she  should suddenly take off now?
Is she in any kind of trouble?’
Trouble was Ballater's euphemism for pregnancy.
He hoped Marshall understood it.
Lowell did.
He remembered the night when Rose had cried out in her sleep — something about a child.
She had sat up in bed, panicked by the nightmare, weeping.
He had tried to hold her, comfort her, but she had pushed him away.
He had taken no precautions during their love-making but she had assured him that she had that under control.
She might have forgotten to protect herself.
She could be carrying his child.
He felt both guilt and elation.
Ballater noticed Marshall's expression and guessed the conclusion that he had come to.
He controlled his anger.
Perhaps it was the wrong conclusion.
He waited for him to answer and when it became obvious that he couldn't the older man voiced what he hoped was true.
‘It's possible that she might have gone to the young agricultural student — Farrel — who was here recently.
They had quite a warm friendship.’
If Farrel had got her into trouble, it was easily the less distressing alternative.
Lowell looked briefly into the abyss and then resolutely closed his eyes to it.
If Rose was bearing a child, that child was his.
When she returned — and she would surely return soon — she would need reassuring and a lot of tender loving.
She would also need money — and the stability the old man was talking about.
He could provide neither.
But must.
Somehow.
The old man's offer to buy the cottage was tempting, a few thousand pounds could be put to immediate use, but it was an offer he couldn't accept.
The money would have to come from another source.
This was Rose's place — and his.
He tried to keep his voice level.
‘I'm sorry, I'm afraid I can't tell you anything.
I don't know why Rose  has gone.
If you should hear from her I'd be obliged if you'd let me know.’
Ballater stood up to take his leave.
He felt very tired, very aware of his age and inadequacy.
The interview had done nothing other than increase his dislike of the musician.
There was no obligation to tell him anything.
‘Thank you for sharing my concern,’ he said dully.
The reply may have been non-committal, but his eyes were decidedly wintry.
12
If Jane Leeson had been a woman to examine her motives she would have absolved herself from any accusation of spite.
She was, she believed, a practical person and a good friend.
Lowell's bit-on-the-side had walked out of the studio and left the canvas holdall containing her dress and beads behind.
The latter might or might not be valuable, she was no connoisseur of jewellery.
If she had also left her name and address they could have been parcelled up and posted to her — but she hadn't.
As she hadn't returned for them during the week they would have to be returned to her — via Lowell.
The address of Lowell's cottage wasn't known to her either, therefore the holdall would have to be taken to the home once shared by Lowell and Zoe.
That was the practical thing to do.
The good friend was acting as a good friend should.
That was all.
Her husband didn't agree, but couldn't dissuade her.
In mitigation he wrote a letter to Lowell and hoped Zoe wouldn't open it.
Drawing a blank at the house was a disappointment.
Jane had driven over to Zoe's in happy anticipation of stirring up trouble: the other woman's clothes and beads were tangible evidence of Lowell's love affair.
She had prepared sentences of outrage and sympathy and felt cheated of an interesting half hour or so.
After ringing the bell several times she reluctantly pushed her husband's letter through the letter-box — he had very meanly sealed it before she could read it — and took the  holdall around to the boiler room at the back of the house.
It would be dry there should it rain.
If she hadn't been due at her craft class at eleven that morning she would have called back later, but as that wasn't possible she'd phone.
She had behaved very reasonably, she told her husband afterwards.
She had done everything that seemed right in the circumstances.
Even her driving as she left Zoe's wasn't to blame.
The other car had skidded into hers and made her forget the phone call.
Who could possibly blame her for that?
Lowell, driving up the road in the opposite direction, had witnessed the collision — a minor one — and decided to do nothing about it.
Other drivers had witnessed it, too, so leave it to them.
He hadn't recognised Jane Leeson; if he had he might have stopped.
Or perhaps not.
His social conscience, dulled by a sleepless night, was now barely alive.
In his narrow world there was room only for Rose.
When she came back to him he must present her with a positive plan of action.
And for that, Zoe's co-operation was necessary.
It felt strange to be letting himself into his own house again.
He inserted the key almost furtively and stood in the small vestibule and smelt the place — floor polish mixed with the bitter scent of chrysanthemums in a blue bowl.
There was a letter on the mat — a square manilla envelope addressed to him and marked ‘personal’.
It assured him of his right to be here and he picked it up and put it in his jacket pocket before walking through into the hall with its white doors leading to the reception rooms.
The brass door knobs gleamed.
He felt assailed by the bright brashness of everything and missed the soft darkness of the cottage.
It was difficult to believe that he had ever lived here.
Why had he and Zoe, in the first flush of affluence, decided the desirable residence was truly desirable?
It looked like a mock-up set in a middle-class soap opera, shining with domestic trivia, very clean.
The Chinese  rug in the centre of the hall showed no blemish — until he walked on it with his muddy brogues.
In the old days he would have felt guilt.
The flakes of mud would have been carefully removed and put in the rubbish bin in the kitchen.
Now, he looked at them, shrugged, and began a quick tour of the house.
It was empty.
Frustration mingled with relief.
It would have been less harrowing to have got the meeting over quickly; on the other hand the delay while he awaited her return gave him more time to think and plan.
First, like a thief casing the joint, he went from room to room again and made a mental inventory of his disposable assets.
Correction: his and Zoe's disposable assets.
Apart from a few ornaments and pictures he had paid for everything.
Even if the law allowed it — which it wouldn't — he couldn't leave Zoe bereft of everything except ornaments and pictures.
The insurance valuation of the contents was probably lower than it should be in these days of rising prices, but if it could be taken as a guide and the amount split in two it might be regarded as fair.
Fair to whom?
Certainly not to Zoe.
She had done nothing wrong — or right.
She had entrenched herself in virtue.
His was the guilt.
It seemed a mean act to open her wardrobe, but he couldn't resist it.
She had covered the mink coat with a nylon overall.
Part of the cuff was visible and reminded him of Middy sleeping under the quilt.
It was getting more and more difficult to feed the cat — and to feed himself.
He opened his own wardrobe.
Had he ever worn those natty pinstripes?
Don't look too hard at that evening suit — your concert get-up — those days have gone.
But he still needed shirts and socks and a winter coat.
The pigskin suitcase was his; he put it on the bed and filled it with essentials.
The bedroom overlooked the garden.
She was  keeping it tidy.
The borders were neatly raked over and the roses cut back.
She was a very efficient woman.
He tried to clip his thoughts into shape: that is cold and somehow derogatory.
She is your wife, not an automaton who works around the place.
And you are hurting her.
He moved away from the window and walked into the adjoining bathroom.
He could smell her here — her talc — her soap.
It occurred to him that she had always bathed in private— the door locked against him.
If, in the future, he could provide Rose with a bathroom she wouldn't be troubled by such inhibitions.
But he could provide Rose with nothing until he had a job.
Zoe's efforts to push him into unsuitable employment had been annoying and resistible.
But to push himself — for Rose's sake — was different.
It was time to get up from what everyone else regarded as the mire and do all the conventional things again.
He went along to the study and opened his desk.
There were three piles of letters in it, secured with rubber bands.
Zoe had written a neat little note on each.
Lowell's.
Ours.
Mine.
He didn't bother with the Ours but quickly flipped through his.
Four were circulars — two were reminders that his subscriptions to a book club and the golf club were overdue.
He had been too busy with his music composition to miss the books, and even if he could afford to play golf his hands wouldn't let him.
The last letter was from his music agent.
There was a possibility that a recording of his might be used as theme music for a commercial — if he could come up to London in the near future this could be discussed.
The letter was carefully worded — it hinted that the offer might be regarded as a debasement of his talent, but if he were not too sensitive about this he might be prepared to accept the fee which was negotiable.
The letter was a fortnight old.
He reached for the phone and rang the London  office.
There was no reply.
It took him three or four minutes to realise that this was Saturday and that there was no one there.
He would have to wait until Monday to find out if the offer was still open.
Whatever it was he would accept it.
Debasement of talent.
Sensitive.
Ominous words.
The commercial must be pretty crass.
But he was beyond caring.
He searched through the desk for various necessary documents that the bureaucratic world would demand to see now that he was returning to it, and took them to the suitcase in the bedroom, together with his agent's letter.
There was a silver cigarette lighter in the desk drawer, he remembered, rarely used now that he'd almost given up.
And a gold-plated pen, the one he had once used for signing autographs, a memento of the good days.
He went back for them.
If he didn't become a telly millionaire turning out musical trash they could be flogged for a few pounds.
The fan who had given him the pen had had L. M. inscribed on it.
A Lowell Marshall pen.
Was Peterson of the piano factory still trading on his name, he wondered?
Or was his name dead?
It was an uncomfortable recollection.
Go and push a few notes on your own piano; there's no one here to wince at the sound you make these days.
Try the melody of the nocturne if your hands will let you.
Zoe had put a vase of Autumn flowers on the
Bechstein.
He had warned her never to put anything on it.
She could do what she liked with the rest of the house, but the piano was his.
He removed the vase and put it on the occasional table next to the wedding photograph.
Why was she hanging on to this?
He picked it up and scrutinised it.
They weren't the same people any more.
It was tempting to put it back face down.
When she returned there would be aggro over major matters.
Don't make matters worse.
Remember the last meeting you had with her.
No, for Christ's sake, don't remember it.
He went back to the piano and sat looking at the keys — afraid to play.
The nocturne is yours, Rose — an expression of my feeling for you.
My fingers can't spell out the words the way I want them to.
I'll make a balls-up of it, but I've got to try.
It was like a blind man walking down a familiar corridor.
No colour.
No light.
No shade.
A walk that began hesitantly and then gained a little confidence.
But not enough.
A stumbling, awkward performance.
Unfinished.
The ending he didn't know until Rose came back to him.
And Zoe had had her say.
Zoe, on a day's outing with Ben and Louise to visit their eldest boy at his prep school, was barely aware of the beauty of the Hampshire countryside they were driving through.
Ever since they had started the journey Christopher had been chewing barley sugar.
Ruining his teeth, she told Louise who — unwilling to mention travel sickness in Christopher's hearing — hinted there were worse things.
Zoe belatedly understood.
But surely Ben could have given the child a pill?
Doctors tended to dole them out liberally.
He was humming to himself as he drove — occasionally contributing to the conversation — a placid, contented family man.
Her kind of man.
His hands on the steering wheel were square, strong, capable.
The kind of hands that got on with everything — a provider's hands.
Reassuring.
Good to hold.
They had touched hers briefly as he had helped her belt herself in.
An accidental contact.
She wished he'd intended it.
She had a swift unwanted memory of Lowell on the concert platform in Rome, his fingers rushing over the keys like wild creatures.
Assured, brilliant hands.
She  banished them from her mind and glanced back at Clarissa who was sleeping peacefully.
The two boys took after Louise, the baby was like her father.
If she and Lowell had had a child it would have been a strange hybrid, perhaps difficult to love.
Gifted, possibly.
Unstable, probably.
One burden was enough.
The prep school was a fourteenth-century abbey, with a modern science block, set amongst trees.
As they drove up to the main door Louise tried not to be emotional.
Ben had warned her not to baby the boy, especially not in front of anyone.
‘He'll probably want to shake hands rather than kiss.’
‘Oh hell and damn,’ she expostulated, ‘he's only ten years old.’
Ben had been nine when he'd gone to the same school, he reminded her.
What was he trying to prove, she asked acidly, his ability to survive?
They were to meet the headmaster first, followed by a chat with the house master.
As Clarissa might wake up and cry, it would be better if Zoe would wheel her around the grounds in her buggy, just for half an hour or so, if she didn't mind.
Chris could come along with them, suitably subdued by the scholastic environment, Louise hoped, to be quiet for a while.
Zoe had expected to be put in charge of the baby.
It was reasonable.
Small boys in grey shirts and pants and red ties were wandering around in groups.
A rugby match was in progress.
She watched it for a while until the ball came rather close.
It was better to move and keep to the garden area.
From what Louise told her, this was a middle-income prep school, not one of the gilded establishments.
Ben was following family tradition by sending him here.
Louise hadn't wanted to send him away at all.
It was unnatural.
Wrong.
Ben had won the argument.
Lowell, in the past, had avoided arguments.
His favourite word had been ‘trivial’.
His favourite phrases:
‘Don't bother me.’
‘Do as you like.’
She hadn't resented  his withdrawal into music when his music had won world acclaim.
Resentment had grown with his declining ability.
Loss of skill should be compensated in other ways.
A man like Ben would have met the challenge bravely and with common sense.
He wouldn't have walked out on the family.
And got himself someone else.
It was difficult to forget the photograph.
The girl had a knowing look.
Young, but not innocent.
Beautiful and aware of it.
Disturbing.
Evil.
Had he gone kerb-crawling one night and found her?
Or had she found him?
Would she let him go again now that the kitty was empty?
Love, if he deluded himself it was love, couldn't exist on air.
No matter what Louise might think of her tactics in dealing with this crisis she believed she had handled the situation in the best way possible.
What else could she have done?
‘That's a lovely baby you have there,’ said a voice at her elbow.
The juniors' sports mistress, with sturdy thighs and a too tight tee-shirt, paused on her way over to the rugby field and smiled down at Clarissa who was sleepily opening her eyes.
‘Boy or girl?’
‘A girl,’ said Zoe.
‘Not one of our future pupils then,’ the sports mistress laughed.
‘You must be terribly proud of her.’
‘Yes,’ said Zoe.
Why bother with explanations?
It would have been nice to have been the mother of Ben's child.
When Zoe hadn't returned by mid-day Lowell went to see if the car was in the garage.
It was.
So she had gone out with someone.
Probably Louise.
It was difficult for him to make contact with people these days, even old friends, and he couldn't force himself to go next door and enquire about her.
When things are normal…when I know Rose is all right…when I'm free of this awful anxiety…then  I'll feel differently.
I'll socialise.
Behave like everyone else.
Talk a lot of rubbish in the right tone of voice.
Smile.
Comment on the weather — the garden — politics.
Be at ease with myself and others.
I don't want this confrontation with Zoe.
My instinct tells me to leave.
To go now.
The cottage is a refuge.
It's the only place where I can find peace.
The atmosphere in this house is rubbing my nerves raw.
But I mustn't quit.
For Rose's sake, I have to stay and wait.
It occurred to him that he hadn't eaten.
His appetite these days was small and he could tell by his clothes that he had lost weight.
If you reduced your intake your stomach adjusted.
Which was just as well.
But there was food here, and it would pass the time to cool it.
When he rooted around the kitchen he was amazed at the amount of food she had stored.
Apart from the essentials, there was a lot of luxury stuff: pate de foie gras, smoked salmon, tins of continental delicacies he'd never heard of and didn't want to try.
What was she preparing for?
A banquet?
A siege?
Did she know that one day he'd come along and look?
And make comparisons?
What did she expect him to do?
Beg for famine relief?
Well — why not?
But don't beg.
Take.
There was a large cardboard box on the floor next to the fridge.
It was full of china.
A Royal Doulton tea-service with a delicate floral pattern and still packed in white tissue paper.
New.
When was she going to stem the financial flow?
Or had she bought this, and all the surplus food, when there had been money in the joint account?
Probably.
His temper was rising as he unpacked it.
One of the plates dropped and broke into two neat sections.
He kicked them to one side.
The empty box was a convenient size and he filled it with essentials — and a few non-essentials.
He reminded himself to include  food for the cat: several tins of meat and a couple of bottles of fresh milk.
There was steak in the lower section of the fridge, also bacon and sausages.
He made himself a mixed grill, something he hadn't had for a long time, and followed it with real coffee.
He had forgotten that you ate food politely, slowly, and that over-indulgence made you queasy.
Before he'd started cooking it he thought he wasn't hungry.
But he'd eaten too much.
Too fast.
The cardboard box would have to be carried out to the van before she came back.
To struggle out with it while she watched would be conceding her victory in a minor battle — undignified.
Dignity.
Indignity.
Words he never thought of in the cottage.
It was heavier than he expected and he had to remove the milk bottles and some of the tins and make a separate journey with them.
The van was capacious and he decided to fill up the space with a couple of sacks of fuel.
There were half a dozen in the boiler room, he discovered, so take three.
Leave three for Zoe.
It was when he was about to remove them that he saw Rose's holdall.
Jane had wedged it unobtrusively between two of the bags.
At first he couldn't believe it was hers.
A lot of people had canvas holdalls.
He hadn't noticed it particularly when they had gone shopping together.
Curiosity prompted him to look inside.
The maroon dress was neatly folded, and the coral necklace carefully pinned to the bodice with a large safety pin.
In such a way are the clothes of the dead put away for disposal.
Made irrational by shock he stood and looked at them and believed that something terrible had happened to her.
Had happened to her here.
13
For Zoe, the day's outing had been reasonably pleasant.
Eddie had pleased his mother by kissing her.
Had kissed them all, in fact.
He had pleased both parents by being obviously happy.
The child wasn't wilting in an alien environment.
They had lunched together at a small restaurant full of pseudo-oak beams and bright red table-cloths.
The afternoon was spent in Winchester wandering around the shops and going to the cathedral.
Ben showed the boys the mortuary chests containing the remains of Canute and Christopher had shouted: ‘Get back sea!
Get back sea!
You're making my feet wet!’
Eddie, suddenly very grown up and self-conscious had hissed at him to shut up.
‘Don't be such a child.
’ Louise and Ben had smiled at each other and Zoe had felt excluded.
Later, when it was time to take Eddie back to school, Louise had kissed him at the gate and his father had walked up to the main door with him.
Louise's eyes had filled with tears and she had gripped Zoe's arm hard.
‘I'm glad you came.’
On the whole, Zoe thought, she was glad, too.
But she wouldn't be sorry to get home.
Eddie had become a very civilised child.
Christopher wasn't.
He didn't want to sit on Louise's knee on the drive back.
He wanted to sit in the front on Zoe's knee.
Zoe pretended not to hear him.
She was wearing a tweed check suit in shades of lovat green and brown and she didn't want his sticky fingers on it — or worse.
He had  eaten an assortment of sweets during the afternoon followed by an ice-cream and was now into barley sugar again.
Louise told him that young children weren't allowed in the front of cars.
Annoyed, he had reached across Ben and tried to touch the steering wheel and Ben had slapped his hand lightly.
‘Do you want to kill your loving family?’
That anyone should want to kill anyone on this tender lovely evening was a concept beyond the understanding of all of them.
The sky was darkening into a grey mother-of-pearl.
Clarissa, half awake, but contented, was murmuring to herself.
Christopher had at last gone to sleep and Louise, her chin resting gently on his head, was thinking of the son who wasn't with her.
She was the first to notice the yellow van as they drove up the adjoining drive — and felt a surge of very real pleasure.
The prodigal, if he could be called that, had returned.
Zoe wouldn't be going into a lonely house after the razzmatazz and bother and warmth of a normal family.
‘Look,’ she said.
Zoe stiffened.
She had been imagining this meeting for some time.
Always differently.
Sometimes he was contrite.
Sometimes aloof.
Always a little frightening.
Their last confrontation in the cottage was unforgettable.
She sounded calmer than she felt.
‘It seems Lowell's come back.’
‘Not before time,’ Louise said, ‘but welcome.’
Ben drew up the car and then glanced at Zoe.
His wife was assuming rather too much.
He asked Zoe if she wanted him to go in with her.
‘But I have to phone the hospital first.’
‘Bring him round for drinks after I've got the kids to bed,’ Louise suggested.
‘That is, if you want to Do what you think is best.’
‘I'd better see him on my own.’
Zoe stood in the driveway and looked at her home next door.
Lights were on in all the rooms facing the front and the curtains were drawn.
She had never imagined the meeting in the evening when the garden was dark with shadows and the air cold with the coming of night.
Shivering a little, she fumbled for her key and went towards the front door.
Lowell had had too long to think and his thoughts were tortuous.
He had walked a labyrinth with no known exit.
Rose, destroyed in some way he couldn't understand, was at the centre of it.
She had been here, he believed, inveigled, tricked into coming.
But how?
Why?
It wasn't in her nature to seek an interview with Zoe.
If she was bearing his child Zoe was the last person she'd tell.
Or was she?
Had he misunderstood her nature completely?
Had she come to sound out Zoe's reaction?
He couldn't believe it.
She would have told him.
So why had she come?
Why were her clothes here?
Where the hell was she?
In the first hour after finding her dress and necklace he might have been prepared to accept a rational explanation — or even a bemused denial of involvement.
But as time had gone on he had found it necessary to try to calm himself.
A measure of scotch helped.
A second measure had him pacing the house again.
A third took him into the garden where he looked at the neat undisturbed flower-beds.
He told himself he was behaving like a fool, that his suspicions were groundless, but he didn't believe what he told himself any more.
The enigma grew more ugly as darkness fell.
He needed lights everywhere and went around the house switching them on.
And then he went and sat on the blue dralon chair in the immaculate  drawing-room, the bottle of scotch at his side, Rose's dress draped carefully along the sofa as if she were in it and alive.
He didn't hear Zoe letting herself in.
But he sensed she was standing at the door looking at him.
Her first words, spoken without thought and due to extreme nervousness, were unwise.
‘You've been drinking.’
He didn't answer.
She was recognisable as a stranger one passes occasionally in the street.
It was impossible to persuade himself that he had cohabited with this woman — that they had slept together — eaten together — planned their lives together.
That's your wife standing there, Lowell, you'd better believe it.
The woman in the wedding photograph.
The woman who knows about Rose.
She took a step into the room and noticed a dark red dress on the sofa.
On the arm of the sofa was a coral necklace.
At first she didn't associate them with Jane Leeson's description.
What were they?
Peace offerings?
A new gown.
Totally unsuitable.
Coral.
Probably fake.
What was she supposed to do?
Exclaim rapturously: Oh Lowell, how kind, welcome back to the fold?
He was watching her watching the dress.
She didn't know what to do or say and wished he would do or say something to break the silence.
Was he expecting to stay the night?
If so she didn't want to sleep with him.
Should she offer him something to eat?
Or black coffee — which he probably needed.
Would that be tactless as her first remark had, in retrospect, been tactless?
She had done everything in her power to force him back and now knew quite clearly and definitely that she didn't want him.
Not like this.
‘Well,’ she taunted foolishly, ‘it has been a long time.’
She made a vague gesture towards the necklace.
A comment of some sort seemed to be expected.
But what?
He'd returned with a bauble — some expensive beads.
‘Don't!’
He thought she was about to touch them.
Beads.
Jane Leeson's description.
A long old-fashioned maroon-coloured dress.
He'd brought his whore's clothes here.
Shocked, she looked him fully in the eyes for the first time.
He saw in her face what he expected to see.
‘So you know Rose.’
Who?
No one had put a name to the woman before.
‘If you're talking about your….’
She had been about to say whore but bit it back.
‘My what?’
‘I don't know — whoever you've been associating with.’
‘Don't pretend you don't know her.
She's been here.’
What was the matter with him?
He must be more drunk than she'd thought.
Or crazier.
‘Why should she come here?’
‘That's what I want to know.
You tell me.’
Dear God, she thought, I don't know how to handle this.
She shook her head mutely.
‘She's been here.
You put her dress and the necklace in the boiler room.
What were you going to do with them — burn them?’
‘I don't know what you're talking about.’
‘Yes you do, Zoe.
And you've got to tell me.
’ He tried to make his voice sound reasonable.
The smooth tones had the silky menace of an inquisitor intent on a confession.
But she had nothing to confess.
‘Her clothes in the boiler room?
I honestly don't know what you mean.’
‘They were in a canvas bag.
You'd folded the dress and pinned the coral necklace to it.’
She supposed she should humour him but she didn't know how.
‘You've been drinking and you're talking a lot of rubbish.
I'll get you some coffee.
We'll talk again when you can tell me sensibly what you're on about.’
She'd make for the kitchen, she thought, and let herself out through the back door.
Ben was needed here.
Lowell, reading guilt in her every movement, followed her swiftly.
She wasn't getting away.
They stood together in the kitchen — he with his back to the door, blocking her exit.
‘You've got to tell me how you got her to come here — what you said to her — what she said to you — what happened to her.’
She felt hysteria rising.
It was like a mad game of consequences at a macabre party.
What was she supposed to have done to this unknown bitch?
Open up the last bit of paper and all will be revealed.
In an effort to quell the hysteria she made herself do ordinary things — putting the kettle on to boil — milk to warm — instant coffee in two brown mugs.
But to Lowell her apparent indifference was infuriating.
‘Stop it!
Answer me!’
He moved towards her and she backed away, smiling foolishly, her body bathed in sweat.
‘Lowell — I don't understand.
How can I answer you when I don't understand?’
‘Stop lying to me.
She came here and you…’
‘No!
No!
No!
I've been out all day.
I don't know who.
‘Not today.
Recently.
What happened to her?
By Christ if you've hurt her…if you've…’
The threat, unspoken, terrified her.
She began  babbling at him in an attempt to diffuse his anger.
He wasn't well, she told him.
Everything would work out.
In the meantime, be sensible.
They should have got together before.
It wasn't too late now to…well, to try to…oh, God, to be calm.
He watched her, his eyes glazed.
Her mouth was opening and closing, spewing words at him that failed to make any contact in his mind.
She seemed insubstantial, fleshless, a long way off,— while the kitchen seemed to close in on him and then recede to the accompaniment of a thumping in his head like a primitive drumbeat.
He moved closer to her.
‘Where is Rose?’
The shouted question seemed to him little more than a whisper.
She cringed back from him, pressing herself against the stove, wondering if she could edge past and make for the door.
She took a couple of tentative steps but he reached out and swiftly held her by the shoulders.
Contact with her brought him a brief feeling of reality.
The voice of reason, speaking clearly over the cacophony in his head, warned him to back off.
To stop.
He almost heeded it.
She felt his fingers digging into her shoulders, relaxing slightly and then gripping more strongly so that she couldn't move.
She felt weak.
Helpless.
No words could be clawed out of the air to calm him.
He was asking again.
‘Where is she?
What happened here?
Where is Rose?’
She lost control finally and screamed at him in panic.
‘I don't know where the bloody bitch is…
I don't know…
I don't know!’
There was a hissing sound of milk boiling over on the stove behind her and she managed to twist herself sideways and grab the saucepan.
Her aim, intended to catch him full in the face with the boiling liquid, was inhibited by the way he was holding her, but some of it splashed his cheek.
The sudden scalding pain, unexpected and acute, thrust him into a vortex of uncontrollable rage.
His distorted hands were clumsy about her throat and this time as she struggled, kicking and gasping, it was skin on skin, not a fantasy attack that did no harm.
He squeezed with all his strength, pushing her down onto the floor, while a raucous parody of the nocturne played fortissimo in his head.
Lowell had no recollection of leaving the house some while later and getting into the van.
There was a blank period of no-memory, like a black dreamless sleep, followed by a slow awakening to events too horrific to contemplate.
So don't think.
Just be.
He was sufficiently sober by now to know that it was necessary to drive with extra care — but not to appear too careful.
It wouldn't do to be breathalysed.
His emotions were slotted into different compartments, and he locked up those that might get in the way of a safe drive back to the cottage.
He was aware of traffic hazards in the environs of Bristol and stretches of hazardous road in the Gloucestershire countryside.
He was conscious of feeling cold in the van and of the unpleasant smell of petrol.
The windscreen de-mister wasn't working and he had to strain to see.
Get home, he told himself.
Concentrate.
He didn't allow himself to think about Zoe until he arrived at the field entrance to the cottage.
And the thought was incoherent.
Something about the great sweep of the night sky.
A disbelief in mortality.
Remorse was a physical ache.
Inexpressible.
As he got out of the van he heard a soft purring and felt the warm caress of a cat rubbing his legs.
Middy, lonely, had come to welcome him home.
He picked him up and held the animal close.
Needing love.
Giving it.
The cat wasn't the bonny creature it had  been when Rose had first given it to him.
It was long and lean and hungry.
He suddenly remembered the food in the van.
‘Tonight,’ he told it, ‘you'll eat.’
In the light of the torch he removed some of the luxury items from the cardboard box and put in the milk.
It was tempting to take one of the sacks of fuel up to the cottage and have one last night of heat — a temptation he couldn't resist.
By half emptying one of the sacks onto the floor of the van he found he could drag it with his right hand and hold onto the box with his left.
With the torch balanced on the box he could see where he was going.
The word ‘survival’ came into his mind.
The cottage was a sanctuary.
If he could reach it and not drop anything…if the cat would stay away from his feet…
The fuchsia by the broken-down gate spilled a few dead blossoms as he brushed past it.
The weeds on the path, crisp with frost, were slippery white hummocks in the darkness leading to the door.
He eased down the sack of fuel, put the box beside it, and felt for his key.
The familiar smell of the cottage soothed him as he opened the door.
Make a fire, he told himself.
Light candles.
Get a big, bright blaze going.
There's no need to be careful with the small hoard of wood any more.
Use it all.
Why not?
He banked it up in the grate, added a little lighter fuel, and carefully built a pyramid of coal on top of it.
He lit a candle and then lit the fire with the candle flame.
As the fire took hold, the walls of the cottage danced with saffron-coloured shadows.
He found more candles, a dozen unused in a box.
No holders for all of them.
Then use anything — mugs — egg-cups — put them on a tray to catch the drips.
Light.
There had to be light.
Lastly, he unpacked the cardboard box and arranged the tins and packets on the table.
The tins of sardines, salmon and corned beef he pushed to one end of it.
Those were Middy's.
The rest was just food that he could look at and not want.
Middy, getting impatient, was miaowing with hunger.
‘All right,’ he said testily, ‘all right — all right !’
He took the tin of sardines through to the lean-to, opened it and emptied the contents onto the cat's dish.
Middy pushed through his legs as he stooped, almost unbalancing him.
‘Damn you, take it easy!’
He had a sudden compulsion to wash his hands in hot water, but couldn't find matches to light the stove.
He felt in his pocket for his lighter and his fingers touched the hard squareness of an envelope.
Suddenly the events of the last few hours gripped him in a violent despairing spasm.
Almost operating on remote control he removed it, looked at it, and remembered finding it on the mat in that other house in that other life-time.
Once more it gave him a feeling of identity, but this time it wasn't reassuring.
It was better to be a non-person.
To cease.
He washed his hands trying to ignore the letter.
Extinction was an impossible concept.
His body was uncomfortably alive.
His hands tingled.
And there was a blister on his cheek where the boiling milk had splashed him.
If she hadn't done that…
If she had stayed calm…
If I …if I…
He had been sitting by the fire for some time before he decided to open the letter.
Leeson had protected the photograph with two thin pieces of white cardboard held with an elastic band.
The note, penned on a large sheet of paper, had been slipped under the band and not folded.
There was no greeting — just an uneasy scrawl:
I'm sorry if landing you with the girl's clothes is an embarrassment.
She left them at the studio when she called and I haven't her name or address.
Jane and I are off to Italy — a photographic assignment — otherwise we would have held onto them a while longer.
Jane promises to give Zoe a tactful explanation.
As she's not brilliantly inventive I don't know what she'll say.
We've had a running argument about this, but as I didn't know the address of your cottage either, I couldn't think of an alternative course of action.
We'll be away until the twenty-seventh.
Come and see me in the studio any time after that and I'll present you with a couple of bottles of duty-free in compensation for any hassle.
You'll find enclosed the original photograph you brought me some time ago — the one I took the enlargement from.
I would have returned it to you before, but the information I dug up about it was disturbing to say the least.
My reaction — rather cowardly — was to shove it in a drawer and try to forget it.
Her name was Anne-Marie Tarrant.
If you haven't already heard the details of her — background I'll fill you in on this when we meet.
He'd signed the note with his initials: E.L.
Lowell, too emotionally mind-blown to try to make any sense of the first part of the letter, was immediately thrust into action by the second paragraph.
He took the elastic band off the two pieces of cardboard and there neatly coffined between them was Rose.
His delightful, beautiful, un-dead, wonderful girl.
He felt the same surge of excitement, the same strong sexual awareness, he had felt when he had first held this sepia photograph in the early days of the summer.
The lips were amused — and now he knew  their taste, their texture.
The eyes were intently probing — a remembered deep, dark blue.
The voice — her voice was speaking his name softly in the familiar accent.
Time was a confusion, a strange blending of Then and Now.
He touched her face very tenderly and believed he felt warm flesh.
And almost wept with pleasure.
A brief scanning of the second paragraph, once again, took a little of the shine away.
Anne-Marie Tarrant?
That was nonsense.
Leeson had got it wrong.
‘Disturbing, to say the least.’
What the hell was he on about?
This was Rose.
Perfect in her imperfection.
Before the letter could contaminate him with reason he pushed it into the fire and watched it burn.
For a long time he held the photograph, fingering it gently, careful not to mark it, and then he pinned it to the cork-board on the wall.
As before he felt the need of a larger portrait of her, as large as the one Zoe had destroyed.
She had viciously torn the eyes, he remembered.
An eye for an eye, Zoe.
My guilt feels less as I remember that.
A few words from Leeson's letter drifted into his mind — a girl's clothes left at the studio — what girl?
Rose?
But why?
Something about an address.
He should have kept the letter.
Read it more calmly.
It seemed to be offering an explanation about something.
But whatever it was, it was too late.
He took the tins of food through to the lean-to and piled them up on the draining board.
Then he returned to the living-room and pushed the table up against the wall under the portrait.
Assemble all the candles so that the light shines on her.
It's a gentle light, candle-light.
I can see her smiling at me through it.
He angled his chair so that he could sit by the fire  and watch her.
Her presence would help him through the waiting hours of the night.
The police would have to be told about Zoe's murder tomorrow, but tonight he had a few hours of peace.
The cat jumped on his knee and as he stroked its fur he could feel its heart beating very fast, almost imperceptibly, like the quiet ticking of a clock.
14
‘Pot is one thing,’ Greg said, ‘but I'm not into mind-benders.’
‘Cheap,’ Rose replied, quoting the pusher, ‘the price of a few gallons of petrol and you're off to paradise.’
They were sitting on the bed in Greg's second-floor flat in Gloucester.
Downstairs the party they had just left was rocking the building.
This new Rose who had descended upon him had joined the gaudy throng, for reasons she wouldn't divulge, and had lost some of her individuality.
War-painted like the rest of them she merged with the sub-culture.
He hadn't wanted a punk girlfriend.
He wanted Rose.
She sensed his disapproval and didn't care.
At this point of crisis she couldn't bear a quiet limbo.
She had to declare herself loudly, brashly.
A change of appearance was like hanging a net over a mirror, she had the same eyes but consoled herself by looking at herself differently.
This is who I am.
How I am.
This is me, now.
I am myself, damn you!
She had driven over to him after the metamorphosis had been completed to her satisfaction — not just the punk hair-do, short spiky, crimson-dyed and outrageous — and the make-up, orange domino mask and a curve of ochre on the cheeks — but clothes, too, tight, tarty, as far removed from the Victorian image as possible.
She hadn't expected him to greet her with  ecstatic joy — his emotions weren't extreme like Lowell's thankfully — but neither had she expected a degree of embarrassment.
It was, she discovered, easier to look the part than to feel it.
The tablets should help.
Rose held two of them on the palm of her hand.
‘One for you — one for me.’
She had stayed a few days in a cheap hotel near the Bristol docks, too bruised mentally to contemplate going anywhere.
Eventually, forced out by the need to buy basic necessities she had met the pusher in the toilets in one of the big stores.
She had always imagined drug-pushing to be a male-dominated business and had been surprised when the prim-looking blonde in a navy blue duffel coat had approached her.
The woman's sixth sense, or whatever radar she operated by, had homed straight in and the deal had been made without hassle.
Greg, relieved that the acid hadn't been obtained locally, nevertheless wasn't happy.
He had never had direct contact with the pushers — the students who bought dope shared it — and, if it wasn't offered him, he did without.
‘You took a hell of a risk.’
She shrugged.
‘They're smoking grass downstairs — that's risky, too.’
‘Does your grandfather know you're here?’
‘I'll phone him tomorrow — if I decide to stay.’
Her assumption that he wanted her to stay was correct, despite obvious difficulties.
An occasional girlfriend called Gail was one of them.
A shared bathroom with three other male students — all predatory — was another.
‘Why did you come?’
He had asked it before and her answer had been evasive.
It still was.
‘Thank you for your enthusiastic welcome.’
‘I'm glad to have you.’
‘By the look of you — overjoyed.’
It was tart.
‘I mean it — flush those tablets down the bog — and come to bed with me.’
She gestured impatiently.
‘I need to get away — inside my head — afterwards I'll — I can't now — I don't want you now.’
(When you touch me I think of Lowell.
I've got to blot him out.
Extinguish him.
Make him go.)
He was perceptive enough to know that she was suffering from some sort of emotional wound that had nothing to do with him.
With Marshall, perhaps?
If the weirdo had kicked her out, well and good.
She had come to him, even better.
So give her time.
There was a crash downstairs as someone knocked the record player over.
This was followed by a few minutes of silence.
Then the music started up again.
The LSD tablets were two tiny blobs on the palm of her hand.
‘I suppose we should take them with water.’
Rose went over to the washbasin and rinsed out a tumbler.
There were traces of toothpaste in it.
She rinsed it again and held it out to him.
‘No,’ he said.
‘Please,’ her voice was cajoling.
‘It will be lonely out there without you.’
It was crazy and dangerous.
Afterwards he couldn't justify his weakness in giving in and didn't try.
It was the most extraordinary sensory experience he had ever had and one he never wanted to repeat.
There was no substance in the bed as he lay pressed up against Rose.
The wall at his back flowed around him with the softness of feathers.
He believed that he got up and felt his feet sink through the floor while the music from down below came up like vapour and was breathed rather than heard.
He yearned for something hard to hold, but there was nothing solid  anywhere.
All was soft, viscous, sour-smelling.
He clutched his arms, but his fingers went through flesh as if he were a drowned man coming apart in a terrible dissolution.
As the effect of the acid slowly wore off, his body, like a film run backwards from death to life, became hard again.
He could feel the bones of his legs, his arms, his fingers, as his skeleton reassembled.
His re-creation — like the creating of Adam on the first day — had taken a little time.
The party down below was over.
The room was silent and dark.
He had been away for some hours.
If Rose's experience had been the same, he thought kindly, she would need one of his ribs to stiffen her.
He offered her one, very seriously, in the darkness.
She didn't reply.
He reached out to feel her.
She wasn't there.
The suburban road, narrow and deserted, seemed to stretch onwards towards a narrow cone of light that never enlarged, never diminished.
Rose, exhausted with running, slackened her pace a little and took in long gulps of air.
At last she had breath enough to say what had to be said.
‘I didn't kill my baby.
It was a foetus — a few cells — not yet a baby.
It felt nothing.’
The nurse, somewhere unseen in the night, disposed of the bloodied remains, also unseen.
Her voice, though barely above a whisper, was clear.
‘Abortion is murder.’
Rose began running again, her footsteps irregular like terrified heartbeats.
‘I was fourteen — too young — the doctor agreed.
It felt nothing.
Nothing.’
It was necessary to keep on repeating this.
The words went around in circles like a hoop being bowled down a corridor — a long corridor of white-washed walls — and with a door at the end of it.
The door must remain closed.
Beyond it was pain.
A long fall into darkness.
The accusing voice was changing, assuming a different timbre, resonant with menace.
The charge wasn't murder of an unborn child.
There would be no donning of a black cap for a promiscuous fourteen-year-old.
She was a woman now, responsible for her actions.
It was murder of the first degree.
She had killed in cold blood.
‘But who?’ she screamed.
‘Who?’
The question, unanswered, reverberated as if her skull were a cavern full of a roaring sea.
The sea, like tears, was warm on her face.
There were rats in the water, swollen-bellied, drowned.
When the sea reached the top of the cave…into her nostrils.
She took a shuddering gasp of breath.
That happened to Alice.
Her father was reading her the story, a long time ago.
And briefly was with her now: ‘Stop weeping, Rose.
Alice didn't drown.
She grew.
Her neck was distorted — like a snake.’
She turned to him for comfort.
He wasn't there.
You're running down a long silent street.
Alone.
The shadows are like black pits and the gaslight is too bright.
Bright as the sun.
But it's night.
Half night — half day.
But which?
They said dawn.
How will I know dawn when it comes?
The light is on all night.
So how will I know?
Keep running — as the world tilts towards the day, run faster.
Make it stay dark — force it to stay night always — don't let the morning come,
She was running wildly when the two college students saw her and recognised her from the party as Greg's girlfriend.
They guessed she was on a bad trip and moved in swiftly before she could hurt herself.
She felt their hands holding her firmly and one of  them pushed his scarf over her mouth to muffle her scream.
She felt she was dying.
They knew she was passing out.
They half-carried her back to Greg's flat which was a couple of streets away.
If this was goddamned mescalin, or whatever, she was unlikely to use it again.
Greg, they discovered, was mind-blown, too, but gradually normalising, so it was their duty to stay around.
It was easier to put Rose on the, sofa in the party room after they'd kicked the debris out of the way than to get her upstairs.
They sat and watched her while Greg paced the room with exaggeratedly heavy footsteps.
‘The world,’ he said, smiling foolishly, ‘is hard.’
‘Too bloody right it is,’ they agreed.
Rose, hearing them through thick heavy darkness, was afraid to open her eyes.
She didn't know where she was and she longed to be back in the cottage where it was safe.
She spoke with her eyes tightly closed.
‘I want to go home,’ she said
The candles began to gutter at a little after three a.m.
Lowell, vaguely aware that the light wasn't as strong as it had been, stopped fighting sleep and dozed a little.
Middy snuggled up closer to him, his shadow a small lump on Lowell's shadow on the ancient walls, so that they seemed to merge like a grotesque pregnancy.
Rose couldn't rationalise her urge to return to the cottage.
She couldn't rationalise anything.
She felt as if she were suspended over a chasm between a past that was dark and terrifying and a future that inexorably beckoned.
She had gone away to escape  Lowell, but the cottage was part of both of them and it was demanding her presence.
She had to be there — and soon.
It was something to do with innocence.
And an accusation she didn't understand.
The two students who were watching over her told her very sensibly that if she tried to drive the car she'd probably kill herself.
When Greg offered to drive her they gave him a similar warning.
During the last half hour or so she had been pacing the room like a caged animal, insisting that the door should be kept ajar and the window opened wide.
No, she said, she wasn't claustrophobic.
Well — not usually.
In her trip she had been in too small a room — that was all.
The trip, one of her keepers told her, might linger a bit.
Acid did odd things to your mind.
Driving a car through the dawn wasn't on.
Wait a few hours.
Preferably wait a whole day.
A whole day was too long — even a few hours would be too late.
She couldn't explain this so didn't try.
‘I have to go home.’
Greg saw ‘home’ as the farm — and Ballater.
He was still too confused for any sort of confrontation with the old man.
When he tried to construct a few sentences in his mind — excusing himself — excusing Rose — they didn't sound lucid.
He'd been smashed on booze once or twice, but this was different.
Booze was soporific, the brain was programmed to zero, it curled up and slept.
Acid was a mad flock of birds that couldn't be cajoled to roost — until they were ready.
‘I don't think I'm entirely with it,’ he said placidly,
‘and neither are you, Rose.
You might put the accelerator through the floor.’
An insubstantial floor, he recalled, with the quality  of sponge rubber.
He rephrased it: ‘You might drive too fast.’
A south-easterly breeze carried the sound of church bells towards the cottage.
Lowell had heard them a few times before on the Sundays when life was normal and they were just background music at the commencement of an ordinary day.
In many ways this day felt ordinary, too.
Bodily functions went on.
He walked down the garden to the privy and noticed that his shoes were wet with dew.
A spider had spun a web between a spade and the wall it leaned against.
Nature, in a teasing mood, flung small dead leaves around.
He felt one in his hair and removed it.
It was brown and crisp.
Clean.
Trees managed the business of dying very well.
They went out in a blaze of glory.
Flowers decayed, and so did people.
Before leaving the privy he disinfected it with pine fluid.
A misnomer.
A pine forest smelt of green sap rising — of a floor of rugged cones on wet sweet earth.
It would be pleasant on this cold sharp morning to stroll across the fields and listen to the bells.
So why not do so?
Because this day is like no other.
When the bells stop ringing you must plan your next move.
Words his father had spoken to him shortly before he died came to him: ‘Everything is in order, Lowell.
You'll find all the necessary papers in a series of manilla envelopes in the top right-hand drawer of the bureau.
’ An extremely simple filing system.
Lowell returned to the cottage and stood looking at the portrait of Rose.
He had no file.
No manilla envelopes.
No desire to tidy up his life so that it could be handed over to someone else.
He had the unfinished nocturne and the portrait.
If they — whoever they might be — tried to take either from him he would kill them.
It was a statement of fact — a very cool assertion of intent.