

Parfois: November to December 1230
It was half a year before she saw him again.
She was kneading bread, her arms flour to the wrists, when the doorway behind her was darkened, and she knew even before she whirled to face him that this was not her father coming home from his snares.
He had not entered the room, but stood warily outside it, looking in at her, and before he would step inside he asked: ‘He's not home, then?
You're alone?’
‘Dear God!’ she said, easily recalling her indignation even after six months.
‘Is that any way to walk in on a girl, when you haven't shown your face nor sent a word all this time?
You should come with your cap in your hand and ask leave before you step in here.
I'm not sure if I'll have you over the door-sill.’
She had him by the hand by then, and was drawing him in to the hearth, for the early November mist was on his shoulders, and his face looked thin and cold.
‘You'll not try to keep me?’ he said warningly, looking her in the eyes without a smile.
‘I'll never try to keep any man who doesn't want to stay, don't think yourself so sorely missed.
We've done without you all these months, we can do without you still.’
She pushed him into a seat on the stone beside the fire, and brushed the moisture from his hair, taking care not to be too gentle about it; and when he made no move to stop her she unfastened his damp cloak and hung it to dry.
‘Are you hungry?
Though why I should care, when you left us like you did, is more than I know.’
Once, if addressed in such a tone, he would have denied his hunger stiffly, even while it stared nakedly out of his eyes; but now it seemed he had learned sense enough not to climb on his high horse quite so easily and unprofitably.
‘I am,’ he said almost meekly, ‘but I'd just as soon not eat you out of home, when I've brought nothing in.
I can't stay but a little while.
I didn't want your father to know I was back, for fear he'd want to hold me.’
‘You're your own master,’ said Aelis tossing her head, and brought him the end of a loaf, and cheese, and milk to drink, and watched him sidelong, not without satisfaction, as he devoured his meal.
‘By the looks of it,’ she said, ‘they haven't been feeding you any too well, where you've been.
Did you find that work you were looking for?’
‘Yes,’ said Harry indistinctly round a mouthful of bread.
He had found it and endured it, but it had opened his eyes to what apprenticeship meant under another master than Adam.
He'd learned from it, too; not, perhaps, very much about masonry, but a great deal about keeping his temper and holding his tongue, even under injustice.
It had been a choice between bearing what he had or running back to Aber where he was privileged and protected, and for Harry that had been no choice at all.
If he wanted to reach his goal he must come to terms with the stages of the journey, however comfortless.
‘Did you bind yourself?’
‘No,’ he said shortly.
How could he bind himself, when he did not know the day or the hour when Isambard might come home?
It was unthinkable to pledge his word to stay for a fixed term when he might not be able to keep it.
‘Then they'd never take you on as better than a labourer.’
She knew what that could mean, when the labourer was as young and inexperienced as he, and she looked him over again carefully for the signs of his servitude, ignoring the forbidding stare that warned her off from probing.
He was still wearing her father's patched chausses and cotte, the short, rusty brown one she had mended for him; it needed more mending now.
He was taller by a good inch than when she had last seen him, or he looked so for being noticeably thinner.
His cheeks were hollow, and his hands  scarred and soiled.
‘I see he starves his boys,’ she said, ‘as well as working them hard.’
Her measuring glance moved to the corner of his mouth, where the line of his lips was prolonged in a short red scar, and then to his cheek-bone, which bore a suggestive blue stain.
‘And beats them,’ she said.
‘What's that to you?’ said Harry haughtily, turning the bruised side of his face away from her.
‘You said you know no reason why you should care.’
‘Oh, Harry!’ she said suddenly in a child's wail of reproach, and fell on her knees by him, flinging her arms round him.
The hunk of bread was knocked out of his hand and dropped on the edge of the hearth-stone.
Aelis snatched it back and blew the ashes from it for him, blinking back tears.
‘Oh, now, it's not been as bad as that,’ he said, shamefaced, and laid his arm awkwardly round her shoulders and drew her close to him.
‘The worst was keeping my hands from my dagger and my mouth shut.
The youngest gets the kicks from all the rest, that's nothing new.
One of the journeymen was a good fellow, and taught me what he knew, and stood by me all he could.
But I missed having you to talk to when I had an hour to myself.’
If the tone was a little condescending she did not complain; it was startling enough that he had brought himself to say it at all, and so he must have felt, for he coloured to the brows.
He had wanted to give her something to remember him by; the feel of her warm and strange in his arm had surprised the clumsy offering out of him before he knew.
Almost he repented it, it seemed to him so inadequate, not to her deserving, but to his weight and worth.
But when she looked up at him astonished and unguarded in her pleasure his heart swelled, and he was glad he'd spoken.
‘You're not going back there?’ she said, fearful and jealous for him.
He shook his head.
‘Where, then, if you won't stay here with us?
Harry, what is it you're about?’
‘There's a thing I must do,’ he said.
If there had ever been  a time when it had been a whim and not an obligation, that time was gone now; the thing was there waiting for him, blocking his path, and there was no way round it to his manhood.
‘Will you come back here again when it's done?’
‘Yes,’ he said, ‘when it's done I will.
And when it's done I'll tell you.’
‘I wish you'd take me with you,’ said Aelis from under the shadow of her tangled golden hair, in a tone he had never heard from her before.
‘That I can't do.
But I'll come back.
And look, I want you to have this.
It's very little, all I've managed to save, but it's for you to use until I come back.
Did they take Barbarossa away with them?’
A new constraint came into his tone when he spoke of ‘them’; it cost him a giant effort now, as well as a convulsion of remembering pain, to look back towards Aber.
‘No, he's below in the undercroft.
They left him here for you.’
He looked down into the fire, his lashes low on his cheeks.
‘Did they wait long for me?’
‘A week or more.
They inquired for you everywhere.
In the end they had to go, there was no sense staying.
They said you'd come back for your horse, and my father promised to send them word.’
‘And you?’ he said with a pale smile.
‘I didn't promise anything.’
And she was promising nothing to him, either; he knew that was what she meant, but he did not ask for anything.
She must judge, too; he thought she would trust him and let him have his way.
‘You could put on your own clothes again,’ said Aelis practically, pleased when she saw his eyes brighten.
Yes, where he was going now he could at least appear as himself; the face was avowal enough, his dress should match the face.
She went and fetched out the folded garments for him, and went about her business at the clay oven outside while he stripped and dressed himself again in the good Welsh clothes that had been made for him.
The sleeves of the cotte  were grown a little short on him, but that was no great damage.
‘They're dry and clean,’ said Aelis over her shoulder.
‘You'll take no hurt from them.
And don't forget your good cloak.
I'll hide these rags away; father'll never know you've been here.’
She turned, hearing the stillness that followed the rustling of his movements, and he was standing in the doorway, looking at her with a strange, soft look of mingled reluctance and resolution.
‘I suppose you're off now, now you've got everything out of me you wanted.’
‘Aelis —,’ he said.
‘Go on with you, then, and see you keep your word and come back afterwards.’
He hesitated before her a moment, and then he took her hands and bent his head, and gave her the solemn kiss of kinship; and before she could draw breath and touch her astonished fingers to her lips, he was out of the paddock and away across the clearing into the trees.
All through the hours of dusk he crouched beneath an overhang of bushes under the broken edge of the plateau on which the church stood, and listened to the comings and goings above his head, where the garrison of Parfois boiled with agitated preparations for its lord's home-coming.
The company had moved fast since landing at Portsmouth with King Henry late in October.
Word of their approach had hardly reached Pool before they themselves were in Ludlow.
To-night, according to the rumours that were running round the streets of Pool, they would camp at Montgomery, and cover the last short stage to Parfois in the morning.
In every village round the Long Mountain at this moment the news was blowing like a cold and killing wind.
The jackal de Guichet, they said, was bad enough, but there were limits to his powers; but the old lion acknowledged no restrictions within his own honour, his rule was as absolute as plague.
Word of his home-coming sent the very wild beasts  quaking to their holes.
The climb had been no trouble to Harry, bred as he had been among the crags of Snowdon.
This wedge-shaped promontory that led up to the isolated rock on which the castle itself stood was nowhere quite sheer, and stunted trees rooting precariously in its crevices afforded cover for one solitary boy, though they would not have hidden an approach in numbers.
But there remained the problem which had been gnawing at his mind for months as he waited for his enemy to come home: how was he to get into the castle itself?
There was only one way in, by the drawbridge and the gate-towers; he had racked his brains for an alternative, but there was none, short of procuring an ally within the walls, and that idea he did not entertain for a moment.
No, since there was but one way in, by that way he must go.
At an ordinary time it would have been almost impossible to enter undetected, but tomorrow morning, when the Lord of Parfois brought home from France his forty knights and their followings, and the entire population of the castle came out to meet them and bring them in, then one more insignificant boy might very well slip unnoticed into the throng and get by the guard at the gate unchallenged.
Once in he could lose himself among the excited household, and never be in one place long enough to be an object of suspicion, until he could find a means of encountering Ralf Isambard alone.
Beyond that he did not look.
There might be nothing beyond.
Yet he could not stop short of that moment, and that was enough for him to know.
The sounds of Parfois were becoming familiar to him.
He heard the hollow thudding of hooves and the duller sound of feet constantly tramping the timbers of the drawbridge.
He heard many voices as people passed on the pathway from the bridge to the ramp.
He heard vespers sung in the deep dusk from his father's church, and his heart stilled and quietened in him with wonder, as though at last he felt himself to be drawing near to the heart of a mystery.
Cramped and cold in his hide, he listened as the sounds of the day fell from him into silence one by one, until he could  hear the measured pacing of the watch on the walk between the gate-towers.
Then, closing all, the chains of the bridge rattled evenly through their pulleys, and Parfois withdrew for the night into its impregnable walls.
He crouched still for a time after that, for there was no haste, and now that it was time he found himself afraid; there might be something to lose there, as well as something to find.
When the silence had been undisturbed for a long, chilly while he crept out of his nest and drew himself gently up the last few yards of broken rock into the long grass and bushes at the edge of the plateau.
There were stars but no moon, and the sky had cleared into a frosty blackness.
He could distinguish, when he emerged from the fringe of trees, the toothed edge of the curtain wall, its merlons jagged against the stars; but between him and them, breaking the serpent-line that coiled round the entire rock, the dark shape of the church loomed.
When he looked up, the tapering masses drawing his eyes aloft even in the dark, he could see the tall tower prolonging its leaping tension towards the stars.
By daylight it had been a sculptured shaft fluted with runnels of light and darkness, withdrawing stage by stage in charmed proportion, shedding weight and gaining impetus as it soared.
Now it was a pillar of darkness covering him from the eyes of the watch as he stepped out from the trees and walked steadily across the open space of grass.
There was a small wicket set in the great west door.
He laid both hands to the ring and turned it, and it gave to his cautious thrust and let him in.
In the cold darkness within he groped his way to the narrow stair that wound upwards into the triforium, and climbed it, clinging with nervous hands to the stone.
Many a time Adam had drawn him plans and elevations of this nave; he knew its proportions and could find his way about it even in the night.
It was not only because of its convenient position and its many sheltering solitudes that he had chosen to watch out the night here.
In the dawn, before the host came home, he would surely be presented at last with one window  into his father's spirit, and add to the many aspects of Master Harry he had borrowed from other people one at least which was his own.
He felt his way along the narrow walk of the triforium to the distant end, close to the east window that showed a shapely pattern of starry lancets against the blackness; and there he wrapped his cloak about him and huddled into the corner with his back against the wall.
It was hard lying, but so much the better, he would be in no danger of falling asleep.
There were times during the long hours of dark when he did drop into an uneasy doze, but never for more than a few minutes together.
He was cold to the bone, and with the first faint grey of pre-dawn he got up and began to walk the passageway, stamping his chilled feet with an infinitely small, puny sound against the flags of the flooring.
The light came slowly.
About him the walls grew out of the dark in gradations of grey, paling and solidifying, put on bulk and proportion and form.
Details unfolded like flowers, the carved heads on the corbels along his walk grew features and hair, and smiled and grimaced as he passed; the procession of the capitals of the nave burst into ebullient growth, leaf unfolding from leaf in the vigour of life itself.
Colour came later, even in the glass of the great east window; first there was only the shape of comparative light, then gradually the lattice-work of the lead cames, a filigree of shapes that had no meaning until the warmth of approaching dawn conjured into them cloudy reds and blues and greens, and with every minute breathed into them a purer brightness and a sharper clarity.
Then almost abruptly there was colour in the stone, too, a warmth of sleeping gold gleaming through the grey.
Shadowy and mysterious, the inverted keel above his head floated, half-defined.
His hands, which were apprenticed to the same mystery, arched and spread their fingers before him in air, involuntarily reproducing the tension and precision of the vaulting.
They thrust and tensed with delight in their own intricate machinery of bones and sinews, as the ribs that sprang  from the piers of the nave seemed to quiver with joy in their own energy.
Then the drifting cloud that had massed before the rising sun parted, and a single shaft of direct light leaped through the east window, setting the rose tracery ablaze with glowing colours, and flew like a lance from end to end of the church, calling out of shadow the strong, slender ribs that patterned the vault with great starry flowers, turning the roofrib to gold, and glittering in the curls of all the singing cherubim on the painted bosses.
He stood quivering to the gradations of light that sang in the roof, and did not know what it was that moved him so, the hour, or the true beauty of the proportions and spaces about him, or the marvellous and frightening sense of having drawn so close to the spring of his own being.
He stared and was satisfied.
So much of him was drawn into his eyes that he never heard the drumming of hooves cross the plateau from the ramp, or the rattle of the chains as the drawbridge was lowered in haste.
Only when the hollow reverberations of the horses' feet on the timber rolled along the rock fissures below did he start out of his trance to the realisation that a company of mounted men was riding into Parfois.
Already?
No, it was impossible, they would not march out of Montgomery much before this.
Where was the haste?
He stood tensed, straining his ears.
The cavernous rumblings did not continue long; perhaps a score of riders, no more.
Then quietness again.
Some advance party with orders in preparation for Isambard's reception.
His part was to lie hidden here until the main body arrived, and all the household poured out to meet them.
A score of men, and mounted at that, were no use to him; he needed hundreds.
The wicket in the west door opened silently; he did not mark it until its weight carried it gently right back to knock against the wall.
The sound, in itself small, was magnified by the lofty roof, and startled him painfully, and he drew back with a bounding heart into the shadows of the triforium as a man stepped into the church.
He was tall and lean, a long dark shape in a sombre cotte of  dark brown or black, cut short below the knee for riding.
Harry saw the jut of a sword-hilt at his hip, and watched him strip from his hands gauntlets that flashed sullen gleams of light from the iron rings banded into their backs.
One of Isambard's advance party, and by the cut of him a man of importance.
His dress was austere enough, but rich and ample, and worn with an authority that comes only by birth, and his movements had the unmistakable quality of nobility, the absolute conviction of one who has never had to hesitate or use caution and humility in order to placate his betters.
They were also startling in their fierce, fluent grace.
He walked forward into the middle of the nave, and stood looking straight before him at some point above the high altar.
His face was in shadow, and Harry, fascinated and fearful, ventured to lean out a little from his eyrie to watch what he was at.
The man below could not have seen the movement, but he felt some shifting of the air above him, or heard, perhaps, if he had a wild beast's hearing as he had its gait, the mere rustle of a sleeve against the stone.
‘What's that?
Who's there?’ he cried sharply, and reared his head instantly to stare into the trefoil opening.
Clinging close in the shelter of the stone, Harry looked down into a face suddenly vivid in the quickening light.
Short, crisp hair, iron grey and still thick, lay close as a helmet on a head magnificently and subtly shaped, and was cut squarely across a great fleshless forehead.
A clean-shaven Norman face, with a long, straight nose and an arrogant jaw, and eyes burning darkly in great hollow sockets.
Why, he was old!
The hard brown flesh was grown leathery and dried.
And yet he was beautiful.
The essential beauty showed through everywhere, and gave him a kind of timelessness that matched his movements.
Through the stretched yellowish skin of the great forehead every moulding of the bone transmitted its permanent grace; through the thick, clinging hair the skull imposed its noble shape.
Out of this splendid, imperishable lantern the deep eyes glared as though a stranger and a savage inhabited the dwelling an angel had  abandoned.
Then he knew that he was looking at Ralf Isambard, lord of Mormesnil, Erington, Fleace and Parfois.
The moment had come upon him too soon; he felt his knees soften, and clung with rigid fingers to the pillar behind which he sheltered.
‘What, are you there?’ said the voice below, full and clear but very low.
‘In the old place, at the old time?
Will you come down to me, or shall I come up to you?
Who calls the measure now?’
Harry felt his way backwards to the wall, out of range of the searching eyes, and leaned there a moment to breathe more easily.
‘Very well,’ said Isambard equably, ‘I'll come to you, since you will not come to me.’
The sound his long-toed riding-shoes made on the flags was not clumsy, and yet curiously halting, like the pace of a lame man whose lameness shows only when he forgets to brace himself.
The steps approached without haste the bottom of the staircase, and began to climb.
On those narrow treads he must go carefully in such gear.
Harry withdrew inch by inch along the dim passageway to the end, where he could have the wall on two sides of him, and flattened himself into the last shallow embrasure, beneath the last curved corbel.
He hitched his belt round to have the hilt of his dagger readier to his hand, and loosened the blade in the sheath.
His inside was molten but his hands were steady.
As well now as after days of hiding and waiting.
Better.
His bones bore him up again.
His heart rose in his breast, not with hope or dread, only with awareness and acceptance.
It was here; he had not to wait for it, and he was glad.
The measured step on the stairs had ceased; somewhere below there out of sight Isambard had stopped.
Why?
The answer to that was made plain to him with a stab of dread when he ventured to peer out of his embrasure, for the tall figure was already at the top of the staircase and advancing silently and at leisure along the stone corridor.
He had  stopped to put off his shoes, that was all.
The long feet in their well-fitted brown chausses made no sound.
He was smiling, if that could be called a smile that drew his long mouth out of line, plucking the left corner obliquely upwards.
He said in the same low, intent voice: ‘Is this what you expected of me, Harry?
Should I rather have brought with me the cross from the altar?’
Harry's heart had begun to beat thunderously.
The man had a devil.
How else could he know everything, the name, the intent, all?
How near should he let him come before stepping out to confront him?
He wanted space to move, some yards between them when he closed.
He was young and quick, he had surely the advantage provided he kept room to recoil out of range.
This man was old, old, by Adam's reckoning five and sixty years.
Now, he thought, stiffening his sinews.
He drew breath hard, and stepped out from his shallow niche and stood in the centre of the walk.
The last of the stone heads his father had carved looked over his shoulder.
He had paid it no attention, for the light still reached it only by reflected glimpses; but Isambard had lived with it on close terms for fifteen years, and knew it line for line and feature for feature.
He saw the stone face and the living face unbelievably alike, and checked in his steady advance, himself for a moment still as stone.
Then the two faces which had seemed identical showed him as suddenly all their diversities.
The likeness was there, Master Harry's divination had been marvellously guided; but he had carved a man, and this, after all, was no more than a boy, not yet grown.
The stone face, lively and young as it was, had a certainty about it the boy could not claim as yet.
The one was made, the other still making.
He knew now who it was who stood before him.
‘Well, well!’ he said softly.
‘You are welcome.
I've waited a long time for this.’
Said Harry: ‘So have I!’
He set a hand to his belt, and drew the hilt of his dagger forward with a gesture there was no mistaking.
Braced with feet apart, his eyes steady upon his enemy, he waited for  Isambard to draw.
The devilish smile, oblique and sharp as a scar, had come back to the gaunt face.
When at length Isambard moved his hands to his belt it was not to the hilt of his sword, but to the buckles from which it hung.
He unfastened them without haste, still smiling, tossed sword and sheath out from him through the trefoil opening, and let them fall into the presbytery.
The clash they made on the stones below jarred Harry from head to heels, and for a moment shook the intensity of his concentration.
He touched his hilt significantly.
‘We're matched, my lord.’
Isambard followed the gesture and laughed, moving his hand slowly towards his own dagger.
The crooked smile was fixed and deliberate.
Harry waited no longer.
All the years of waiting and longing and wondering poured together into his braced hands and poised, quivering feet.
He plucked out his dagger and hurled himself with all the weight and skill he had upon his enemy.
The shock of the assault carried them both a yard or two back along the passageway.
The blade tore Isambard's cotte not an inch below his heart, but he had caught the lunging wrist in his left hand and jerked it outwards and downwards, and the thrust sliced through cotte and shirt down his ribs, and left only a harmless surface graze behind.
He had not attempted to draw, Harry was aware of that even in the heat of his attack, and it enraged him past measure and gave him strength beyond normal.
A long right arm as hard as steel took him about the body, prisoning his left arm above the elbow, and the grazed breast leaned violently over him and broke his balance.
Feeling himself falling backwards, he drove his heel hard into Isambard's instep, and brought him down with him, heaving and struggling on the stones.
The fall broke their hold on each other, and Harry tore his wrist free and stabbed again, but again his forearm was caught and held, and this time he did not draw blood.
Isambard let his weight lie over him and held him down, and deliberately lifted the boy's right arm and dashed his elbow hard against the paving.
Pain flashed like fire from shoulder to finger-tips, and all his shrieking muscles tingled into helplessness.
He fought to make his fingers remain closed on the dagger, but they would not obey him.
He tried to reach across with his left hand and snatch the blade away, but his hands were held apart, and he was pinned down struggling and sobbing until the dagger slid slowly out of his fingers and clattered on the flags.
Then, still smiling, Isambard forced the boy's wrists together, enclosed and held them mercilessly in one lean, muscular hand, and with the other picked up the dagger and tossed it after his own sword.
‘Well, have you done?’
He held him down one-handed, smiling at his heavings and pantings as he struggled to break free; but as soon as he tossed the straining wrists away from him and sat back on his heel to rise, Harry made a furious lunge for the hilt of the dagger Isambard himself had disdained to draw.
He had it half out of its sheath when a hard knee came down on his forearm and smashed him to the flagstones again.
‘What, have I to strip myself before you'll cry enough?’ said the deliberate, amused voice, not even blown after all this tussling.
And he an old man!
Harry lay still, gathering his breath and tasting his chagrin, and the hatred he had never truly felt until then congealed about his heart like heavy fire.
To struggle was only to weaken himself; he could not displace the weight or break the grip that held him down.
They were still only man to man, and there was still quietness as soon as they were quiet.
He drew long, soft, angry breaths, waiting mute and dangerous inside his helplessness like a beast in its lair.
Sooner or later Isambard would have to loose his hold of him.
He had promised nothing, asked for no quarter, made no submission.
It was not yet over.
‘So, that's better!’ said Isambard grimly, and drew off from him and rose to his feet in one quick movement; but he kept his hand on his dagger this time, and swung that hip away from the boy.
Harry, heaving all his angry energy into action, caught one  dazzling glimpse of the lean, clear profile black against the sunlit air, framed between the cusps of the trefoil, with a drop of thirty feet at least behind him, and the stone flags of the chancel below.
The boy rolled over and came on to one knee in a single lunge, and hurling himself at the man, caught him round the thighs with both arms, and swept him with him through the opening.
For one moment Isambard was caught off-guard, but he had lived in and trained and trusted that hard old body of his for sixty years, and in emergencies his very muscles thought for him.
His long right arm went round the pillar at his shoulder, his unshod feet stiffened into the stone of the floor to resist the thrust, and gripped it immovably.
Harry's weight swung him round but did not tear him from his hold, and it was the boy and not the man who hung for a long, palpitating moment suspended on the edge of the drop.
Even then he did not fight to recover his own hold on safety, but strained at his slipping grip on the man, dragging him outwards.
Isambard braced his weight back and held fast.
He thrust his free left hand into the back of Harry's collar, took a fistful of him, cotte and shirt and all, and twisted until the boy's cheeks purpled and his eyes began to swim.
Choking, he shifted one hand from his enemy to claw at his own throat, and instantly the fist that was strangling him heaved him roughly back from the edge and flung him down in safety at the foot of the wall.
This time he was not released.
The pressure on his throat ceased at once, but the hand had only transferred its hold to his arm.
‘No more of that!’ said Isambard grimly, clapping the bruised wrists together again and pinning them fast.
He stooped over the gasping boy, and with deliberation and without apparent anger struck him three light, stinging blows on the cheek with his open right hand.
Not even hard blows a man could take with dignity, only the manner of measured punishment he might have dealt out to a misbehaving child with whom he had not lost patience.
‘That's for despising your own life, fool,’ he said calmly, ‘Learn to kill like a reasoning man when you must, not like a woman crazed with spite.’
The boy crouched, glaring up at him fiercely, still panting, his suffused face marked now by the lean white stains of the blows, just beginning to flood with angry red.
He set his teeth and said nothing, but his eyes were eloquent.
‘I see he bred a good hater,’ said Isambard, looking him over at leisure as he held him, and smiling at what he found.
‘Well, well, this is a memorable home-coming!
For you, as for me, boy, there'll be a warm welcome in Parfois.
Let's go and savour it.’
He jerked him to his feet, and separating the thin wrists he held, twisted them together again behind the boy's back, and so thrust him painfully before him along the passageway to the staircase.
As they went they heard the clatter of feet in the porch of the church, and voices that spoke in reverent undertones, but not from awe of the holy place.
‘De Guichet!’ called Isambard, in a tone of high content.
‘Here am I, and with a guest for you.
Call the guard, let them take good care of him, he's a desperate firebrand.’
Three or four knights had come hastening in at the sound of their lord's voice.
‘Do you know this face?’ said Isambard, turning Harry about in his hands to display him to them all, and taking him by the chin to jerk up his face to the light when he turned it haughtily aside.
The brief martial exercise, however unorthodox, had put the lord of Parfois in the best of humours.
‘Well?
His temper should name him, if his face is something marred.’
One of them, a thickset, bearded knight who by his manner might well be the seneschal de Guichet, said after a long, astonished stare: ‘This is Talvace's kin, surely.’
‘Talvace's kin, surely!
It seems it was a son they carried off into Gwynedd.
He's too like, the signs are too many on him to be son to any other man.
We know, do we not, how to entertain a Talvace in Parfois?
Here, take him!
See him safely lodged in the Warden's Tower.
And feed him,’ said Isambard carelessly, after a searching look into the  bruised, defiant face.
‘Never let him say we starve our visitors, expected or unexpected.
He'll be better sport, fed.
He's puny enough now.’
They received him readily, and haled him away across the moist grass just touched in the hollows with rime.
And thus, not anonymous among hundreds but the centre and focus of a tight little group of a dozen guards, Harry crossed the drawbridge and made his entry into Parfois.
‘And which of them,’ asked Isambard lazily, stretching out his long legs before him across the bare floor of the stone cell, ‘sent you to kill me, Harry?
That fiery little mother of yours?
Or Llewelyn?
We used to be good enemies, that great prince and I, but somehow the enmity's grown cool of late.
He's had his hands full with other matters, and so have I. No, I doubt it was not Llewelyn.
I dare say he's bred you true to a Welshman's bounden duty, and taught you the sacredness of a blood debt, but I think it was not he who sent you here alone on such an errand.
Well?
Have you nothing to say?’
Nothing.
The boy had not spoken since they thrust him into this sandstone cell under the ground and left him with his single candle and his narrow bed.
He was neither too sullen nor too frightened to talk; when he had something to say he would speak up loudly enough.
The trouble with him was that he was utterly astray here.
There was nothing about him he could understand, nothing of which he could be sure.
What did they mean to do with him?
Isambard would make little ado about hanging a marauding boy who had attempted his life, especially one who was no business of the county justices or the crown, and had no one in England to take his part.
But if they meant to kill him, why delay?
Why lodge him here thus roughly but not in any great discomfort?
And above all, why should Isambard come down here in person to visit him after supper, splendid and ceremonious in his brown and gold brocade, attended by servants bringing in a gilded chair for him, and a page carrying wine?
And why  send all the hangers-on out of the cell?
If he was merely bent on amusing himself with his prisoner, did it matter who heard?
‘Or was it Benedetta?’ asked Isambard.
No answer.
Harry stared back at him with wild, wary eyes, the lids drooping a little with weariness.
‘I see you know that name, Harry.
Am I right in calling you Harry?
It seemed to me you could have no other name.
Come, you can tell me so much without giving away any other man's secrets.’
‘Harry is my name,’ said the boy grudgingly, in a voice that creaked a little with distrust and disuse.
‘Good, I see you still have your tongue.
I began to think you had bitten it out.
So you are acquainted with Madonna Benedetta.
Then she's still living?’
No answer, but perhaps he found something in the watchful face that was not quite mute, for he smiled, and deep within the hollow eyes a spark kindled.
‘And was it she sent you on your mission to pay me my due?
She had a score to settle, I grant her that.
But time was when she could have commanded a grown man to do her errands and pay her debts.’
Harry's lips tightened angrily at that slur, but he remained silent.
‘And Adam Boteler, is he yet living?
And that fellow of Benedetta's who helped her away to Shrewsbury when the Welsh took the town?
Fifteen years, Harry, and you see I forget nothing.
They soon withdrew from it, it was too hot to hold long.
Shrewsbury will never be Welsh again for more than a matter of days, and Llewelyn has the wit to recognise it.
It's exposed, but it's English to the bone now, nothing can change it back.
Just as Poitou and Anjou and Normandy and Gascony, and all those pleasant counties where we've spent so many foolish months and so much good money are French, do what we will, and will continue French from this on.
We may hold them again at a price a hundred times their worth to us, for a few months, a few years at a pinch, but French they will still be, and in the end we must leave go of them.
Even Brittany, for all Peter de Mauclerc's homage to  our lord the King.
Let him call it an English fief if he will, it makes no difference to the truth, it's but a word.
And that's all we brought back from this expensive jaunt of ours, boy.
Thanks be to God, and to our expert shepherding, for failure may have cost us enough, but success would have cost us and our heirs dearer far.
Henry's had his royal progress, since have it he would, now perhaps those of us who do the work here at home may find our hands a thought freer.’
He looked up over his wine and caught the stunned green eyes, hopelessly puzzled and disquieted, and laughed.
‘How you stare, Harry!
Am I not to think aloud in your presence?
Your father grew used to it.
Does it confuse you that I should do the talking and you the listening?
Talk, then, and I'll be silent.’
He waited, the crooked smile twisting his mouth, but Harry had nothing to say.
‘So I'm to credit them all with this attempt on me, am I?
I have a long reach, remember, and a long memory.’
‘I came of my own will,’ said Harry abruptly.
‘No one sent me.
They've been looking for me to take me back.’
‘Ah!’
Isambard leaned back in his chair, smiling.
‘You can speak to the purpose when you choose.
Well, I see they've instructed you in the story of your birth, since you had so thriving a grudge against me.
And what else have they taught you about your father?
There was more to him than the dying.
Have you a grain of his art in you?
I've seen you have his curst temper.’
It seemed to Harry that there was nothing he could usefully say to this bewildering and terrifying man, and indeed that he was not required to speak.
Whatever was to happen to him would happen without any provocation on his part, and nothing he did in conciliation could ward it off.
Better to be silent.
He was very tired.
All he wanted, all he hoped for now was to be left alone to come to terms with his plight.
And he had so nearly succeeded!
An inch higher and a thought quicker, and he could have  climbed back down the rocks vindicated and free, with all his debts paid.
‘True,’ said Isambard, grinning at him, ‘it's a pity to think  I might have been dead by this, and you ten miles away on your road home.
But these reverses visit a man now and then in his life, you'll find.
No doubt God had his reasons.
Come, let's see if you can be made to speak again.
How did you pass the lower guard?
Have I to hang all the garrison for letting you slip through?’
‘I never passed through the guard,’ said Harry perforce.
‘I climbed the rocks.’
‘Well, well, you encourage me.
Ten whole words out of you at a stretch!
One more question, then.’
He spread his long, lean hands on the arms of his chair, and the rubies in his two rings took the candle-light and burned into crimson.
Deep in his cavernous eyes the same red glowed steadily.
‘When they took Master Harry out of the river below here, where did they bury him?’
Harry held his breath, catching at that as at the first landmark by which he might hope to get his bearings.
The tone had hardly changed, yet he felt at once that this was different; to this Isambard meant to have an answer.
So his enmity followed even the dead.
After fifteen years he was still pursuing his feud against his master-mason, unwilling to let even his bones rest.
Suddenly Harry felt the narrow cell so filled and overfilled with his own dread and hatred that he could hardly breathe.
‘What do you want with my father's burial-place?’ he said thickly through the gall that scalded his mouth.
‘You provided him his death, others have provided him a grave.
You let him be.’
‘To do strict justice,’ said Isambard equably, ‘John the Fletcher provided him his death, and Benedetta procured him to do it.
But I don't quarrel with your version.
Harry, Truth is more than the naked facts.
I killed him.
Now answer my question.
Where does he lie?’
‘Where you'll never trouble him, my lord.
As safe from you as you are safe now from his vengeance —’
‘Ah, that may well be,’ agreed Isambard with a hollow, dark smile.
'— but not from mine, my lord!
While you leave me alive, I  shall be waiting to get a weapon into my hand again, and you within my reach.’
He was trembling now with the intensity of his detestation, his voice precarious with passion.
‘I always heard tell of you that you were a wolf, but never that you were come so low as to prey on dead men.
As you would hunt him to the end, God helping me I'll hunt you, and see you into your grave before ever you lay hand on his.’
‘Gently, gently!’ protested Isambard with galling mildness.
‘You're wasting your heroics, there's no one to hear.
Better leave showing me all the good reasons for hanging you out of hand.
I might be tempted to do it, and no one would be less pleased than you if I did.
Never use words as gambling counters, Harry, unless you're prepared to pay the score in good coin afterwards.
It's well for you I have other uses for you.
There's this one thing you have to tell me before you hang.
When that's settled, we'll see.
Come, now, I mean to have an answer.’
‘You'll never get one,’ said Harry, setting his jaw.
‘Oh, but I will, Harry, and from you and none other.
Never doubt that.’
The voice was silk, but it chilled Harry's blood none the less.
There was a stony determination there that set him examining his own resolution in a panic, in case there should be weaknesses in it he never suspected.
How did he know how far his virgin courage could be stretched?
It had never yet been tested.
He moistened his dry lips, and held his tongue, his eyes enormous and apprehensive upon Isambard's face.
‘We have infinite resources,’ said the lord of Parfois delicately, ‘and all the time in the world.
We can afford to go gently about our negotiations.
These limited comforts we've provided you here, Harry — in what order can you best spare them?
We'll take, say, food from you to-morrow.
The next day, drink.
Then warmth, perhaps, and last of all, light.’
He saw the long lashes drop for an instant and the lips contract fearfully, and laughed.
Had he known it, he had merely started the echo of another man's voice in Harry's overburdened  mind, saying bitterly: ‘Light is the last thing a man should willingly surrender.
Except breath!’
‘A week wanting all these, and who can tell what tune you'll be singing?
No need to take to cruder means until we must.
You'll not change your mind, and tell me what I want to know to-night?’
He had risen from his chair, taking the refusal for granted.
‘Not to-night nor any other night,’ said Harry doggedly.
‘Ah, well, sleep on it.
Your spirits may be a little duller and your wits a little brighter to-morrow,’ said Isambard tolerantly, and left him to his uneasy solitude.
‘No!’ said Harry.
He had been saying it nightly now for three nights.
If his voice was less steady this time it was because he was cold, not because he was afraid.
They had ceased to bring him food at the end of the first day, taken away his carefully hoarded drop of water at the end of the second, and the third refusal had cost him his coarse blankets and the thin straw palliasse on his plank bed.
It was added cruelty that Isambard never asked twice.
The boy's contemptuous: ‘No!’ was always accepted without comment, and with no attempt at persuasion; but each night a soft, sidelong, tormenting smile recognised the growing reluctance and diminishing arrogance with which he spat the refusal at his questioner.
‘Very well!’ sighed Isambard, and reached a hand to take up the candle in its iron holder from the rocky ledge of the wall.
The boy sat hunched on the edge of his bed, his slight shoulders rigid; the green eyes followed with an uneasy glitter the deliberate progress of his captor's elegant, muscular hand through a meagre yard of air, and lived through a wilderness of reluctance and temptation during its passage.
His folded forearms hugged his cramped belly.
Three days without food is a starvation-while to a boy of fifteen.
But he minded the passing of the light more.
His eyes lingered wistfully on the flame, followed it through air as Isambard lifted it.
Shadows quivered in his fallen cheeks.
He shrank a little more compactly into himself.
‘In three days,’ said Isambard, ‘I'll ask you again.
Three days this time — not one.’
No answer, but the pinched face reflected clearly enough how the boy's heart sank within him.
Above the guttering candle-flame Isambard's crooked smile offered him sympathy; voice and face had a devilish gentleness when he pleased.
‘Think once more, Harry, before I go.
Only a few words, and you can be taken out of this cell, fed, warmed, lodged in a better place,’ he tempted softly.
‘No need to condemn yourself to darkness.’
The light from below conjured into sharp gold and black every subtlety of the great forehead, and made the cajoling mouth piercingly beautiful and kind, but the demon still inhabited the gaunt pits of his eyes.
‘Tell me, and spare yourself.’
Harry swallowed the soft strangulation of tears and clung with desperate hands to the obstinacy that must do duty for his flagging courage.
‘No!’ he said, so relieved when it was out that the recoil made him faint and set him shaking.
The face, the hand and the candle withdrew backwards, still smiling at him, for the smile seemed to embrace all three, as though the withdrawing brightness emanated from the man rather than the flame.
The door closed on them slowly; they thinned into a long, faint strand of light and vanished, and everything was dark, dark for three days; except that now there was no way of distinguishing night from day, and time, like hope and pleasure and companionship and all the human things it measured, had stopped.
A hand took him by the shoulder and shook him awake, and he started up with a cry, for a moment not knowing where he was or what was happening to him.
There were torches and men in his cell.
He clung shivering to the comfortless bed that seemed now the only tenuous security he had, but he was plucked away from it and hustled through the doorway, still bemused with cold and sleep.
It could not be three days since he had been left in the dark; was it even three hours?
They thrust him stumbling up a winding stairway cut in the rock, and along another passage into a large, smoky room, blackened and bare but for certain engines and implements that stood against the walls, and a low brazier in the centre.
He saw Isambard standing impassive beside the flame, de Guichet at his shoulder.
Hazily through his sense of nightmare and unreality Harry knew the long shape of the rack with its ropes and pulleys, and the blackened irons laid by the brazier, and the whips dropped into sconces on the wall.
He had always known this would come next.
It seemed Isambard could not wait three days.
Now there was nothing left to him but the conflicting passions of his terror and his furious pride, knotted together in inextricable warfare in his bowels.
He would not speak, not if they started every joint in his body, not if they beat or burned the flesh off him.
Not even for his father's sake or his honour's sake now, only because he would rather die than give Isambard best.
He might endure to be forsworn and dishonoured, but he would not endure to be defeated.
‘You know, I imagine,’ said Isambard briskly, ‘the purpose of these instruments?
Look at them, look well!
You understand their use?’
Harry said: ‘Yes.’
But the croak that came out of his parched throat was hardly recognisable.
He understood; his shrinking flesh understood, and had no hope of being spared anything.
‘I want certain information from you, and I shall get it.
Will you give in now, or later and at greater cost?’
He dragged out of himself somehow a better voice, loud and passably firm from sheer despair, that said: ‘I'll never give in.’
Isambard made a motion of his hand to the men who held the boy pinned by the arms, and he was half-dragged, half-carried between them to the rack.
He let go then of every dignity but the dignity of defiance, and fought like a wild-cat, lashing and struggling and biting, wearing himself out uselessly in an effort that could gain him nothing.
But in fact he did get something out of it, a confused, exhausted numbness  that almost comforted his aching muscles, and robbed even his overwrought mind of its sharpest awareness as they overpowered him.
He was stretched helplessly on his back, the smoky ceiling leaned to his face; he felt the straps drawn tight round his wrists and ankles.
‘For the last time, Harry!’
‘No!’ he said in a hoarse scream; and even then he was still able to feel that it must be by the grace of God that what felt like the terror of an animal in extremity should produce a cry of respectable human rage.
He heaved and strained in his thongs, gasping for breath, trying to brace himself, creating the agony before it came.
But it did not come.
There was a long, strange, dream-like while without motion or sound, and then Isambard's voice, controlled and cool still, saying: ‘Let him up!’
Now he was hopelessly confused and lost, and the fear he had extended himself to contain shook him from head to foot as they unstrapped him and stood him on his feet again.
He could hardly stand, he had to cling to one of the arms that helped him up.
He looked at Isambard with great bruised eyes in which tears of bewilderment were helplessly gathering.
‘You should have taken it further, my lord,’ said de Guichet, eyeing the trembling boy with a hard, measuring state.
‘A little real pain would get more out of him than all the threatening.’
‘You under-estimate the little fool's curst nature.
You might cut him to pieces and he would not speak,’ said Isambard, thoughtfully frowning.
‘You could put it to the test in a very few minutes, my lord.’
De Guichet had one of the whips from the wall in his hand; he drew his arm back quickly, and slashed Harry across the face.
The boy gave a faint, startled cry, and fell back a pace, putting up his hands to his bleeding cheek.
What happened then he never saw, it remained always a confusion and a blank to him, but certainly there was another cry, louder and more astonished than his, and a sudden sharp impact like a  blow, and the clatter of the whip falling.
When Harry smeared away the blood from his face and opened his eyes again it was to see Isambard standing with one foot flattening the whip to the floor, and the bronze lantern of his face blazing with such an intensity of dangerous, silent fury that even Harry, who was no longer threatened, shrank with sympathetic dread.
De Guichet confronted his lord with a pale face and fixed, fearful eyes.
‘My lord, I thought to get you what you wanted, and what you'll never get by patience,’ he protested defensively, but with resentment thick in his voice.
‘You thought!
Did I bid you lay hands on the boy?’
‘No, my lord, but —’
‘Then keep your hands from him until I do so bid you.’
The flame died down abruptly, the bronze head cooled into quietness.
He turned on the guards who held Harry between them, and looked at his prisoner for a few minutes in silence.
Then he said quite calmly, drawing his gown more closely about him as though the scene was finished: ‘Take him back to his cell.’
The boy was led away staring dazedly.
The large eyes, dilated with exhaustion, had the lost look of a child frightened among strangers.
‘And leave him a light,’ said Isambard.
In pure reaction from terror he broke down and wept himself into a deep, swooning sleep as soon as he was alone with his blessed candle; but when he awoke strangely refreshed and heartened he had his wits again, and could reason about his escape.
If there was one thing sure about it, it was that Isambard had abated nothing of his purpose, and if he had halted his experiment in terrorisation short of the act, it was not from any impulse of pity, but the result of a calculated probability that these methods would not get him what he wanted.
It was not compunction that restrained him, but an inherent sense of economy that objected to seeing time and effort and pain squandered uselessly.
This reflection went far to set up Harry again in his own  esteem, for it meant that Isambard had been sure of his victim's obstinate silence even under torture; more sure of it, if the truth were told, than Harry himself had been at the worst moment.
It also made a pattern of sense out of the minor ordeals through which he had passed, and put him on his mettle for the future.
For if he was right, then this lull foreboded some new and less direct assault upon him, and it behoved him to be ready for it.
Nonetheless he was almost gay that morning.
He had his light back, and his blankets, they brought him food, and in every movement he was acutely aware of his still resilient sinews, and the smooth round joints that turned and bent in such a beautiful and ingenious fashion.
Suddenly every finger was a marvel and a joy to him.
All kinds of pleasures became apparent now that they showed as points of brightness in such an overwhelming dark.
He trusted nobody and hoped for nothing, but the little delights that fell into his lap by the way had their due in appreciation at last.
He waited with roused senses for what would come next; and what came was so transparent that he had hard work not to laugh, and set out without more ado to take every advantage of a stratagem that would not have fooled a child in arms.
Two of the youngest and pleasantest of his guards began to spend their time in his cell with him day and night, watch and watch about.
Isambard was taking it for granted, it seemed, that a boy of fifteen could easily be seduced into giving his confidence, or at least some incautious fringes of it, to companions not so far from his own age and under orders to ingratiate themselves with him.
Even if he did not allow himself to betray his secret directly he might let slip something that would provide a clue.
But he never would!
What, when he was already forewarned?
He welcomed them with open arms, talked freely, played draughts with the younger and learned tables from the elder.
He revelled in their company, but he told them nothing.
When Isambard came down in the evening with his question, delivered with a dry, impersonal smile as though the brief upheaval in the night had never happened, Harry gave his  answer with only the slightest convulsion of fear at the pit of his stomach.
It was accepted without comment.
The lord of Parfois turned and went away.
It was the same the next day, and the next, and still nothing happened.
He was uneasy in the face of this unnatural quietness, but he watched his tongue and waited.
And in the afternoon of the fourth day his guards suddenly trooped into his cell and ordered him up and out with them.
‘Where are you taking me?’asked Harry, feeling the familiar knot contract in his vitals.
It seemed the present experiment was being abandoned as ineffective.
What came next?
‘Up to fresh quarters, lad,’ they told him, grinning at his suspicious face.
‘Fine lying, fresh air and the whole place to yourself.
You'll think you're in a palace.’
His heart sank, perversely convinced that he was to be transferred to some damp hole where he would be able neither to stand upright nor lie at full length, and chained there in darkness.
But when they brought him up into the higher reaches of the Warden's Tower and shut him into his new prison he was stupefied to find it all they had claimed.
There was a good bed along one side of the small, square room, a bench and a heavy table, even a brazier; and most wonderful of all, there was a high window, narrow and barred and unshuttered, but if it let in the wind, it let in the light and the sun, too.
Many a time he had slept in  worse quarters when he had attended David on his seasonal progresses in Gwynedd.
He stood in the middle of the room and stared mistrustfully round him, wondering why he should be so favoured.
Was Isambard bent on winning him by kindness now?
His strategy changed with bewildering suddenness, but everything he did was devoted to the same end, that was certain.
When he came in the evening — it was by this time unthinkable that there should be an evening when he did not come — he might let slip something that would make sense of this new move.
It was later than usual when the lord of Parfois came.
His  face was serene; Harry had never seen him so content.
He looked all round the room, checking its appointments with satisfaction.
‘Well, Harry, are you comfortable here?
Is there anything you need?’
‘I need my freedom,’ said Harry.
‘An error, child.
You want your freedom, it isn't a necessity.
You came here of your own will, I fear you must stay at mine.
But at least you may be comfortable in your captivity.’
He turned from the window, which was on a level with his face, and came to where Harry stood.
‘Turn to the light.
So!’
He raised his hand, and with brusque, impersonal fingers which nevertheless had a surprising lightness of touch he felt the edges of the cut de Guichet's whip had left on the smooth cheek.
‘Closing well.
You have clean-healing flesh, there'll be no scar.’
‘You're concerned for my face,’ said Harry, curling his lip.
‘I'm concerned that no one shall mar it but myself.
You're my meat, Harry, no one else's.
De Guichet is zealous, but he overdoes things.
Proportion is all, as you should have learned in your craft, and excess, as in this case, is so often unnecessary.’
He smiled, moving away without haste.
‘Well, if you have any needs you may ask.
I'll leave you to your rest.
Good night, Harry!’
It was impossible, but it was happening.
He was at the door, he was going away without having asked the question.
Harry could not bear it.
‘My lord —!’
Isambard turned, his brows raised inquiringly.
The contentment in his eyes engendered at its heart a faint, malicious spark of amusement.
‘Well?’
‘What is this game you are pleased to play with me?
You bury me underground, you threaten me with starvation and torture, you ask and ask always one thing of me, and then suddenly this ease.
And no reason for it!
And after all this questioning to one end, now you have nothing to ask!’
‘Ah, that!’ said Isambard, smiling.
‘That need not trouble you any longer, you'll not be pestered again.’
‘Not —?’
Harry gaped at him, brought up short.
‘My lord, if you have repented of this pursuit —’
‘I never repent, Harry.
No need to trouble you farther, I know what I wanted to know.’
‘You know?’
It was a trick, it must be a trick.
And yet he had that smoothness of satiety about him, in his voice, in his smile, even in the touch of his hands.
‘I don't believe it!’ said Harry violently.
‘You can't know.
Who else could tell you?
And well I know you never got it from me.’
Isambard laughed, gently, tantalisingly.
‘Are you so sure?’
‘Do you think I've let my tongue slip once with those creatures of yours marking my every word?
No, my lord, you'll not fool me.
I know what I've said and what I've not said.
I'm sure as death.’
‘Very well, then you're sure.
It's well to have so rock-like a certainty.
I envy you.
Good night, Harry!’
He could not go like that.
Harry ran and caught him by the arm, clenching his fingers desperately into the folds of the wide velvet sleeve.
‘You're lying!
You must be lying.
You can't know.
I've never said a word to betray it.
Every waking moment I've been on the watch —’
‘And sleeping?’ said Isambard, grinning.
‘None of us knows what he betrays in his sleep, Harry.
Did you ever think of that?’
He wanted to cry out scornfully that it was a lie, but the dreadful truth knocked the voice out of him.
How could he, how could anyone, be sure of his silence while he slept?
With this one issue so heavy on his mind, might he not have muttered some confused reference to it in his dreams?
His mind fought off the idea furiously, and yet it came back to fret his certainty again.
How could he be sure?
‘Did I not say, Harry, that I'd get it from you, and no other?’ said Isambard, still laughing at his stricken face.
He plucked his sleeve gently out of the boy's hand, and turned unhurriedly and walked out of the room.
The door which had opened hastily to let him through was just swinging heavily to when Harry roused himself out of his  daze of doubt and consternation, and flung himself after in a burst of despairing rage.
‘Devil!
Devil!
Damned carrion crow!’
He clawed at the edge of the closing door, but the butt of a lance shoved hard under his ribs heaved him back gasping into the room, and the door closed on his convulsed face.
They heard him battering furiously at the panels and shouting hoarsely: ‘What do you want with him?
If you affront him, I'll kill you.
Do you hear, Isambard?
I'll kill you!
Leave him alone, you devil!
Leave him alone!’
Isambard had halted and turned in the passage, frowning a little, in two minds whether to go back to him, but in the end he did not; he merely waited for a little while, listening until the torrent of defiance had grown strangely shaken and softened with moments of entreaty.
He smiled, recognising conviction.
The muffled voice behind the door sank at last into hopeless silence.
Parfois: December 1230 to January 1231
The boy who brought him food in the morning was a young fellow he had never seen before, and not one of the men-at-arms, but by the look of him one who belonged behind Isambard's chair in his great hall, or about his wardrobe to help him to dress.
He was fair and pertly pretty, and not above seventeen, and his manner towards the guards in the anteroom indicated that he was a privileged person in the household.
Some page from a knightly family, most likely, thought Harry, eyeing him distantly out of the obscuring mist of his own preoccupations.
The youngster addressed him with condescending friendliness, and got a morose answer.
‘You could be civil,’ said he, injured.
‘I'm sure I've done you no wrong.’
‘No, I know it.
I ask your pardon,’ said Harry, stirring himself out of his lethargy of despair.
He had been wakeful all night, gnawing over and over the tangle of his doubts and fears, and unable to worry his way through them to any certain hope.
He would have given anything to believe that Isambard was lying.
But why should he lie?
Only to torment?
There could be no other reason, and yet that did not accord with the placidity of his face and his voice, nor did it match with the image Harry was beginning to form of him.
Everything he did had method and purpose.
And if he was telling the truth, what terrible damage had been done unwittingly, and what incomprehensible and cruel outrage was to come of it?
He was a prisoner here, helpless to act, and already frayed and fretted with too much and too bitter thinking.
He stared out of his constricting net of anxieties and fears at this clean, smooth, well-intentioned boy, and wondered why he should  be expected to make the effort to answer him at all.
The page came and sat on the bench beside him and spread his arms confidentially across the table, leaning close.
The heavy door of the room was fast shut, but he sank his voice to a mere whisper as he said: ‘And I could do you right, if you had the wit to listen to me.
Unless you want to rot here.
It's nothing to me, if you don't choose to speak me fair.’
Harry's mistrustful face turned to him slowly.
The youth grinned at the dubious stare he got, but not unkindly.
‘What do you mean?’
The voice was grudging, and slow to have any truck with hope after so many bewilderments and frustrations.
‘Here, you'd best be eating.
It gives me a reason for staying.
And you'll need it before to-morrow if you show sense.’
It did not sound like a threat; there was even something of a promise about it.
Harry pulled the wooden platter towards him, and broke the bread.
‘You're his man,’ he said ungraciously.
‘Don't listen, then, if you're so curst.
I'm my own man.
I'm as free as he is, and my father's Gloucester's knight, not his, if you want to know.
You're a fool as well as surly,’ said the boy, and stuck his neat, short nose in the air and bounced up from the table in dudgeon, but Harry caught him by the sleeve.
‘No, don't take offence!
I'm so low I can't help doubting every man who comes near me.
What did you mean?
God knows I don't want to rot here if I knew of a way out, surely that's plain.’
The page sat down again, readily appeased.
The face he leaned so confidentially close to Harry's was glimmering with triumph and self-importance.
‘He's given me the task of looking after your wants and bearing you company.
And you're to be allowed the freedom of the outer ward, to take air and exercise with me sometimes.
But don't think you'd ever get past the gate-towers.
No one ever has.
There's no way out for you there.’
His voice sank to the finest whispering thread of sound.
‘But I know of a way.’
Harry held his breath and reined in his heart from hoping.
‘A way out of Parfois?
For me?’
He had begun to tremble at the very thought.
The fair boy brought his closed hand out of the breast of his cotte and opened it proudly under the edge of the table.
‘Do you know what that is?’
It was a small bronze seal, deeply cut.
‘That's his little personal seal, the one he sometimes uses to give authority to his special messengers.
He gave it to me so that I could come in and out to you as I like.
Whoever has that,’ he whispered impressively, ‘can go where he pleases and give what orders he pleases inside Parfois, and he won't be questioned.’
‘You'd be questioned fast enough at the gate-house, seal or no seal,’ said Harry gloomily, ‘if you had me with you.’
‘I know that, but we're not going near the gate-house.
I know a way out of Parfois that hasn't been used for years, but it's still open if you know where to find it.
There's a sally port under the rock.
And old Ralf doesn't know I know how to get to it.’
He leaned back, glittering with triumph.
‘Well, what do you say to that?’
‘You'd let me out?’ whispered Harry, dry-mouthed.
‘Why should you?
Why are you doing this?
And how can you?
As soon as they find I'm gone, what will your life be worth?’
It was a trick, it must be a trick.
Yet if there was the slightest chance of the offer being genuine, how he would leap at it!
‘Ah, but I shall be gone, too.
I shan't be here to be either questioned or blamed.
Whether you choose to come with me or not, I'm leaving Parfois to-night.
It was through you I got this chance, why shouldn't I share the benefits with you?
But if you're too suspicious to trust me, stay and be damned.
What do I care?’
‘No, don't be so quick to offence,’ entreated Harry hastily.
‘Would you trust easily, in my shoes?
Why are you going?
How have they misused you here?’
His eyes flickered involuntarily over the rich dress and pampered appearance of his visitor.
The boy laughed, not at all displeased.
‘Nobody's misused me.
But I don't like it here, and I've good reason for going.
I'll tell you if you like.
My father is Sir  Humphrey Blount, a knight of Earl Gilbert of Gloucester, who died last month.
There's a girl my elder brother wants to marry, and my family want it, too, but she likes me better, and I like her, and her parents won't force her.
So when my father had to leave in the summer he thought fit to send me here to my lord Isambard, to keep me from under my brother's feet until Isabel's safely wed.
Old Ralf likes me, and I've made myself very serviceable to him, and behaved myself circumspectly here.
They think I'm reconciled, but I've only been biding my time for a chance like this one you've brought me now.
I've not been allowed out of the wards, except under escort, that I owe to my father, I know.
And to get to the passage I know of isn't easy, but with this little key I can open the doors now.
I'm for home to-night, whatever you choose to do.’
‘But your father'll only send you back again,’ said Harry, still dubious.
‘Where's the use of it?
Either that, or he'll see you moved somewhere else out of your brother's room.’
‘He won't, then, for he took the cross in the summer, after he'd placed me here, and went off to join the Bishop of Winchester in the Holy Land,’ said young Blount delightedly.
‘And my mother's on my side, and will talk my uncle round to her way of thinking, and in no time I shall be betrothed to Isabel.
Her parents would as lief have me as Humphrey, and she'd a good deal rather.’
The picture was so circumstantial that it began to be convincing, and Harry's heart hammered in his breast with hope and dread.
He gripped the slender hand that dandled Isambard's seal.
‘You mean it?
You'll take me out with you?’
‘Why not?
I owe old Ralf nothing.
If he's trusted me I've never asked him to, and I've never promised him fealty.
I can't help you once we're out, though.
I'm for Shrewsbury, I know where I can get a horse there’
‘I'll need no help, once I'm out,’ breathed Harry, thinking with feverish urgency of the grave under the lee of the church at Strata Marcella, and the little curling leaf on the threatened stone.
If Isambard was not lying it might be already late.
‘Get me past the walls and the rest is for me to do, and  I'll be grateful to you lifelong.’
‘Mind,’ said the page warningly, ‘it's rough going down the rocks even from the gully.
It has to be at night or we'd be seen.
The way down on the eastern side, where I'm bound, is not so steep, but on the other it's a hard climb and a risky one.
Which way are you bound?
Back into Wales?’
‘Yes, but I know the climb, I've done it already.
Only let me past the walls and I ask no more.’
He was trembling now, he hated the thought of the long hours of the day dividing him from his hope.
‘When can we go?’
‘After supper, but soon after, or they'd wonder too much at my coming for you.
I'll have orders to bring you to old Ralf, they'll believe that.
But hush, now, we're getting too loud, and I'm here too long.’
He rose, flashing down at Harry the easy, sidelong smile of a born conspirator.
‘I'll come again at noon, then we'll have all settled.
On my life,’ he said in a quick, light whisper, ‘I'm glad you've given up thinking I mean to trick you.
I'm not used to being so mistrusted.
If I don't put you safely on the outer side of Parfois, may I never see Isabel again.
There!
Could I give you a better pledge?’
At the last moment, when the barred window was already darkened, and the echoes from the outer ward grown scattered and few, Harry suffered an agony of fear that after all this would be like other nights, that Isambard would come with his taunting smile and his small, shrewd ironies that stabbed like knives; but instead came young Thomas Blount, true to his word, with his tilted nose and his provocative swagger, and flung open the door of the room with a flourish.
He stood on the threshold dangling two keys in his hand, and did not bother to step within.
‘You're to come to my lord Isambard in his own chamber.
You may walk with me like a civilised man if you care to, but I warn you there'll be an archer behind to keep us in view, so 1 wouldn't advise you to try any tricks, they'd do you no good.’
He waved the men-at-arms in the ante-room imperiously  out of his path, and led the way out without even turning his head to make sure that Harry was following.
‘Look blacker, fool,’ he said out of the corner of his mouth as they stepped into the cold darkness of the outer ward, ‘and drag your feet.
You're not going to your wedding.
There's no archer, don't be afraid.
That was a flourish for them.’
There were still a great many people about in the outer ward, but once they had passed through the archway to the inner ward the night world about them was quiet, troubled by only a few echoing footsteps.
Harry had never been here before.
He saw it now as a crowding darkness of giant shapes against the merlons of the curtain wall, dominated by the eyeletted walls of the tall hexagonal keep.
Spears of light from loopholes stabbed outwards into the night and charmed up in sharp black and white disconnected passages of masonry.
‘Where are we going?’ whispered Harry, quivering at his guide's shoulder.
‘To old Ralf's tower, just as I told you.
Ah, leave fretting, man!’ he said impatiently, feeling the fingers that clutched at his sleeve tighten in suspicious anger.
‘We're not going near him, he won't bother us.
We're going there because the door we want is there.
There's another in the keep would have done just as well, but seal or no seal, they'd have wanted a better tale than I could think of before they'd have given me the keys of the keep.
This one unlocks his private wine-cellars under the tower, and this one is of the inner cellar, where the best wines are.
I said he wanted some of his favourite French wine — there's an envoy from the Chancellor in with him to-night, so it rang true enough, even though he's never sent me to bring it before.’
‘That's a mort of doors between the garrison and the postern, if they were pressed,’ muttered Harry.
‘Parfois never has been pressed.
They've never yet had to use it.
But his lordship's grandfather was a cautious man, and provided himself with a secret way out at need.
Hush, here's Langholme coming from my lord.
Keep close and look sullen.’
He twirled his keys airily for all to see, gave Isambard's  body-squire an amiable good night, and giggled like a girl as soon as they were past.
‘In here, now, and quickly to the right, where it's dark.’
They slipped like shadows through the great doorway of the Lady's Tower, and along a dark stone passage to a low oak door set in the inner wall.
Thomas unlocked it with the larger of his two keys, and taking from its sconce the last of the torches that burned along the passage, led the way through to a narrow spiral stairway, and began to descend without hesitation into the depths.
‘Are you not going to lock the door again?
Suppose someone tried it?
They might really want wine from below.’
‘No.
Wait until I let you through into the last cellar, and then I must take the keys back to the steward.
He'd be suspicious if I kept them long.
It means I must leave the doors unlocked, but that's less risk than having him come looking for me within the quarter-hour, as he surely would.’
‘And your things?
Where are they?
You're not leaving Parfois empty-handed?’
‘On my soul,’ sighed Thomas, injured but patient, ‘1 never did see any fellow could find all the devil's arguments like you.
When you're away down the mountain you'll still be sure I've laid a trap for you somewhere.
If you must know, I dropped my bundle off the wall four hours ago, down into the copse under the eastern end of the gully.
How could I come and fetch you away with my belongings under my arm?
I know exactly where to lay my hands on them.
Here, through here!’
The second key let them into a vaulted stone cellar, and groping torch in hand along the far wall behind the piled casks of wine, Thomas brushed the cobwebs from a low, insignificant door.
‘There!’
He drew back the groaning bolts and turned the rusty iron ring, and the door opened inwards with a protesting creak.
Beyond there was the reddish darkness of sandstone and a breath of earthy coldness.
‘Now will you wait for me here in the dark till I take back the keys, and not imagine I've locked you in to starve?
There's your warranty of a way out.
And here, keep my purse if you like, till I come back.
You can be sure I'll not leave that.’
‘I need no pledges,’ said Harry, shamed.
‘I'll wait.’
He did not have long to wait, though it seemed an age to him.
Within a quarter of an hour Thomas was back, hugging himself with pleasure in his own cunning, and they passed together through the little door, and drew it to again after them.
From that moment they drew breath more easily, not afraid to talk above a whisper, and undismayed by the echoing sound of their own footsteps.
Already Parfois seemed to lie behind them, and Harry had almost lost that tense expectation that at every step someone would reach out and take him by the shoulder to haul him back into captivity.
There were hanging cobwebs at first, but the torch swept a clean way through for them.
The passage continued narrow, clearly cut and low-roofed, a safe and secret way out of the castle by which the garrison could retreat towards Shrewsbury, if too hard pressed, and by which it could receive stores and reinforcements in time of siege, or emerge to raid and counterattack by night.
‘It comes out in the gully, well to the eastward end.
You'll have to pass under the gate-towers to get down to the west.
But you'd do better to come down with me and make the long trip round.’
‘No,’ said Harry, already in his mind scrambling down the rocks in the dark to Severnside.
Should he make for Robert's assart?
No, he would lose time rather than gain it, and a horse would be little help to him, for he'd have to go downstream to the ford.
No, to-morrow was time enough to reclaim Barbarossa and see his friends again.
To-night he must make the shortest time of it he could to Strata Marcella, reassure himself that his father's grave had not been desecrated, and warn the prior of Isambard's malignant interest in it.
There was a boat at the mill, and the current would help him down-river in the crossing and bring him quickly to the water-meadows by the abbey.
Or if by any chance the boat was not there, or too securely chained, he could swim across at a  pinch.
The level would be reasonably low now, for the autumn had been dry; and the cold he could bear in such a cause.
‘As you please,’ said Thomas airily.
‘I'd rather you risk your neck than me, but if it's a question of time you're justified; it would take you two good hours and more to work your way about.’
The passage in which they walked had changed its nature gradually, and Harry had not noticed it until he stumbled in the broken formations of the flooring where all had been smoothly levelled before.
He looked up, and the flickering torchlight showed him a vaulted cavern-roof innocent of tooling by men.
They were in a deep crevice of the rock, and the faint lightening of the darkness before them was the mouth of a narrow cave opening upon the December night.
‘We'd better douse the torch here,’ said Thomas.
‘Someone might look over from the gate-towers and catch the gleam of it.
And from here on keep your voice down.
When we come out in the gully, go to the right and keep close in under the rocks, and you'll be safe enough, for there's a good overhang.’
Harry was shaking with relief and joy.
To the last moment he had feared a trap, but this was the fresh air before him, the dim air of the ravine he knew, hemmed in with rock on both sides between the church and the castle.
He felt for Thomas's hand and wrung it in the momentary blindness after the torch was quenched against the rock.
‘What you've done for me I'll never forget.
God speed to you, and I hope you get your Isabel.’
They emerged into the sharp, clean cold of the open air, and overhead hung a crumpled ribbon of stars.
There in the channel of rock they parted, Thomas going to the left, Harry to the right towards Wales.
They embraced at the last, but did not speak for fear of the clarity with which even a whisper might carry here.
Thomas was quaking with giggles like a girl, but Harry would never again be so easily taken in by that, after this experience.
Their hands parted, they were away into the night.
Harry went slowly and cautiously through the gully, feeling his way at every step until his eyes had accustomed themselves to the darkness, and could judge distances and distinguish the shapes of the weathered planes of rock that leaned over him.
He knew when he was beneath the gate-towers because he could see how the machicolations projected against the sky rounded shapes of darkness void of stars; but he heard not a sound, not even the tread of the watch on the walk between the towers.
He was alone, the whole of the night was his.
The ravine widened and opened upon the sly, the curtain-wall with its vast bulk of darkness curved away from him to the right, and left him.
He was on the rocky slope he knew already from more than one climb, and somewhere here on these smoother protected faces of rock were the plans he had scratched and pondered over so many months ago.
He began to descend, and in confidence that he was now too far from Parfois to be heard he abandoned his caution and swung his way down the cliff with frantic haste.
Several times he tore his hands and barked his shins, and once he missed his footing and came crashing several yards down the slope before he got a desperate grip with fingers and toes and knees, and clung sweating till he recovered his breath.
He could not go fast enough now to satisfy him.
Hope and foreboding struggled in him and drove him, and there would be no peace for him until he saw his father's grave immaculate and at peace still, and knew quite certainly that Isambard had lied.
And even then he must warn the brothers to be on their guard.
The lord of Parfois was a law to himself; if he ever did discover where Master Harry lay buried, the Severn would not stop him from pursuing the dead with his living and virulent hatred, the Welsh border would be no bar to him, even the sanctity of the church would not restrain him.
The rocks gave place to tufted waste grass and bushes; he was down, and with nothing but a graze or two to show for it.
He knew these sheep-slopes, he knew the woods below.
He made good speed down to the river, and then there was a path to aid him as far as the mill.
The boat was there, tied up and  rocking gently to the swirl of the dark water inshore.
It was not chained; he untied it thankfully, and thrust softly out into the current.
He was in midstream when the clouds that had covered the moon parted and drifted away, and before him on the distant bank he saw the gracious, massive shapes of Strata Marcella pastured like sheep in their silver meadows.
He pulled strongly across into the inshore current, and let it carry him down abreast of the church before he grounded the boat and climbed ashore.
Here in the open grass he broke into a headlong run, lurching and recovering as the tussocks turned under him.
He homed to the nameless grave like a pigeon, and fell on his knees beside it with a great sob of thankfulness.
The ground about it was undisturbed, the stone unviolated.
Isambard had lied.
He was absolved, neither waking nor sleeping had he betrayed his trust.
All the tension went out of him.
He leaned his forehead against the stone, and was suddenly so weary and so content that it seemed to him there was nothing left to be desired in life, and nothing more he need strive for.
He had meant to say a prayer of thanks for his escape and for his mercy, but all he did was to spread his arm protectively across the stone, and lie there breathing deeply, embracing his father, and as gratefully at rest as though he had flung himself into Master Harry's living arms.
Behind him the grasses stirred almost silently, but he heard and raised his head sharply.
Cloud was advancing steadily again over the moon's face, and its shadow rolled across the mitred stones of the abbots, and covered the dark inward movement of the men who had followed him up from the water.
Six of them, ringing him round, closing in on him from all sides.
He opened his mouth to shout a warning to the brothers in their distant dortoir; if it was not yet much after Lauds they might be waking, and hear him.
But a hand was over his lips before he could utter a sound, and an arm took him round shoulders and breast from behind, and pinned him helplessly  against a broad chest.
They wound him in a cloak to pinion him from struggling, and twisted folds of the cloth hard round his mouth.
Isambard stepped into the dwindling lance of moonlight without haste, and walked the bright shaft of it until he stood face to face with the swaddled and muted figure of the boy.
The stretched, polished skin over the lofty cheek-bones and the finely moulded forehead gleamed golden, the pits of the eyes were black but bright.
He was smiling like a happy demon, almost tenderly.
‘Well done, Harry!’ he said softly.
‘Did I not say I'd get my answer from you, and none other?’
He smiled for a long moment into the raging eyes that would have struck him dead if they could.
He looked from the waiting ring of his retainers to the blank and nameless stone, and in the last pale ray of moonlight his eyes caught the small, obscure shape of the carved leaf.
He bent to trace its lines with a finger-tip, and lingered over it long.
‘Take him back,’ he said over his shoulder, without turning his head.
‘He's told me what I wanted to know.’
Aelis was out before dawn, in the frosty end of the starlight and the faint gilding of the still unrisen sun, making the rounds of her rabbit snares high on the hillside.
She saw the little procession of horsemen climbing the ramp towards Parfois, and crept up through the trees to see more closely, for it seemed to her that the middle figure of the five was bound, and one of those who rode beside him led his horse by the bridle.
They passed close to her, where she crouched still in the bushes.
Four men in Isambard's livery, and one, slender and smaller than they, wound tightly in a dark cloak, the lower part of his face swathed, and his feet roped together under the horse's belly.
They might muffle his body and cover his face as they would, but they could not hide Harry Talvace from Aelis.
She would have known him anywhere by the very set of his head, the mere shape of him, even so cramped and disabled.
She slipped through the bushes alongside the sorry procession  until they passed in through the lower guard of the castle, and disappeared up the tree-shrouded ramp.
Then she turned and snatched up her rabbits, and ran for home with her bad news.
Where had he been all this time, that she should see him now being led prisoner into Parfois?
What had he done, where had he slept, who had fed him?
This was the first and only certainty, that he had fallen foul of Isambard, and was now in captivity.
And even if the Prince of Gwynedd should send an army to set him free, how were they to get him out of that impregnable hold?
She remembered his scratched plans and his frowning concentration, and for the first time fully understood that all that persistence had been devoted to the cause of breaking into Parfois.
But now what miracle of ingenuity would be needed to get him out?
She should have slammed and barred the door on him while he was changing his clothes that day in November, and kept him there until her father came.
She should never have let him slip away silently to Pool in the first place, but clung fast to him there among the trees and called out the men to overpower him.
Better that she should suffer his anger and displeasure than that he should fall into the clutches of the lord of Parfois.
For no good reason she suddenly thought of the bruise on his cheek, the slight blue stain he had tried to hide from her, and burst into angry tears as she ran.
Within the hour Robert set out up-river to the ford by Pool, to carry the news across the river to the castellan at Castell Coch; and before the morning was out, a rider was despatched on the long ride to Llewelyn's court at Aber.
Harry lay all day long on his bed without a word to anyone who came in to him, and would not touch food or drink.
In the evening Isambard himself opened the door of the room, and even in his small closed hell of hate and despair and self-disgust, Harry knew who had entered, and drew himself erect before him.
He would not even have turned his head for anyone else, but in the presence of his enemy, now truly and  irrevocably his, no longer merely the legacy of his father's wrongs, he stiffened his back and reared his head.
‘What's this I hear of you?’ said Isambard in the formidably courteous voice in which he habitually gave his orders.
‘Refusing food and turning your back on the world?
No man should do that unless he's ashamed of his dealings with it.
Are you shamed?
I know no reason why you should be.’
‘And you, my lord?’ said Harry through his teeth.
‘It's well known of me that I am not subject to shame.
But why should you condemn yourself because you were taken in by an elaborate trick and an accomplished liar?
Thomas lies as naturally as other men breathe, if he told truth he would be untrue to himself.
It may not be a virtue, but there are times when it's an asset.
He and I should be hiding our heads perhaps, but not you.’
‘What do you mean to do,’ demanded Harry, looking fiercely up at him from under drawn brows, ‘now that you've tricked me into this betrayal?
If you disturb him, if you dishonour him, I swear to God I'll never rest until I've killed you.
There's no name vile enough, my lord, for creatures like you who vent their spite even on the dead.
Did he so outdo you, living, that you have not the generosity in you to let him rest even now?’
‘He so outdid me, living,’ said Isambard with a dark and hollow smile, ‘that even now neither one of us can let the other rest.
But just now we are concerned with you.
You are another matter.
If you think I shall allow you to sink into this silly shame of yours and eat out your own heart until you die of despair, you are in a great mistake, boy.
Now you will get up and make yourself presentable — I'll see to it that the wardrobe shall provide you with clothes that will fit tolerably — and you will come to supper at my table and take your place among your peers, and behave yourself like a man and a Talvace, instead of a sick and thwarted girl.’
‘No!’ said Harry, startled and stung into what was almost a cry of pain.
‘But I say yes.
You'll come, boy, because if you do not I shall have you dragged there.
And you'll eat, because, by  God, if you refuse I'll have food forced into your mouth and stroked down your throat, like medicining a hound.
You'll carry your humiliation — since nothing can stop you seeing it so — in quietness and with a good grace, as other men have had to learn to do before you.
Yes, and you'll brush sleeves with young Thomas, liar as he is, and restrain yourself from flying at his throat.
He's no match for you, and I won't have him abused for being so good at the one thing he does well.
You hear me?’
He put out an imperious hand and tapped Harry smartly on the cheek to turn the boy's face to him.
Their eyes met in a long, arching stare.
Isambard smiled.
‘Leave the small game go free, Harry.
Save all that fine, lusty hatred for me.
I am the only enemy here worth your steel.’
Aber, Parfois: January to April 1231
‘God witness,’ said Llewelyn, drumming his long fingers on the arms of his chair in a hard-driven rhythm that was always a key to the stresses of his mind, ‘it could not have come at a worse time.
Well, we must do what can be done.
My obligation to Harry is sacred for his father's sake, even if I did not love him like my own.
As God knows I do.’
‘My lord,’ said Gilleis in a low voice, ‘I well know you do.’
Yes, she knew, and she had never blamed him.
Yet he had been to blame.
He had never willed to injure or dismay the boy, but the thing was done and could not be undone.
He looked out through the open shutters at the grey January sky over the strait, where the islands had vanished in frosty mist.
The sea moaned and cried uneasily across the salt flats between, the incoming tide hissed beneath the field where the tragedy had ended.
How many thing had been done last spring that could not be undone?
The boy's fate was the last and the least reverberation of that disastrous thunder, but not the least pitiful.
‘Soon or late he would have gone,’ said Gilleis.
‘A little thing could have set him on his way any time these past three years, and it would have had the same ending.’
She did not say a word of blame.
How could she accuse the traditional education he had received at Welsh hands, when she herself was not entirely innocent?
She had wanted him safe and sheltered, but she had wanted vengeance, too.
Now she would have given up every lingering resentment, every long and bitter hatred, to have the boy back at Adam's banker, humbly cutting stone.
‘The place is impregnable,’ said David sombrely.
‘There's  no way of bringing up siege engines to the walls.’
‘If it were not, I cannot assay it.
I'm in no case now to make war on any marcher lord.
Wales has the first claim on me, and there's grave enough danger threatening Wales now; God forbid I should do anything to add to it.
De Burgh is speaking us very fairly and friendly, but both his hands are gathering up the borders round us.
He has an appetite for land and castles I would not willingly see in the King himself, but he's a more dangerous man than the King.’
‘But no soldier,’ said Owen with a brief grin, remembering Kerry.
Llewelyn's blazing smile showed abstractedly for an instant and was gone.
‘That's to make our own prowess less.
I grant you we put a check on him once, and could again, but never think you saw the true measure of de Burgh in Kerry, there's more to him than that.
It isn't the soldier we have to fear.
He gets his conquests without fighting for them, and every one moves in upon us more closely.
He has his new marcher holding of Cardigan and Carmarthen now, if the grant's confirmed — and confirmed it will be.
And only a month ago he won two successes without a blow struck.
You know them as well as I. John de Breos in Gower is no longer a tenant of the crown, but of de Burgh's new fief.
And since Gilbert de Clare died in Brittany on his way home from this French campaign, the earldom of Gloucester and all its lands go to a child, and boy and barony are handed over to de Burgh.
That makes him the master of Glamorgan.
What Marshall leaves Welsh in the south, Hubert devours.
It's only a matter of time before he begins to move north, and I have an itch in my sword arm says the time's running short.’
‘It might be well to strike first, before it runs out,’ said David.
‘It's coming to that in the end.’
‘So it might, but not westwards at Parfois.
And the time's not ripe yet.
When the hour does come I shall need a good, clear cause, every man I have and all the speed I can muster.
I cannot touch Parfois.
If I sent my army against a border lord on a private quarrel I should be throwing Wales into  Hubert's hands.
At best it would provide him with the opportunity to strike elsewhere while my back was turned, and at worst— and he'd see it plain enough — with an excuse to raise the whole royal power against me.
What Hubert orders, Henry does.’
‘It's true,’ said Owen.
Not even for young Harry could Llewelyn be asked to throw away Wales, which was David's birthright.
And who would be more bitterly indignant if he risked it than young Harry himself, whose pride in his prince and jealousy of his rights had no match even among David's own blood-kin?
‘But the border's alive with irregulars.
If a few more join them, these next few days, who's to blame you for that?
Let me go, and if I run my head into a hornet's nest you may disown me.’
‘And do you think a dozen or so irregulars are going to break a way into Parfois?
Nobody's ever done it with arblasts and trebuchets, let alone bows.’
‘Not by force,’ admitted Owen.
‘But there may be other ways in, or ways of bringing the quarry out.’
‘If he gave his parole he might be let out of the walls,’ said David with no great conviction.
‘He'll never give his parole.’
No one said no to that; they knew their Harry.
‘Well,’ said Llewelyn heavily, ‘we'll manage as best we can.
I can do one thing in the light, and that's send and treat for him in open negotiation.
It may be that Isambard will let him go for a price.
He's an older man and maybe an easier since he had me galloping the best of my horses lame over you, Owen.
But even if he refuses, we have something to gain.
We can at least bring the case to the light, and make it dangerous for him to harm the boy privily.
We stand to England in a different relationship since John's day, and no prisoner for whom I have offered ransom can vanish now without an account being demanded.
If he won't deal, we'll send formal notice to King Henry, and see that the law has at least knowledge of the matter.’
Adam said unhappily: ‘But I doubt Harry went there to kill, and his standing at law may not be all we could wish.
And the King's writ hardly runs in the march, to take a felon out of the hold of such as Isambard.’
‘That may be true, but it has vigour enough to ensure that he shall not be hanged out of hand.’
He saw Gilleis shrink in Adam's arm, and turned his face away into the shadow of his hand, wishing the words back.
Wales was a different matter.
The march might be a girdle of lawless palatines, only elusively within reach of the King's justice, but the shadow of royal displeasure was at least a curb there; but Gwynedd, though it formerly owned Henry as suzerain, was a free principality, and could harbour runaways and make short work of captured felons with impunity.
That was his achievement.
The final and absolute statement of his sovereignty had been the hanging of a felon out of hand.
All our acts, he thought, come back upon us sooner or later.
But Henry was not involved with my prisoner; he sailed for France and abandoned him without a tremor.
Isambard has there under his hand a piece of my heart, and draws me by it with cords of custom, and indebtedness, and love, and guilt.
And still I deny to answer.
Like Henry, for a dream of empire; but his dream was a pageant in the sun through a conquered land, over soil alien to him, among people speaking a language he knows, perhaps, but not his own; and mine is of a country preserved and perpetuated, peopled with my own blood, speaking my native tongue, and the work is to be mine, and the fruit for David and for Wales, after I'm gone.
Oh, God, does that justify me?
‘And one thing I can do in the dark,’ he said, ‘behind my own back while I keep the peace.
Take your party, Owen, and go to the march.
I'll send Philip ap Ivor to Parfois to treat for Harry's release.
Whatever the answer, Philip will meet you at Strata Marcella when he comes from Isambard, and if the man will not come to terms, then it's for you to act as you think fit.’
‘How many men may I have?’ asked Owen, brightening into eagerness.
It was only just, as well as practical, that the task should be his.
He had once been a prisoner in Parfois  himself, he knew the castle and the country round it, and owed his escape from it alive to Master Harry and none other.
‘You'll do well to keep your numbers within bounds.
Take a dozen men, and if more can serve you, send for them.’
‘Will you take me for one?’ asked Adam.
‘There's no man I'd rather have.
Come and welcome!’
‘Send Philip here to me, Owen, as you go down.
We'll put him on his way to-day, and you shall follow at first light.
Gilleis!’
Llewelyn caught her by the hand as she rose, with one of those warm, moving gestures of his that came so suddenly out of the very centre of his royalty, to join him by the heart with the simplest of those who moved about him.
Touches like that had bound men to him for life, and their sons after them.
‘Girl, never doubt but he'll come back to you whole and hungry, as he always used to from the butts or the wrestling when you were fretting over his lateness.’
She said: ‘God grant it!’ and clung for a moment to the great, warm, vital hand that could put heart into her even now.
Adam drew her arm through his and led her away, for she was half-blinded with tears.
She had lost too much already in Parfois to believe easily that anything of hers could come unmarked out of it.
When father and son were alone David stood warming his hands at the brazier, and looking down with a clouded face into the red glow.
‘Philip is a good man,’ he said slowly, ‘and carries weight.
He's dealt with the King too often to want influence, even with Isambard.
But —’
‘Well?’ said Llewelyn, dark-faced, knowing what was in his mind.
‘There's one who carries more, and could do this office to better effect.’
His brows were drawn together in a frown, his face still; the reflected light from the brazier made his fairness ruddy that was usually so pale and clear, but even so the likeness was extreme.
It caught and twisted at the heart, and there was no armour against it.
‘If you would but use her,’ said David, and turned his back and went to  stare from the window at the frosty strand and the shifting, misty sea.
‘I have full confidence in Philip ap Ivor,’ said Llewelyn, his voice harsh and dry.
He felt for the words that should follow, the first step that was as hard as a death, or more truly, as hard as being born again.
And yet it could have been said so simply.
The hour may come within weeks, within days, to-morrow; and then, before I take the field with the fate of Wales in my hands, I have a need of her and a use for her here; and then I shall be loosed from this dumbness that binds my tongue, and I shall be able to say to her what needs to be said, and what as yet I cannot say.
He opened his lips, struggling to put off the pride and bitterness that held him mute; but the slight rustle of the tapestry at the door spoke first, and eloquently, and when he looked up David was gone, leaving still silent on the air between them the name that was not to be spoken.
Isambard was in his bath, washing off the sweat of the hunt, when they brought him word that there was a groom at the lower guard in Llewelyn's livery, asking safe-conduct for an envoy from Aber.
He threw his head back and laughed like a young and boisterous man, till the drops flashed from the clustering wet tendrils of his iron-grey hair.
‘The gods have no imagination,’ he said, stepping out of the tub on to the towels spread on the rugs before his glass, and turning himself about beneath Langholme's ministering hands.
‘They're for ever repeating themselves.’
He was known for a devout man, the lord of Parfois, a patron of pilgrims and collector of relics, and long ago he had taken the cross; when he wanted to blaspheme he turned to his classical education and its multiple gods, and loosed his barbs at them.
‘So the news has leaked out already, has it?’ said he.
‘Now I wonder how did they get word so soon?
I'll swear the boy was alone, he told me himself the enterprise was his own.
Llewelyn's well served in these parts, it seems.
Well, fetch de Guichet here.
I'll have him send an escort down to the  riverside to fetch in our guest with ceremony.
And tell the chamberlains to have an apartment made ready for him in the King's Tower, the best they can offer.
Leave me now, Walter, I'll dress myself, there's other work for you.
Take young Harry somewhere out of sight — the armoury, if you will, he's spoiling for exercise, he'll make no difficulties.
Provide him with playmates enough to keep him busy until supper, and see no one tells him we have a visitor from Aber.
And Walter!’
Langholme turned again in the doorway.
‘My lord?’
‘Let him be late in coming to the table.
See to it!
We'll have them both off-guard.’
They ran in all directions to do his bidding.
He stood flexing the body he had preserved to himself by hard exercise and the austere living that wore so deceptive a cloak of luxury.
There would not be a man at his table that night who did not eat more and drink deeper than he.
He examined himself from head to foot, assessing without vanity the beauty that had once given him an honest pleasure, and he marked without fear the changes that moved in upon him now daily.
He had seen to it that his spare flesh should not go soft with time, or lose its springy vigour; but the years had revenged themselves as best they could.
The slender loins and wide shoulders kept their elegance of shape and movement, the skin was clear of wrinkles except for the lines of experience that had graved themselves into his face; but the flesh was drying and withering now, hardening between weathered skin and shapely bone.
The straight, tall thighs grew lean and leathery, the arched rib-cage broke through the shrinking flesh and etched its pattern in glossy light on the taut skin.
The magnificent engine was strong and skilful still, but the suppleness and the sap were drying up in the long sinews, the head was already a death's-head.
He smiled; he had been on intimate terms with death for a long while, it had no terrors for him.
‘They might well send a priest to you,’ he said to his own image, and reached for the clean shirt Langholme had laid ready for him.
Philip ap Ivor rode into Parfois somewhat before the early dusk of the second of February.
In all his discreet and circuitous years as one of the most trusted of Llewelyn's clerical envoys, he had seldom had such a royal reception.
He wondered, as he dismounted in the outer ward, precisely what it foreboded.
Not, he thought, an easy success.
No one goes to the trouble to dress up compliance so elaborately.
He ran a shrewd brown eye over the formidable ramifications of Isambard's favourite castle, and speculated on which of the stony holes under it held young Harry.
There was not a word said of business until they came to table in Isambard's great hall, where the envoy found himself in the place of honour at his host's right hand.
On his own right there was an empty place, no doubt to be filled by some trusted official of the household.
Isambard, like Philip, would be concerned with the discreet placing of witnesses to what was said; the contredanse had begun.
Philip looked round the high table in the blaze of torches and candles, and was encouraged.
There were knights there not of Isambard's following, there were two English clerics of rank whom he did not know, and a burly young man whom he recognised as a nephew of Hubert de Burgh.
The justiciar, he knew, was on excellent terms with Isambard.
It would be well, if the opportunity offered, to precipitate the coming encounter there in public, before all these independent witnesses.
They might not avail to get Harry out of his prison, but they would make it extremely awkward for Isambard to remove him quietly from the world afterwards.
They were very civil together, and very punctilious.
The old wolf had lost neither his looks nor his sparkle.
‘And what is troubling my lord the Prince of Aberffraw and Lord of Snowdon?’
He managed to turn Llewelyn's imposing new title, compounded of the old sacred name for a reassurance to the Welsh, and the added flourish for English ears that had scarcely heard of Aberffraw, into a satirical comment, but he did it with great delicacy.
‘In what particular can I be of comfort to Prince Llewelyn?’
He, too, it seemed, wanted the encounter to be public.
He  had raised his voice so that it carried through the babel of the many conversations at the high table, and even reached the nearest of the lesser knights below.
‘In the matter of his foster-son, who is missing from court since last spring.
lt has come to the Prince's ears, my lord, that the boy was seen some days ago entering Parfois, escorted by four of your men.
I come to you to know if it is true that you hold him here in your charge.’
‘His Grace has, I believe, more than one foster-son,’ said Isambard, spreading his brocaded elbows comfortably.
‘Without, of course, numbering the one he himself holds in charge at Degannwy.
With which one are we now concerned?’
‘With Harry Talvace, my lord.’
So he would have names named, would he?
There was far more in this than met the eye.
‘Yes,’ said Isambard readily, ‘Harry Talvace is here.’
‘As your prisoner, my lord?’
‘As my prisoner.’
‘Taken in trespass on the hither side of Severn?’
‘Taken in trespass on the hither side of my own guard, your reverence, if the whole truth be told.’
‘Ah!’ said Philip ap Ivor.
‘That was not how we heard it at Aber.
As the tale came to us, my lord, the boy was seen bound and muffled, being led up the slopes from Severn into Parfois.
But not then within your gates.’
‘Very like.
But you are speaking of an occasion some days ago, when we recovered him after an attempt at escape.
The boy has been in my custody since November.
As for how he first came into my hands, you shall ask him that for yourself.’
‘Then I may see him?’ said Philip, promptly securing at least this concession.
‘Very simply, your reverence.
You have only to look down the hall at this moment.’
Harry had come into the lower doorway at the right time, and was moving up between the tables to take his normal place among the young fellows of knightly family, his peers.
Langholme had done nobly.
The boy was flushed and gleaming with exercise and haste, his eyes bright, his cheeks freshly scrubbed, his dress a suit in rich Flemish cloth, long ago outgrown by Isambard's younger son, and re-fashioned now for the involuntary guest.
If Philip had been looking for a pale, sickly, ragged and possibly fettered prisoner, Harry would be a considerable shock to him.
They saw each other at the same moment.
Harry halted sharply at sight of the slender, elderly priest, austere and grey beside Isambard's splendour.
The face meant home to him.
He paled, and flushed as richly again, and his composure was shaken for a moment; but the small, testing smile in Isambard's eyes straightened his shoulders and stiffened his back.
He left his place and came round the high table to kiss Philip's hand, and was himself embraced and kissed.
Philip made use of the moment to compose the countenance which he was afraid had almost betrayed his surprise and consternation, and to revise all his ideas about his errand.
Nothing was as it seemed here.
The boy was so far from being ill-used or closely confined that he apparently lived a normal life, at least within the walls, going and coming much as he pleased, and eating in hall like a member of the household.
Princes enjoyed such easy captivity, but seldom commoners.
Did Isambard intend to let him go gracefully, after all?
Was he, for some reason, anxious to have good relations with Gwynedd, and using Harry's well-being as an elaborate move in the game?
‘For to-night, Harry,’ said Isambard, ‘your place is there beside his reverence.
You will want to talk to him about home, and he has things to ask you.
He would like to know from you how you came to fall into my hands.
Tell him.’
Philip's thumbs pricked; in the sudden certainty that any further public avowal was designed to serve Isambard's purpose and not his, he made haste to speak before the boy could open his mouth.
‘My lord, we should perhaps postpone this discussion until after supper.
I had no intention of turning your table into a  business conference.’
‘I could not discuss in Harry's absence what closely concerns him,’ said Isambard, ‘and I trust we can all be relied upon to continue our exchanges like civilised men.
Speak out, Harry!
Where was it I took you, within my own domain or outside it?’
Harry had lost the high, blooming colour he had got from two hours of strenuous play with blunted swords, and was pale now with a bright, wary, aggressive pallor.
And it was surely not merely over-confidence of his good usage here that gave his eyes that insolent green blaze, and his voice the sharp, clear edge of defiance.
‘Within it,’ he said firmly.
‘In the church, where I had climbed and hidden overnight.’
‘For some lawful purpose, no doubt, Harry?’ prompted Isambard, the small, devilish smile growing warmer and fonder.
Harry's palms were slippery with a sudden, chilly sweat.
He understood very well how he was being tempted, and for what purpose.
Whatever he did would play into the hands of Isambard, whose traps were always dual, and could not be evaded.
If he boldly avowed his real purpose thus publicly, he put himself in the wrong, and his cause past any help from the law, which would tamper here in the march only on unassailable grounds.
Isambard did not mean to let him go for money, and was ensuring that the crown should not intervene to take him out of his hands perforce.
The temptation to evade the truth was suddenly almost more than Harry could bear, so achingly did he want to go home.
The first glimpse of Father Philip had made his heart turn and contract in him with the pain of the memories that tugged him back towards Aber, older memories than the bitterness and anger that had driven him away.
But if he lied, saying that he came to Parfois with no felonious intent, and attacked only when he was surprised and frightened, Isambard would have won a better victory.
He would not find fault with the falsehood.
Harry felt in his blood with what calming delight and fulfilment his enemy  would embrace the lie that made him the victor.
That was what he wanted.
It would even be worth surrendering his prey, to have brought him down to the ignominy of lying to excuse himself.
Everything that terrible man laid in the way between them was a test or a trap, and all his will was bent to break the son as he could not break the father.
‘According to such law as I know,’ said Harry loudly and clearly, ‘it was lawful.
By our Welsh code it's legal to kill in repayment of a blood-debt.
No, it's an obligation!
I came to kill you, my lord, for the killing of my father.’
The brief silence seemed to stretch down the long room and hold fast by the pillars of the door, and every eye in the hall fixed greedily on the three at the high table.
Isambard broke stillness and tension together, saying with careful serenity, and to the hall in general: ‘Lucky for us both that intent and act are sometimes so far apart.
As you cannot choose but see, he did not kill me.’
Even the oblique implication that he had feared to put his purpose into effect seemed to Harry a new pitfall for his integrity of hatred.
‘I did my best, my lord,’ he flashed fiercely.
‘How many times in your life have you been nearer dying?’
The cavernous eyes, guarding in their depths those distant red flames of intelligence and appraisal, looked back at him laughing.
The lord of Parfois pondered for a moment.
‘Perhaps three,’ he said mildly at last, as if he were answering the simplest and most natural of questions.
‘Then do me justice, my lord!’
‘Be quiet, child,’ said Philip, laying a hand restrainingly on Harry's arm, though he would have preferred to lay it about his ears if he could have had him to himself for a moment.
Who could make a success of any embassage with such a turbulent brat at his elbow, over-ready with all the wrong answers?
‘I ask your pardon, Father,’ said Harry, quivering to the touch.
‘But I was asked, and I must answer truly.
I know no reason to be ashamed of it.
I did what it was laid on me to do.
But not well enough!’
‘You are making things difficult for his reverence, Harry.
He is here to inquire into your case and treat for your release, and I am prepared to listen.
But I fear your position at law is more vulnerable than you suppose.
The pity is that your Welsh code does not run here in England, where the offence was committed.
But I grant your sense of obligation, and I am willing to overlook your trespass.’
‘My lord,’ said Philip warmly, ‘this is generous in you.’
‘On conditions, of course,’ said Isambard.
‘I will entertain your offer for his ransom, if he will publicly close his blood-feud against me, and pledge himself to think of it no more.’
‘I will not,’ said Harry loudly and quickly, before the temptation could lay hold too treacherously on his heart again.
‘My lord, the boy is overwrought, he's saying what he does not mean.
Can we not talk the matter over later in private?
He'll be reasoned with, give him time and quietness.’
‘No,’ said Harry.
‘This is the time, and I am saying what I mean with all my heart.
My debt is not discharged, and I cannot and will not forgo it until it is paid.
God grant me another chance, and I'll make better use of it!’
He could not help it, for an instant the restraint he was arduously imposing on himself slipped like a mask from his face, and the bitter blaze of his hatred flared from dilated eyes, burning ferociously upon Isambard's calmly smiling countenance.
‘That could hardly be called a conciliatory speech,’ said Isambard delicately.
‘You'll understand that I'm loath to set him at liberty without some guarantee.
I have the reasonable man's preference for continuing alive.’
There was no sense in expecting any help from the boy, the only thing to be done was to exclude him as an irresponsible minor from the consideration of his own fate.
‘My lord,’ said Philip, ‘you shall have from the Prince the pledge you cannot get from Harry.
Let us discuss what his ransom should be, since you are so generous as to entertain the possibility, and I will get for you full assurance that he shall be restrained from ever infringing your territory or your person  again.
If necessary the Prince will keep him in close ward until he sees reason.
You know him, you know he'll hold to his bond.’
‘I know Harry, too,’ said Isambard, laughing.
‘He's no less a man of his word.’
‘The Prince has an authority over him he'll not deny.
I am empowered to offer you five hundred marks as his price, and he may be held until you have the guarantees you want from Prince Llewelyn.’
‘No.
Unless he will forswear this feud of his own will I cannot release him.’
He said it thoughtfully, as though he might reconsider, but Philip knew then that he had no intention of changing.
However, he tried.
‘A thousand marks would come nearer the worth of his release, in my own view, considering the circumstances.
I will go so far.’
‘I regret, your reverence, that I cannot come to meet you.’
‘My lord, you have been forbearing with him, and I dare make an appeal to you to have pity on this headstrong youth, and trust his future good behaviour to us.’
‘Why, if he would ask me for pity, I believe he might gain it.’
Harry believed it, too, and pity from Isambard was something he could not and would not bear; the mere thought of giving his enemy that satisfaction made his jaws set desperately to prevent the emergence of even one word or sound that might be mistaken for an appeal.
Philip cast one glance at him, observed the signs, and thought better of making any demands on him.
‘I am concerned to find him like this,’ he said, sliding away from the immovable barrier.
‘This is not the mood, these are not the spirits, in which I've known him at home.
I fear he is not in such sound health as you may think, my lord.
I trust he is allowed air and exercise?
Perhaps if he might ride — under escort, of course!’
Isambard smiled.
‘I've lost fledgeling birds like that before,’ he said, ‘even under escort.’
‘You said he was a man of his word.
Will you not accept his parole?’
‘I would if it should ever be offered.
Try him, your reverence.’
They were always back to Harry, do what Philip would.
On whose side was the young mule supposed to be?
He set his teeth against every concession that might have got him his liberty, bent on doing Isambard's work for him, as Isambard had all along intended he should.
He had put it on record firmly that he had attempted a sacrilegious felony, and was justly restrained in consequence.
He refused to plead his youth or excuse his act or promise amendment.
The Welshman in Philip understood and warmed to him, but the thwarted diplomat would willingly have beaten him.
He saved his last throw for the end of the meal, when the wine was flowing freely.
Turning again abruptly to Isambard he said: ‘My lord, to return to the matter of the ransom.
You have refused my offers.
I ask you now to name your own price, and the guarantees you shall have also.’
Isambard's deep eyes flashed to Harry's face and lingered there, untroubled by the naked hate and defiance that stared back at him.
He smiled mockingly into the bitter green glare.
‘How can I put a price on a Talvace?’ he said.
Owen and Adam came running to meet the little priest as soon as he rode through the gate and paced wearily into the stable-yard.
‘We'd all but given you up, Father,’ said Owen eagerly, holding his stirrup for him while Adam took the bridle.
‘We've been looking for you these five days, and never a sign.
Have you any good word for us?’
‘Good, yes,’ said Philip ap Ivor sturdily.
‘The first and best word we could ask, and we must be grateful for it.
The boy's alive and well, and in no hardship.’
It was indeed the first and most urgent measure of good, and they breathed the more easily for it; but they read in the tone no less the failure of his mission.
‘But he won't let him go,’ said Adam flatly.
‘He would on terms, that's the rub.
But on terms he knows the boy won't accept himself or let us accept for him.
He plays him like a harp.
He'll overlook the trespass on his lands and the assault on his person — oh, yes, there was an assault, and by all the signs a bitter one, too — if Harry will renounce his feud henceforward, but Harry will die first.
He'll show mercy on him, if he'll plead for it, but Harry'll cut his tongue out rather.
He'll give him a greater measure of liberty even so, if Harry'll give his parole, but Harry'll give him nothing short of a dagger.
I can get no sense into him nor out of him, though I've been at him without relenting for days.’
‘You've seen him and talked to him, then?
And Isambard let you speak freely?’ asked Owen, marvelling.
‘Let me?
The man's so sure of himself he pressed me, would have me reason it out with the boy until I was satisfied.
The only concession I could not get was leave to see him alone, but it's plain I should have got nowhere with him even so.
It's been time and breath wasted.
And yet,’ said Philip, shivering as the bleak little wind from Severn ruffled his grey tonsure, ‘I swear he has received very tolerable usage there, better than I dared expect, and why he keeps such a particular hatred against the lord Isambard is something I cannot fathom.
There's some personal thing and deep between them.
The father's quarrel was enough to move him to act, but it's some new offence against himself has sharpened his enmity to this extreme.
He says no word of what's been done to him, he shows no mark, but the thing is there, and I cannot account for it.’
They looked at each other across his furrowed forehead, and saw each his own thought staring back at him.
‘But we can, Father,’ said Owen grimly, ‘or so I think.
Come and see the thing that met us when we rode in here six days ago.’
They led him through the great court and round the cloister to the flank of the east end of the church, where the mitred graves of the abbots lay.
Close under the grey buttresses  of the wall one of the long stones was propped on its side, the grave beside it laid open to the frosty sky.
Open and empty.
Nothing remained of Master Harry but the faint dark staining of the stone where he had lain, a slender shadow outlined in rime at the bottom of the coffin.
Philip ap Ivor stood staring down into the blank cavity for a long moment with drawn brows and tight lips.
‘This is profanation,’ he said harshly, looking up at last.
‘A sacrilegious outrage against a holy place.
Men have been excommunicated for less.’
‘So they may have, Father, when those responsible could be named.
But who's to show who did this?
We may know it very well in our hearts, but what is there to prove the offence on him?’
Owen's voice gathered anger from his own helplessness.
‘Look here, where they've chipped the stone when they raised it.
Those marks are no more than a few weeks old, that's certain, but within that time no one knows when they were made.
If it had not been for Adam's quick eyes we might never have seen anything amiss.
He came running back from the grave the day we reached here, saying someone had been tampering, and we could scarcely believe it.
But we looked, and there were flakes of stone in the grass below, and these fresh marks.
And when we prevailed on the prior to let us raise the stone, this is what we found.’
‘I know every inch of that stone,’ said Adam jealously, leaning to finger the carved leaf with a gesture of ungovernable tenderness.
‘You couldn't so much as bruise the mosses on it but I'd know.
And I know the scores of an iron crow on stone too well not to know how these frets were made.
We've lost him,’ he said, grieving.
‘Even his poor bones we couldn't keep safe.’
‘None of the brothers ever heard any disturbance in the night,’ said Owen sombrely, ‘but in the night it must have been done, between Lauds and Prime.
That's time enough for the wicked work, if they knew where to find him, and it seems they did.
And if they did, they knew it from Harry.
Where else could they have got it?
Only a handful of us ever knew.’
‘He never would have told them,’ said Adam stoutly.
‘I know Harry, he'd die rather.’
‘Dying's a hard enough thought for old men, and terrible past bearing, maybe, for a boy.
But God knows I don't say Harry told them wittingly, for I know him, too, and know him as stubborn in holding fast as any grown man among us.
I say they must have got the knowledge from him somehow, by what manner of deception I know no more than you.
And if I'm right, what better reason could he have for being so implacable against Isambard?’
‘But if he'd known of this outrage,’ said Philip, looking from one to the other of them with searching eyes, ‘the boy would have told me in Isambard's presence.
In open hall, I tell you, he spat out his detestation of that man for every page and scullion to hear.
He is too full of hate even to be afraid, he would have accused him to his face.’
‘Isambard would hardly make him privy to what he's done, if this is indeed his work, as I swear I believe with all my soul it is,’ said Owen.
‘But Harry may know only too well that through him the secret of this grave's no secret.
That's an issue he'd surely hold close between the two of them as long as he thought no absolute harm had come of it.
He'll be clinging to the hope that we'll keep his father's bones safe for our part — and Isambard he wants for his own.’
‘And this is how we've done our share,’ said Adam bitterly.
Philip considered, gnawing his lip and frowning.
‘You've found no witnesses?
No one heard men abroad at night or saw the river crossed?’
‘None on this side Severn.
Beyond that we haven't ventured.’
‘And what has been done in the matter?’
‘Nothing as yet.
We were loath to prejudice your dealings there, or do anything to rouse tempers until we had Harry back with us.
And then, the prior's reluctant to make any accusations against Isambard but on good, solid evidence.
Would not you be?
The brothers have to live here, and it's  but a perilously little way across the river.’
‘True, we must not put them in more danger than is needful.
But this is a matter for the bishop, so sacrilegious an act as it is.
We must make the facts known to him, but make no open accusation.
Let the proper authorities do that, and in due form of law.
I must talk to the prior.’
He looked round questioningly towards the river.
‘Was there never sign of a boat having put over from Parfois by night?
No trampling of the grass?
Nothing?’
‘If there was, it escaped notice,’ said Owen, ‘and no one was looking for such signs, well it might pass them by.
We know he's thorough, and puts such fear into those who serve him that they do his work as he will have it done.
And I doubt the night in question was well past before ever Adam called attention to the sacrilege, and what signs there were to be read were long gone.’
‘Well, now that I am here and can have the tale formally, direct from the prior, it's for me to join him in sending word to the bishop.
And you, where have you lodged your men?
Not here?
If you're to do any service to Harry, you must not appear in this.
‘They're in Castell Coch, Father.
I thought better not to burden the prior with such dangerous guests.
If it should come to their being used, we could be the cause of burning his roof over him.
But come in out of the cold,’ he said, seeing how the little priest hunched himself like a ruffled bird inside his gown.
‘Let's hear all you have to tell us.’
They looked back at the corner of the church, for Adam was not with them.
He had wandered away along the narrow trodden path through the grass while they were talking, to the small hollow cove where boats came in to the abbey meadows.
He was standing at the edge of the water, looking into the turgid grey-brown eddies that poured down towards Breidden with such force and in so absolute a silence.
His face was as bleak as the frost.
They called to him twice before he heard, and then he started and came after them at a rapid walk, like a man driven by some urgent pain he could not slough off.
Seeing the set of his countenance, Philip  looked down the river where he had looked, and paled with apprehensive anger.
‘You think he took that way?
What, cast the poor remains into the Severn when he took them from the grave?’
‘What else?’ said Adam, low-voiced.
‘He threw him in there newly dead, and Benedetta with him living, to sink or swim together.
John the Fletcher took them out of the water and out of his power for a while, but do you think a man like Isambard would ever forget or forgive the crossing of his decree?
What would he do with Harry's body when he found it at last, but toss it back again to go downstream as he willed it to go, and leave its poor slender bones scattered all along the banks of Severn without a name or a resting-place?
And if ever he got his hands upon Benedetta again, he'd send her after.
That's the man he is,’ said Adam abruptly, and strode before them at a furious pace towards the guest-house, pursued by the pain he could not outdistance.
They forgathered again at Castell Coch near Pool, on a day in March, Owen and his twelve picked men.
Three of them had kin along this border, and had spent the patient weeks just past in picking the brains of their cousins regarding the habits of the household of Parfois.
Two more, with Adam, had been across the river in the villages beneath the Long Mountain, in Leighton and Forden overlooking the river, and even into the hamlets that lay inland, in the high valley of the brook beyond.
There were men and women there who looked narrowly at Adam when they clapped eyes on him, and being alone with him in quiet places called him tentatively by name.
They brought him in after dark to their hearths, and answered his questions as well as they could; and soon they spoke of Master Harry Talvace, drawing up the image of him slowly out of the well of memory.
They had not thought of him often in the years between, but he had never been very far from the borders of their hard and wary lives.
He came back readily when his name was spoken; they saw him not tools-in-hand in his lodge under the church, nor frowning thoughtfully  over his tracing tables, but naked to the waist and brown in the harvest-fields, swinging a sickle instead of a mallet, a slender young fellow with grass seeds in his tangle of dark hair, who might have come out of any cottage in the hamlet.
That was what they remembered of him best.
It was long since Adam had thought of him so, and he gathered the warmth of their recollection to him as gratefully as if he had salved one bleached and solitary bone of the beloved right hand out of the Severn, and laid it back in holy ground.
So Adam at least came back with a grain of comfort, though for the dead Harry, not the living.
For the rest, there was little to report.
They recounted all that they had learned in their careful reconnaissance, clustered in a corner of the great hall with the dogs round their feet in the rushes.
‘So he's kept close within,’ said Owen at the end of it, ‘and that's no more than we expected.
Never a glimpse of him since that good little lass saw them dragging him back into the wards.
And the place is a nut we're hardly likely to crack with an army, let alone this handful of us.
Harry won't be let out of it, we can't go in to him.
So we must set about it a more roundabout way.
If Harry never goes out and in, there are others who do.
And hostages can be exchanged.’
‘Those who go in and out of Parfois,’ said Adam, ‘seldom go in ones and twos.
This is border country, and Isambard never had any illusions about the love the country people have for his household.
I've seen it again these last days.
They ride out by companies, whether it's hunting or hawking there are always enough of them to make for safety.
Do him justice, he looks after his own, or at least he sees to it no one but himself shall flay them or hang them.
Then there's the matter of the hostage.
If we took de Guichet himself — I saw him pass the other day, twice as thick as when I knew him, and the beard changes a man, but I knew that thwarted, ambitious face of his — if we took de Guichet himself, would Isambard give us Harry for him?
Not for love!
He despises him, and always did.
For the sake of his usefulness he might, or for his own honour he might, but if I were de Guichet I'd  never feel sure of it.
Small use threatening a man with harm to someone who matters not a rap to him.
And who does matter to Isambard?’
Once, he thought, there had been someone who had mattered all too much, but by the grace of God and Llewelyn she was safe out of his reach now, calm in her sanctuary above Aber; a refuge as sacrosanct as the grave and almost as narrow.
But for one other person, perhaps, Isambard had cared in his time, before affection changed to anger and hate; and not even the last and holiest stone cell of all had kept Master Harry safe from his insatiable enmity.
‘We'll not make do with de Guichet,’ said Owen.
‘We can do better than that.’
His dark eyes were shining hotly in the torchlight.
He was remembering, too; the air thus near to Parfois was full of memories.
He remembered a homespun breast rough under his sleepy cheek, and an arm that cradled him, and the steady rocking of the horse under them on the long ride into the fringes of Wales that day; and suddenly at parting the terrible knowledge in him that, if he let go of Master Harry now, he would never get him back again.
He remembered clinging frantically to the stirrup-leather, and being lifted back to the saddle-bow and comforted.
Comforted but not deceived.
And then Adam holding and reassuring him in his turn, himself utterly without comfort.
‘There's one at least,’ said Owen, ‘who rides out from Parfois almost unattended when he pleases.
I've been following every move he's made outside the walls these last ten days.
He and his falconer go out perhaps once in a week along the ridge towards the Roman road from Shrewsbury.
There's good sport over that high pasture, I remember it well from my time there as a boy.
And there's a copse I know of, the end of a tongue of woodland that gives good cover for a retreat to the river with a prisoner.
He passes through it every time he rides to the old earth fort on the crest.
That's the place where we'll pick off our man.
We could climb to the church rock, as Harry did, but getting a prisoner down the slope again with us might be too dangerous and too slow.
No, we'll  wait for the opportunity outside, if we wait here a month and more.
And we'll take no seneschal or steward, either.
We'll have someone whose liberty others will be glad to buy with Harry's, if he himself will not — we'll have the old wolf himself, Ralf Isambard and no other.’
It was on the fifteenth of April that they waylaid the lord of Parfois on his own ground, in the thick copse of scrub-oak and brushwood threaded by the narrow path that linked the main approach of the castle with the highway to Shrewsbury.
They had lived wild in the forests below for nearly three weeks, waiting for their chance; and three sorry weeks they had been, saturated with spiteful April rains that had discouraged even Isambard from his usual activities.
Twice Iorwerth's warning signal had fetched them hastily to their pre-arranged places; but on the first occasion Isambard had shunned the dripping copse and ridden away down the softer slopes eastward of Parfois, with his attendants strung out after him like beads on the string of darker green he left in the wet grass; and on the second it had been a full-scale hunt with a dozen or more guests and very nearly fifty retainers, and Owen had held his hand, unwilling to venture against such odds.
They had waited long and patiently for this third call.
It came in mid-morning, and brought them all slipping through the branches and the coarse grass to lie hidden on either side the narrowing of the path with their bows strung and their shafts fitted, listening for the soft thudding of hooves that came as a reverberation along the ground rather than a sound.
This time it did not turn aside.
This time it wanted the confused, drum-like fullness of great numbers.
From the edge of the trees Iorwerth's green woodpecker laughed again.
‘Good!’ breathed Owen soundlessly into Cynan's ear, in the bushes close to the path.
The leaves were not yet full, but they served for cover, and the undergrowth was thick here.
‘Put an arrow into the ground in front of him when I give the sign — far enough ahead to be seen in good time.’
Iorwerth had three bowmen with him in the rear, to ensure that once the party entered the wood they should not turn and leave it again.
Adam was ahead with two more, to halt any who managed to break through.
They would do no killing unless they must.
They wanted nothing but the person of Isambard, and a sufficient start on their withdrawal to the river.
Ralf Isambard came into sight along the pathway, splendid in black, riding at a gentle trot.
His dress was too rich for his usual strenuous hunting, nor were there hounds abroad, or Iorwerth would have known and signalled it long ago.
He had no hawk on his wrist and no falconer at his elbow, only a handful of decorous gentlemen of his household, riding as though to welcome guests on the road and bring them courteously homewards.
He wore a sword, but it had the light, ceremonious quality of a court decoration rather than a weapon for use in earnest.
Owen counted nine riders at his back, three of his squires and six who might be knightly, officials or soldiers of the household, but peacefully disposed, it seemed, this morning of April.
It was hard to believe in such luck.
Ten swords to be reckoned with, but never an archer among them, and the soft, constant rain dulling all sound.
Owen dropped his hand upon Cynan's shoulder when Isambard was still some twenty yards short of them.
The arrow left the string lightly, almost lazily, and struck and quivered in the centre of the path, some yards before the horse's feet.
The hand that held the rein tightened without even a start, the head that had been inclined easily forward in thought came up smoothly and instantly, every muscle in formidable control.
Either he was smiling, or the gaunt hollows of his face gave him the daunting appearance of a smile.
He was still, tensed and alert on the sidling, startled horse; but he had not been startled.
‘Halt there, my lord!’ cried Owen from his deep cover.
‘There are archers all round you.
Make a move and we drop you.’
Isambard lifted a hand without turning his head, and snapped his fingers at the shifting, uneasy murmur at his back.
‘Do as he says.
Be still!’
The arrow in the path still vibrated faintly and rapidly, humming like a bee.
‘Well?’ said Isambard.
‘What do you want with me?’
One of the young men at the rear of the little procession tugged at his rein and made to wheel and ride out of the wood.
Iorwerth dropped a shaft across his path, and he thought better of it, jostling back nervously into his companions.
Isambard had not so much as looked round.
‘Walk your horse forward till I bid you halt,’ ordered Owen.
‘You only, my lord.’
He had half-expected that the response would be a thrust of the long spurs and a head-down gallop for the open, and those ahead had orders to bring down the horse if Isambard tried it; but instead he stirred gently in the saddle and brought his mount edging forward in obedience to the order, dancing restively past the quivering arrow, and almost abreast of Owen's hiding-place.
‘Enough!
And now dismount.’
Very slowly and deliberately Isambard slipped his feet clear of the stirrups and leaned forward as if to swing himself out of the saddle, but in the act he jabbed home hard into the beast's side with his right spur, and drove him not forward, but flinching sidelong into the bushes in a wild leap; and leaning both hands on the pommel of his saddle he vaulted out of it and dropped crashing into the bushes almost on top of Owen.
Old he might be, but he sprang to meet whatever situation he encountered with the alacrity of a boy.
He fell on his feet, coiled hard into a ball, and used all the weight of his body and the power of his long legs to project him forward again after the enemy who recoiled from his reaching arms.
Owen eluded the embrace, but Isambard flung one arm round Cynan, bow and all, before he could either spring back or draw.
The broken twigs flew crackling from the fall they took together.
They rolled with the bow whining and humming between them, and the fitted shaft snapped off against the  stony ground.
The head lay harmlessly flattened into the grass, but the broken shaft pierced through Cynan's tunic and shirt and stabbed and splintered against his ribs.
He flung his weight sidewise and rolled away from the stab, and finding firm ground beneath his knees, heaved himself up with all his power and broke the hold on him.
He was on his feet in an instant, and leaping back out of range.
The string of the bow, snapping at the notch, coiled with a fierce whine about Isambard's arm, like a spring released.
But for that he would have got his sword out of its scabbard, and the fight they could not afford would have been on in earnest.
But the momentary paralysis and the matter of seconds it took him to unwind and cast off the incubus cost him his chance.
Owen had closed in behind him and flung a cloak over his head and shoulders, and twisted the skirts of it tight round his body and arms.
Cynan flew to pin the struggling legs, and Meurig slid sidelong through the trees to help him.
It was all but over, and they had him.
Owen drew breath and plunged back to the little group, still hemmed into a few yards of the pathway.
There had been some disturbance there, too, when their master launched his attack.
Three of the foremost had tried to ride to his aid, and one of them lay now propped against a tree with an arrow through the fleshy part of his right upper arm, clutching it tightly with his left to slow the bleeding.
The other two had taken the warning, and reined in in time.
Somewhere behind them one of the younger squires had been pulled from his mount, and was sitting dizzily on the grass nursing a shocked head in his hands, too stunned to give any further trouble.
The rest had taken the lesson.
They crowded the path, uneasy on their uneasy mounts, looking from tree to tree in search of their assailants; but they kept their hands from their swords.
Owen reached through the branches to the bridle of Isambard's horse, that stood tossing his head and nervously trampling the path.
He parted the bushes and drew the beast in to them, and left Cynan and Meurig to hoist the lord of  Parfois across his own saddle and hale him away hastily among the trees towards the river.
Owen was swinging back to order the rest of the party to dismount in their turn when he heard a voice raised suddenly at a little distance in a long, challenging hail.
All the tensed heads came up hopefully, all the too quiescent bodies braced, all the wary eyes gleamed.
The young squire who crouched clutching his head suddenly slid like a snake for the cover of the bushes and lifted his voice in a great shout of: ‘Á moi! Á moi, Isambard!’
Iorwerth reached out of the leaves for him and choked him mute, but the damage was done.
Not for nothing had this little procession presented the air of a party setting out to receive guests.
Suddenly the earth was drumming and quivering with the beat of hooves, coming at a fast gallop along the grassy verges of the Roman road from Shrewsbury.
There was no time left for anything but withdrawal.
Owen bellowed orders, and the bushes threshed as the Welsh circled their enemies and took to the thickest of the woodland on their way to the river valley.
No time to stampede the horses and leave the riders unfurnished, and no sense in it, either, for there were other horsemen coming fast and in numbers, and they could not hope to stand off all of them.
The only course was to plunge into the close-set thickets where riders could not follow.
and run for the Severn.
But it was late even for that.
The Welshmen, crouching low and running like hares, overtook the two who led the laden horse only a matter of minutes before they were themselves overtaken.
Isambard's men were mad to establish their zeal now, and the woodland rides were not yet too steep and overgrown to give them passage.
Crashing merrily on their heels came the newcomers, horseman after horseman, knights and squires and grooms, flashing the red and green mascles of the Earl of Kent's livery.
Owen waved Cynan furiously onward, and turned to stand off the assault.
The bowmen slipped backwards from tree to tree, fitting and shooting as they could, the lancers  aimed for the men rather than the horses, and brought down three in the first onslaught.
Then the riders crashed among them as they hugged their covering trees, and it was a chaos of hand to hand fighting and opportunist running, without shape or direction.
Some way ahead in the bushes a horse bellowed, and Cynan's angry voice roared defiance.
They had reached the muffled prisoner and overrun his guards.
So it had all been for nothing!
They could not hold him now, they could only hope to come off with their lives and unidentified.
Outlaws from the forests to the south, grown over-bold; let them be taken for that, and they might yet make another and a better attempt.
But to be so near, and then to fail!
Adam ran crashing downhill in a narrow dark ride, almost into the arms of a man who came striding suddenly out of the bushes, sword in hand.
The sword was dabbled at the point, and the man was laughing.
The short, iron-grey hair, ruffled from his unceremonious usage, stood in tangled locks on the magnificent head Master Harry had loved to copy in stone.
The clear, imperious voice, lately gagged by the folds of an archer's cloak, was singing gently to itself, and did not fall silent even when he instinctively took one dancing step back from the collision, and then as readily translated the movement into a forward lunge that almost passed Adam's startled guard.
Only then, as they swung in a half-circle with a hiss of blades between them, changing places on the slope like a pair of dancers with only a foot of air separating their faces, did Isambard know his mason again.
They flung each other off and stared for an instant, each of them aware that he was known, each conscious that this recognition made many things plain.
Then Adam closed in again furiously, pressing his opponent with a flurry of strokes, and for a moment Isambard gave ground.
He parried almost mechanically, his eyes leaving Adam's face only by swift, flickering glances; and suddenly he leaned hard forward and caught Adam's blade on his own, and with a fierce turn of  wrist and elbow wrenched the weapon half out of a shocked and bruised hand.
Adam recovered it strongly, but there was an instant when Isambard could have killed him, and they both knew it.
Instead he lowered his blade and drew back a rapid pace or two, nostrils wide and long lips smiling savagely, and suddenly turning away, vanished into the bushes.
Adam ran on towards the river confounded and astray, to blurt out his concern and incomprehension into Owen's anxious ears.
They drew off as best they might to lie in hiding until nightfall and lick their wounds; and in the dark they crossed the river by the ford at Buttington and went to earth with their defeat and their chagrin in the forest under the ridge of Gungrog Fawr.
Owen had a badly gashed forearm, Cynan some splinters of his own shaft lodged deep under his ribs, and all of them minor cuts and bruises; but they had left behind them on the crest several of their enemies wounded by lances and arrows, some probably dead.
They had come off lightly.
But they were known now, Parfois was alerted, and the thing was to do again, and against infinitely greater odds.
And why, thought Adam, sleepless and sore in his damp cloak under the trees, why am I here to fret at it still?
Why did he withhold his hand and leave me yet alive?
Parfois: April to May 1231
‘Ah, they'll show their hand again,’ said Isambard, shrugging off his escape lightly.
‘I'm warned now, I know what to look for.
They're over the river by this time, and so should I have been if you had not come so prompt to your hour.
It hardly suits me to challenge their comings and goings formally.
Let them stew, and they'll soon betray themselves.
And when they do I shall be ready to move.’
His thirst was deeper than usual that night, his colour higher and his eyes brighter.
That brief brush had done him good, body and spirit.
He had withdrawn early with his guests, for they were bent on leaving next morning, and their business with him was not for the openness of the hall.
‘Well, so the Earl Marshall's gone.
And half of south Wales to be disposed of in consequence.
His brother gets Pembroke, no help for that.
But this wardship of his over the de Breos lands, that's a plum indeed, and one the King won't willingly confide to Richard along with his earldom.
I don't wonder my lord of Kent is holding out his hands for it.
But it seems it's already fallen into other hands.’
He smiled, watching the smooth, impenetrable diplomatic faces that maintained their benign reasonableness even for him.
That poor rash fool de Breos, who had run his neck into Llewelyn's noose a year ago at this same season, had left a fine bone of contention behind him with his wide lands and his four little daughters.
Now that their good uncle of Pembroke and natural guardian was gone there would be more than one pair of noble and greedy eyes turned on their fat marcher holdings.
But it was not the earl's death that had sent these influential couriers of de Burgh riding hard across  country to Parfois, it was the fall of the coveted prize into the hands of Richard of Cornwall.
How had Hubert let Elfael and Brycheiniog slip through his fingers in the first place?
‘Hardly the best hands,’ said Warrenne carefully.
‘His Grace the Earl of Cornwall is an excellent young man.
but very inexperienced to be put in charge of so grave a trust.’
‘True,’ agreed Isambard, obliquely smiling.
‘He has certain claims, of course.’
There was no need to labour that, de Burgh knew well enough how delicately the business of displacing him would have to be undertaken.
Richard was the King's brother; according to Henry's mood and caprice that might make the young man either indispensable or unthinkable, but even for de Burgh it made it difficult to disparage his stewardship openly.
Moreover, he was recently married to Earl William's sister, which gave him a family claim to an interest in the children and their estates.
‘His marriage is but two weeks old,’ said Isambard thoughtfully.
‘He may be somewhat off his guard where other matters are concerned.’
They kept their admirable calm at that, permitting no shadow of a smile to answer the wicked look he gave them.
‘The justiciar is chiefly concerned,’ said Warrenne, ‘that Brecon and Radnor should be in the hands of someone who understands their importance to England.
You of all men, my lord, know that at this moment the issue between Wales and England trembles on the verge of war, and that Brecon and Radnor may be vital to us.
No one can present that point to the King so well as you.
You have kept this march inviolate from the encroachments of the Prince of Gwynedd, and you have seen his inroads on those less wary and less able than yourself.
Moreover you think, as does the justiciar himself, in terms of England, and like him you see no advantage in clinging to old and now artificial connections with territories on the mainland of France.
The future of England is here in these islands.
If this nation is to grow great in establishment it must grow here, my lord.
Westwards into Wales.’
‘And northwards into Scotland,’ said Isambard softly.
‘My lord, no one has ever proposed any threat to the  sovereignty of King Alexander —’
‘Not yet,’ said Isambard.
‘That's still to come.
Not in my time, and not in Hubert's, maybe, but come it will.’
He rose abruptly, and began to walk the wide chamber with his wine cup dangled lightly between his fingers, a habit of his when he was thoughtful.
‘I am with the Earl of Kent in this, as he well knows.
I divested myself of all my own French honours and laid them in my elder son's lap on condition he should be content to be French, as I had discovered I was English.
A man cannot be both.
And I see, as Hubert does, that the sea must be our frontier, but within that frontier we can and must be a unity.
Nevertheless, I should advise him to tread gently as yet in the march.
If he gains this custodianship from the Earl of Cornwall, he will be master of a third part of Wales.
He should beware of presuming too far on the patience of the Prince of Gwynedd.’
‘The justiciar has no territorial ambitions for himself,’ said Piercey quickly.
‘He is thinking for England.’
‘He is thinking for England,’ said Isambard bluntly, ‘and for Hubert, too.
I have no quarrel with that, provided he sets them in that order.
But if Hubert provokes Llewelyn into action, it's England that will take the blame and the blow, and let him remember it.’
Nevertheless he would hold with Hubert, that he knew.
It was this very vision that drew him to a man with whom he had so little in common besides.
The rest, even Ranulf of Chester, still saw only their own palatines, and built at them and fought off encroachments on them feverishly, looking no farther.
But this low-born de Burgh, this double man despite himself, even while he leaned back greedily, hankering after lands with the ambition of the landless, even while he envied the de Blundevilles and the Marshalls and composed about himself a synthetic replica of their hereditary splendour, yet saw England by glimpses as Isambard saw it, an empire not decomposing and falling to insecure tatters like the Emperor's sprawling hold, but compact as a clenched fist, solvent as a Jew's treasury and self-sufficient as a well-run manor, a power not hemmed in but completed and transmitted by  the sea.
For the sake of the veritable man of state Isambard, born to dominion, forgave the collector of castles and amasser of manors.
Moreover he was perversely drawn to a man so apt to be hated.
‘None the less,’ he said, turning again to face them with a calm and decided countenance, ‘I think it indeed needful that this march should come into the justiciar's hands rather than Earl Richard's.
He shall have my support in seeking to have it transferred to his care.
You may tell him I'll do what he wishes.’
‘And you'll come yourself to the King, my lord?
The court is now at Windsor, but with these Welsh raids already infringing the territory of Brecon who knows how long his Majesty will be left in peace there?’
‘I'll come,’ said Isambard, ‘as soon as I have dealt with these Welsh raids of my own.
If my agent can pick up their traces clear of the garrison at Castell Coch I'll have my friends from Gwynedd running for Aber within a week.
And if the King leaves Windsor in the meantime, the justiciar may send me word, and I'll come to him at Gloucester or wherever he may be.’
‘My lord,’ said Warrenne warmly, ‘he knew well he could rely on you.
Your counsel on all matters concerning the march carries such weight that the King cannot fail to listen to you.’
‘It will be no hindrance, either,’ said Isambard dryly, ‘that as at this time there is, as I hear, a certain animosity between the King and his brother.
Between my arguments for him and young Richard's against, I doubt not that Hubert will get his way.’
It was fifteen days before Isambard's inconspicuous agents in Pool and about the hospitable courtyard of Strata Marcella picked up traces of the Welsh marauders.
Looking for them was in effect looking for Adam Boteler, who alone had been marked and recognised; and Adam had orders to remain out of sight in Castell Coch until the second attempt was ready to be launched.
It was no part of Owen's plan to let his whole  company lurk there, now that they were compromised; in case of close inquiry that would have been all too clear an indication of Llewelyn's unofficial complicity in the enterprise, and however little doubt Isambard himself might have on that head, it would not do to let it be established and admitted.
They were and they must remain irregulars, to be disowned at need.
So Adam sat chafing in Castell Coch while Owen and his men camped in the forest beyond Gungrog Fawr, and waited until they should find a chance to cross the river again.
Owen was for trying to get word through to Harry in his prison; there were men in Leighton who had kin within the castle, and for the sake of Master Harry whom they remembered well might be willing to risk the carrying of a message.
But April ended, and their daily reconnaissance confirmed that still the fords and the ferry were watched, and the river shore on the English side patrolled day and night.
They waited; he would not keep this up for ever, he was not so wary of his life and liberty.
If Adam had not issued from his hiding-place early in May they would not have been discovered; but the messages which had come from Llewelyn were grave enough to warrant a risk which by then appeared so slight.
The disturbances on the borders of Brecon, whether officially encouraged or not, had grown to such proportions that the King had despatched his brother the Earl of Cornwall to the march in haste to try and suppress them, and was himself in the act of setting out from Windsor to join him there.
A breath on the flames, and there would be fire from end to end of the march; and the Prince was in urgent but still friendly correspondence with King Henry in the effort to settle the dissensions peacefully and without affront to either Welsh or English honour.
So wrote Llewelyn from Aber; and between the lines they read plainly that though he might still be arguing for peace he had ceased to believe in it or greatly to desire it.
It was only a question of the hour.
So Adam slipped out of Castell Coch at dusk, and himself carried the word to Owen in his camp in the woods overlooking  Cegidfa; and a beggar who had hung about the gates for some days and been fed from the kitchens went after him every step of the way.
By the next dawn Isambard had the news for which he had been waiting; and the following night he put two parties across the Severn, one upstream from them and one down, and converged upon their hiding-place from either end of the ridge.
The alarm came at about three in the morning, a barn-owl's screech out of the night from Meurig on top of the ridge to Iorwerth waking and on guard at the camp.
They had damped their fire till there was no red, and yet the attackers came fast and unerringly for them, from the north and from the south.
Iorwerth shook Owen awake and they stood to their arms rapidly and in silence, but silence and darkness did not cover them.
‘Glad am I,’ said Adam in a hurried whisper into Owen's ear as they deployed among the trees, ‘that I never went back, to leave you a man short.’
The assault from the north came with a flurry of tinder among the trees, and a crackle of sparks on a driving breeze.
The full foliage of May did not burn, but the mould of dry, dead leaves and brushwood on the ground caught fiercely, and flared down upon them so fast that they were forced to turn and run, having no time to take the harder way up to the crest.
Southwards the long arms of Isambard himself were stretched to receive them; the fire died on their heels after that brief flare, and left them on the points of English swords.
The archers loosed blind in the darkness, but could do so only once without imperilling their friends, for after the shock of meeting it was stark hand to hand work without any daylight art about it, first a hacking and swinging ahead at any flesh that moved, then body to body fumbling where everyone panted out words in his own tongue to be safe from his comrades, and even swords were of little use.
They clutched and wrestled, feeling their way to one another 's throat with the dagger or the naked hands.
They shortened swords and used them like daggers at armpits and neck.
Then the wind rose, fanning the few sparks left alive in the brushwood; the  fire flared into life again and gave them light to see by, and they broke apart from their terrible embraces and sprang off to blade-length and lance-length.
The capricious blaze, devouring the easiest fuel, hissed between them and drove them apart, and Isambard came leaping through it, grinning like a demon and bringing with him a shower of sparks and the smoky, scorching odour of hell.
For a moment he launched himself upon them alone, and Owen closed with him gladly against the glare, though dazzled by the flickering gleams and blinking shadows.
Then the fire died down and Isambard's more timorous followers came hurtling after him, and by sheer weight swept their opponents before them down the hillside.
The fire burned out behind them.
Darkling they drew off as best they could, dragging their wounded with them, carrying them when they dropped.
Three times their number drove them unrelentingly a mile and more through the broken copses and across the brook south of Cegidfa.
They fought, and ran, and stood to fight again, tiring, separated, driven now like hunted hares, until Isambard called his men back at the brook and let them rest at last.
Owen had then Adam and three others still marshalled at his back, not one of them whole, though these at least could stand and go.
Searching back wearily and wretchedly through what was left of the night they found Iorwerth dragging himself painfully along the grass like a trampled snail in a slime of blood, and two more who crawled and swooned by turns in the fringes of the wood.
Three bodies they brought down hacked and clawed from their camping-place, and Meurig, last of all, they found in the dawn on the crest of the hill, pinned to the ground by his own lance.
By the time they had brought the dead down into Cegidfa, Iorwerth was also dying, with the priest from the church kneeling by him; and before noon one of the other two worst wounded followed him.
Owen laboured over the living, mending them as best he could, and over the dead, making them ready for burial, until he fell and lay like dead beside the last of them, but still  conscious and aware, and Adam and some of those who had come with the priest to their aid carried him away and bedded him in quietness in one of the cottages.
When he had strength enough he turned his face into his arms and hid from the light.
He had lost half his command, and failed of winning back Harry for whom he had come.
He did not know that Isambard, unsure of the numbers with which he had to deal, and always thorough, had brought forty men to sustain the assault against his dozen; and even if he had known it would have brought him no comfort.
Every one of the dead men ached in him like an amputation.
Iorwerth had taught him to ride, Morgan had been his idol in boyhood by reason of his prowess at wrestling, Meurig, unfree but irrepressible, could never be kept out of any fight though his only real duties with the army were as a baggage-servant.
Owen fingered them over with his exhausted and beaten mind, and bled and burned without tears.
Even when Adam lay down beside him, groaning with the stiffening of his grazes and flesh wounds, Owen did not stir.
Even when he laid his hand on him gently, he did not uncover his face.
Harry was so intent on his work that he did not hear the door open.
He had moved the table under the direct light from the window, and was bending over the tough, cross-grained wood and the awkward knife with knit brows, breathing heavily.
Isambard, putting the door to very softly behind him, was stabbed by yet another of the recollections that fronted him every way where Harry was.
If the boy had growled over his shoulder: ‘Stand out of my light!’ the illusion would have been complete.
I see, thought Isambard, that all human life moves in inescapable circles, and brings us back to moment after moment we thought past.
Why?
Is there yet something that can be changed?
An imbalance that can be adjusted?
He came silently almost to Harry's shoulder, and still the boy was not aware of him, so perfectly was every sense concentrated on the block of wood before him.
He must have picked it up from among the sawn logs in store for fuel.
But where did he get the knife?
‘I see you are his son,’ said Isambard.
The boy's head came up sharply, the green eyes flashed their invariable challenge, and flew back jealously to the shape of the opening flower that was heaving itself painfully out of the wood.
With a violent movement he clenched his fingers hard on the knife and pared the flower cruelly out of the block like a blemish from an apple.
The grain was too complex and cross for him, the blade stuck, and in the same instant Isambard stretched both arms over the boy's shoulders and seized his hands, forcing them apart and wringing them until he twisted with pain and let go both the knife and the wood.
Isambard caught up both, and stood for a moment staring down with a formidable frown at Harry, who nursed his bruised wrists and glared back, expecting a blow and tensing every muscle to receive it without a tremor.
It did not come.
Isambard's quickened breathing stilled again.
He looked at the torn flower, his eyes hooded.
‘Was it worth so great a violation to do me such a little hurt?’
The boy was silent, his mouth set.
‘Who gave you this knife?’
It was pitiful, the broken blade of a dagger that he had bound with strips of rag to give him a handle, and sharpened as best he could on the edge of the stone under the window; the worn hollow, paler in colour, was there to be seen.
If he had been asked where he got it, that obstinate jaw of his would have remained clenched, but Isambard knew how to ask his questions now.
He had only to say, with that threat of punishment in his voice: ‘Who gave you —?’
‘No one gave it to me.
I found it in the armoury and hid it.
It was thrown away for waste.’
The poor make-shift clattered on the table under his startled eyes.
Why had it never occurred to him to use it for more than carving?
And why, if his enemy had the same thought in mind, should he toss it back to him so carelessly?
‘Why have you not asked me for tools, instead of breaking your finger-nails and your heart on firewood and trash?’
‘It shall go very hard, my lord, before I ask you for anything.’
‘God's life, you arrogant imp,’ cried Isambard between laughter and exasperation, ‘do you presume to be prouder than your father?
Or are you simply afraid to show openly what you can do where he's been before you?’
‘My lord, I know better than any that I am not his match,’ said Harry, stung and colouring vividly.
‘I never meant to challenge him, I was carving only to pass my time —’ His voice faded out wretchedly on the disclaimer, for that, too, was spoiled and finished now that Isambard had stripped it bare.
‘Not his match!
And have you not the heart in you to be anything but best?
How many are his match?
How many in this world do you think stand in the front rank?
Are all the rest of us to give up and sit on our hands rather than serve humbly where we deserve?’
He held the mutilated carving close before Harry's face and made him look at it.
‘There!
Dare to tell me that you see nothing there of him, that you have no feeling for the strokes of your hands, that you have no will in you to venture after him!
Say it, if it's true, and I've done with you, you may rust unprovoked for me.
Only to pass your time!
Faith, that's the first lie I ever heard from you!’
Harry sat mute, his lashes lowered, his cheeks burning resentfully.
But when he looked up again fleetingly at the spoiled flower he could not keep all the compunction and fondness out of his eyes.
‘Get up!’ said Isambard abruptly.
‘Come with me.
It's time you looked at your inheritance.’
Harry jerked up his head distrustfully, eyes flaring wide.
His inheritance?
What kind of talk was that from this man?
If there was anything here that came to him from his father, it could be nowhere but in the church, and he had never yet been allowed past the gate-towers, and could not believe in any such concession now.
Nevertheless his eyes had begun to gleam with an excitement that was unwilling to be lured into hope.
‘Ah, no!’ said Isambard, discerning his flight and plucking him back to earth.
‘Not that, not without your pledge.
But come and see!’
Hard fingers encircled his arm and haled him out of the room, and he went like one in a dream, unable to resist but ready for some treacherous pitfall to open under his feet at every step.
There had always been a trap waiting for him somewhere along the way when Isambard loosed the reins a little, and it would be the same now.
But they went together down the narrow stone stairway, and still he was not jerked back again.
They crossed the outer ward, followed by covert glances and whispered wonderings that halted for a moment the bustle and business of the day.
‘Here, in here!’
The lean hand gripping his arm thrust him in at a door in the long encrustation of buildings that clung to the curtain wall on the sunny side, where the best light fell and the day lingered longest.
A large, bare room with big trestle tables in the centre and benches along the walls.
There were several chests and one great press, and on the tables were laid out some unfinished drawings and a litter of instruments.
There was no one in the room at this moment but themselves.
Isambard pushed Harry gently forward and closed the door behind them.
The boy stood looking round him with a wary face and large, intent eyes.
Isambard's hand on his shoulder brought him to the bench at the end of the room, where a film of stone-dust coated the floor, and several fragments of carvings and half-cut blocks of stone lay pushed together against the wall, as though discarded long ago.
There were drawings, too, rolled aside out of the way, and ranged along the bench a great array of tools, mallets, chisels and punches, from the coarsest to the needle-fine, all their handles polished and worn with use.
He looked round at Isambard; the green eyes questioned frantically.
‘Yes,’ said Isambard, ‘this was his tracing-house.
Those are his tools.’
He watched the quivering face that was averted haughtily from his too close perusal.
‘Twenty-four years old he was when I found him in the provost's prison in Paris, and paid his fine to get him for my own, him and that foster-brother of his whom you know well.’
Was he living or dead this day, that same Adam?
Last night's lesson had been taught blind, there was no way of knowing how many had survived to get it by heart.
‘A part of your father's gift I think you have, if you can learn not to deface it for spite because I am in the same world with you.’
Harry drew breath to deny the slur, and then said nothing after all, seeing in his heart that it was true enough.
He put out his hands almost against his will, took up one of the mallets and swung it testingly to get the feel of its balance, picked up a punch at random and applied its point, none too deftly because his hands were tremulous, to a half-defined fold of drapery in the nearest block of stone.
The mallet tapped with a sweet, small, occupied sound.
The boy smiled faintly, and then bit hard on his lips and gnawed the smile away.
He looked at the handle of the punch he held, fitting his fingers wonderingly into the shape another hand had worn in it, a good hand, muscular and slender, shaped very much like his own.
‘His tools,’ said Isambard softly.
‘Your tools, if you want them.’
He heard and would not hear.
In his extremity he put down the punch he could not hold steadily, and began to handle the half-shaped blocks of stone, dragging them forward and turning them to the light.
One of them, small and dusty and obscure in its corner, took the sunlight as he drew it towards him, and showed him the vigorous sketch of a face he knew well, a face he had seen long ago in the triforium, when he had crouched against the wall in the last embrasure of the walk, listening to the approaching footsteps of his enemy.
He had not marked it then, but he remembered it now.
‘A study for the last head he ever made,’ said Isambard, watchful and patient at his shoulder.
‘His signature at the end,’ said Harry in a whisper.
‘So I used to think, too.
When you stepped out of hiding and fronted me, this same face looked over your shoulder.
Then I knew better.
Look again!
This is no signature at the end, Harry, but a prophecy at the beginning.
Do you not know yourself?’
Harry stared, and was slow to see his own face, and yet he could not but believe.
Love reaching out to him took him by the heart and wrung him.
He shut his eyes upon a rush of tears, and painfully contained them, but the springs of fondness in the middle of his being were weeping inconsolably for the stilling of the quick hands and the creative mind.
He felt older than his lost father, and desperate with protective love.
He wanted to hold him safe from every profaning touch, and fend off every malignant thought from him.
He wanted above all to know that he still lay safe and quiet in his nameless grave; he was heavy and burning at heart with his longing to ask, but he would not.
It was fear that locked his tongue, but mercifully he mistook it for pride, so its bitterness did not poison him.
He stood there silent beside the bench for a long time fondling with a wondering hand the unknown contours of his own young head in the stone, thinking himself strangely wonderful suddenly, and a terrible responsibility.
‘Your tools, if you want them.
Tools can be used as weapons, Harry, but if you'll promise these shall never be put to any purposes but those for which they were intended, you may work here whenever you wish.
This bench shall be yours.
My mason shall provide you with materials, and if you choose to work under him and learn from him, he shall find you enough to do.
The tasks he'd give to any apprentice, until you prove yourself.
You'll not be privileged.
Well?’
The silence continued long, while Harry picked up and laid down tool after tool, smoothed a finger-nail along the chisels, hefted the mallets, turning and twisting like a caged animal with the fury of his longing and the rigidity of his pride.
‘Unless, of course, you're afraid to venture where you dread you'll prove less than excellent?’
‘I pledge you my word,’ said Harry with a tearing gasp, ‘I'll not misuse them.’
‘That came out of you like drawing a tooth,’ said Isambard critically, ‘but the first time's the hardest.
Come, let's try you once more.
To-morrow I must leave Parfois for a matter of some days.
Give me your parole until I return, and you shall be free to go where you choose about Parfois, and free to use this tracing-house.
Otherwise I fear you must wait in closer confinement till I come back, for I'll trust no one but myself to keep you safe for me.
And you — if it please you to give me your word?’
It did not please him; almost he wished the first pledge back again, so naked did he feel now without his armour of obstinacy.
But the giving had begun, and now it was harder than ever to draw back.
The feel of Master Harry's mallet in his hand, the way the heel of it swung in his palm, filled him with a fever of ambition and impatience, and he could not wait the threatened few days for the assay.
Trembling, he hugged the most worn and shortened of the punches to his heart, thumbing its point, and wrestled with the words of compliance that rose all too readily.
‘Well?
Will you give me your pledge?’
‘Yes!’ he said, the word jerked out of him furiously, and twisted away to hide from the malicious smile he dreaded.
Such a despair seized him at the sound of his own acceptance that he made a half-hearted attempt even then to deliver himself.
‘Only until you return!
After that I promise nothing —’
But only silence answered him, and when he looked round he was alone in the room.
Isambard had accepted his bond on the instant without a word of triumph or mockery, and left him alone to exult and grieve over his father's belated legacy.
Suddenly he took the visionary image of his own manhood into his arms, his ruffled hair against the stone curls, and burst into a storm of silent weeping.
Aber: May to early June 1231
It was late before the members of the council left Llewelyn's chamber.
Owen could not bear the emptiness of the anteroom and the abrupt murmurs of the low voices behind the inner door.
He went out and sat on the top step of the staircase like a banished child waiting to be admitted.
He was still sick and light-headed with the fever that had kept them so long immobilised at Cegidfa, and made the ride home such long-drawn discomfort to him; but the sorry account he had to make of his stewardship weighed more heavily on his spirit than his wounds did on his body.
At least two of the five he had brought back with him were in worse case than he; and Adam, who had perhaps come off lightest in actual injuries, was by no means to be envied for that, for the same story Owen had to tell to the Prince, Adam was at this moment telling to Gilleis.
Owen thought wretchedly that his own was the lighter task of the two.
The door of the inner room opened.
He roused himself wearily to exchange greetings with the elders as they passed him, and went in to his foster-father.
Llewelyn had been in council for several hours, and was no less weary; nevertheless, he saw the labour and pain with which Owen bent his knee to him, and reached to take him up before he could complete his reverence.
His kiss was brusque but warm, and his hands transmitted a vital vigour of which no one else had the secret.
‘No, no ceremony, boy, we're alone here.
There, sit, and take your time.
No one will disturb us now.
I ask your pardon for leaving you waiting at the door, but I'm pressed, Owen, the days crowd me, and there are things I must set forward  while I may.
I had your despatch from Meifod.’
It was his way of saying at once that he knew the worst of what was to come, and had only the details to learn.
‘I've lost you six good men,’ said Owen, ‘and gained you nothing.
I took the best I could, and this is how I've made use of them.’
‘Did they reproach you?’ asked Llewelyn sharply and dryly.
He poured wine and brought it across the room to Owen's chair, pressing him back brusquely when he would have risen to receive the cup.
‘They had no time,’ said Owen bitterly.
‘They had no will, and well you know it.
The like is waiting for us all, when God so designs.
Tell me the whole of it, and if you have done ill, you shall hear of it.’
Owen eased his stiffened shoulder wound against the cushion, and began the story of his failure.
He was not sparing with himself, and yet the tale ran more readily than he had supposed possible, so completely did he trust the listener.
From Llewelyn he would get his deserts, and be grateful for them.
He had never rested with such absolute confidence in the judgement of any other, excepting once for that brief while in his childhood, when he had been in the care of Master Harry.
‘How he found us I still don't know.
Adam fears it was through his coming to us from Castell Coch, and indeed it may be so.
Yet I cannot feel that Adam was to blame.
How could he know the man had his creatures planted even there to watch for him?
I should have allowed for it that he was no ordinary man, and could move like a thunderstorm when he willed.
He knew straitly where we lay, and all our dispositions.
He could not plan for the way of the wind, that was luck, but for the rest he had everything at his finger-ends.
And he fights like ten men still, as old as he is.
I cannot feel that we had been negligent, had we been dealing with another man.
But we were dealing with Isambard, and what I did was not enough.’
‘Twice luck was with him,’ said Llewelyn.
‘Once with a favouring wind, and once with reinforcements when he most  needed them.
For neither of which favours can you be blamed.
The devil has looked well after his own.’
‘And once we all but had him safe,’ said Owen, groaning into his hands, for he was very tired.
‘I ask myself every hour now if we might not have held him and still drawn off well enough if I had but kept a better watch on the road to Shrewsbury.
I meant to try again and better, either to get at him, or to find a messenger who would carry word to Harry inside Parfois.
For you know he has a measure of liberty —?’
‘I know.
I have it all from Philip ap Ivor.
I know what that man owes to Harry, and what to me, and I have kept the account, and in good time I shall take what is due.
A measure of freedom to the son, and the last indignity to the father's bones — what manner of dealing is that?’ said Llewelyn, smouldering.
‘And I fear him,’ said Owen feverishly, ‘truly, sir, I fear him.
This forbearance with Harry is too capricious and cruel for me.
If he so mortally hated the father, living and dead, how can we trust his indulgence with the boy?
If Harry should come to worse harm through me —’
‘You take too much to yourself.
It is not your blame, and I will not spare to you what is mine.’
The Prince's voice was hard and hot.
How often in his life had he admitted guilt before anyone but God?
‘It was I sent the boy out after his act of vindication.
These six lives are all of my spending, and if I were free I would go with any army and take them back with usury.
But I am not free.
It is no part of my duty now to give any thought to the making of my own soul or the righting of what I have done wrong.
God deals as He will, I as I can.
I am the servant of the cause I have at heart, and you and I, and Harry if need be, are coin to be spent for it.’
‘Did they get so bad a reception at Worcester?’ asked Owen, dismayed by the tone rather than the content of this speech.
The Prince's envoys had returned to Aber from the latest of the long-drawn conferences with the King's representatives, two days ahead of the battered remnant from Parfois.
‘No, not ill at all.
There were civil looks and fair speeches, and there's another meeting called three days hence, at Shrewsbury.
But it means little now, for the mountain is in motion, and slide it must.
Two ideas over-large for reconciliation are fronting each other now, and there'll be no peace until there's been — no,’ he checked himself, ‘I won't say a settlement, but at least a temporary losing and winning that shall silence us both until we get our breath for the next bout.
Sometimes I have a fear in me that this is but the first of many engagements in a struggle which is new, in scope if not in kind.’
He crossed to the window to set wide the shutter on the last night of May, and heave the smokiness of his long closeted hours out of him in great, assuaging breaths.
‘You know the crown still holds back from acknowledging our title to Builth?
The act of denying matters little.
So my constable continues to hold the castle, let the King garrison the title as strongly as he will.
Yet the sign is there to be read.
They deny their own law, denying my right, and the precedent is there to stead them in the next encroachment.
They are ready, as they think, to devour me.
But by God, they shall find me stick in their gullets and rip their bellies open.’
‘De Burgh is the mover,’ said Owen, propping up his drooping eyelids.
‘My heart misgave me when I saw his livery at Parfois, for Isambard is close and confidential with him, and sure they had some business between them that bodes us no good here in Wales.’
‘They had indeed!
Have you not heard it yet?
They brought me the news back from Worcester.
Isambard joined the King at Hereford early in May.
He must have left Parfois no more than two days after his raid across Severn.
King Henry respects my lord's views on all that pertains to the march.
And the upshot of it is that he has taken the custody of the de Breos lands from the Earl of Cornwall, and bestowed it upon his beloved justiciar.
De Burgh hems me in on every side but where the sea is, save only Chester, where I thank God for Earl Ranulf.
The cause is complete now, I need no more to show me the time is on me.
Now there wants only the occasion, which, God willing, shall be of my choosing.’
‘I thought at least to have taken Harry off your mind,’ said Owen wretchedly, ‘so that you might give all your heart to this.
And I've done nothing but lose you six good men.’
‘All my heart is given to this.
Harry, poor lad, must wait his turn.
The keeping of my vows, the honouring of my obligations, all give way to this.
If I live, I will redeem all my pledges, and if I die, I will answer for their going unredeemed in the judgement.’
He leaned his great bronzed forehead on his hand, turning his face gratefully to the cool of the night air, and went on talking in the soft, absorbed voice of one alone with his own spirit.
‘I tell you, boy, we are engaged with more even than I knew.
While I have been busy compounding a kingdom here for my son, I have borrowed from the English as I thought fit.
There is no way of standing them off in the old fashion.
I have paid for my court and my campaigns by means they showed me, by taxation, and rents, and fees levied on settlers in my townships.
I have given lands and privileges to get knight service, and kept my army in the field by contracts my forefathers never countenanced.
I have settled the succession by English law and not by Welsh, to make it hold the firmer, and stop their mouths from questioning it.
So, while I stood off their changes and challenges with the right hand, I let them in with the left.
And I see that by the left or the right, by compact or by conquest, come they will.
There is no way of preventing.
All we can do is shape the means by which they approach us and the terms on which they will live with us in the time to come, that we may keep our honour and our identity, and be their free neighbours and allies, not their villeins.
And I know this, that if we are to gain such a bargain with them we must first know ourselves who and what we are, and set a true value on our blood and our tongue.
Not we only of Gwynedd, not the men of Powis, not the gnawed remnant of Deheubarth.
But we Welsh.
And this is more than the ambition with which I began, and more than my son's inheritance.
If I die for it, if David must die for it in his turn, no matter, so the spring  survive and the unity grow.
And if Harry dies for it, his death be on my head, and I will answer for it to God and to him when my time comes.’
When his voice had ceased there was silence in the room.
He stirred himself at last and looked round, to find one even more worn out with weariness than himself.
Owen had dropped asleep in his chair.
The heavy brown head lolled a flushed cheek on the red cushion that supported his bandaged shoulder.
Llewelyn crossed to him, smiling, and gently shook him awake.
He started up in alarm, staring dazedly, and then, realising his lapse, paled with mortification.
‘My lord, give me your pardon!
I've ridden far to-day — and then the wine —’
His long fever had peeled the flesh from his bones and left him half his proper bulk, and the brown of his cheeks was yellow and drawn.
When he started to his feet he had to lean hard on the arm of the chair while a moment of dizziness passed.
‘Go to bed, boy,’ said Llewelyn, holding him reassuringly between his hands.
‘You can, with a quiet mind.
What you attempted was not blessed, more's the pity, but none the less it was well done, few could have done better.
I find no fault with you.
There, go and sleep!
Who knows if I may not have need of you by to-morrow?’
In the late afternoon of the second of June a courier rode into Aber on a reeking horse, the last of a chain of messengers who had carried urgent news from Cydewain.
Llewelyn was close in his chamber with his chaplain-secretary and Ednyfed Fychan over the dictation of letters, and his seal was already on the credentials of the envoys who were to represent him in Shrewsbury; but David, when he heard what the messenger had to report, on his own authority brought him in to the conference and shattered it.
‘What is it?’
Llewelyn looked round from the table with a formidable scowl.
‘Did I not say I was not to be disturbed?’
‘My lord and father, blame me for this interruption, not the  courier.
But this cannot wait.’
Llewelyn looked from his son to the rider, who was dusty and streaked with sweat from his gallop.
He pushed the papers from him as though he knew already he had done with them.
‘Speak out, then.
What is it?’
‘My lord, I bring word from the march by Montgomery.
A week ago the garrison there made a sally against us and surrounded and took a company of our men.’
The man came up from his knees coughing the dust out of his lungs with the words.
‘The number I do not know.
But they took them into the castle at Montgomery, prisoners.’
‘This I know,’ said Llewelyn, his face dark.
‘Come to the news.’
‘My lord, yesterday the Earl of Kent came to Montgomery, and himself saw the prisoners.
He ordered them out to execution on the instant, and it was done.
Beheaded, every man!’
‘Beheaded?’
Llewelyn came to his feet with a leap that shook the chair jarring back across the floor-boards, and tumbled the scattered rolls of parchment to the rugs.
‘Has he dared?
In my face!
He spits this in my face!’
He whirled away from them to stalk the floor for a few raging paces, and as abruptly rounded on them again.
‘Is there more?’
‘My lord,’ said the messenger hoarsely, ‘they are saying the heads are sent to the King of England.’
‘Two days before the King's envoys were to meet mine!’
‘This he could not do in folly, fool though the man can be,’ said David, white to the lips as he watched his father's face.
‘This is deliberate.’
‘It is deliberate.
He conceives that he is ready.’
Llewelyn plucked the pen from his secretary's hand, and swept the remaining letters from before him.
‘Leave these, they'll not be needed.
There'll be no meeting in Shrewsbury.
Hubert shall see where to-morrow will find me, and I'll be there before he looks for me.
Ednyfed, the writs go out within the  hour.
See to it!’
‘They've been ready this week past,’ said Ednyfed Fychan, and swung to the door with alacrity.
‘And send my captain here, and Rhys with him.
It is time,’ said Llewelyn, drawing a great breath.
‘He'll choose it for me, will he?
So be it!
We shall see who'll come best out of it.
But was it necessary to kill my men in cold blood?
Was there no other gage he could have flung in my teeth?
By God, he shall rue it!
I'll make him pay dear for every head.’
He swung on the messenger again, his hawk-face sharp as a sword.
‘Is the earl still at Montgomery?’
‘As I heard it, my lord, he's already gone back to Hereford.’
‘So much the worse, I would have wished him to see his township burn.
But he'll keep.
What I owe him shall be paid in full, and I'll make him count the coin over in his ruin.
David, see this good fellow fed and housed, and come back to us here.
We have yet some planning to do.
Before dawn we march.’
They ran every one, ablaze at his fire, to do his bidding.
The columns for support and supply had been alerted long ago, the clansmen waited only for the signal, and his great seal on the writs his messengers carried would bring them out to join him like bees from a hive disturbed.
He had only to call and they would come, eager and hungry.
‘I have dealt moderately,’ said Llewelyn through his teeth, flexing his great, shapely, sinewy hands before his face to take hold on the challenge and the promise in the air.
‘I have held my hand time and again, and even when they drove me to act I have abated my askings to keep the balance true and save Wales from worse enmity.
But now we cannot be so saved.
They think their hour is come to close on me, and to deal moderately now would be a thing in their littleness they could not but mistake.
Now they shall see that I can do extremes and by God they shall learn to keep their hands from Gwynedd while I am yet alive.’
Owen, when he heard the news, came limping in great haste through the furious bustle of the maenol to claim his rights, afraid in his heart of being rejected.
‘I am fit,’ he persisted, holding Llewelyn fast by the sleeve, for he was apt to flash away from armoury to store and stable to council chamber disconcertingly upon his universal errand of supervision.
‘David is my prince, and well I know this is not border play this time.
Where David goes I must go.
You would not leave me behind?’
Llewelyn turned from the harness that was being checked out of the armoury, and looked at his foster-son for a moment from so far away and by so dazzling a light that he seemed hardly to know him.
Recognition came with a sudden warm and brilliant smile out of his preoccupied frenzy.
‘Ah, you!
Leave you I would, if I did not know you'd fret your heart out worse than I'll let you fret your body in the field.
Yes, you shall come, if you'll be ruled and do as I bid you.
I would not let you from David's side willingly, no more than I'd send him into the battle without a shield.’
He saw Owen redden with pleasure, and laughed, flinging an arm about his shoulders so forgetfully that it was a worthy as well as a willing sacrifice Owen made for him, containing the pain of the embrace.
‘And, Owen, I have yet a use for you here and now.
Find Gilleis and Adam for me, and bring them to the chapel.
I would have you all three witness a certain vow I have to make before we march.’
Owen brought them within a quarter of an hour, grave-faced both, and heavy-eyed from nights broken with too much thinking of Harry.
It seemed to Llewelyn, watching Gilleis approach, that she had lost flesh sadly in the year of lacking her son, and her rose and white had faded into the pallor of prisoners.
Half at least of her day she spent in the closed and sealed place of her lady's captivity, half of her night imprisoned with the boy.
And yet she neither pleaded nor complained.
Her great dark eyes questioned and hoped, but without reproach.
And even now, he thought, all I have to offer will seem so little to a woman.
It was dark in the wooden chapel even in the early evening; the candles on the plain, linen-covered altar guttered faintly in the draught before the door was closed, and after its closing  there was an astonishing silence, all the sounds of the activity without banished to infinite distance.
Llewelyn kneeled and prayed.
Even when he raised his face open-eyed to the altar the silence still continued for a while.
‘Bear with me,’ he said.
‘I am not adept with words without my elders by me, and this is matter for care.
A man never thinks, when he undertakes one journey, that he may not return from it to contemplate another.
And yet I think my time is not yet, and God wills well to hear me.’
He set both hands before him on the crucifix.
His touch could be wonderfully gentle, but it was never tentative; he laid hands on holy things with the same direct and innocent fearlessness he used towards men and women.
‘So be my witness,’ he said, ‘that before the face of God and in your presence I swear this: that when God's good time serves me to do it without injury to my foremost obligations to Him and to my country, I will take and destroy the castle of Parfois for the wrongs of Harry Talvace dead and Harry Talvace living.
If my foster-son be still held there, by the grace of heaven I will take him out of his captivity.
And if not, yet I will not spare of what I have sworn touching Parfois.
So help me God I will not forget nor fail of making good my word on my enemy and Harry's.’
Owen said: ‘Amen!’ gladly, but his was the only voice to answer.
Adam would have echoed it, but he was intent on his wife's face, and in his anxiety he let the words go by him.
She was regarding the Prince with the faintest and saddest of smiles, in which he thought he could read affection and indulgence, and surely also a soft, secret gleam of derision.
Llewelyn turned from the altar in time to catch that disconcerting look, but it neither puzzled nor disturbed him.
When he was roused to such a peak of experience, confronting the issues of life and death for thousands besides himself, all things became simple to him.
Things which had bewildered him were clear as crystal, problems which had daunted and defied him gave like locks opening to the right key.
The power of words which he had disclaimed sprang golden in his mouth.
‘Well I know it, girl,’ he said, ‘this fills neither your arms nor your heart.
Yet it is all I have, and, if it does not loose you, yet it binds me.
Take it for a pledge of my faith that God will hold Harry safe for us, howsoever we miss him now.’
‘My lord,’ she said, ‘I do believe it.’
‘So trust, then, as you have spoken, and, if God will, you shall yet stand by the altar of the church of Parfois, when the day comes for me to fulfil my oath, and see Master Harry's bones honourably buried there.’
He saw her blanch and veil her eyes, and said no more of that for kindness.
He was moved and promising miracles, the recovery of things lost, the wholeness and holiness of things profaned; but the faith she had professed was perhaps no more than a conviction that the star of the Prince of Aberffraw would not fail him, and that God would humour him and not cheat him of the fulfilment of his vow.
Yet Llewelyn felt the forces of heaven moving him, and aligned himself with them boldly, going without hesitation where they carried him.
The thing which had seemed so hard was simple now, the gulf that had appeared unbridgable shrank to a child's leap, and vanished as he stepped over it.
‘Gilleis, one more thing I must lift from my heart before this hour breaks over me.’
She raised her eyes to him quickly, wondering and doubting.
‘Go to your lady, and ask her if she will receive me.’
She was sitting beneath the narrow, barred window when he entered the room, and the first thing he saw was the light lying ashen in her fair hair; there was more grey than gold in it now.
She had grown heavier in her enforced stillness, her body was ripe and full that had been so slender, and moved with something less than the old negligent grace.
But her face was not full but fallen, the pale skin stretched over slight bones, the eyes grown enormous and calm like grey glass.
They looked upon him and gave no sign.
Her hands were spread upon the arms of the chair, as she used to sit beside him on occasions of state, erect and observant, quick to anticipate, deft in manipulation.
She was richly dressed.
He saw and understood that she had prepared herself for him.
She was a king's daughter and the wife of a prince, whether in his palace or his prison.
For a year he had neither seen her nor permitted her name to be spoken in his hearing.
He had thought that he must come back to her now as a stranger, learning afresh the shape of her wide forehead and tapering face, and the way she had of opening her eyes wide to take in entire the person to whom she spoke.
He had expected to have to batter his way laboriously through the months that had separated them, as through the stockade of a castle into which he must break by force of arms.
But at the first sound of her voice even this changed woman became familiar to him, and the veil of estrangement between them broke and drifted like gossamer.
‘You are welcome, my lord,’ she said.
‘There was no need to ask permission, your prisons are always open to you.’
Gilleis had gone, and closed the door quietly behind her.
He stood just within the room, looking steadily at the Princess, and went headlong where his genius pointed him.
Constraint and ceremony could have nothing to say to her that would not be wearisome to hear as it was costly to say.
There was no time.
He had always been at his best when he was pressed hardest.
‘Joan,’ he said, ‘I need you.’
In spite of herself she stirred so sharply that he felt her astonishment recoil upon his own flesh and set him trembling.
If he had spoken of forgiving, or pitying, or even loving, she would have been ready for him, but to be needed was something she had not looked for.
‘That cannot be true,’ she said.
‘You have done without me well enough for a year, and so you can now.’
She said it very mildly, without reproach or complaint, only uttering what she felt to be true.
He saw now where Gilleis had learned her patience and endurance.
‘I have done without you, but not well.
Without you nothing is well.
I need you.
I am going into the field to-morrow against King Henry's army and against the Earl of Kent  in particular, and God knows what the outcome will be.
It is a long tale.’
‘You need not tell it,’ she said, ‘I know it already.
Do you think I have not been following all that you have done and all that has been done to you all these months?’
‘If you know it, you know the need I have of you.
Always before when I ran my head, and my country, and my son's inheritance into danger, and stood to it in arms, always I had you by my side, heart in heart with me.
I am well served as princes go, and I have wit to know it.
But when I go from hence to this testing I must leave affairs here in one pair of hands, the closest and dearest to me.
There is no other I can trust,’ said Llewelyn, ‘as I trust you.’
At that word she raised her head and looked at him again, and long, and behind the clear disillusionment of her eyes a burning darkness had gathered and hung, glowing from deep within her.
The pale mask of her face fended him off, incredulous, but the bright creature within, so long coffined and mute, knew that she had heard aright.
He came nearer, and the light of the June evening turned the tanned planes of his hawk-face and the ridge of the bold, importunate nose to copper, and picked out the russet reds in the short, dark beard, scoring deeper the deeply graved lines of audacity and laughter.
The laughter had been absent for a while, but it had not withdrawn far from him, the marks of its permanent habitation were still there.
‘Don't think this is merely habit,’ he said, ‘though habit it has been for twenty-five years.
Without you I do well enough?
Ay, so I do, for a man lamed and distracted in mind.
Self-maimed and a sinner against the truth, such I am without you, Joan.’
‘And I,’ she said, very low, ‘what am I?’
‘You are that part of me that I cut off, and I never have been and never shall be whole without you.’
She turned her head a little and put up her hand to shield her face.
‘The diseased part,’ she said.
‘No, but wounded.
And I who should have healed it severed it.’
‘Dear God!’ she said in a shaken whisper.
‘Be careful what you do with it now.
Do you think you can restore it and it will knit again without festering?’
‘By the grace of God, yes,’ he said, and leaned and took her gently by the wrist, but did not force her hand away.
‘Do you not feel the two halves closing?
Flesh of my flesh, blood of my blood, I want you though you poison me, but well I know you never will.
Come back with me to the place that was and is yours, be to me as you were before.
Complete me.
Make me a whole man before I go out to take the field with Wales in my hands.
With one hand only, how shall I carry it safely?
The heritage of your son and mine!’
‘Have you forgotten,’ she said harshly, starting and quivering at his touch, ‘my offence against you?’
‘Have you forgotten mine?
Even in the right a man can offend past any forgiveness.
The measure of my outrage and anger was the measure of my love for you.
God witness, at the worst I never ceased to worship you.’
He had used another word of power.
She looked up, and the prisoned creature within her was bright and burning close within her eyes, frantic for freedom.
‘Nor I you,’ she said, amazed, and let her hand slip into his and be held fast.
‘God witness!’ she said after him.
‘At the worst, even when I was bound and blind and mad, I swear it never touched you or anything that was yours.
If you could take my love in your hands, you would not find one mark upon it, not one.
Never a break nor a blemish!’
She leaned her head against his sleeve and drew deep breath.
‘I am in the dark still.
It will always be a mystery, a thing that happened to me like the seasons, like floods and lightnings, without question or escape.
And yet I would not lay it all on him —’
She broke off there.
It was the first time they had mentioned the third who was there in the room with them, though they had both felt his presence, and she, indeed, had lived with it close and uncomforted for a year.
‘Yes, speak of him,’ said Llewelyn, looking down at the heavy ashen head that lay so still upon his arm.
‘It's meet we should.
It's time we should.’
‘He was blown in the storm as I was, however the thing began.
Your rival he never was.
You never had a rival.’
The beautiful voice bled words in short, hard sighs into his arm.
‘When he came he was weak and in pain.
And so young!
He needed all those things in me for which you had no use, pity, indulgence, even forgiveness.
By his youth he showed me how late it was, and by his admiration that it was not yet too late.
He made me know that I was growing old, and that everything he was was slipping out of my hands.
And I closed my hands and grasped it while I could.
And then I could not loose.’
She was silent for a moment.
She turned her head a little, and he saw that the calm had come back to her face, but now there was light and colour in it, as if the blood curbed and slowed to solitude and stillness had begun to flow again.
‘You it never touched,’ she said.
‘Your place it never threatened.
The world would not see it so, but I tell you, this is truth.
And yet it all but shattered your life and mine and all our work, and killed an unfortunate, rash young man no worse than the most of men, and hardly deserving of death.
Night and day, I never can forget him.’
‘You need not,’ said Llewelyn, ‘as I have not forgotten him.
Wherever we go, he will go with us, that I know.
But he will not go always between us.’
He took her by both hands, and drew her up to stand breast to breast with him.
His arms he folded round her, and so held her for a moment passive; then with a sudden sharp sigh she embraced him again, quivering, and lifted her mouth to him ravenously.
There was the taste of death in the kiss, but she accepted the price with the prize, and clung to the bitterness and the bliss alike, knowing them for ever inseparable now.
Llewelyn felt the chill shudder through her before it died in his heart.
He held her face cupped and cradled in his great hand, hard against his cheek, and the beat of his blood passed into her veins and drew her own blood into the same passionate measure.
‘Death is waiting for me no less,’ he said low and gently into  her ear, ‘and for you.
When the time comes that we must face William de Breos, we'll face him.
What's in store for us then is not for us to ordain.
God be thanked!
And let God dispose.’
She could not speak, but her lips shaped against the pulse in his throat: ‘Amen!’
After a long while of silence he unlocked his arms from her.
He was smiling.
His long-sighted eyes reflected gold back to the sunset, and the brightness did not fade as the sun went down.
She saw the pale flame she had lit in him burn tall and steady, a miracle of faithfulness out of unfaithfulness.
He would be a lantern to his clansmen, and lightning striking at his enemies.
And she had thought herself quite spent!
‘Put on your robes and your crown, my lady,’ he said, ‘and come with me to the hall.’
In the court a little groom was crossing from the stables, in haste for his supper.
He saw them and halted, standing at gaze for a moment open-mouthed and great-eyed, and then he whooped like a huntsman hot after game, and turned and ran like a hare for the hall, bounding as he ran.
The word was before them, the fire ran through the brushwood.
Heads came bursting from every doorway to see them pass, and the warm hum of excitement and eagerness span after them in a golden thread, the voice of the brightness that flashed like sparks from face to face.
The old formidable unity, that had seemed lost and broken irrecoverably, blazed torch-like through Aber to confound its enemies.
David was coming from his own lodging, pale and grave and preoccupied, with his child-wife by the hand.
He smiled as he looked down at her and answered her quick, light speech with conscientious gentleness.
Some distance behind them her ladies walked; they were kind, but they oppressed her with their insistence on her royalty, and it was hard to live up to them.
She had never fully understood why her life should have changed so suddenly and drastically, though she knew by rote the duties and privileges of married ladies, and did her best to play her part decorously.
So suddenly fatherless, and so abruptly given to a husband, translated from the familiar  company of her sisters at Brecon to this barbarous foreign court where she was the last and loneliest of the children, Isabella had looked round her forlornly for an anchorage to which she might ride in safety.
And she had found it.
She held to it confidingly, at rest in David's hand.
He was more than usually serious and thoughtful tonight, he went with his eyes on the ground and his brows drawn, and smiled only fleetingly when she poked fun at Ednyfed's wife to amuse him and get his attention.
He had his eyes downcast when they came to the corner of the great hall, and he did not see the Prince approaching, leading by the hand an unknown lady.
A tall lady in dark blue velvet, with a string of agates round her neck and a golden diadem in her hair; a lady Isabella had never seen before in her year at the court of Gwynedd.
Child and woman looked at each other with the same wonder and wariness, attracted and afraid.
Joan saw a little girl of eight or nine years, eyeing her alertly and clinging to David's hand.
The child wore a soft yellow woollen cotte and a brocaded surcoat stiff with gilt thread, and smoothed at her finery with her free hand as she approached, aware of the need to look her best before this unknown lady.
The soft, rounded face had a fresh, high colour, and was framed between two short braids of wavy black hair.
Innocent and anxious, her father's long-lashed dark eyes looked up bright as swords.
She tugged furtively at the hand she held, drawing close against David's hip.
He looked sidelong at her with a quick smile, and she frowned and nodded his attention quickly towards the stranger.
David raised his head, and saw the two who walked towards him hand in hand.
He checked and stood amazed, half afraid to believe, and the colour of incredulous joy flushed through his fairness and made him bright as a rose.
The child, watching him hopefully but without understanding, shone with reflected eagerness.
For a long moment there was silence as they converged upon the steps of the hall, until David got his voice again.
‘Why, here's my mother home at last,’ he said, and came smiling to meet her, putting forth the child by the hand to her, a little clumsily because he could not see well for the tears in his eyes.
‘Madam, here is one I beg you to love and cherish as your own child.
Here is Isabella, my wife and your daughter.
She has been waiting a long time for your kiss.’
Joan drew near and took the dead man's child by the hands, and kissed her.
The soft, shy fingers quivered in her palms, the half-formed flower of a mouth tasted of the spring and the sun.
The great black eyes were clear without a shadow as Isabella, recognising the bright aspect of love and unaware of its dark face, looked up and smiled.