

NON-BANK FINANCIAL INTERMEDIARIES
7.0 INTRODUCTION
This chapter explores the functions of the diverse grouping of financial institutions known as non-bank financial intermediaries and comparisons are made between unit trusts and investment trusts, and the impact of pension funds on the operation of the financial system are considered.
The effectiveness of venture capital funds in promoting seed-corn businesses is analysed, and the changing role of venture capital funds is detailed.
The operations of the National Savings movement are set out and the special status of National Savings is emphasised.
The activities of finance houses in providing credit facilities are also examined.
7.1 UNIT TRUSTS
Unit trusts are an investment vehicle for persons and companies to obtain a share in a diversified portfolio of assets.
Funds contributed to a unit trust are invested in a variety of assets ranging from liquid to relatively illiquid — bank deposits, equities and loan stock (both UK and overseas), local authority debt and government securities.
Investors contribute funds in order to obtain a share of the stream of dividends and any capital gains that accrue on the portfolio of assets.
Of course the ‘Units’ are bought by investors, and these units are priced according to how many are in existence and what the total value of the trusts' net asset holdings are (e.g. £50m net assets and 5m units means each unit is priced at £10).
The offer price of units (the price at which they are sold to investors) and the bid price (the price at which they are bought by investors) are worked out day-to-day, and are determined by the daily market value of the net assets of the trust.
Various fees and charges make up the difference between the offer and bid prices, such as profit, brokerage charges, trustees' fees and contract stamp, although the maximum permissible spread is regulated by the Department of Trade and Industry.
The largest spread allowed between offer and bid prices is 15 per cent of net asset value.
If the net asset value of the trust were £50m and there were 5 million units in existence, then the net asset value of one unit would be £10 and the largest permissible offer price would be £10.75 with a possible bid price of £9.25, giving a 15 per cent spread.
In general, spreads tend to average around 6 to 7 per cent .
It should be recognised that there is no secondary market for units, they can only be bought and sold from the unit trust itself.
Unit trusts must buy back any units investors wish to sell, at the prevailing price, and so investors can obtain liquidity at any time, although of course if instant liquidity is required the transaction may have to be carried out at unfavourable prices, and so units should be thought of as long term investments with a deposit account held at a bank or building society for liquid funds.
Unit trusts are run by two separate companies, a trustee company, and a management company.
The former acts as the overseer of the unit holders' income and assets on their behalf.
The trustee company, which is often a subsidiary of a major financial institution such as a large insurance company or bank, checks that investments of unit holders' funds are in line with the general investment strategy of the fund as stated in the trust deed.
The management company, which again is often a subsidiary of an insurance company or bank, is in charge of actually making and carrying out investment decisions, and selling and buying back units.
Unit Trusts are open-ended, which means that their size can grow or diminish according to the demand for units.
As stated above, investment decisions are carried out in accordance with the broad policy set out in the trust deed, but the limits of the investment policy are in turn delineated by the following conditions (LAUTRO):
1.
Investment in commodities and property are not permitted.
(Although see the section below on Property Unit Trusts).
2.
A minimum of 75 per cent of the value of the portfolio must be invested in securities which are quoted on a recognised stock exchange.
A maximum of 25 per cent of shares can be invested in shares on the Unlisted Securities Market.
A maximum of 5 per cent can be invested in unquoted shares.
3.
No more than 10 per cent of the share capital of any single company can be held.
4.
No more than 5 per cent of the value of a unit trusts portfolio can be invested in any single company, at the time the investment is made.
If after the investment is made the value of the shares rises, intervention is not necessary by the trustees as long as the value of the shares does not increase to rise above 7 ½per cent of the value of the portfolio.
It is generally regarded that liquidity is a very important factor in the management of unit trusts, given the ability of unit holders to require payment for the resale of their sales on any day, and the above conditions relating to investment policy largely reflect the need to plan for adequate liquidity.
Net new investment in Unit Trusts in 1989 was £3866 million, and funds under management stood at £58 159 million.
Money invested in unit trusts has grown throughout the 1980's, particularly in 1986, with funds under management growing by 63 per cent.
The number of unit holder accounts has also grown, particularly in the bull market years of 1985 to 1987.
The number of accounts faltered slightly after the crash, and appear to have settled at around 4.8 million.
The number of trusts has grown from 493 in 1980 to 1379 in 1989, with many commentators predicting a certain degree of rationalisation in the 1990's, although there is no evidence of this as yet.
During the 1980s income growth in unit trusts has been high (£1000 invested in a unit trust in 1989 would have yielded £142, compared with £81 in a building society).
Several factors encouraged the growth of unit trusts in the 1980s: the abolition of restrictions on unit trust charges and the abolition of exchange controls, both in 1979.
The third was the abolition of capital gains tax on unit trust portfolios in 1980.
Life insurers have historically placed a proportion of their funds in unit trusts because capital gains on units were tax exempt until sold.
Tax exemption is to be closed by the Inland Revenue in 1991, however, and life companies have recently withdrawn substantial  sums from unit trusts (£63.8m net outflow in June 1990).
Most of the funds withdrawn are actually from unit trusts owned by the life insurers through subsidiaries, and a switch away from unit trusts will be a substantial structural change, as life companies held 44 per cent of unit trust funds at the end of 1989.
Life companies are to be assessed each year on the gains on their units, and taxes spread over seven years.
Life companies have until the end of 1991 to switch their unit trusts into the underlying shares without tax penalties.
Such substantial flows of funds as these show the effect that the tax system or changes in the tax system can have on the patterns of finance in the UK.
Table 7.1 Unit Trust Industry Statistics
Nearly 95 per cent of UK unit trusts' assets are held in company securities (both UK and overseas).
Ordinary shares dominate the UK company securities section and the overall portfolio, accounting for around 56 per cent of total net assets.
British Government securities are insignificant by comparison, with only 1 per cent of the assets (see Table 7.2).
Short-term assets account for around 5 per cent of total assets, and have been becoming more important  in recent years.
(Table 7.3).
Overseas securities grew markedly after the removal of exchange controls in 1979 largely at the expense of UK company securities, but as with overseas investments by investment trust (see next section) have fallen away slightly in recent years.
Table 7.2 UK Unit Trusts; Assets and Liabilities
Short term assets are held for investment opportunities, and the government's privatisation programme, coupled with high interest rates on liquid assets may explain the increased popularity of cash and other short term assets in recent years.
UK Property Unit Trusts are ‘unauthorised’ in that they do not have to be authorised by the DTI because of the fact that they do not deal with the general public (major investors being pension funds and charities).
As their name suggests, they invest largely in  property (see Table 7.4) and are exempt from income and capital gains tax.
Table 7.3 UK Unit Trusts; Asset Distribution Holdings at end year, Market Values %
Unit trusts are regulated by the Life Assurance and Unit Trust Regulatory Organisation (LAUTRO) and the Investment Management Regulatory Organisation ( IMRO ), and they have a Unit Trust Association (UTA) which carries out supervision on an informal basis, and is more of a lobbying body on behalf of the unit trust industry.
Table 7.4 UK Property Unit Trusts; Aggregate Assets Amounts Outstanding, Market Value 1988
There are a certain number of tax barriers to selling UK unit trusts in the EC:(Yearbook 1990).
1.
UK tax has to be deducted from income payments such that the investor has to reclaim the tax.
2.
Income from a UK unit trust invested in foreign shares is lower than a locally based one because of UK corporation tax.
3.
UK unit trusts are the only ones in Europe taxed on ‘Trading Profits’.
Unit Trusts have been allowed since 1985 to operate across EC borders.
The UCITS (undertaking for collective investment in transferable securities) Directive of 1985 sets out minimum requirements for unit trusts, in terms of information policies of owners, investment policies of trusts, and marketing aspects.
With regard to marketing, unit trusts which comply with the directive can be marketed in any EC country, and will have to abide by host country advertising restrictions.
Products that contain both life and unit trust elements will still be regulated by separate member countries.
7.2 INVESTMENT TRUSTS
Investment trusts are similar to unit trusts in that they allow persons and companies to obtain a share in a diversified portfolio of assets and have a specialist fund manager to control the portfolio, but are fundamentally different from unit trusts in other ways.
Investment trusts are mis-named in that they are not trusts as properly defined, but are in fact actually limited companies quoted on the stock  exchange .
Moreover, the scope for advertising is limited, as they are prohibited by the Companies Act to advertise their own shares for sale (as are all quoted companies).
Advertising is limited to a new issue by an investment trust, and to investment trust saving schemes.
The Securities and Investments Board's Retail review Committee recommended in 1990 that investment trust savings schemes should be allowed to be advertised with the same degree of freedom as unit trusts.
There is still the limitation however that this relates only to investment trust savings schemes, such that investment trusts cannot advertise their shares directly.
This is a great step forward as advertising should reduce the level of ignorance of the investing public that apparently exists  according to a survey by the Stock Exchange and the Association of Investment Trust Companies.
It was found that even existing shareholders had had a very limited knowledge of the savings schemes that investment trusts offer.
Investment trusts can issue debentures and warrants as well as equity, and can retain capital gains from investments and retain other income if they so wish, whereas unit trusts cannot.
Investment trusts are closed end funds, while as stated earlier, unit trusts are open ended.
The broad policies of investment trust companies are set out by a board of directors, and as with any limited company they are limited by the articles of association and shareholder approval.
Day-to-day running of the trust is carried out by specialist fund managers, often by merchant banks.
As with the shares of any quoted company, prices can vary quite substantially according to their supply and demand, which in turn can be determined by a variety of market factors.
Investors buy a general claim on the investment trust, rather than buy the assets as in a unit trust.
Management fees of investment trusts are considerably lower than those of unit trusts because of the wide disparities in money spent on advertising, although with the changes in rules on advertising for investment trusts, their fees are likely to rise.
In terms of regulations as to permitted forms of investment, investment trusts are only limited by the listing requirements of the Stock Exchange:
1.
No more than 10 per cent of total investment to be tied up in any one company.
2.
Holdings of unlisted shares must not account for more than 15 per cent of total investment.
In practice the majority of investment trust assets are held in quoted company securities, although they are also free to invest in property and trade in currency options and futures, none of which unit trusts are permitted to do.
The major element of investment trusts' asset portfolios is ordinary shares, with UK and overseas ordinary equities accounting for nearly 90 per cent of total assets net of short-term liabilities.
Holdings of government securities and property are relatively insignificant (Table 7.5).
Relatively few government   securities are held, and although overseas securities grew in the 1980's, European equities are in fact a relatively small proportion of the total.
Table 7.5 Investment Trusts: Aggregate Assets.
Amount Outstanding End Year, Market Value 1989
The removal of exchange controls allowed diversification of portfolios to continue on an international scale, and it should be recognised that the increasing globalisation of markets through deregulation and liberalisation also contributed to the growth in holdings of overseas securities.
This shift towards overseas equities can clearly be seen in Table 7.6.
The proportion of assets accounted for by overseas equities grew rapidly from 36.6 per cent of the total in 1980 to 49.3 per cent in 1984.
There appears to have been a certain degree of retrenchment after the initial enthusiasm, with overseas securities standing at around 45 per cent of the total at the end of 1988.
This growth in the proportion of overseas equities in the portfolios and subsequent decline has been mirrored by a fall in the importance of UK company shares over 1980–1984, but a resurgence since then at the expense of overseas securities.
Shorter-term assets are kept at relatively low levels and tend to be used for investment transactions and repayment of loans.
Reserves and provisions in Table 7.7 refer to investment income and realised capital gains that have been retained for reimbursement.
Table 7.6 Investment Trusts' Asset Distribution, End Year, Market Values %
Table 7.7 U.K. Investment Trusts: Medium and Long-Term Liabilities and Capital.
Amounts Outstanding, End Year, Market Value 1989
Notice from Table 7.7 however that investment trusts have a low level of gearing (borrowing in relation to equity).
Liabilities and short-term assets are at book value, foreign currency items are translated into sterling at middle-market exchange rates, real assets and investments are at market value.
Shares in investment trusts are often priced below their net-asset  value (NAV).
The discount on the share can be worked out using the formula:—
Investment trust shares can also trade at a premium where the market value of the share is greater than its NAV:
It is generally the case that a discount exists for a variety of reasons.
Breaking up the investment trust would involve costs, and selling large blocks of the shares on the market would probably depress their price, such that the shares are ‘discounted’ when in a portfolio of an investment trust.
Obviously investment trusts' management expenses need to be paid and corporation tax paid, again reducing the value of the shares relative to the underlying assets if they were held by the investor.
Also investment trust shares may be less marketable or liquid than others, as they are not actively traded by institutional investors.
One of the major problems of investment trust shares trading at a discount is that the company becomes a relatively attractive proposition for predators, particularly other financial institutions wishing to buy a ready-made diversified portfolio of assets (at a discount).
Pension funds, in particular, are interested in buying investment trusts that have a wide discount to net asset value in order to build up their portfolios.
At the time of writing, British Coal Pension Fund is making a contested bid for Globe, Britain's largest investment trust, with over £1.09 billion of assets, and more than 40 000 shareholders.
The intention of a predator (as with British Coal Pension Fund) is to buy the shares of the investment trust at a premium to market prices (to induce investors to sell) but still at a discount to NAV.
From the investors point of view, discounts can be good as they effectively increase the ability of the investment trust to create income relative to a given investment of funds.
For example, if there is a 25 per cent discount on shares valued at 200p, NAV of each share would be 250p. £10 000 invested in shares would have an underlying NAV of £12 500 (ignoring transactions costs) with which the investment trust can generate income.
Investment trusts are regulated by the rules of the Companies Acts, which lay down requirements with respect to number of  shareholders, form of financial accounts, constitutional structure, etc. and by the listing requirements of the Stock Exchange (see above).
The Association of Investment Trust Companies (AITC) has no formal regulatory powers, but is rather a voice for the investment trust industry.
7.3 PENSION FUNDS
Pension funds can be conveniently divided into state schemes and private schemes.
State or public sector schemes are generally referred to as ‘pay-as-you-go’, whereas private funds are generally externally funded.
Pay-as-you-go means that the present pension benefits are provided through the taxation system.
Those in work are paying for the pensions of those past retirement age at the current time, rather than for their own pensions in the future.
This situation where current pensions are paid for out of current income does not present a problem for governments, as they should always have the power to raise funds through taxation.
Private sector companies do not have this luxury however, and operate on a funding scheme where money placed into the fund is used to finance future pension payments.
A number of reasons exist as to why companies run funded schemes.
Perhaps the most important reason is that if the company should go bankrupt, the pension fund (which is normally administered by an appointed financial institution) would not be affected, which can be contrasted with a pay-as-you-go system where obviously there would be no employees left to finance current or future pension benefits.
The second reason (and also a powerful one) is that funded schemes benefit from favourable taxation.
Examples of pay-as-you-go include the National Health Service, the Armed Forces, the Civil Service and teachers, although it is somewhat of an  anomaly that the pension schemes of Nationalised Industries, e.g. British Coal, British Rail, are in fact externally funded, when there is no clear rationale as to why they should be.
In terms of financial intermediation it is only externally funded schemes that carry out an intermediary function, as the funds collected for future pension payments are invested in financial  assets (and a small proportion in real assets — property and works of art) in order to earn a return on investments to be able to pay out future pensions, whereas in pay-as-you-go funds are merely transferred from present employees to present pensioners, with no financial intermediation taking place.
Most pension schemes are ‘final salary’ schemes, with the pension being a proportion of the employee's final salary at retirement multiplied by the number of years of pensionable service.
Specific schemes differ in their elements: for some final salary may be the best of the last three or five years or the average, or may be based on earnings as opposed to salary.
A popular form of scheme is the ‘managed fund’, generally administered by insurance companies whereby the funds of several pension funds are combined to form one large portfolio, and the portfolio is often divided into units that are owned by the pension funds, the value of the unit being equal to the market value of the assets held in the whole portfolio divided by the number of units issued.
Pension funds can further diversify their portfolios by investing in a spread of these units across different managed funds (insurance companies have in fact set up specialised managed funds that are largely made up of specific investments, to allow such diversification across managed funds by pension funds).
The size of the pension fund is a major determinant of the extent to which managed funds are used.
Medium-sized funds may have a small proportion invested in managed funds, with the majority of assets in its direct control, large pension funds are likely to have totally direct control, whilst smaller funds may simply invest in a range of managed policies.
If a pension becomes large enough to move away from managed funds, specialist fund managers are normally used to invest the assets, and extremely large pension funds such as British Coal tend to employ a team of specialist investment advisors.
Changes in pension provision came about with the passing of the Social Security Act 1986 and the Finance (No. 2) Act 1987.
The changes came about because of the costs of the State Earnings Related Pension Scheme (SERPS), the need for pensions that could be moved along with a change in jobs, and the wish to provide the public with more freedom of choice in their pension plans.
The main changes included the ability to contract out of SERPS, voluntary membership of occupational schemes, and the availability  of personal pensions through a wide range of intermediaries — insurance companies, friendly societies, banks, building societies and unit trust groups.
Personal Pensions are ‘money purchase’ plans whereby the retirement benefits depend mainly on the amount of funds paid in and the return on investment, whereas the company schemes can be either money purchase or ‘final salary’, where the benefits are based on the employee's salary and length of service.
Pension funds are massive institutions and rival insurance companies in terms of size.
As with insurance companies, pension funds are tremendously important to the efficient working of the secondary market of the Stock Exchange.
The majority of the pension funds' assets are company securities, both UK and overseas, and especially ordinary shares.
At the end of 1988 UK and overseas ordinary shares accounted for around 67 per cent of total net assets (Table 7.8).
British Government securities are also important, at around 13 per cent of total net assets, with particular emphasis on index-linked and long-dated stocks.
Land, property and ground rents are also significant, at approximately 8 ½ per cent of the portfolio.
There was substantial growth in the early 1980's in overseas shares after the abolition of exchange controls, and holdings of both UK and overseas equities have grown rapidly (Table 7.9).
Holdings of overseas securities of course allows for greater diversification of the asset portfolio, and often offers higher yields, especially in the Far East in recent years.
Fund managers are increasingly developing portfolios that track world indices.
If this trend continues, then pension funds, for example, will steadily off-load domestic (UK) equities in favour of European and other stocks.
Indeed, over the period March 1989 to March 1990 pension funds increased their holdings of European equities from 6 per cent to more than 8 per cent.
This should not be cause for alarm, however.
It is likely that overseas institutions will simultaneously be increasing the proportion of UK equities in their portfolios.
Short-term liquid assets are held for active trading purposes and for buying long-term investments.
Pension funds have used property unit trusts as a cheap method of diversifying into the property market, without the problems associated with actually dealing in the properties themselves.
Table 7.8 UK Pension Funds: Assets Portfolio Holdings at end of Year Market Values 1988
‘Other’ assets include unit trust units, local authorities mutual investment trust, property unit trusts, loans and mortgages, UK   local authorities securities, plus other investments, minus short-term liabilities and long-term borrowing.
Table 7.9 Selected Asset Holdings of Pension Funds, %
As can be seen from Table 7.10 private sector pension funds are by far the largest by asset size, with nearly 68 per cent of the assets of all pension funds.
Given that the end product is a pension some time in the future, then the majority of assets are viewed as long term.
As can be seen from the table, around half of pension funds' assets are UK company securities.
According to modern portfolio theory (MPT) pension funds ought to hold a ‘core’ portfolio of securities in large blue chip companies that are rarely traded,(i.e. held for the long term) around which ‘satellite’shares in smaller less well known (less well analysed, and therefore possibly inefficiently priced — see Chapter 11) companies are actively traded in order to make short-term capital investments.
It does appear that many large pension funds do carry out such a policy, with many of them attempting to replicate the FTSE 100 Index with their core portfolios so that the returns will match the market.
There are no specific regulations relating to the structure of pension funds' asset portfolios.
UK pension funds are exempt from both capital gains tax and income tax on their investments, and hence there is no preference (according to the taxation regime) for preferring income over capital gains or vice versa, nor any constraint on the volume of trading (apart from transactions costs).
Table 7.10 UK Pension Funds.
Analysis by Type of Fund, Total Assets, Holdings at end of Year, Market Values 1988
Property might seem to be an unusual investment for pension funds given its volatile nature, but its inclusion can be defended on the grounds of past long-term returns that have been a good hedge against inflation.
Many smaller pension funds invest in property unit trusts, some of which specialise in overseas property, and hence gain portfolio diversification in their own portfolios by including property, but also benefit from being diversified in the property market.
The regulation of pension funds tends to be far lighter than for insurance companies as they are bound by trust legislation, and because the companies that offer pensions have an incentive to make sure that schemes are adequately administered as they are responsible for the benefits they have agreed upon for their employees (even though they rarely run the fund themselves).
Pension funds must gain approval from the Superannuation Funds Office (SFO)— part of the Inland Revenue — to gain the tax advantages relevant to pension funds (although this does not relate to protection for pension scheme members).
The National Association of Pension Funds (NAPF) acts as the lobbying body on behalf of the pension industry, but has no specific regulatory powers, nor does the Occupation Pensions Board (OPB) which comments on pension matters that are referred to it by the Secretary of State (and also has responsibility for issuing contracting out certificates).
Indeed, it is something of an anomaly that there is no self regulatory organisation for the pension fund industry.
Specific areas of controversy where an SRO for pension funds would be useful are in disputes over  investment strategies of funds, in fund surpluses, and in pension fund ‘holidays’.
Pension fund surpluses arise as a result of assets growing faster than liabilities.
This may occur through the return on assets being higher than the growth in earnings or salaries.
The question arises as to what should be done with the surpluses that arise.
One method of reducing surpluses has been for companies to take contributions holidays (although generally these are not extended to employee contribution holidays) whereby they do not pay any contributions for a period of time.
These can be useful for the company as the money that would have gone into the pension fund can be used to boost profitability (particularly useful during a takeover bid), or for the financing of projects.
Another method has been to increase the benefits paid by the pension fund, although this has been rarely used, nor has a refund to the company from the pension fund, as it requires approval from the SFO.
In relation to contribution holidays, Goacher et al.(1987) point out that stock market prices can at times be dependent on the increase in profits derived from the contribution holiday, which could at times increase volatility, and lead to inefficient pricing of shares.
Pension fund surpluses can be dangerous in that they may encourage corporate takeovers in order to strip the pension fund, although many companies nowadays have very carefully worded trust deeds for their pension funds to limit the chance of takeover.
There has been a certain degree of controversy in recent years over the practice of self-investment by pension funds.
Pension funds ought to be immune from the performance of the company to which they relate, so that employees' pensions are safeguarded even if the company is experiencing difficulties.
With self-investment however, a downturn in the company's fortunes can cause problems for the pension fund.
In 1987 for example, the value of Victor Products' (an engineering group) pension portfolio was reduced by £400 000 due to poor results of the company, and the fact that a quarter of the funds' portfolio were self-invested in Victor Products.
The Investment Committee of the National Association of Pension Funds recommends that shares held in the parent company should be based on the proportion of the share in the All Share  Index,(in order to allow Index ‘tracking’) or 2 per cent, whichever is lower.
Further problems with self-investment can occur when a pension fund invests heavily in its parent company's shares in order to fend off a takeover bid, particularly if those shares are bought at a premium during the bid, and have to be off-loaded at a loss afterwards.
In relation to Europe and 1992, it is expected that there will be substantial growth in many markets (particularly Spain), although at the present time EC rules and regulations on pensions are still being liberalised.
Freedom of services will be one of the most important directives, and British firms are likely to be extremely active in the European pensions market.
(See also Chapter 13.)
A recurring complaint from industry has been that pension funds are too short-term orientated, to the detriment of the companies in whose shares they deal.
(See Chapter 13.)
7.4 VENTURE CAPITAL
Venture capitalists provide equity and other types of long term funds to unlisted companies which have no or little past performance record.
Backing small growth companies is extremely risky in terms of possible failure of the companies, but this risk tends to be counterbalanced by high rewards in the form of long-term capital gains.
One of the major risks stems from an ‘information asymmetry’(Dixon 1989) where the knowledge of investors as to the prospects of companies is extremely low.
Rarely do the investors have a documented past record to analyse, nor are they able to glean information from historic share price data.
Similarly, those starting up the business have a lack of knowledge of the methods and management systems used by venture capital funds.
The risks involved are thus extremely high, and it is generally recognised that close management control of these companies by the venture capital funds in necessary, as compared with the more remote approach of investors on the Stock Exchange.
Venture capitalists attempt to fill the information gap by close examination and control of companies, which should reduce the risk of loss.
Assistance is provided through financial expertise, technical abilities, and management expertise.
The growth of venture capital funds in the UK has been substantial in the 1980s and is the result of a number of factors.
In the bull markets of the eighties long term investment funds were attractive to investors, and there was also a steady demand from new businesses starting up and from management buyouts that became popular.
The unlisted securities market, the Third market and the over-the-counter market provided business with something to aim for and provided investors with a method of disposing of their interests (an ‘exit route’ in the terminology).
Finally, the venture capital industry in America was a useful model to adopt.
The venture capital industry has grown rapidly in the 1980's and into the 1990's, from around twelve in the mid 1970's to approximately 124 at the present time.
Total investments in 1989 (latest figures available at time of writing) amounted to £1.7 billion, and UK venture capitalists dominate the European market, with around 55 per cent of total venture capital investments (ECU 23 billion, £16.3 billion).
There are a number of different forms of venture capital funds:
1.
Captive funds — generally subsidiaries of the large UK insurance companies, banks and pension funds, which provide them with capital for investment.
2.
Independent funds — raise capital from a diverse range of sources, such as private investors and institutions.
3.
State owned funds — those which manage the Business Expansion Scheme (Set up in 1983 to encourage investment by private investors in unquoted companies, through tax relief at their marginal rate up to £40,000 in a year) and the Scottish and Welsh Development Agencies, set up to fund growth in their particular areas.
4.
Semi-independent — some funds have emerged recently that are linked with a financial institution, from whom funds are received, and also attract funds from elsewhere.
5.
Corporate venturing — some large companies (e.g. BP, Shell) take an equity stake in smaller companies (often in a similar line of business) to encourage innovation and growth, although the size of these funds is relatively small.
Most captive funds are open ended, that is, they have no predetermined size or duration, and will be dependent on the  general strategy of the financial institution to which they are linked.
Independent funds tend to be closed ended, and have a pre-set strategy and investment size and duration.
In terms of size, independent funds are the largest, with over 75 per cent of total venture capital funds invested.
Special mention should be given to 3i which is the largest single venture capital provider in the UK.
It is jointly owned by the Bank of England and a group of clearing banks.
It originates from the Industrial and Commercial Finance Corporation (ICFC) and Finance for Commerce and Industry (FCI) set up in 1945 on the findings of the MacMillan Committee that a gap existed in the provision of long term capital funds to small businesses.
Table 7.11 Venture Capital Investment in the UK (Numbers)
Criticisms have recently been raised as to the increasingly short-term investment attitude of venture capital funds in the UK.
The Bank of England (1990) argues that the venture capital industry has done little to reduce the funding gap and indeed that it may be getting larger.
The figures in the table above seem to confirm this point of view.
There has been a large growth in the number of buy-out/buy-in deals carried out, at the expense of start-up business.
Buy-out/buy-in business now accounts for a quarter of investments made by venture capital funds, whereas the number of startups account for only approximately 13 per cent(Table 7.11).
Venture capitalists thus seem to be moving away from riskier start-ups and towards more established companies in buy-out situations.
Particularly acute problems appear to be found in the area of raising seed-corn capital (pre start-up capital, less than £250,000, the riskiest type of venture capital) and that venture funds are looking for shorter term returns (BEQB 1990).
The amount of funds channelled towards buy-out/buy-ins has risen to 61 per cent of the total in 1989, whereas that for start ups has fallen to only 6 per cent(start-ups and other early stage only account for 15 per cent of total funds invested).
Table 7.12 Venture Capital in the UK (amount)
UK pension funds are the largest provider of capital to venture funds (over 30 per cent of the total).
Some would argue that the compound rates of return required by venture capitalists — on average 20 per cent to 25 per cent p.a., but sometimes up to 50 per cent for start ups-are too high, but this is difficult to argue against given the nature of the investments involved and the high degree of risk.
Institutional fund managers, including those responsible for venture funds, are increasingly pressurised to perform against their competition, and this has resulted in more regular reports on funds, greater investment in buy-outs with fast exits and therefore short-term profits, and performance targets for businesses that may lead to short-term objectives.
New entrants to the venture capital industry are now low in number, probably reflecting the size and strength of incumbents in attracting the available funds, and it is likely that concentration will occur, creating larger institutions, possibly to the detriment of independent venture capitalists who tend to specialise in particular markets.
One argument is that venture funds apply inadequate investment criteria in assessing potential start ups.
A survey (Dixon  1989) has shown that  arbitrary , internal rate of return figures are used (up to 60 per cent) for start-ups, and that the Capital Asset Pricing Model is ignored.
This may be one reason why venture capitalists argue that profitable start-up opportunities are rare — perhaps they do exist, but that the theoretically correct investment criteria are not being applied and so they cannot be found — although no concrete evidence exists for this link.
European Venture Capital is likely to exhibit fast growth over the next decade, and UK venture capitalists have the expertise to be very powerful competitors (see Chapter 13).
7.5 FINANCE HOUSES
There are 47 finance houses in the UK.
Finance houses are a diverse grouping of financial intermediaries that carry out a variety of instalment credit facilities for the personal sector: hire purchase, credit sale, conditional sale, secured and unsecured personal loans, revolving loans and repayment loans.
For the industrial and commercial sector services include leasing, factoring, industrial hire purchase, commercial loans and stocking loans, and block discounting.
1.
Hire purchase — personal customers hire goods for an agreed length of time and buy them at the end of the period for a low price.
The goods are owned after the last instalment.
2.
Credit sale — the customer buys the product (and legally owns it from day one) but pays by instalments.
3.
Conditional sale — the price of the product is paid by instalments, but the product remains in the ownership of the seller for a pre-set period of time, often until the last instalment has been paid.
With these three methods of finance the finance house provides the funds and a percentage rate of interest.
The seller of the goods may wish to simply pass on the interest charges to the customer, or may wish to push up the price of the product and market it as zero interest finance.
4.
Secured and unsecured personal loans — loans are provided for fixed periods of time, often at fixed rates of interest and  equal instalment payments.
For larger loans security may be required.
Obviously there is intense competition from banks and building societies.
5.
Revolving loans — personal customers under this type of arrangement can borrow a multiple of monthly payment, e.g. £30 per month may be paid to the finance house which allows up to 15 times that amount to be borrowed (£450).
6.
Repayment loans — customers pay fixed monthly repayments based on what the Finance House expects the market interest rate to be over the period of the loan, and at regular interval or the end of the loan, the difference between actual and estimated interest rates is calculated, and the difference is paid or received by the customer.
For commercial customers services include:
1.
Leasing — these are mainly used for large plant and equipment.
A lessor (in this case a finance house) hires out capital equipment to a lessee, and the ownership of the equipment rests with the lessor.
Two main types of lease exist, financial and operating.
With the former rental is set up at such a rate that the full cost of the equipment is recovered plus a return, whilst with the latter the contract is shorter and the same equipment may be leased to a number of lessees.
The lessor receives capital allowances against tax.
2.
Factoring — factoring services can involve the full operation of companies' invoicing and debt collection, credit protection through cover on sales made, and payments of up to 80 per cent of debts in advance of collection.
With many businesses waiting up to two-three months for payment, and research showing that many companies fail through poor cash flow, factoring is a very important service to industry.
3.
Industrial Hire Purchase — the same as hire-purchase for personal customers but for items of capital equipment.
4.
Commercial Loans — either secured or unsecured, and used for a variety of purposes.
5.
Stocking loans — used specifically to allow companies to hold necessary volumes of stock, as in car dealerships.
6.
Block discounting — a finance house may buy a ‘block’ of debtors from a company at a discount, and follow them up  for the company.
Cash flows are improved and possible defaulters removed.
On both the personal and commercial side of their business finance houses experience intense competition, both from within the industry and from without in the form of building societies and banks.
For non-bank finance houses the assets portfolio is dominated by the supply of credit to the personal sector (see Table 7.13), although credit to industrial and commercial companies is also important.
The majority of funds tend to come from the banking sector, although commercial bills are also important.
Finance houses use the wholesale money markets to borrow around 25 per cent of their funds, and raise another 30 per cent from commercial banks.
The rest of their liabilities are raised through deposits from the general public, share capital and deferred taxation.
One of the major problems faced by finance houses is that of interest rate risk, given the volume of fixed rate lending business.
If interest rates change adversely, finance houses could find themselves funding fixed rate loans with more expensive floating rate loans.
Finance houses are regulated by the Consumer Credit Act 1974 and the Director General of Fair Trading.
Credit business to both the personal and corporate sector (but especially the former) are likely to grow in the future, providing substantial opportunities for Finance Houses (see Chapter 13).
7.6 NATIONAL SAVINGS
The main role of the National Savings movement is to collect the savings of small or relatively unsophisticated savers in order to finance borrowing by the public sector.
The variety of National Savings instruments is extremely diverse, and the degree to which various governments have utilised the National Savings sector as a method of raising finance has tended to vary over the years.
The National Savings Bank has a large branch network in that its services are provided through post offices and sub-post offices, although of course the nature of these outlets differs considerably from those of the building societies or retail banks.
Table 7.13 Non-Bank Credit Companies: Aggregate Balance Sheet.
Holdings at end of year, book values 1989
As can be seen from the amounts outstanding in various instruments there are a number of different types of saving available, the most popular of which are National Savings Certificates, Ordinary Accounts and Investment Accounts (it is not the intention to describe in detail all of the instruments available, as descriptions are readily available from post offices).
Many National Savings instruments pay tax free interest as this is more sensible than the government paying a higher gross rate of  interest and then having the administrative cost of collecting the tax on those interest payments.
Unfortunately this also means that non-tax-payers lose out to an extent as they would prefer a higher gross interest rate that is subject to a person's rate of income tax.
National Savings are not part of the composite rate tax system (unlike building societies and banks) in which the composite rate is deducted at source and cannot be reclaimed by non-tax-payers.
As interest is paid tax free on National Savings there is a competitive advantage in attracting the savings of those who do not pay tax.
One of the major differences of the Department of National Savings relative to other financial intermediaries is that it does not hold an asset portfolio to back up liabilities held, and therefore is not constrained by the need to adhere to liquidity, solvency or capital adequacy regulations (given that funds are backed by the Treasury and are therefore essentially default-free).
National Savings were particularly competitive in the 1980's when emphasis was placed on raising government funds from this source, largely because it relieved the need somewhat to borrow from the banking system which created credit and therefore inflationary conditions, and because of the fear that government borrowing in the long-term capital markets would tend to ‘crowd-out’ industrial and commercial companies from that market, and impede their ability to raise funds for capital investment and long-term growth.
Index linked National Savings Certificates were popular up until the early 1980's, but with a fall in inflation they have tended to be eclipsed by the popularity of fixed interest certificates which accounted for about 16 per cent of total assets in 1990.
Investment accounts have offered competitive rates in the late 1980's and now account for over 22 per cent of the total assets portfolio.
7.7 VARIOUS SCHEMES
Table 7.14 National Savings: Amounts Outstanding in Various Instruments at end period 1990 Q1
In 1971 the Bolton Committee reported on the financing of small companies in the UK and concluded that an ‘equity gap’ existed in terms of difficulty of raising funds up to £250 000.
It was also recognised that an ‘information gap’ existed in relation to the knowledge of entrepreneurs as to the sources of finance available to small firms.
The Wilson committee largely concurred with these  views, and pointed out the specific problems of small firms in raising long term finance, whether loan or equity.
In 1986, the Committee on Finance for Industry, an arm of the National Economic Development Office emphasised that although lending facilities were becoming more available from the banking system, a major problem still existed with a need for a greater proportion of equity funding for small businesses.
The Loan Guarantee Scheme (LGS) and the Business Expansion Scheme (BES) are government initiatives that have been set up in order to facilitate the channelling of funds from financial institutions to small businesses (thus these schemes are ‘enabling mechanisms’ rather than forms of financial intermediation).
The LGS is a system whereby the government guarantees loans provided by banks to small businesses in situations where the risk may be high and finance might not otherwise be provided.
Set up in 1981 and operated by the Department of Trade and Industry, the LGS has been heavily criticised as a tool for helping channel funds to small business because of the high cost of the funds involved.
On top of the lending margin over base rate which the banks charged, a risk premium was added to cover the guarantee, making funds extremely expensive.
In June 1984, small businesses were also required to provide security for the first time under the scheme, which obviously deterred many potential entrepreneurs and damaged the usefulness of the scheme.
Moreover, Robson Rhodes the Accountants found that many firms that were proceeding along conventional lines in terms of raising finance, often suddenly moved to being financed totally under the LGS.
The aim of the Business Expansion Scheme (BES) is to increase the availability of equity capital to companies.
The main incentive to investors is income tax relief on an amount up to £40 000 p.a. invested in ordinary shares of unquoted (i.e. not quoted on the main exchange, the USM, the Third market or the over-the-counter market — see Chapter 11 for definitions) companies, and capital gains on selling the shares are exempt from Capital Gains Tax (CGT).
Shares cannot be sold for five years, however, or the various benefits will be lost to the investor.
Firms thus benefit from a solid investor base, and of course there is not the problem of high levels of gearing as with the LGS.
Set up in 1983 under the Finance Act, the BES has been a major facilitator of the channelling of funds to businesses (Peat Marwick 1986), many of which would apparently not have been able to raise capital without the help of the BES, although it was also reported that very little of the funds were provided for seedcorn businesses.
One problem for small businesses is that capital needs to be reinvested over a number of years yet there are no special allowances provided by the government for doing so.
Perhaps one method would be to allow small firms to set aside a percentage of profits into a tax free investment vehicle on the understanding that it is to be used for reinvestment within 5 — 10 years.
There is some argument for a form of National Investment Bank, although there is considerable doubt as to the real necessity (Budd 1986).
The objective would be to provide funds for startups and for small and medium-sized businesses in general.
The rationale is that traditional financial institutions have in some way failed to find funds for these sectors, as outlined above.
The main difference between a NIB and say, venture capital funds would be that:
1.
Loans would be at subsidised rates of interest (provided through the taxation system).
2.
Funds would be available long term.
3.
‘Different’ investment criteria would be used from those traditionally employed.
Subsidised rates of interest are needed it is argued for times when interest rates are high due to monetary policy as in the 1990's, which might discourage start-ups and result in bankruptcies of small firms if loans are not available, and because rates charged by financial institutions are too high.
The first case is probably justifiable, but the second is unlikely, given that financial institutions have to take adequate account of the risks involved.
Competition is relatively strong in UK corporate banking and would suggest reasonable costs of borrowing vis-a-vis the risks taken on.
As has been seen with venture capital funds, there may be some evidence of difficulty of raising long term funds for under £200 000, and a National Investment Bank may indeed fill this gap.
The greatest problems emerge from the third main difference between an NIB and financial institutions.
‘Different’ lending criteria would relate to businesses that have significant regional growth prospects or growth prospects in general— large growth in employment, those with good export or import substitution potential, and those involved in new technologies.
Such a list is not exhaustive, and the major problem for a NIB would be to identify companies that fall in the above categories, which is by no means an easy task.
Problems also arise over companies that receive funds but subsequently do not perform as expected.
Will further funds be withdrawn and the company allowed to fail with loss of jobs, or will it be supported as a ‘lame-duck’ reintroducing many of the industrial problems of the UK of the 1970s?
THE BANK OF ENGLAND
8.0 INTRODUCTION
The Bank of England occupies a central position in the UK financial system in terms of its main activities and areas of responsibility.
This chapter describes the various roles that the Bank takes on, and puts them in the context of the overall powers that it enjoys, particularly in relation to the supervisory activities carried out and the possibility of the emergence of a European Central Bank.
Given the pervasive influence of the Bank of England over the UK financial system, it is no surprise that later chapters also contain a great deal of further information on its business.
8.1 FUNCTIONS AND STRUCTURE
The Bank of England is the central bank of the United Kingdom, and carries out a variety of traditional central bank functions.
The Bank is a nationalised corporation, and has an organisational structure as set out in Fig. 8.1.
The Bank of England's balance sheet has traditionally been divided into two separate sections — the issue department and the banking department.
The issue department is concerned with the issue of notes by the Bank, and is classified as part of the public sector in the national account.
The banking department deals with all the other banking business, is classified as part of the banking sector, and falls within the UK monetary sector.
Figure 8.1 Organisation of the Bank of England
The issue of banknotes is the sole function of the issue department, the notes being fiduciary backed by government securities   rather than backed by gold.
The liabilities of the issue department are thus simply notes in circulation in the economy, plus the operational balances held at the Bank.
Table 8.1 Assets and Liabilities of the Bank of England: Year End 1990
Government securities and debt refer to British Government and government guaranteed securities, Treasury bills and any special Treasury liability, and advances to the National Loans Fund.
Other securities are local authority deposits and bonds, commercial bills, company securities and miscellaneous securities.
The main areas of activity of the Bank of England can be grouped under the following categories:
(1)
Banking role.
(2)
Lender of Last Resort.
(3)
National Debt Management.
(4)
Monetary Policy Role.
(5)
Note Issue.
(6)
Foreign Currency Exchange Market Intervention.
(7)
Supervision.
(1) Banking Role
The Bank of England acts as banker to a variety of customers, many of whom would be atypical clients of a commercial bank:
(a) Banker to banks and other financial institutions — every commercial bank has an account with the Bank of England in which ‘operational deposits’ are kept in order to settle interbank debts from the cheque clearing system, and for payment of funds due to the government (and, conversely, funds paid by the government to the banks).
Operational deposits make up approximately a fifth of bankers' balances held at the bank, the remainder being made up of non-interest bearing cash deposits that banks are required to keep at the Bank of England to provide it with an income.
In recent years the Bank of England has become more profitable as a result of high interest rates and good yields on the investments that these non-interest bearing deposits are placed in.
[N.B. these non-operational non-interest bearing deposits are in no way connected to monetary policy or control of the money supply].
(b) Banker to the Government — the Bank of England maintains the ‘public deposits’ of the government  from which payments are made into and out of .
Public deposits include the National Loans Fund through which all transactions involving the National Debt (see below) pass through, the Exchequer (tax revenues), the Paymaster General (including the Exchange Equalisation Account — see below), and the National Debt Commissioners.
The Bank of England merely acts as a bank in terms of these accounts, with the government making the decisions as to the level of public deposits.
The Public deposits are usually relatively small, as surplus cash is utilised for repayment of government debts.
(c) Overseas Central Banks and International Institutions — the Bank holds accounts for a variety of international financial organisations, including the World Bank, the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) and the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and organises international transactions that originate from intervention in exchange markets.
(d) Private customers — the number of these is small, and are mainly made up of staff members of the Bank and some UK organisations.
There is no pretence of competition with commercial  banks for private sector business, and there is some suggestion that the accounts are maintained in order for the Bank to keep in touch with banking practice, although the degree to which such experience accrues is likely to be limited given the small number of accounts relative to a commercial bank.
(2) Lender of Last Resort
The Bank of England acts as lender of last resort to the domestic banking system, in that it will provide funds to the banking sector when it is short of cash.
Shortages may occur through large outflows of funds from the banks to the government (into the governments accounts held at the Bank of England) or due to a large need for cash by customers, and may occur on a daily basis.
Lender of last resort facilities are provided through direct loans to the banking sector, or by purchasing Treasury bills or commercial bills (mainly the latter in recent years) from the banking system.
The Discount houses usually act as a conduit in such transactions (see Chapter 9 on more detail relating to these operations).
If it so wishes, the Bank can provide assistance only at penal rates of interest, if for example it wishes interest rates to change as part of its overall monetary policy of controlling the money supply.
(3) National Debt Management
Complementary to its role as banker to the government is the responsibility for administering the public sector debt.
This includes financing any public sector borrowing requirement (PSBR) that exists as a result of a shortfall in government revenues compared with expenditures, or at times managing the public sector debt repayment (PSDR) when government income is greater than government expenditure.
In addition, the Bank is responsible for funding the constant flow of maturing government debt instruments, and carrying out open market operations in respect of private sector holdings of government debt in response to desired policy objectives.
The Bank also attempts to smooth the flows of funds between the government and the private sector that are the product of its activities in the government debt market.
To avoid large outflows of funds on the redemption of a large government debt issue, the maturing stock is bought by the Issue  Department (see below) of the Bank over a period of time to avoid shocks to the financial system.
When a large debt issue is undertaken, the Bank will underwrite a large proportion of the issue and slowly sell them to the market over a period of time to avoid excess supply of government debt.
(4) Monetary Policy Role
The fundamentally most crucial function of the Bank of England is the responsibility of carrying out monetary policy operations.
Specific policy objectives are set by the government, and put into action by the bank, although the Bank has an important role as adviser to the government on monetary policy matters.
It is in a strong position to provide sound advice, given its close links with institutions in the financial system and in its capacity as the collector of financial statistics from the banks.
The dominance of monetarist strategies in the 1980s and start of the 1990s has meant that monetary policy has played an extremely important role in overall economic policy, with control of the money supply and inflation being of prime importance.
Monetary control instruments can generally be divided into market controls and portfolio (or non-market controls).
Of the former, the main techniques are market intervention through open market operations (see Chapter 9), intervention in the foreign exchange markets, and lender of last resort facilities.
Portfolio controls consist of special deposits, supplementary special deposits, reserve requirements, directives, and moral suasion.
Portfolio controls were used intermittently through the 1970s, but have fallen out of favour in the 1980s and early 1990s with the recognition that they distort the workings of the financial system, and that methods of circumventing the controls exist (see Hall 1983).
The experience of the monetary authorities in carrying out a policy of control of the money supply has not, however, been a happy one (Leigh-Pemberton 1986).
The Bank of England did not appear to have fully considered the problems of financial change at the introduction of the Medium Term Financial Strategy (MTFS).
The Bank maintained in 1980 that although targets were set, it was possible that structural change and financial innovation may affect the relative growth rates of the aggregates, but that the problem was not insuperable (Green Paper on Monetary Control 1980).
In view of future events, however, it appears that the problem of financial change was underestimated.
In contrast to the initial confidence of the authorities as to the insignificance of changes in the financial system for the operation of monetary control, the monetary authorities progressively emphasised the importance of financial institutions during the MTFS and subsequent analyses of the MTFS.
Official publications have tended to cite the effects of change in the financial institutional framework as the major factor for the problems experienced with monetary control, yet the Bank of England's conclusion that monetary policy is affected by financial change is not a new viewpoint.
Indeed, the notion that the behaviour of financial institutions needs to be taken into account when examining the efficacy of monetary controls has a long, although perhaps not popular, pedigree.
The ‘institutionalist’ school (comprising, inter alia, Gurley and Shaw 1960, Tobin 1963, Radcliffe 1959) first warned of the possible dangers of ‘traditional’monetary theory, which has promulgated the view that the financial system is essentially a static equilibrium system, a mere unchanging backdrop against which policy operates.
Opposed to this, the institutionalist school takes the actions of financial institutions as being of central importance in the conduct of policy.
It is recognised that observed statistical relationships may change over time due to changes in financial markets.
Even if a policy of controlling the money supply may be optimal at present, if previously held relationships break down under rapid financial change, then the rationale for controlling the money supply may disappear.
With financial innovation, traditional instruments may become obsolete in influencing the money supply.
The Radcliffe Report (1959) emphasised in stronger terms the problems associated with financial change and maintained that it is impossible to define money, because there is no clear criterion with which to determine those assets that are part of the money supply.
Obviously, if it is impossible to define the money supply, it is impossible to control.
This view has since been reflected in official commentary during and after the MTFS.
The impact of increased competition between building societies and banks has been blamed as a major determinant of the observed change in relationships among the various monetary aggregates, and between them and nominal incomes.
The activities of building societies and banks have been given prime consideration when  assessing the appropriate definition of money and the problem of implementation of monetary control (Bank of England, Dec. 1984).
One of the main reasons cited has been the importance of liberalisation of credit markets and the introduction of new types of financial assets (Bank of England, March 1982).
The authorities have given special emphasis to the financial instruments offered by banks and building societies (Bank of England March 1983).
Although little detailed research has been carried out in the UK on the effects of financial innovation and structural change upon the appropriate conduct of monetary control, it appears that there is a consensus opinion that the effects of financial change necessitate that monetary policy be conducted in a discretionary manner.
Not only may policy have to be carried out in a discretionary approach, but the authorities may be constrained to,
‘muddling through in a discretionary, but unrigorous manner.’
(Goodhart 1986, p. 101)
Where does this leave the operation of monetary policy?
It appears that there have been major changes in the rationale and operation of the MTFS as a result of the effects of financial innovation, which would indeed seem to suggest a degree of discretion is necessary in policy actions.
Currie (1987) has noted that there are some who maintain that policy is turning full circle back into a fully discretionary mode.
Currie (1987) provides reasons for the continuation of some form of medium term strategy.
He maintains that it would provide greater certainty for economic agents as to the governments likely policy reasons; the government could establish/maintain a reputation for consistency and commitment.
It would provide built-in automatic short-term policy responses, and would provide consistency between short-term and medium-term policy actions.
(5) Note Issue
The Bank is responsible for printing and issuing banknotes and coins in the UK.
New notes and coins are withdrawn by banks  from their accounts held in the Banking Department of the Bank of England.
Notes withdrawn by the banks will show a fall in the value of the ‘notes in Banking Department’(a liability of the Issue Department) and an increase in the value of ‘notes in circulation’(another liability of the Issue Department).
(6) Foreign Currency Exchange Market
Intervention — the management of the Treasury's Exchange Equalisation Account (EEA) is carried out by the Bank of England.
The EEA contains the deposits of the UK's gold and convertible foreign currency reserves that are used to intervene in the exchange markets to stabilise the exchange rate of sterling, or to raise it or lower it relative to other currencies.
(7) Supervision
The Bank of England is responsible for the supervision of all banks under the Banking Act 1987.
The institutions were categorised under the Act as ‘recognised banks’(which offer a wide range of banking services and have net assets of not less than £5 million), and ‘licensed deposit takers’(those institutions that do not meet the requirements for recognised bank status).
A major change was made however after the need for the Bank of England to rescue Johnson Matthey Bankers (JMB), a recognised bank, such that the categorisation of licenced deposit takers and recognised banks was abolished and a single category of bank established for regulation.
The main problem stemmed from the fact that there was an asymmetry of regulation in that recognised banks were less strictly regulated than licensed deposit takers.
It is interesting to note that this situation was in contrast to an earlier serious problem in the banking system, the secondary banking crisis of 1973–1974, in which less well known banks were subject to less regulation than the more stable institutions.
The Bank of England evolved as the regulator of banks largely through its operations in the financial markets.
The institutions preferred to be regulated by ‘one of their own’.
Llewellyn (1986) points out that until 1974 banking supervision was carried out by  the Bank's Discount Office, which was responsible for money market operations.
The Bank of England has a great deal of power over the financial markets because of its role as lender of last resort.
The Banking Supervision Division was established in 1974 mainly as a result of the secondary banking crisis in 1973–1974.
8.2 POWERS/CHANGING ROLE
The influx of foreign banks into the domestic financial market has undoubtedly reduced the ability of the Bank to carry out monetary control through moral suasion or supervision through the traditional informal networks.
The ability of the Bank to operate through such systems is largely through the historical building up of relationships and the ingrained tradition of the banks to accept such a system because of their desire to be watched over by ‘one of their own’.
Overseas financial institutions often come from a far different system in which rules and regulations are far more explicit, and tend not to be fully conversant with a less transparent form of control as operated by the Bank.
The growth of overseas financial institutions in terms of their numbers has been a major factor in the formalisation of supervision with more emphasis on the ‘rulebook’ and a relative decline in the less formal traditional system.
The Bank of England has lost some independence in recent years because of the formalisation of what were previously informal supervisory activities.
Notably the Banking Acts of 1979 and 1987, the FSA 1986, the Basle Concordat and capital adequacy arrangements have all meant that the Bank has lost a certain amount of discretion in implementing supervision (see Chapter 12)
8.3 INDEPENDENCE OF THE BANK OF ENGLAND — THE EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANK AND PRIVATISATION OF THE BANK OF ENGLAND
A common currency and a European Central Bank are necessary for a fully integrated European market.
A European Central Bank  would operate a lender of last resort facility for individual nations' central banks, and would aim at stability of the European economy through interlocking economic policies within the EEC.
The West German finance minister has formally requested that ‘Eurofed’— the future European Central Bank (if it comes about) be based in Frankfurt, which would obviously undermine the position of the Bank of England.
The Bundesbank wants national Central Banks to be made independent, and of course for the European Central Bank to operate independently with respect to price stability.
The European Central Bank would have members consisting of the governors of the national banks, and other members chosen by the European Council, according to the Delors report.
The problem that exists is that factions of governors who are members of the European Central Bank and who disagree with its policies may join together to frustrate them at the national level.
The ability of the European Central Bank to carry out policy will depend upon the independence of the individual central banks.
Under the ‘hard ECU’ proposal put forward by the then Chancellor of the Exchequer, John Major, a new institution would be set up to manage the hard ECU, the European Monetary Fund (EMF).
The EMF would not carry out national monetary policy decisions, so this would not interfere with the Bank of England's role in this area, although the EMF would act as an indirect constraint on domestic monetary policy and would be in control of ECU interest rates, which would eventually be expected to influence national interest rates.
Initially then, the Bank of England would still be responsible for carrying out UK monetary policy, but would be slowly overtaken to some extent by the EMF's control of ECU interest rates and control of the supply of ECUs.
There has been some debate over the necessity of maintaining a central bank, when it is possible to have a free banking regime in which banks would be free to print their own notes to satisfy the demand for cash.
Opponents of free banking argue that a lender of last resort (i.e. a central bank) is needed, and that inflation would be rampant under free banking because of the banks' ability to print notes at will.
This would not be the case, however, if each bank that was allowed to print notes was forced to repay the face value on demand (in gold, for example) such that convertability  would restrain the banks from issuing too many notes.
Certainly, if convertability did not exist, few would accept the notes of banks if there existed the chance that they might be worthless in future years.
It is also argued that a lender of last resort would not be needed because of the ability of banks to issue their own notes backed up by their deposit base (Dowd 1990).
Mullineux (1985) argues that many functions carried out by the Bank of England could be done so by private sector institutions.
He maintains that foreign exchange intervention and management of the Exchange Equalisation Account could be carried out by private institutions, as could the banking role, and monetary policies designed by the Treasury could be implemented by a major commercial bank for a fee.
The only functions that necessarily have to be carried out by the Bank of England are lender of last resort facilities — even supervision could be carried out by a self regulatory organisation (SRO — see Chapter 12) for the banking system.
Mullineux does not make it clear, however, what the advantages would be of dismantling the Bank of England and the major functions being carried out by the private sector, indeed it is difficult to see of any real benefits, although the disadvantages could be major.
Housing all of the traditional Central Bank functions under one roof has the advantage of considerable economies of scale in collecting and analysing data and the interdependencies of departments.
It is often pointed out that governments manipulate the economy to engineer booms in periods immediately  preceding elections, to the detriment of the economy, often by manipulating the money supply.
It is therefore argued that the operation of monetary policy should be taken out of the hands of the government which is politically motivated and into the hands of the Central Bank, which is neutral but has a reputation to uphold (such a situation exists in Germany, with the Bundesbank deciding on monetary policy).
It could be argued however that according to the theory of bureaucracy the Central Bank would operate monetary policy to suit its own needs, and also that monetary policy ought to be operated by a body that is accountable to the electorate (a central bank is not, although the Bundesbank does not appear to suffer from the above problems).
STERLING MONEY MARKETS
9.0 INTRODUCTION
A market can be said to be a place where buyers and sellers meet to make an exchange of goods (or services).
Those with more goods than they have need for their own consumption will sell to those who have insufficient goods for their needs.
A money market works in a similar kind of way.
It is a financial market where essentially short term capital is raised — those with excess money lend to those who have insufficient for their needs.
It is where surplus and deficit units are brought together; many of such units are financial intermediaries.
The process involved is a direct one, lender and borrower deal with each other directly, although arrangements are often made through brokers acting as agents.
The sterling money market in London is the device used by banks and others to adjust their liquidity.
Every day bank deposits are withdrawn and fresh deposits made so that at the end of each day liquidity for each bank will be different from that at the beginning.
Some banks will be more liquid, typically those which have received net deposits, and some will be less liquid, those which have experienced net withdrawals.
Either condition is unsatisfactory from the banks' point of view.
To be over liquid means that profit opportunities are being passed up.
To be under liquid means that an individual bank may not be able to fully clear its cheques, standing orders, direct debits and other bank giro items the following day, when individual depositors wish to make withdrawals.
Clearly confidence in a bank would quickly suffer if cheques were returned unpaid due to a bank having insufficient funds in its operational account at the Bank of England, if a clearing bank.
Therefore there are benefits to both liquid and illiquid banks in using the money market to adjust liquidity positions near to its ideal.
Those with excess liquidity wish to become less liquid and lend money at a return they would otherwise not receive, to those with insufficient liquidity; those with insufficient liquidity are prepared to pay for funds.
Virtually all funds come to the bank at a cost, so these money market funds are no different in this respect.
In fact in many ways they may be preferable to funds raised in the ‘ordinary’ way at branch retail level.
Funds raised on the money markets are wholesale, large amounts, so that the expense of raising them is quite small in that it does not require an expensive branch network to attract deposits in small amounts.
The market being described is the London interbank market.
Rates of interest in this market are of importance and significance as will be seen later.
They are known as LIBOR or LIBID (London Inter Bank Offer Rate and London Inter Bank Deposit).
Other parts of the money market are concerned with the buying and selling of money market instruments.
These instruments are sold to increase liquidity and bought by those who wish to reduce liquidity, in what is known as a secondary market.
The largest market here is that for Certificates of Deposit (CDs).
It should be understood that the market does not have an actual geographical location, but that the market is the activity which takes place between financial institutions, using the various instruments and facilities to make liquidity adjustments, to maximise returns on money they are holding.
It should also be appreciated that activity between market participants is used by the Bank of England, directly and indirectly to implement monetary policy via interest rate changes.
9.1 THE DISCOUNT AND PARALLEL MARKETS
Table 9.1 Discount Market and Parallel Market
The money market is traditionally split into two categories, the discount market and the market which runs ‘parallel’ to it, the parallel market.
To some extent the distinction is  arbitrary , but still perhaps useful nevertheless.
It is easy to distinguish between the two markets — the discount market has as one of its participants the Bank of England, participating in its capacity of ‘lender of last   resort’, an important function dealt with later in this chapter.
The parallel market has no participation by the Bank of England; a further distinction is that the discount market activity is on a secured basis — in the parallel market it is unsecured.
Apart from this the participants in both markets are often the same but not exclusively.
The discount market is arguably unique to London and currently consists of eight discount houses (refer to Table 4.6 for members).
A small number of bill broking firms are involved — they act as agents (brokers) in bringing together those wishing to sell instruments and those wishing to buy.
The object is to match required amounts and maturities at the right rate.
Also participating are the money dealing departments of commercial and eligible banks and Accepting Houses; the latter accept bills of exchange for a fee.
This enables the bill to be traded at a ‘fine’ rate of discount.
Before looking at each market in detail it would be helpful if a basic principle could be understood.
9.2 PRICE/YIELD RELATIONSHIP OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
There is a simple relationship between the price of a financial instrument and its yield, i.e. the financial return from holding it.
Initially a Treasury bill will be used as an example.
For the purpose of understanding the basic relationship between price and yield, the following needs to be explained, without going into a lot of detail here concerning the issue of Treasury bills.
Treasury bills are issued by the Bank of England on behalf of the government.
By selling Treasury bills the government is borrowing money from the original purchaser of the bill and the government repays the loan on an agreed day; in the case of Treasury bills this is usually 91 days after issue.
On day 91 the Treasury bill is said to mature — the original purchaser is lending money to the government.
Like any lender the buyer will wish to make a return as a reward for loss of use of the money and for the risk of non repayment when the loan expires.
In practice the risk of default of non repayment is nil so far as lending to the government is concerned.
A return for loss of use of the money is still required and if no return were made then buyers would not  lend to the government and would lend elsewhere, for example.
by making a bank deposit.
Treasury bills pay no rate of interest.
So how can a return be earned from purchasing one?
Quite simply a return can be made by paying a lesser amount today for the bill than will be repaid at maturity, 91 days in the future.
The difference between the purchase price and its value at maturity (nominal value) will be its yield or return; the bill will therefore be sold at a discount to its nominal value.
This yield can be expressed as a return in percentage per annum terms so that comparisons across a range of financial assets can be made.
The following formula can be used 
r = percentage return expressed on a per annum basis
N = nominal value, i.e. the sum paid by the government when the Treasury bill matures.
Could also be said to be its maturity value.
P = price paid by the buyer on a given day.
n = days to maturity.
(note: N — P = money return for holding bill, for 91 days in this case)
Using a numerical example, let: N = £5 000 P = £4 900 n = 91 days 
Note the following relationships:
1.
If the price falls the yield rises, for example, price falls from £4 900 to £4 800  
2.
If the price rises the yield falls, for example, price rises from £4 900 to £4 950 
Thus there is an inverse relationship between price and yield, as one rises the other falls, or as one falls the other rises.
A reworking of the basic formula allows a price to be calculated for a desired return.
As has been explained, Treasury bills have a life, usually of 91 days (occasionally Treasury bills of different maturities are issued).
The original purchaser may hold the Treasury bill to maturity if he so wishes, present the bill for repayment and pocket the difference between the original purchase and its nominal, maturity value.
As demonstrated, a percentage per annum return can be calculated for comparative purposes with other types of financial investment.
The purchaser of the bill can, if he so wishes, sell the bill before maturity.
In fact the bill can be sold, re-discounted, any number of times before maturity and there can be any number of holders during its life.
When a new Treasury bill is issued, it is issued in the primary market.
When the original holder sells to another it is traded in the secondary market and all subsequent sales will be in the secondary market.
There is a ready market in financial instruments like Treasury bills because there are always plenty of willing sellers and buyers at any one time.
Buyers are temporarily too liquid and therefore wish to reduce liquidity by buying.
Sellers are too illiquid and therefore wish to sell, the proceeds making them more liquid.
Treasury bills are held as liquid assets.
Liquid assets are assets which can be readily sold without experiencing significant capital  losses/gains or losses/gains in interest.
The question then arises, at what price should a Treasury bill be sold on a given day?
Each day during its 91 day life, it should increase in value a little.
This increase in value is the equivalent of the return or interest that could, for example, be expected on a bank deposit for each day that the relevant sum of money is on deposit.
(In practice market expectations can alter the price from the values suggested here.
See later for details).
In practice, two way prices are quoted, sell and buy.
A single (true yield) rate of 8.9 per cent p.a. for illustrative purposes is used.
Using formula ii prices on various days can be calculated and are summarised in Table 9.2.
Table 9.2 Treasury Bill Prices according to Maturity
This information can be plotted, as in Figure 9.1.
It is apparent that the appropriate price can be calculated or read off the graph for each day during the life of the Treasury bill.
The forgoing calculations were made and represented graphically to give a return on an 8.9 per cent p.a. basis.
Clearly the prices shown would only have been achievable if 8.9 per cent p.a. were the prevailing rate of return on Treasury bills throughout the 91 days.
Suppose the following were to happen:
8.9 per cent is the current rate of interest on Treasury bills on day 0, the day of issue.
Price £4,891.46 is therefore appropriate on day 0 to give the 8.9 per cent rate of return.
(See Table 9.2.)
Figure 9.1 Treasury Bill Prices According to Maturity
But, what happens if, for example, on day 20, rates of interest were to rise for reasons we need not be concerned with here?
From Table 9.2 the price on day 20 to give an 8.9 per cent return would be £4914.91.
Would anyone buy at this price?
Clearly not.
If interest rates had increased, buying at this price would give a return inferior to that obtainable elsewhere.
Does this make the Treasury bill unsaleable, and therefore have to be held to maturity by the current holder?
Yes, it is unsaleable at this price of £4914.91 but can be made saleable if the price is adjusted so that a return at the new, higher, current rate of return can be earned.
A few moments thought should reveal that the price needs to be adjusted downwards.
We have already identified the inverse relationship which exists between price and yield.
If the yield rises then price must fall.
By using the formula ii we can calculate and graph new prices consistent with the new, higher rate of return (let us say the new rate rises to 10 per cent).
It is worth noting that for each price there is a rate of return consistent with it, or conversely for every rate of return there is a price consistent with it.
Figure 9.2 shows the original line plotted on Figure 9.1 with the figures from Table 9.3
It can be seen from Figure 9.2 that at day 20 the price falls from £4914.91 to £4904.60 (from point A to point B).
Figure 9.2 Treasury Bill Prices following a Change in Yield
Table 9.3 Calculation of New Treasury Bill Prices following a Change in Yield (using formula ii)
In a similar fashion, had the interest rate fallen on day 50 then the price would have fallen from price C to price D. On day 70 it would have fallen from price E to F. Conversely, had the interest rate fallen, then prices would have risen.
(This effect not illustrated).
From the illustration provided by these figures, and their graphical representation, a further feature of Treasury bills, and similar money market instruments, becomes apparent.
The further away from maturity that the instrument is, the greater is the price effect following an interest rate change.
The nearer to maturity that the instrument is, the smaller is the price effect following an interest rate change.
AB > CD > EF £10.31 > £6.06 > £3.13
This is true not only in absolute terms, but also in relative terms too.
AB is a greater proportion of A20 than CD is to C50, which in turn is of greater proportion than EF is to E70.
AB = 0.21% of A20 CD = 0.12% of C50 EF = 0.06% of E70
It is this feature of price/yield relationships that ensures that the nearer an instrument approaches maturity, the more liquid it becomes.
It is necessary to remember that the speed with which an asset can be turned into cash is not a sufficient characteristic of an asset to make it liquid.
It must be readily convertible into cash without sustaining significant capital loss (or loss of interest).
Clearly the nearer an instrument is to maturity, the less significant is the risk of capital loss (or gain) should interest rates rise (or fall).
There is one further point worth realising.
It may seem that a holder of a bill can avoid making a loss should he retain the bill, rather than sell it, if interest rates should rise.
However, a loss is still sustained, even if the bill is held to maturity and not sold.
It is earning an inferior return to that currently being earned elsewhere as a result of the rise in interest rates.
The holder is locked into the old, lower rate of return and cannot enjoy the superior returns now available.
In this way a loss is being experienced, the return on money being forgone.
Furthermore, the Treasury bill may have to be sold for liquidity adjustment purposes.
This inverse relationship between price and yield applies to all financial instruments, whether they have no rate of nominal interest attached to them, as with a Treasury bill, or interest as usually with a CD.
9.3 MONEY MARKET INSTRUMENTS
At this stage, the financial instruments traded in the money markets, introduced earlier, can be usefully described in more detail.
A reminder, they are:
Treasury bills
CDs
Bills of Exchange
Local Authority Bills
Sterling commercial paper
in addition to which there are a number of market deposits:
Local authority
Finance house
Inter-bank
9.4 TREASURY BILLS — INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
Treasury bills are negotiable, bearer government securities, and represent a charge on the Consolidated Fund.
As a proportion of government debt they represent a small amount, however, they do have significance in relation to Bank of England operations in the money market and their number and therefore value outstanding is currently increasing slightly.
Treasury bills can be issued to the public in two ways.
Every Friday at 1.00 pm they are issued by allotment to the highest bidder by tender, or by allotment to the highest bidder when the Bank of England wishes to absorb a money market surplus on a particular day.
Bids are by invitation to discount houses and to the clearing banks by this latter method.
In addition, Treasury bills can be issued at any time to government departments and the Issue Department of the Bank of England.
These are known as tap bills and the rate of discount is set by the Treasury.
Treasury bills are usually issued with a maturity of 91 days, but 61 day bills and sometimes greater maturities are used.
Treasury bills have also been issued denominated in ECUs.
At the weekly tender each tender must be for not less than £50 000.
Bills are allocated to those offering the highest prices until the total amount on offer is used up.
It is an obligation of the discount houses to bid for Treasury bills at the weekly tender; the proportion of each issue that individual discount houses tender for is agreed with the Bank of England and corresponds to the size of the capital base of the discount house.
The number of bills allotted and the prices (quoted as a percentage discount) can be seen in the money market report of the Financial Times on the following Monday.
Very occasionally the Bank of England will refuse all offers at tender.
(See later in chapter for reasons.)
Even if a large cash shortage in the money market is anticipated for the following week, as is usually so, Treasury bills will still be announced to be on offer for that week in order to ensure the preservation of a market in the bills.
(The purchase of Treasury bills takes money out of the money markets as it flows to the government, therefore sales of Treasury bills during a shortage creates a greater shortage.
Significance of which will be seen later in this chapter).
9.5 CDs (CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT)
CDs are literally a certificate given by a deposit-taking institution like a bank or building society to acknowledge the existence of a deposit made.
The issue of sterling CDs in the UK was made possible under a provision of the 1968 Finance Act.
Prior to this US$ CDs were being traded in London.
Sterling CDs have a minimum value of £50 000 and are issued to the value of £1 000 000 in increasing multiples of £10 000.
Not all banks are authorised to issue CDs by the Bank of England; the primary market exists between the original depositor and bank.
A secondary market exists when the original depositor, holder, wishes to sell the CD before it reaches maturity.
The main participants in the secondary CD market are the Discount Houses.
Sterling CDs are issued at par (i.e. with the value of the primary deposit being made) on an interest to maturity basis for 28 days to 5 years.
However, recently they can be issued for maturities for as little as 7 days to enable them to compete with the sterling commercial paper market.
They are fully negotiable instruments.
For CDs with a maturity of one year or less interest is paid at maturity.
For those with a maturity greater than one year interest is paid gross annually.
The deposit taker does not repay the deposit before maturity; thus the necessity and usefulness of the secondary market.
CDs can be obtained in the primary market, for example by a company with excess funds.
Then, when it has need of the funds, it can be sold in the secondary market and in this way the maturity does not have to match the need exactly.
Discount Houses, banks, building societies will be ready purchasers of secondary market CDs, and sellers, in order to adjust their day to day liquidity.
In this way there is always a ready market.
As with all such financial instruments bid and offer (buy and sell), i.e. two way prices are quoted.
The price at which CDs are traded is a reflection of their maturity value plus ‘accrued’ interest.
‘Accrued’ because the interest has not yet been actually paid by the original deposit taker.
Due to this a small adjustment, downwards, in the price occurs, to compensate for the dealer being short of funds.
The following example illustrates this point.
To apply formula in first instance assume that yield and nominal rate of interest on the CD are the same 
This gives an actual return for holding the CD for 90 days of £2,406.41.
This is slightly less than would have been obtained on an ordinary fixed deposit for 90 days at 10 per cent.
Such a deposit would give interest of:
The dealer is paying £2,406.41 90 days before interest is actually paid by the original deposit taker.
This cost is calculated on a ‘discount to yield’ basis at 10 per cent.
It can be seen that the inverse price/yield relationship applies to CDs, as all other financial instruments.
This can be seen by taking the example of falling interest rates giving capital gains on holding the CD.
Using same figures as before, in Formula iii, let y = 8% this gives a price as follows:
As a result of falling CD yields the price has risen from £102 406.41 to £102 901.66.
A similar calculation for rising yields would show an appropriate fall in price.
(For the moment ignore why yields might fall).
Equally, with the use of appropriate figures, it would show that CDs become more liquid, the nearer they get to maturity, i.e. the nearer to maturity they get, the smaller is the loss or gain as a result of changes in prevailing yields.
The same affect as was seen with Treasury bills.
9.6 BILLS OF EXCHANGE
Bills of exchange are of various types, but all conform to a common set of criteria.
They can be referred to as bills, drafts or acceptances and often come with a label — bank bills, bank drafts, time drafts, bankers acceptances are some examples.
Firstly it would be useful to understand the mechanism by which a ‘standard’ bill of exchange is created, then to see how other types occur.
There is a buyer and a seller.
In a straightforward way the seller provides goods or services to the buyer, presents an invoice and is  paid on the due date (more or less).
This is how most domestic, commercial transactions are conducted.
Some, however, and many transactions concerned with foreign trade, are covered by a bill of exchange whose value equals the value of the sale.
Section 3 of the Bills of Exchange Act 1882 provides an exact definition of a bill of exchange.
The sequence of events to create a bill of exchange is illustrated in Figure 9.3.
1.
Goods/services are supplied by the seller to the buyer, thus creating an obligation to pay a sum of money.
Usually a certain amount of trade credit will be given so that payment will be some time after delivery of goods or services.
Figure 9.3 Creation of a Bill of Exchange
2.
Bill drawn by seller on buyer.
The bill of exchange is written out initially by the seller who becomes the drawer.
It is usually written on a standard form, but not necessarily.
The  bill in question here, because trade credit is being given, will mature when the payment is due for the goods/services.
It is known as a term, tenor or usance bill.
When the bill matures the buyer/drawee/acceptor has to pay the sum of money on the bill (see 6.).
By ‘drawn on’ simply means that the named buyer is identified as the party who should pay the sum of money involved.
In this way the buyer becomes the drawee, the person upon whom the bill is drawn.
The bill is then sent to the buyer.
3.
On receiving the bill the buyer must ‘accept’ the bill, having agreed to do so as part of their contractual obligations under the sale of goods or services.
If the buyer believes such an obligation does not exist, then clearly the bill can be ignored and the matter does not proceed further as far as is concerned here.
The bill is accepted by the buyer/drawee writing on the face of the bill the word ‘accepted’ and must be signed and dated.
The buyer is now the drawee/acceptor of the bill, who then returns it to the seller.
4.
The seller can, if he so wishes, simply keep the bill to maturity and present it for payment (as in 6.).
There is little to be gained from this however.
What the seller now has is something of immediate value — the undertaking of the buyer to pay a certain sum of money at a future date.
It is possible to borrow money using this undertaking, or promise to pay, as security.
Who will lend money against this security?
Discount Houses, banks and some other financial institutions.
Clearly, no one is going to lend, for example, £50 000 today, if the item being relied upon for repayment, the bill, is worth £50 000, and payment is in, say 60 days.
Were £50 000 lent today against repayment of £50 000 in 60 days time this would be the equivalent of the lending institution lending at zero interest.
Therefore a lesser sum will be lent and the difference between the sum lent and the full amount will equate to the ‘interest’ being charged.
The bill will be discounted, sold for a sum less than its maturity value.
The principle is that explained when discussing Treasury bills earlier in the chapter.
Discount Houses derive their name from the discounting of such bills of exchange.
5.
The original discounting institution, a bank or discount house, for example, might well find itself short of liquidity before the bill matures.
In which case it will be able to re-discount the bill to similar institutions who have excess liquidity.
In holding the bill it will increase in value day by day and thus earn a return — return whose value will always be better than that for simply holding liquidity solely in the form of ‘cash’.
Each time the bill is re-discounted the discounter becomes the holder of the bill.
In practice most trade bills are discounted once and then held to maturity.
The market for re-discounted paper is ‘thin’ in that the risk is greater and the names of the parties to the bill will often be unknown.
Thus trading becomes less easy and sure.
It should be noted that some bills carry a ‘definitive’ rate of interest.
This is a rate of interest written in such a way that the final maturity value of the bill can always be calculated.
This is necessary so that the bill can be accurately discounted.
6.
On a particular day the bill will mature.
That is, it will be due to be paid by the  acceptor .
The current holder of the bill will present it for payment and all being well receive the full value.
Clearly the financial standing of the buyer/  drawee acceptor is being relied upon, and a certain risk will attach to non-payment.
The greater the risk of non-payment, the greater will be the expected return for discounting.
That is, the greater the risk, the greater will be the discount and the greater will be the cost of borrowing experienced by the original discounter, the seller.
However, under the provisions of the Bills of Exchange Act 1882, in the event of non-payment by the acceptor, each holder of the bill can gain redress from previous holders, leaving the original discounter the right to recover the relevant sum of money from the drawer.
The logic of this is that the drawer is in the same position he would have been in had he not discounted the bill.
He would have remained unpaid, and the loser in the matter.
He has used the bill as security to borrow money; if that security turns out to be  worthless, then he should be liable for compensation to the lender of funds.
It should be noted that in some other legal systems the drawer is not liable in this way and can discount ‘without recourse.’
Bills being discounted and re-discounted is part of the Sterling Money Market at work.
Such bills must be drawn in sterling and payable in the UK.
The bill described above would be known as a commercial or trade bill.
If the drawer (due to recourse) and the drawee were highly credit rated then the bill would be a fine trade bill and would attract a finer, smaller discount, i.e. a lower effective rate of interest, due to the smaller risk of default.
Clearly the financial standing of the drawer and drawee are important in determining the rate of discount.
If the drawee were, for example, a bank, then a bill accepted by such a bank would be more marketable, i.e. more liquid.
It would also ‘cost’ less to discount it.
A bill accepted by a bank would therefore be a bank bill.
Some banks are known as eligible banks (see later in the chapter) and create eligible bank bills, or simply eligible bills.
The sequence of events in the creation of a bank bill is in Figure 9.4, and is only a modification to that for commercial bills.
This section of the market is generally known as London Bankers' Acceptance Market.
In order to provide the acceptance facility banks charge a small acceptance commission of  — 1 ¾ per cent per annum.
It must be remembered they must pay on maturity, whether or not they actually receive the covering funds from the seller, having been paid for the underlying commercial transaction by the buyer.
Not to pay at maturity, would be to say the least, extremely damaging to the bank's credit rating and would completely destroy confidence in it.
Bank bills are traded in the money markets in the same way as trade bills, except that the rate of discount is different (smaller) and they are more marketable due to the much lesser risk of default.
In this way bank bills may be re-discounted a number of times before maturity.
There is an active secondary market in such ‘paper’.
Figure 9.4 Creation of a Bank Bill
9.7 LOCAL AUTHORITY MARKET
The Local Government Act 1972, Schedule 13, as amended by Schedule 70 of the 1985 Act, allows local authorities to issue bills, technically Local Government Promissory Notes.
Occasionally they are called revenue bills or money bills.
They are normally issued by tender with a tenor of 91 days or less, usually 6 months.
All issues have to have approval from the Bank of England if they are to be re-discountable at the Bank of  England and attain eligible status.
It is this status which makes them popular and marketable.
(See later in chapter for significance).
The tender procedure is similar to that for Treasury bills and as with Treasury bills, most LA bills are taken up by discount houses and clearing banks.
LA bonds normally have a maturity of 1 year and 6 days but can be issued for up to 5 years tenor.
They are quoted on the Stock Exchange and underwritten by similar institutions to those which underwrite share issues.
Local authority stocks provide long-term funding.
It is the LA bills which are traded in the money markets.
9.8 FINANCE HOUSE MARKET
Finance Houses provide funds for hire purchase, leasing and trade stock financing.
They raise funds for these purposes by borrowing mainly from wholesale banks, taking deposits from insurance companies, pension funds, companies and some private individuals.
They also draw bills which they then discount to obtain funds and issue CDs.
Today it is a relatively minor part of the sterling parallel money market due to many Finance Houses obtaining bank status, and therefore able to raise their funds on the sterling inter-bank market.
9.9 STERLING INTER-BANK MARKET
This market has already been used at the beginning of the chapter to introduce the concept and purpose of ‘the money market’.
It is a very important market in that it is the main link between all other sectors of the money market in London and participants include not just banks, but just about every area of the finance community.
Main participants are indeed banks, the clearers plus all others in the banking sector (see Chapter 4), merchant banks and accepting houses and foreign central banks.
In addition there are pension funds, insurance companies, large companies, finance houses, discount houses.
Business is conducted via money brokers, of which there are currently six.
Essentially those institutions with surplus funds lend to those with insufficient funds to meet their requirements.
Most transactions are £½ million plus and funds are lent on an unsecured basis.
Most are for three months or less, right down to over-night or at call.
Most deals over three months would be made with a CD due to their greater flexibility in that the depositor can gain back the deposit by selling the CD in the secondary market.
It is in this market and the CD market that the clearing banks now obtain the majority of their deposits.
The cost of interbank deposits is crucial to setting base rates, as additional deposits are obtained by borrowing in this market it can be seen that LIBOR represents the marginal cost of funds to the clearing banks.
As a guide clearing banks seem to use 1–3 month LIBOR + ¼ per cent as a basis for setting their base rate.
The ‘guide’ is just that and is not intended as a rigid rule.
Base rate can be often seen to be outside this guideline, due mainly to expectations in future movements in interest rates (see later in chapter).
Many large commercial customers of the clearing banks have their deposit and borrowing interest rates linked to movements in a particular maturity of LIBOR.
9.10 CENTRAL MONEY MARKETS OFFICE
Up until the Autumn of 1990 all money market instruments when bought or sold were physically delivered to the buyer, usually by messenger in the City of London.
Therefore during every working day many thousands of items had to be delivered causing a great deal of work, plus a security risk.
During early 1990 $297m worth of securities were stolen from a City messenger and whilst a general alert went out should any unusual presentations for payment be made at maturity to minimise the risk of loss, it is nevertheless true that this kind of occurrence causes a certain difficulty due to the fact that invariably the instruments in question are bearer instruments.
To deal with such difficulties and unnecessary travel of pieces of paper the Bank of England announced in November 1988 that it would set up a Central Money Markets Office (CMO) to develop a book entry transfer system to enable money market instrument paper to be ‘immobilised’ and eventually be ‘dematerialised’.
It  provides a central depository, in its initial stages, for the paper once it has been raised.
The paper then remains at the Bank and ownership is transferred by change of registration only.
The transfer is effected by an electronic book-entry system, which also actuates the associated payment instruction.
There will be two types of participation, direct membership and indirect participation.
Direct members have an account with the CMO and are  able to input instructions and receive details of deliveries of instruments on a terminal on their own premises.
Tariffs will apply.
In addition direct members arrange for money settlements to be made and received.
Indirect members will buy and sell instruments and make and receive money settlement through a direct member who in turn will levy a charge for the service.
All instruments allowed into the CMO system must be payable at maturity by a CMO member.
Whilst the system remains paper based, the actual certificates and bills that make up the instruments will be held in a safe custody vault at the CMO.
It is anticipated that the system will eventually further develop, in addition to that of a paper-less system, to include, for example, automatic payment of any interim interest due on CDs or provide an automatic ‘parcelling facility’.
This would enable parcels of instruments to be made up to a given value, type or maturity for sale and thus improve their marketability.
9.11 THE ROLE OF THE BANK OF ENGLAND IN THE STERLING MONEY MARKETS
This section will attempt to demonstrate how the Bank of England operates in the sterling money markets and thereby influences the level of interest rates in those markets.
It will also explain how market rates indirectly affect sterling interest rates generally, and specifically bank base rates.
In the seventh Mais Lecture (reported BEQB, Aug. 1987.) the Governor of the Bank of England said:
‘There is a popular perception that the monetary authorities dictate the general level of interest rates, and of course it is true that we are able to exert a very considerable influence on it.
But  the extent of our influence should not be exaggerated.
The financial markets are themselves an immensely powerful influence which we can never afford to ignore.
At times, if market sentiment is uncertain and if the authorities are relatively confident in their view of the appropriate policy stance, the Bank's lead may be readily followed.
But at other times, if we sought to impose a level of rates against strong market opposition.
we are liable to be forced to change our stance…
We need always therefore to try to work with the grain of the markets to achieve the required effects.
…
Often our aim will be to slow the momentum of an interest rate movement sought by the markets rather than obstruct it altogether.
In seeking to influence the size and timing of interest changes we can operate with a higher profile — through publicised 2.30 p.m. lending to the market, for example, which is the equivalent to the earlier MLR announcement; or we can operate more discreetly through varying the scale of assistance in relation to the market's needs or the terms on which we lend privately to the discount houses.
When there is an interest rate change, we can either follow a move in base rates initiated by the clearing banks or we can choose to anticipate a move that they might make on the rates prevailing in the interbank market.’
The operation of the sterling money markets and the role of the Bank of England will be built up from a relatively simple picture.
Firstly, imagine that the UK is a closed economy, with no foreign trade, with no capital flows of money to or from abroad and with no government sector.
In this case all money transactions would be between UK residents and UK companies within the UK (i.e. the UK M4 private sector).
Most of these transactions would take place via bank accounts.
Company A paying company B would mean a transfer of deposits from company A's bank to company B's bank.
These transfers would take effect when netted out with all other transactions across the operational balances of each bank with the Bank of England.
At the end of a day's banking some banks are going to be more liquid, as a result of net deposits and other banks are going to be less liquid than they were at the beginning of the day's business, as a result of a net withdrawal of deposits.
This position of under or over liquidity is unsatisfactory in each case.
Under liquid banks will have insufficient liquidity to meet demands on deposits the next day.
Over liquid banks will have money balances earning no return, so that profit opportunities are being lost.
This will affect their ability to pay a return to their shareholders and meet their running expenses, including being able to pay interest on the deposits, where appropriate, that they have taken.
It is to the mutual advantage of both sets of banks, those over liquid and those under liquid, for those over liquid to lend to those under liquid.
Money is lent and borrowed in this way on the interbank market.
Money can be lent at varying maturities and money settlement will be achieved via changes in operational balances at the Bank of England.
(See Chapter 4.)
In addition banks will also hold a set of liquid assets in the form of Treasury bills, various types of bills of exchange, LA bills etc., as has already been described earlier in the chapter.
Liquidity adjustment can also occur via appropriate buying and selling of these money market instruments, instruments held for this specific purpose, where they can be readily exchanged without significant loss.
Holding them of course means a return is being earned that otherwise would be forgone.
In a closed economy with no government sector where no money either enters or leaves the system it would be possible for total liquidity adjustment between banks to occur in such a way.
More realistically, however, we have to allow that money does enter and leave the system so far described.
Money leaves the UK private sector, the system, and flows to the government sector when tax of any kind, for example, is paid.
Company A paying its corporation tax from its bank deposit will cause Bank A to lose the deposit to an account at the Bank of England.
It does not end up with another bank as would be the case were, for example, an invoice to Company B paid.
Thus payments to the government cause loss of liquidity to the banking system as a whole.
On the other hand government expenditure results in an increase in liquidity within the system.
If Company A receives payment for supplying defence equipment to the government then the payment results in an increase in Company A's bank account, without a decrease in any other M4 private sector bank account.
Net inflows or outflows clearly determine the liquidity position of the banking system on a day to day basis.
In a closed economy (Figure 9.5) the circled banks which find themselves over liquid can lend to or buy money market instruments from the under liquid banks (uncircled).
In an economy with a government sector (Figure 9.6) a net outflow of funds to the government (where taxes exceed expenditure on a particular day) results in the banking system being under-liquid.
Figure 9.5 Liquidity Adjustment, Closed Economy
Figure 9.6 Liquidity Adjustment, Open Economy
A net inflow of funds from the government (where expenditure exceeds taxes on a particular day) results in the banking system being over liquid.
N.B. On a daily basis different banks become under or over liquid quite fortuitously as a result of the transactions conducted by their customers.
It can also be seen that in reality the UK economy is an open one, with a foreign sector.
Thus UK residents, companies and private individuals can make or receive payments to or from abroad.
The extent to which these are in sterling or exchanged into sterling, will also have a corresponding effect on the sterling liquidity of the UK banking system.
Under or over liquidity is an unsatisfactory position for individual banks within the system.
Even within an open economy, with a government sector, a certain amount of liquidity adjustment can be made between over and under liquid banks in the system.
Even when the system as a whole is, for example, under liquid, there will still be individual banks with over liquidity.
They can lend to and buy from other banks.
In this fashion a partial adjustment can always occur.
However, there will always be individual banks left under liquid when the system as a whole is under liquid.
(And vice versa, banks left over liquid when the system is over liquid.)
As remarked before, this position is unsatisfactory and cannot be ‘tolerated’ by the banks concerned.
Building up further towards a picture of reality, in the UK we have the system of discount houses.
These have various rights and obligations under the auspices of the Bank of England.
One of their obligations is to always provide two-way prices on the discount money market instruments which have been considered in this chapter.
This means they must always be prepared to either buy or sell securities when approached to do so by one of the banks.
The result of this obligation, under conditions of the system as a whole being under liquid, is that the shortage ends up with the discount houses, either with all of them, or with individual houses.
Banks having the right liquidity will not enter the money markets.
Thus all banks which find themselves illiquid will naturally seek to relieve the shortage by offering to sell securities to the discount houses.
In addition many banks will have money market loans at  call with discount houses.
In conditions of liquidity shortage they will call back these loans, requiring the discount houses to repay the money lent to them.
In both ways, the shortage ends up with the discount houses.
There is only one final source of relief with regard to the shortage of liquidity and that is the Bank of England, specifically performing its role of lender of last resort.
The Bank deals mainly with discount houses and only on a very limited basis with the commercial banks.
As described, the shortage essentially ends up with the discount houses.
They, in turn, if short of funds can expect to relieve their shortage, balance their position, either by selling eligible bills to the Bank or by borrowing funds from the Bank, against collateral provided.
By eligible bills is meant any instrument which the Bank is prepared to buy as part of its money market operations to adjust liquidity in the banking system.
They include the government's own instruments which it issues, Treasury bills, certificates of tax deposit, as well as eligible Local Authority bills and eligible bank bills.
As seen earlier, in a rather circular fashion, eligible bank bills are bills of exchange accepted by an eligible bank.
In turn, an eligible bank is one whose acceptances will be rediscounted by the Bank of England, that is will be purchased by the Bank from the discount house holding them.
Such bills have to meet a number of criteria, apart from the credit rating of the bank which accepts the bill.
They include an original maturity of no more than 187 days, be payable within the UK and be for an identifiable underlying trade transaction.
They must not be accommodation bills, where no underlying transaction exists, where the bill has been accepted so that it can be discounted for capital purposes.
On 23 September 1988 the list of eligible banks numbered 158.
During periods of acute cash shortages the Bank may purchase gilt-edged stock under a repurchase (repro) agreement.
Here the discount house/bank agrees to buy back the gilt at a future date.
This is an exceptional facility and most shortages are relieved by outright purchases by the Bank, against same-day settlement.
Usually, no distinction is made between types of bill, but occasionally the Bank does so.
Purchases may also be confined to certain maturity bands as below:
band 1
1 — 14 days
band 2
15 — 33 days
band 3
34 — 63 days
band 4
64 — 91 days
Maturities refer to the remaining maturity, not the original.
Thus the Bank does not usually purchase bills with a maturity greater than 3 months.
It does not usually purchase eligible bank bills within seven days of their acceptance.
It should be emphasised that the Bank only buys eligible money market instruments.
The reason for this is clear.
When the instrument matures the Bank will present it for payment to the relevant institution.
In the case of Treasury bills it is the government which will be paying — no loss effectively possible there.
In the case of bank bills it has to be sure that the acceptor bank will be in a position to pay, thus the requirement of eligibility.
Often in money market reports as published in the Financial Times trade bills or commercial bills will be referred to in relation to purchases by the Bank of England.
They will always be eligible bank bills and not true trade bills and their nomenclature in this context can only be described as a kind of shorthand and corresponds to the requirement that they must be drawn for transaction not capital purposes.
When there is a shortage of liquidity in the banking system, the Bank of England invites discount houses to offer for sale eligible instruments to the Bank.
Open market operations are made via the discount houses, but can also be conducted directly with the major clearing banks.
The preference is, however, for the discount houses.
They are easier to manipulate, they have less money and depend on the Bank largely for their livelihood.
There is a great deal of liaison between Bank and discount houses, all are visited once per week by a bank official from the Money Markets Office to explain reasons behind actions taken in the markets by the Bank.
Clearers are also visited in a similar way.
The Bank makes an estimate of what the liquidity position of the banking system will be on a day to day basis for several weeks ahead.
Estimates can be quite accurate once two days in advance are concerned.
Government departments give information on expected major flows of money.
In a similar fashion treasury departments of banks and discount houses also make their own  estimates to enable them to plan their strategy for their ‘book’ of money market instruments.
The market is given the estimate of the liquidity position for the coming day's business at 9.45 a.m. on their information screens.
Usually the first operations by the Bank are at 12 noon.
This is when, under positions of market shortage of liquidity, discount houses are invited to offer eligible instruments for sale.
It is for the discount houses to tell the Bank the rate at which they wish to sell — the Bank may accept or decline the offers.
The ‘stop’ rate is the rate below which the Bank will not buy — it may differ for different maturity bands.
The market is not told the stop-rate but of course those houses which offered other bills and were declined will know.
Not all the shortage is taken out early on.
This is because if the estimate of the liquidity position is incorrect it will cause large changes in market rates of interest, the undesirability and significance of which will soon be seen.
Exceptionally, if there is a large shortage then the Bank will offer an ‘early round’ of assistance.
Here discount houses can make telephone offers of sale of instruments.
Having decided which, if any, offers to accept, the Bank will publish, as at all times of assistance, the amount and types of bills purchased, with the appropriate maturity bands and spread of discount rates given.
If the forecast liquidity position has changed significantly by the ‘usual’ first round of assistance at 12 noon, then a revised forecast is given.
No details of the factors creating the change are given.
By practice banks withdraw their callable funds with the discount house by 12 noon, but they may offer their surpluses to them up until the close of business in the afternoon.
For this reason any shortages in the system can be expected to be revealed in the discount houses' position by 12 noon.
At 2.00 p.m., if there are any further revisions of significance in the market's position they are published.
If there is still a sizeable shortage, then further assistance is given, though not necessarily at the same rates and maturities as earlier.
If a market surplus of liquidity is forecast, then the Bank will only act at 2.00 p.m. if it is large.
In such a case it will invite discount houses and clearing banks to bid for Treasury bills of one or more specified maturities.
The Bank does not rediscount eligible bank bills back to the market in such instances.
To do so  would suggest that the Bank were in effect guaranteeing their payment at maturity.
Liquidity surpluses have become quite common and this accounts for the increased issue of Treasury bills of late.
Maturities are designed to take out anticipated shortages at a later date and therefore maturities differ from the standard 91 days.
If a discount house finds itself short of funds after the final round of assistance at 2.00 p.m. then money may be borrowed from the Bank on a secured basis within its agreed facilities.
A director of the discount house needs to attend personally to effect this, traditionally complete with top hat.
The total amount of such late assistance is published on the financial news screen.
The rates are not.
Further telephone borrowing is possible at the discretion of the Bank and usually at an increased rate of interest.
Such late borrowing is necessary because only when Town Clearing has been completed will the final position for the day become known and the final position of the clearing banks in relation to their operational balances at the Bank.
Very exceptionally the Bank may alter the above arrangements.
It may announce that 2.00 p.m. lending to discount houses is to be put back to 2.30 p.m., when the rate at which loans are made will be published.
Lending limits are often suspended to the discount houses and do not count against their agreed lending facility with the Bank.
9.12 MONEY MARKET INTEREST RATES AND BASE RATE
Having seen the function of the Bank of England in the sterling money markets carrying out its role as lender of last resort, it is now possible to look at the significance of its open market operations in relation to interest rate determination in the money markets and in the wider economy.
When it becomes necessary for a bank to liquidate some of its liquid assets in order that it may then have a desired liquidity position, it will, as has been explained, sell to other banks or discount houses.
As has also been seen, for each price of a bill or other market instrument there is a given yield or rate of return.
So long as the price is consistent with the current yield then nothing in relation to bank base rates need change.
However, imagine the situation should the Bank of England, when conducting open market operations, alter prices it is prepared to pay to discount houses.
Suppose it lowers the prices it is prepared to pay; this will mean a capital loss to the discount house if it has just given a bank a price consistent with current yields.
Now the price has fallen and future purchases by discount houses will be at the new, lower rate.
This new, lower rate will be consistent with a higher yield on the assets in question as per the inverse relationship demonstrated earlier.
It means new funds going into the banks as a result of liquidating assets have cost more.
This additional cost, if sufficiently large, will be passed on to bank customers based upon a new, higher base rate.
For administrative reasons it would be undesirable for base rates to change every time money market rates changed, but if the change is large enough, then a base rate change becomes necessary.
As a rough guide base rates are usually kept within about a ¼ per cent margin either side of market rates, although it is possible to see base rates outside this ‘guide’ on occasion.
Thus, when the Bank of England wishes to bring about a change in base rates, which in turn affect all other sterling rates of interest over the whole yield curve, it does so by adjusting its money market intervention rates, in what must be, by definition, the discount market.
Rates are altered so that the new price reflects the desired new rate of interest.
Once intervention rates have been altered in this fashion, a change in rates will occur across all sterling money markets.
The process of arbitrage would ensure that it occurs although in reality market participants would alter rates immediately, so that arbitrage opportunities did not occur.
In the example given, if prices were to fall in the discount market, and the yield rise, then the process of arbitrage would ensure new rates in the parallel market, should market participants not immediately adjust prices (which in fact they will).
If they did not adjust prices immediately then market activity would bring about the changes.
If parallel market rates were lower and instrument prices higher, then it would be possible to sell parallel instruments, at a high price, and with the proceeds buy a similar instrument with regard to risk and maturity in the discount market  at a low price, and therefore higher yield.
In this instance the benefit would be a capital gain between the selling and buying price.
The movement of a large number of sellers in the parallel market would drive down the price, and push up the yield until it equalled that in the discount market.
Arguably the increased demand to buy in the discount market would push up the price and depress the yield.
The only factor which disturbs the markets moving towards each other in this way, as opposed to the parallel market doing all the moving, is the existence of the Bank of England in its lender of the last resort function.
In the above example it is the Bank of England initiating the base rate change.
Should a change be initiated in rates downwards, then prices would be adjusted upwards by the Bank of England.
In many instances, however, it is not the Bank of England which initiates the change in rates of interest.
Quite often it is the clearing banks which make the first move by announcing a base rate change before the Bank alters its intervention rates.
The Bank in this case endorses the change by bringing its intervention rates in line with the new base rate.
It must be said, however, that it is extremely unlikely that a clearing bank would announce a change in this way without first getting the view of the Bank as to the desirability of the change at that particular time.
The sequence of events in this latter instance can probably be best explained by ‘market expectations’ or ‘sentiment’.
There may well be an expectation or a sentiment exist that interest rates will change in the near future.
Those expectations, sentiments, may well be based upon interpretation of economic data concerning inflation, the balance of payments position, the exchange rate or many other economic variables.
If the expectation is held strongly then market participant action may well bring about the event that was expected.
In this way events may be a self-fulfilling prophecy.
It may well be that there is a strong market view that interest rates will rise shortly.
If this view is held then it makes sense to borrow funds now at low rates to obviate the need for borrowing later, when funds are expected to be more expensive.
Equally, if an institution has excess funds at the moment, and expects interest rates to rise, it will be acting rationally if it does not lend those funds out, except very short term.
In this way when interest rates do rise it can benefit from these new higher rates.
In both instances  lenders and borrowers activity will tend to ensure that their expectations become fulfilled.
The increase in demand for borrowing will push up rates.
In order to lock into today's low rates potential borrowers will have to agree to marginally higher rates than are really current.
But, having agreed these new, marginally higher rates now, they have in fact caused rates to rise.
The process will continue upwards until rates rise to meet expectations.
Sometimes it can be seen that rates go ‘too high’ and have to adjust downwards slightly.
On the opposite side of the market there is a reinforcing process at work.
At the same time that there is an increase in the demand for borrowing, there is a reduction in the supply of those wishing to lend.
In order to ‘persuade’ lenders to lend, as seen above, fractionally higher rates will be necessary.
It is therefore possible to see movements in interest rates in the money markets as a whole in advance of changes led by the Bank of England.
The key market here is the interbank market, as described before the principal source of funds for clearing banks, and where additional funds are obtained.
Funds raised in this way represent the marginal cost of funds to the banks involved.
It therefore makes sense, as described earlier for banks to keep base rates within ¼ per cent of interbank rates, specifically 1 — 3 months.
Shorter maturities are perhaps a little too volatile and respond to day-to-day liquidity conditions too readily to be used as such a guideline.
One — three months seems about the right time horizon for raising the majority of deposits.
Any longer makes it difficult to easily adjust to market conditions.
It is often possible to see three month interbank outside the ¼ per cent band with regard to base rate.
Apart from being a guideline, and not a rigid rule, it is evidence that changes in interest rate expectations are being held, but perhaps behind the scenes approval from the Bank of England has not been forthcoming.
The Bank does not hold the view that a change is  desirable — yet.
Money markets are therefore a device which has grown up to adjust liquidity principally between financial institutions and at the same time enables a return on deposits to be maximised.
Market intervention by the Bank of England enables it to influence market rates of interest and thereby all other sterling interest rates across the complete maturity spectrum.
9.13 MINIMUM LENDING RATE
As a final point of information, the Bank of England still has the facility to re-introduce minimum lending rate (MLR) if it so wishes.
It did so for one day on 5 October 1990, on the announcement of the application for UK entry into the exchange rate mechanism (ERM) of the European Monetary System (EMS).
The previous example was in January 1985.
In both instances the Bank wished to make a very public and positive statement about interest rates.
MLR was ‘suspended’ in August 1981.
EURO-CURRENCY
10.0 DEFINITIONS
There are a number of ways of classifying banking activities.
Domestic banking involves taking and making loans in domestic currency to residents of the country where the bank is located.
An example would be a person or company resident in the UK either making a deposit or receiving a loan in sterling to or from a UK bank.
It would not matter that the resident were a foreign national or a foreign company, so long as they were resident, were located in the UK and the transaction were in sterling, it would constitute domestic banking.
Traditional foreign banking would involve taking deposits or making loans in domestic currency to non-residents of the country where the bank was located.
Here the example might be a UK bank lending sterling to a person or a company living or located in the US.
Again it would not matter if the person were a US citizen or not, so long as he or she lived in the US the classification would stand.
Eurocurrency banking activity, the subject of this chapter, has been defined in a number of ways.
Eurocurrency is currency held outside the control of the monetary authorities of the country where the currency originates
or
bank deposits in currency not of the country in which the bank holding them is located
or
currency held on deposit outside its country of origin.
If a UK resident had a deposit in a UK bank in any currency other than sterling, this would be an example of Eurocurrency.
Thus a company holding US$ on deposit in London would represent a Eurocurrency deposit.
The qualification of resident (company or person), coupled with UK bank are the combination which determines the definition of Eurocurrency.
By UK bank is meant any bank within the UK — it does not matter whether ownership is foreign or not, it could be an American or Japanese bank, or any other ‘nationality’, including British.
Location in the UK is what counts, in the example cited.
Equally, of course a sterling deposit held by a French resident in Paris would also constitute Eurocurrency.
The term ‘Euro’ does not confine the Eurocurrency market exclusively to Europe.
It is now a global market, with the main Eurocurrency centres in London, New York, Paris, Luxembourg, Canada, Singapore, Hong Kong, Tokyo, Bahrain and Nassau.
The term derives from the origin of the market in European financial centres, especially that of London.
The term ‘off-shore’ is sometimes used as an alternative, but as this has a meaning in other contexts the term Eurocurrency is the one which has generally stuck and most Eurocurrency transactions continue to be in Europe.
Terms Eurodollar, Eurosterling and so on are also often used, especially Eurodollar.
The latter is quite frequently used synonymously with Eurocurrency.
So long as the correct conditions are satisfied any currency can be used with the prefix Euro.
Occasionally Asian dollars are used to describe US$ held in the Asian financial centres.
The term International Banking Market also appears as a classification in many statistical tables.
This market constitutes the Eurocurrency market plus deposits in domestic and foreign currency held by non-residents.
Examples would be an American resident holding a deposit in London in sterling or any other currency, including his own US$.
Therefore it includes Traditional Foreign banking activity.
It should be appreciated that currencies deposited and lent in Eurocurrency are no different from those deposited and lent via domestic banks — it is the location of the deposit or lending which differs.
The Eurodollars which are lent are indistinguishable from domestic dollars which are lent, the source is merely different.
If a  large sum of Eurodollars is borrowed and then used in a transaction, the recipient of the dollars does not see that they are Eurodollars rather than‘domestic’ US$.
Euromarkets are mainly wholesale in that large sums are lent or deposited.
The main operators are commercial and central banks, large companies, institutional investors and a few wealthy individuals.
10.1 UNDERSTANDING EUROCURRENCY
It is helpful to understand how money is transferred from one country to another and the bank accounting procedures which accompany such transfers if the concept of Eurocurrency is to be fully understood.
If, as an example, an importer of goods in the UK needs to pay for goods purchased from the USA, the importer will have to send the money to the USA.
At one level bank notes could be sent in a parcel to the American exporter.
This would be somewhat inefficient and unusual.
Imagine that the payment were to be in US dollars.
This would mean that a supply of dollar bills would need to be available at UK banks.
Where would they come from?— the US is the sole source.
A constant stream of US dollar notes would need to be sent from America, only to be sent back a little at a time in individual parcels as above.
The same wasted effort and security risk would apply if the UK importer in our example were to pay in sterling.
Plenty of sterling notes in the UK!
Sterling notes in payment would be sent in a parcel to America, only to be exchanged in US banks for dollars and sent back to the UK again.
Yet a UK importer would still prefer to send the payment for the goods to America, either in US dollars or sterling (or in any other agreed currency for that matter).
So how is this achieved?
Banks do not aggregate customers' payments and send parcels of bank notes abroad on their behalf either!
However, they will still refer to remitting or sending money abroad on behalf of their customers.
A simple insight is to remember that money principally takes the form of bank deposits, without the existence of any other physical form to somehow ‘back-up’ the deposit.
The record of the deposit in the bank is all there is.
Money is often telexed or cabled abroad, or nowadays ‘sent’ via computer systems known as SWIFT.
Take the example of telexing money abroad, or receiving it.
A telex is only a message sent electronically along a communications cable and translated into type on a piece of paper at the receiving end.
Money, in the form of bank notes, does not travel along the cable as well!
The telex message is just that — a message, which advises details of the accounting procedures necessary to change bank deposit records and at the same time gives the authorisation to make the changes.
Bank accounts known as NOSTRO and VOSTRO accounts are used along with mirror accounts which record balances in the former.
They reflect money balances and just as a mirror image shows everything literally as a mirror image, everything is the opposite way round, so too are the balances in the mirror accounts in relation to the balances in the NOSTRO and VOSTRO accounts.
(For example if a UK bank has a credit balance in its NOSTRO account, this will be ‘reflected’ by a debit balance in the mirror account of the same value).
Given below is a simple worked example of a UK importer sending a payment of $10 000 to the supplier of goods in the USA.
The payment will be handled by the importer's and the US exporter's banks on their behalf, using the computerised SWIFT system.
This system takes care of both the necessary accounting and authorising messages.
UK importer authorises his bank in UK to pay $10 000 to US exporter as named beneficiary via named US bank.
UK bank debits their customer's account by sterling equivalent of $10 000 (or if the customer has a US$ account this might be debited instead).
At this point it is necessary to know that the UK bank will have a US$ account with their ‘correspondent’ bank in the US.
The money in this account is the property of the bank, it is their money.
The UK bank will call this account their NOSTRO account.
They will be able to say it is ‘our’ money.
(NOSTRO equals ‘ours’ in Latin).
Using the SWIFT system a message will be sent to the US bank by the UK bank.
It will contain two instructions or  authorisations.
It will authorise that $10 000 be debited from their NOSTRO account and that this money in turn be credited to the beneficiary, the US exporter.
The US exporter has now been paid, using money from the UK bank's NOSTRO account.
It may appear that the UK bank has now given away $10 000 of its own money, the money really is held in the name of the UK bank.
It should, however, be remembered that the UK bank had earlier debited the UK importer with an equal amount of value.
Profit will be made by charging commission.
Like any prudent business the UK bank will wish to keep a record of what it in turn has on deposit in its account with the US bank.
This accounting record is the mirror account.
A summary of the total is as follows:
US dollars build up in the UK bank's NOSTRO account when US importers pay UK exporters in US$ (see next example) or when the UK bank buys in US$ in the foreign exchange market.
Example of US importer paying UK exporter $10 000.
In this case the message sent on the SWIFT system from the US bank to the UK bank is that your (NOSTRO) account has been credited by us with $10 000, in return pass on this amount to the named beneficiary, the UK exporter.
(N.B. That from the US bank's point of view they will refer to the account as ‘your’ account when communicating with the UK  bank.
To the US bank this same account is therefore a VOSTRO = Latin, your account).
On reflection it should be possible to see that all sterling remittances and receipts to and from abroad will be transacted using sterling accounts in UK banks which are the property of banks located abroad.
To UK banks they will be VOSTRO accounts, the same accounts to non UK banks will be NOSTRO accounts.
(If  say something is ‘yours’ you will say of the same thing that it is ‘ours’when you refer to it).
Since the abolition of exchange controls in the UK in October 1979 it has been possible for residents of the UK to hold foreign currency on account if they so wish.
This currency could be accumulated by holding, for example, the proceeds of foreign trade sold for foreign currency.
It might be held so that this currency in turn could be used at a later date to make foreign purchases of goods or services, a method often used to hedge exchange risk.
If such deposits were aggregated in all UK banks, this would represent the total of Eurocurrency within the UK.
If similar deposits were aggregated in all countries then this would represent the total of all Eurocurrency deposits.
This corresponds to the second and third of the definitions of eurocurrency given earlier in the chapter:
bank deposits in currency not of the country in which the bank holding them is located.
currency held on deposit outside its country of origin.
We will get a sense of the first definition given earlier as the chapter proceeds.
10.2 EUROCURRENCY AND CREDIT CREATION
A further concept concerning Eurocurrency will now be introduced.
It is that the sum of currency deposits held outside their country of origin far exceed the sum of the NOSTRO/VOSTRO accounts to which they nominally correspond.
That is to say it might be possible, as an example, to find that a particular non-US bank held deposits in a NOSTRO account in the US to the value of  $1m.
If in turn the non-US bank aggregated the value of all US$ claims on it, that is the value of all US$ deposits with it, the value of all the US$ claims would far exceed the value of its US$ NOSTRO account in the US.
In general terms, Eurodollar deposits in the UK, for example, far exceed the corresponding dollar claims on American banks which UK banks have.
That this is possible is due to the process of credit creation outside the country where the currency originates.
An example should demonstrate.
The first Eurocurrency deposits were created when, for example, a depositor of US$ in an American bank transferred those funds to a UK bank in London.
The depositor now had a claim on the London bank and in turn the London bank had a claim on a bank in America.
Both claims were in US$ and were equal.
The credit creation process can now begin, creating dollars outside America, exceeding the claims on American banks.
That is, Eurodollars can be created as opposed to ‘domestic’ dollars.
London bank has $1m deposit from customer.
London bank has in turn $1m deposit with US bank.
London bank now lends out dollars.
Dollars are spent and re-deposited in London either same or other bank (example uses different bank).
Total deposits in London now exceed the original size of deposits in America.
It may help to follow the process through the relevant NOSTRO accounts.
Bank A in London has customer with $1m deposit
Bank A in turn has $1m on deposit in NOSTRO account in US bank.
Bank A lends $500 000.
This $500 000 is spent buying oil from Mexico.
Oil supplier re-deposits funds in Bank B in London.
Bank A, via SWIFT network, authorises US bank holding NOSTRO account to debit it $500 000 and credit the NOSTRO account of Bank B $500 000.
Bank B credits oil supplier with deposit of $500 000.
Total deposits in London $1.5m
Total deposits in NOSTRO accounts in US $1m.
Eurodollars have been created.
Dollars have been used to make purchases outside of America, independent of any aggregate impact on the US money supply.
Ownership of the dollars in the US has changed from Bank A to Bank B with regard to the $500 000, but the total remains the same.
The normal process of money creation is taking place within the banking system.
Banks outside America do not need to keep in their NOSTRO accounts a sum equal to their deposits.
A useful way to understand this is to remember that in a domestic context UK banks do not need to keep operational balances at the Bank of England equal to the total value of their deposits, just in case they are withdrawn.
Many deposits end up being re-deposited either in the same bank or another bank in the system.
Much inter-bank lending in Eurocurrency takes place and accounts for much of the business.
Eurocurrency business is in very substantial sums and also often involves governmental or governmental agency transactions.
A distinction can thus be made between ordinary ‘domestic’ dollars — those used for transactions with the US — and Eurodollars.
Eurodollars have an existence outside the US and can be used to make purchases, denominated in US$, outside the US.
They are still US$, the distinction is between Euro and domestic.
Eurodollars can be used to cover transactions inside the US, at which point they cease to be Eurodollars and revert to being ordinary, domestic US$ again.
When Eurodollars revert to domestic dollars it is here that the stock of Eurodollars diminishes.
Again a view of the NOSTRO accounts should assist understanding:
UK resident has US$ on deposit in UK bank in London and wishes to buy goods in America denominated in US$.
UK bank authorises US bank to debit their NOSTRO account with the relevant sum of money and pay American beneficiary who has supplied goods to depositor in London.
There are two important points to note from this.
The first is the one already made and the purpose of the example, it is that the stock of Eurocurrency has now reduced — no dollars have been re-deposited outside the US.
The second is that there is now an impact upon the US domestic money supply.
The US money supply has now increased.
The beneficiary's account is now larger and there has been no corresponding decrease in another domestic bank account to match it, as would have been the case had the transaction been purely domestic, and thus not created further credit.
It is this which has led some commentators to believe that the Eurocurrency market could create inflation within the US economy should large sums of Eurodollars be spent in the US by transformation, as it were, into domestic dollars.
The fear is unfounded and can be eased by remembering firstly that the existence of sums of US$ in NOSTRO accounts is only possible because there has been a transfer into them from the US money stock.
As NOSTRO accounts increase, they do so at the expense of US domestic bank accounts.
As the NOSTRO accounts rise they reduce the US domestic money stock.
As they fall, as in the example given, they merely replace what was lost in an earlier time period.
Thus there is no net loss or gain over the period of time.
It is not possible for all the Eurodollars in existence to be spent within the US.
Reference to the first reason given above provides part of the answer.
The dollars that could be spent equal the amounts held in NOSTRO accounts which are but a small fraction of total Eurodollars.
Secondly, it must be remembered what would happen in any banking institution should depositors start withdrawing funds which did not end up being re-deposited within the system.
This is what is effectively happening in the scenario posed.
Loans would be called in or not be renewed when repaid.
The whole credit creation process would go into reverse so that the amount of Eurocurrency would drastically reduce and therefore not be totally available for spending within the US.
As stated earlier, expenditure could only equal the value of NOSTRO accounts, the size of which only  equal withdrawals from the US money supply in earlier time periods in any case.
10.3 EUROCURRENCY STATISTICS
Difficulties in interpreting data on Eurocurrency often lead to problems in assessing the market's economic influence.
The main sources of data are the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) and studies published by Morgan Guaranty in ‘World Financial Markets’.
An examination of the BEQB will show UK bank activity in the Euromarkets from data on currency assets and liabilities.
It also reproduces a summary of BIS data.
Much data is published on the wider concept of the International Banking Market in recognition that total external activity of the banking system is important for macro economic concerns and not just that in foreign currency.
10.4 PATTERN OF ACTIVITY IN THE EUROCURRENCY MARKET
An examination of the figures shows that the market began in the late 1950's.
During the 1960's there was slow growth with more rapid growth during the early 1970's.
From the mid 1970's to the mid 1980's there was very rapid growth.
Since the mid-1980's there has been little or no growth.
A number of reasons are often given for the origin and growth of the Euromarket, they include the following:
1.
Eastern block deposits
2.
Large US current account deficits.
3.
US dollar and other currency convertability.
4.
Regulation Q of the US banking system.
5.
OPEC surpluses on current account.
6.
Central Bank regulation of domestic markets.
7.
Lack of regulation of Euromarkets by Central banks.
An alteration in circumstances concerning 4–7 of the above reasons has brought about the situation found since the mid 1980's, when there has been a lack of growth.
1.
Eastern block deposits
A view often quoted of the origin of the Eurocurrency market is that of East European banks, due to the cold war, wishing to have their dollar balances held in London, rather than in the US.
In this way such balances would be outside the control of the monetary authorities in the US (see first definition offered of Eurocurrency earlier in the chapter).
The balances in London would of course have their counterpart in the US, but would be in the name of the London bank, not that of the East European bank.
Therefore, should cold war tension heighten, it would not be possible for the US authorities to place a moratorium upon the use of such dollar balances.
Had they been on deposit in US domestic banks, then naturally such a course of action would be open to them.
Since then there have been instances concerning dollars held in London by Iran, contrasted with deposits held in the US which illustrate the point well.
Although attempts were made to freeze activity on accounts in London by the US authorities, these were resisted.
The earliest deposits of Eurodollars seem to have been those in the Moscow Narodny Bank in London and that of another USSR owned bank in Paris.
While this may be so, it would be insufficient in itself to explain the growth of the market.
There must have been other factors present to account for the size of deposits created by the credit multiplier effect described earlier.
2.
Large US current account deficits
These occurred during the latter part of the 1950's.
US current account deficits meant an outflow of US dollars to pay for the goods and services purchased abroad that created the deficit.
US dollars thus became owned by the exporters to the US.
Foreign holdings of US dollars increased the role of the US as a vehicle and reserve currency.
In short large sums of US dollars came to be held on deposit outside the US.
That they should be held outside the US was for reasons which follow.
3.
US Dollar and Other Currency Convertibility
In 1957 UK authorities placed restrictions on the use of sterling outside the UK in relation to financing.
This reinforced the use of the US dollar described in 2 above, as it filled the vacuum created.
UK banks thus began to take dollar deposits to on lend in place of the restricted use of sterling.
In 1958 the foreign exchange restrictions left over from the immediate post-war period were eased in many countries in Western Europe.
This meant that West European currencies when paid to non-Western Europeans for goods and services imported from them could now be freely converted.
This created a more active market in foreign exchange and facilitated the use of the US$ for financing balance of payments purposes.
In turn this encouraged dollar lending outside the US, creating further Eurodollars.
To a much lesser extent the process also applied to  Deutschmarks , Swiss Francs and sterling itself later on.
The dollar still remains the most important Eurocurrency, due to the very large size of the US economy.
US dollar deposits also became large as a result of another factor:
4.
Large OPEC Surpluses
These dollar deposits became larger as the price of oil, priced in US$, rose during the early and late 1970's.
Eurodollar deposits, on lent, became the means by which the OPEC surpluses were re-cycled back to deficit countries to enable such deficits to be financed.
The influence of such deposits on Eurocurrency growth should perhaps not be over-stated.
Absence of such deposits in the late 1980s has not seen a decline in Eurocurrency.
5.
Regulation Q of the US Banking System
This regulation prevented US banks located in the US, but not abroad, from paying interest on deposits above a given rate.
When this given rate was below rates in the Euromarket, then funds would flow to the Euromarket.
This situation would occur in circumstances as in the late 1960s, when due to a credit squeeze, interest rates rose.
Due to the loss of domestic deposits at that  time, US banks sourced their deposits from their foreign branches which had ‘sufficient’ Euro-deposits due to the interest rate effect.
In fact this led the US authorities to limit borrowing in this way.
A separate, but similar effect occurred when quantitative controls were introduced on UK domestic lending during 1969 and 1970.
In this instance UK firms borrowed unrestricted sterling and other currencies abroad to circumvent the controls.
In response the authorities had to place restrictions on capital imports.
6.
Central Bank Regulation of Domestic Markets
Specific examples of such regulation are given in 5 above.
As a general point banks in many countries were highly regulated in relation to deposits and lending conducted in their own domestic currency.
In relation to US banks they had to hold non-interest bearing reserve balances related to the size of their deposits, as did German banks in the Federal Republic.
UK banks were subject to special and supplementary deposits at the Bank of England during the period of the ‘corset’.
These regulations constitute a cost in that they prevent a larger number of deposits than would otherwise be the case, from being on lent.
They also mean that lending rates, due to the higher cost must be higher and deposit rates must be lower than they would be in the Euromarkets.
In other words, margins were much lower in the Euromarkets than in domestic markets due to:
7.
Lack of Regulation of Euromarkets by Central Banks
Larger proportions of deposits could be on lent, thus the credit creation multiplier could be larger, creating Eurocurrency growth.
Naturally deposits would be attracted at higher rates than the equivalent domestic deposit rates and demand for lending would increase at lower rates.
Interest rates in both markets would still, it should be noted, be consistent with one another.
If rates were to move up or down they would do so in both markets.
Only the margin or spread would be different.
The slow down in the rate of growth in the Eurocurrency market-growth that has been just about static since the early 1980's — can perhaps be attributed to the fact that domestic markets have become increasingly deregulated, while the foreign currency activities of domestic banks have become increasingly regulated by domestic central banks.
This has enabled domestic markets to compete on a much more equal footing.
If reserve requirements and capital adequacy rules apply equally to domestic and foreign currency deposits and lending then spreads between bid and offer rates will tend to become the same.
Indeed the process of arbitrage between the two markets tends to ensure that this is the case.
In this way it can perhaps be argued that the underlying rationale for the existence of the Eurocurrency market has been somewhat undermined, hence the classification by the BIS statistics to encompass the whole International Banking Market, of which the Euromarket is a part.
The former of course includes lending or deposits in domestic currency by non-residents and therefore strictly not ‘Euro’.
10.5 EUROCURRENCY INTEREST RATES AND FORWARD EXCHANGE RATES
Due to the presence of foreign exchange risk, or simply exchange or currency risk as it is often described, many exporters and importers use the forward market to hedge such risks and a link exists between Eurocurrency interest rates and the forward exchange rate.
Currency risk is the risk that one currency will change its value (rate) in relation to another such that unexpected losses or gains are made.
As an example an exporter might decide to quote today a price to a German importer and the price to be quoted is DM100 000 for the consignment of goods in question.
This DM price was arrived at by using the current spot rate of £1=DM2.75.
This gives a sterling value, at this rate of £36,363.64 and is of course the expected return.
However, it may take the German buyer say one month to decide to buy; delivery may take a further month and a credit period of a further month may be agreed.
Thus between the date of quote and date of actually receiving the Deutschmarks three months will have elapsed.
Now when the exporter exchanges the Deutschmarks for sterling the rate might well be £1=DM2.95 giving a rate of return of £33 898.31 only, £2465.33 less than expected, or alternatively just below 7 per cent less than expected.
This 7 per cent might well represent the whole or a substantial proportion of the expected profit on the transaction.
Naturally, the rate may have moved in the exporter's favour instead of against.
The point is, however, that neither the exporter, nor anyone else, can predict movements of exchange rates.
Uncertain domestic currency values in instances like this are always going to be present.
To charge the German buyer a sterling value is to pass the risk on to him, making a sale less likely, especially under highly competitive conditions.
To cover the ‘open’ position described above, the position can be ‘covered’or ‘hedged’by the exporter entering into a forward contract to sell the Deutschmarks at an agreed rate, at a time to coincide with their expected receipt.
This agreed rate, the forward rate of exchange, is not someone's guess as to what the spot rate will be in the future.
As outlined previously the forward rate is connected to Eurocurrency interest rates.
The bank with which the exporter makes the forward contract must itself hedge its position, otherwise it too will be exposed to currency risk.
(It does not do this by entering into a forward contract with another party, the risk would always end up somewhere!)
Firstly, the bank can match its position.
It will be entering into contracts to both buy and sell specific currencies on or between specific dates.
Therefore a certain amount of matching can always take place: contracts to buy can always be matched  with contracts to sell.
The currency obtained when they buy can be used to sell.
However, there will always in practice be an unmatched position.
Imagine that they have entered into contracts to buy US$1m on September 30th and entered into contracts to sell $1.5m on the same date.
Clearly US$0.5m is unmatched — the bank has an obligation to sell US$0.5m more than it will have available.
It can ensure that this sum is available when required by exchanging sterling today, when the contracts were entered into, at today's spot rate.
These dollars can then be placed on deposit and earn interest.
The dollars exchanged at spot plus the accrued interest should equal the sum required in the future, US$0.5m.
The question now arises — has it cost the bank or benefited the bank to do this — that is, would a greater return have been available by placing the sterling sum on deposit instead of the US$?
To answer this question reference has to be made to the prevailing interest rates in the Euromarkets, for this is where the deposits would be made.
If sterling were at higher interest rates than the US$, then clearly this represents a cost to the bank in that it has foregone a return in sterling better than that available in US$, so that exchange risk can be hedged in the way described.
This cost represents the difference between sterling interest rates and US$ interest rates in the Eurocurrency market.
A calculation can be made to pass such costs (or benefits) onto all who enter into the forward contracts by an adjustment to the prevailing spot rate to give a forward rate.
In the example quoted, where higher rates of interest were available in sterling, compared with the US$, then the forward rate would be lower than the spot on the day the contracts were entered into.
The margins applied to the spot rate would be said to be at a premium, premium because it makes the US$ more expensive in terms of sterling to enable the cost to be passed on.
From this it can be seen that the rate of exchange must fall to make the US$ more expensive.
Premiums are therefore deducted from the spot rate.
Were matters the other way round, with sterling at lower interest rates than the US$, then the US$ would need to be quoted at a discount.
The basic principle is therefore:
forward exchange rates are determined by interest rate differentials in the Eurocurrency market.
It should also be possible to visualise matters from the opposite perspective in that forward rates can determine the interest rates.
In fact there is a constant interaction between the two in that both are markets where arbitrage ensures that forward rates and Eurocurrency interest rates are kept in alignment.
The following example illustrates this process.
Suppose that interest rates in Italy are higher by 2 per cent than in the UK and at the same time the necessary discount applied to the spot rate were only 1 per cent.
This would enable investors currently holding sterling to exchange into lire and place the resulting lire on deposit for 2 per cent extra.
However, it must be remembered that to do this of itself would incur an exchange risk.
If the investor were to return to sterling at some time in the future, the rate of exchange might be such that the extra interest earned would be completely eroded away.
The risk that this might occur is why in general terms ‘everybody’ does not do this when interest rates are positioned in this way.
Knowing that it is possible to hedge by entering into a forward contract therefore seems to be the thing to do, in conjunction with the proposal just outlined.
That is, exchange sterling to put lire on deposit.
The forward contract would mature at the time when it was proposed to change back into sterling from lire.
If the discount applied to the lire were only 1 per cent as suggested above, then clearly it would be possible to gain over all by earning an extra 2 per cent on the lire deposit and accept that this would be reduced by 1 per cent as the cost of forward cover, making a 1 per cent gain overall in comparison with staying in sterling and importantly be fully hedged.
However, the above situation would tend to move both interest rate differentials and cost of cover together, so that they equalled one another.
(This is a further reason why such arbitrage opportunities are available only rarely).
In this instance interest rate and cost of forward cover parity would be restored by the following two processes:
1.
There would be an increase in demand for lire so that the lire deposit could be made.
This would make the spot rate fall and thus adjust the difference between spot rate and forward rate such that the cost of forward cover would increase.
This effect would be further reinforced by the increase in demand for forward cover, thus pushing up its  cost.
In these two ways the cost of cover would rise to approach that of the interest advantage.
2.
At the same time that the effects in 1.
were being experienced, there would also be an interest rate effect.
Increased deposits would push deposit rates down.
The combined effect of the two should ensure that cost of forward cover, as reflected by the rates, fluctuates closely around the interest rate differential of the currencies concerned in the Euromarkets.
THE STOCK EXCHANGE
11.0 INTRODUCTION
The Stock Exchange has undergone considerable change in the last decade, and this chapter attempts to analyse those changes with reference to the role of the Stock Exchange and overall efficiency.
Topical subjects (particularly for the media) such as the cases of insider dealing uncovered, supervision of the Stock Exchange, and the crash of 1987 are all investigated.
11.1 THE ROLE OF THE STOCK EXCHANGE — PRIMARY AND SECONDARY MARKETS
The London International Stock Exchange (ISE) can, like all stock markets, be divided into two sections, the primary market and the secondary market.
The primary market is involved with the raising of new financial claims, whereas the secondary market is involved with the buying and selling of ‘second-hand’ or already existing financial claims.
The secondary market is by far the larger of the two markets.
While the functions of the primary and secondary markets differ it is no accident that the financial institutions participating in them are often the same, because an efficient secondary market, in which existing securities can be bought or sold easily, contributes in several important ways to the strength of the primary market.
The secondary market provides investors with liquidity, the ability to turn securities into cash if required, which makes it reasonable for many savers to hold long-term assets.
Increased liquidity for investors provided by the Stock Exchange means that  investors will accept lower returns for long-term investments than if the exchange did not exist.
The Stock Exchange thus reduces the cost of capital to companies.
The Stock Exchange is an information centre.
Companies are constantly being valued by investors and analysts.
The Stock Exchange disseminates information, and reflects it in the share price.
Profitable companies will be valued highly, and this should be reflected in the share price, and in the terms on which the company can raise funds.
The cost or price of borrowing or lending is thus set in the capital market.
As capital is a scarce resource, it is important that information on a company gives a fair and accurate view of its prospects, such that resources (capital) are allocated efficiently.
The secondary market helps new issues get underway in the primary market and therefore provides capital for growing companies.
The secondary market helps the primary market in the pricing of new issues.
The price of a firm's shares will depend upon the prices of similar securities at the time the issue is made.
An active secondary market in which shareholders who have access to information about the company and are able to deal freely, will lead to share prices accurately reflecting the companies prospects and in turn the accurate pricing of new issues.
This continuous appraisal helps to determine the prices at which securities are traded and makes it much easier for the institutional investors to reach a swift decision when they are invited to subscribe to or underwrite a new issue.
In the absence of the secondary market the time required to raise new capital would be prolonged and the costs involved increased.
The secondary market contributes to the primary market by enabling a wide range of institutions to participate in underwriting new issues.
The underwriter has to take up shares if called upon to do so, and for this has to be able to obtain the necessary funds.
While most institutions can rely on borrowing for short periods, the risk associated with underwriting would be greatly increased if institutions were unable to dispose of their existing assets quickly to provide cash (or repay short-term borrowing) should it prove necessary.
The stock market also provides a price guide to the value of a company that can be used for transferral of ownership in the form of a takeover.
Market capitalisation of domestic equities listed throughout the world stood at £6 551 billion in 1989, with European stock exchanges representing 23.1 per cent of the market capitalisation, and the ISE accounting for 30 per cent of European domestic equity capitalisation (the largest proportion of any European country).
The ISE is the foremost market in international equities with over 65 per cent of trades.
It also has the largest number of overseas companies listed.
The ISE has three tiers, the main market (Official List) of over 2000 domestic companies with a market value of approximately £500 billion; the Unlisted Securities Market (USM) established in 1980 to allow smaller companies that might find the costs of full listing prohibitive the chance to raise capital, with over 450 companies valued at around £9 billion; and around seventy companies on the Third market with capitalisation of £O.6 billion.
The Third market closed however at the end of 1990.
A variety of EC directives have meant that the listing requirements for the Third market are now very similar to those of the USM and there was no clear rationale for them to be kept separate.
Some companies will transfer from the Third market to the USM, some will go to the over-the-counter market (OTC), which is an informal market that consists of trading in small business shares by a group of brokers and licensed dealers to the public.
11.2 BIG BANG
Concern had been voiced for some time by the Office of Fair Trading (OFT) as to the restrictive practices maintained by the Stock Exchange:
1.
the operation of the single capacity system,
2.
prohibitive membership policies creating barriers to entry to both domestic and foreign companies, and hence reduced competition in the market.
3.
minimum commissions offered by brokers which limited price competition.
With the system of single capacity, jobbers were ‘principals’ and dealt only with brokers, not the general public.
They made their  profits through the spread between their buying and selling prices.
Conversely, brokers could not act as jobbers (and thus had ‘single’ capacity) and their role was to find the best price from the jobbers for their customers.
Single capacity was supposed to reduce conflicts of interest as brokers found the best prices from jobbers for their clients and jobbers competed amongst each other to produce fair prices.
It was also thought that jobbers would stabilise prices through their short-term speculative activities.
One of the main problems of the single capacity system was that there were pockets of less actively traded shares that jobbers refused to make a market in.
For some shares therefore the deals were often done on a matched basis.
One of the problems of some shares being illiquid is that they may be incorrectly priced (i.e. the market may exhibit pockets of inefficiency).
Jobbers were supposed to quote buy and sell prices without knowing whether or not the brokers wished to buy or sell (i.e. the direction of the deal).
The 1970s and 1980s saw large increases in turnover and in the average size of transaction, which meant greater risks for the jobbers who often wanted to know the direction of the deal before quoting a price.
The 1970s and 1980s also saw the rise of institutional shareholders who often acted on similar information and hence took similar buy or sell decisions.
Jobbers often faced one-way markets in which they would either have to buy a greater number of shares than they had sold (go ‘long’) or they had bought (go ‘short’).
Both these positions entail a great deal of risk; going long produces the possibility of capital losses on the shares held, going short produces the possibility that the jobber may have to buy in the shares at a future date at expensive prices.
It was felt by many that jobbers were too small and hence under-capitalised in relation to the above risks, and that an injection of capital was needed.
The most obvious way of doing this was to allow outside membership.
Under the old Stock Exchange system, membership was through personal partnerships, generally with low capitalisation.
Low capitalisation tended to be a factor in stifling competition, as firms were not willing to compete on price terms if they did not have the capital backing.
Competition was restricted by member firms by maintaining a minimum commission system.
Some more far-sighted members feared that the restrictive practices of the ISE meant that business was being lost to overseas exchanges, and changes were required.
Stock Exchange members were also concerned that their restrictive practices were leading to a loss of business in international equities, with over 60 per cent of business being transacted outside the exchange.
Particularly important were American Depository Receipts (ADRs) whereby British shares can be traded by US investors without paying British Stamp Duty, and which completely by-passed the ISE.
In 1976 the ISE was referred to the Restrictive Practices Court.
The ISE abolished minimum commissions at the end of 1986 in a deal with the Government in return for withdrawing the referral to the Restrictive Practices Court.
There were three main changes in the ISE in the Big Bang:
1.
Corporate members (both domestic and foreign) were admitted to the Stock Exchange.
2.
Abolition of minimum commissions.
3.
Abolition of single capacity (dual capacity introduced).
Many banks were keen to move into Stock Exchange activities in order to capture some of the business they were losing through disintermediation.
By 1985 nearly all the main broking firms and jobbers had linked up with financial institutions, both domestic and foreign.
Under dual capacity a member firm can act as both agent and principal whereas previously jobbers and brokers were separated.
Instead of jobbers quoting buy and sell prices verbally on the market floor, quotes are now displayed electronically on screens by ‘market makers’.
Market makers quote continuous two-way prices for shares in which they deal.
There were fears that the advent of dual capacity would produce conflicts of interest, and certain technical changes were made to the mechanics of trading.
A trade can only be carried out within one firm if the market maker of that firm offers a price at least as good or better than that offered on the general market.
This stops a firm from channelling its business through its own market makers.
There is also continuous recording of all deals so that they can be checked if necessary.
Equity inter-dealer brokers provide a service for market makers to deal with each other, largely to keep large transactions between market makers hidden from the market by non-disclosure of the participants names.
Large integrated securities houses were thought to be necessary as an average size broker without a market-maker could feasibly find itself advising on equities, yet the business of transactions could easily be carried out elsewhere.
Medium sized firms would thus have difficulty keeping institutional investors' business.
11.3 PERFORMANCE SINCE BIG BANG: ISSUE COSTS
The structure, conduct and performance of the ISE are of importance because they affect the degree of competition in the market, and hence on the costs to investors and borrowers.
It must be recognised that if the Stock Exchange is perceived as being an expensive form of raising finance and/or of investing relative to other forms (or relative to overseas stock markets) then the Exchange is likely to lose business.
Moreover, any monopoly tendencies in the market will tend to increase transactions costs and lead to an inefficient mechanism of channelling funds from savers to borrowers.
The costs of a new issue provide a good guide to the advantages of the Stock Exchange and to whether or not it is an efficient method of raising funds for firms in terms of costs.
The two principal methods of flotation (Initial Public Offer as opposed to a further offer or rights issue) on the ISE are through (i) an offer for sale or (ii) a placing, although within these main methods there are some technical variations.
In an offer for sale a fixed price is set for the shares to be offered to the public by an issuing house for the company concerned.
The issuing house will underwrite the issue (i.e. agree to buy up any unsold shares) for a fee, and will generally pass on some of the risk to sub-underwriters, who are usually large institutional investors.
In this way the company is guaranteed that its shares will be sold at a certain price, whatever the prevailing market conditions.
In an offer for sale by tender, there is no fixed issue price, but investors are invited to bid or ‘tender’ prices for the shares.
A final price (striking price) is chosen at which all the shares will be sold (even  those tendering higher prices for the shares will only have to pay the striking price).
In a placing the issuing house buys the shares from the issuing company, and ‘places’ them with investors, mainly institutional investors (although if the placing is for more than £2 million, then a quarter of the issue has to be sold to the public).
Privatisations, because of the large size of funds involved, have tended to include elements of both offer for sale and placings.
Table 11.1 shows that £24 billion of equity has been raised (both new equity and to existing shareholders) between 1985 — 1989, the majority in privatisations with £16.6 billion, with the largest single method being offer for sale at £5.8 billion.
Table 11.1 Total Sums raised via Initial Public Offers (£m)
Placings were the most popular method of issue over 1985–89, although the average size at £6m was considerably smaller than offers for sale and tenders at £62.3 and £32.8 million respectively, reflecting the fact that smaller companies tend to go for placings as  they tend to be cheaper (see Table 11.2) and placings have also become more popular as a result of the requirements for the size of company using a placing being relaxed after Big Bang.
Table 11.2 Initial Public Offers 1985–9
Table 11.3 Direct Costs of Initial Public Offers (£m)
For small issues placings tend to be cheaper and faster than offers for sale,(about 11 ½ per cent of the funds raised for less than £5m as opposed to 14 per cent for offers for sale) largely as a result of savings in advertising and preparing an offer document, and  because of underwriting costs in offers for sale at about 2 per cent of funds raised.
It is also important to recognise that indirect costs of issue exist in terms of the final issue price being below what the market might have been willing to pay for all of the shares (and hence the company receiving less funds than it might otherwise have done).
Research has shown that in general, discounts are higher in placings than offers for sale, and that the timing of issue is important, with 1987 being a ‘hot’ issue period when share prices rose extremely fast and when discounts were high (around 30 per cent at times).
Indeed, the large number of placings and the large discounts in that year may have been the reason as to why placings have had higher discounts than offers for sale, on average.
Table 11.4 Admission Requirements to ISE Markets
Companies can of course sell their shares directly to the public but this is likely to prove a costly and risky exercise.
How are the  shares to be distributed?
What if they are not all sold?
The responsibility of the issuing house (usually one of the main merchant banks, a member of the Accepting Houses Association) is to ensure all the funds are raised, and as cheaply and efficiently as possible, with a minimum degree of risk to the company.
The ISE at the time of writing is attempting to implement changes in the way in which shares are floated.
Criticisms have been made that the present system excludes private shareholders.
Under the new arrangements there would be an ‘intermediaries offer’ to increase the distribution of new shares by giving private clients priority when they applied for the 25 per cent of the issue that is not distributed by the sponsor in a placing.
These changes are likely to be in place in 1991.
11.4 PERFORMANCE SINCE BIG BANG: BREADTH AND DEPTH
The ‘quality’ of a stock market can be measured according to‘depth’and ‘breadth’.
Depth relates to the ability to absorb large buy and sell orders with only small movements in price, i.e. for share prices to fluctuate only marginally as a result of large trades.
‘Breadth’ relates to the composition of investors and their expectations, and a market is said to have breadth if there is a variety of investors with different expectations as to future prices.
It has recently been recognised that there have been considerable liquidity problems both before and after Big Bang for some of the smaller companies listed on the ISE, prompting some calls for a two-tier market.
It is argued that the breadth and depth of the market in small company shares is suffering, particularly as the volume of trading in smaller company shares has dropped since the crash of October 1987 as investors have fled to blue chip shares, and the number of brokers cutting back on their small firms business has increased.
At the present time, the illiquidity of gamma stocks means that it is difficult to make a market in them, and also brokers find that they cannot buy or sell without prices swinging widely in reaction.
Improvement in the gamma stocks' liquidity and in the market mechanisms for smaller shares are required, or firms will leave the 
The Stock Exchange 213
stock market in disillusion.
If gamma shares are not liquid and tradeable, then pricing efficiency will be extremely poor.
Private client broking firms have set up their own trade body in response to fears that the ISE is ignoring small customers in favour of institutional investors and international equities (Association of Private Client Investment Managers and Stockbrokers (APCIMS)).
David Jones of Sharelink has proposed an order-driven system for small value share transactions which would be displayed on investors' TV screens at home instead of on TOPIC.
An order-driven system is one in which prices at which buyers and sellers are prepared to deal are displayed (the existing system is quote driven).
John Redwood, the Corporate Affairs Minister, has supported the idea of a new order-driven market for private investors and smaller companies to complement the ISE.
The ISE is sceptical of these developments, although critics of the ISE argue that it is only interested in large companies and particularly in developing the international equity market at the expense of smaller domestic equities.
The ISE is aiming at creating a Single European Market in the top 200 international equities in cooperation with European exchanges, with one price mechanism (centred in London, the ISE hopes), although plans are at an early stage.
Rival small company market(s) could develop along the above lines and would provide a considerable degree of competition to the ISE.
Any new share market would have to be authorised by the Securities and Investments Board (SIB) as a Recognised Investment Exchange (RIE).
11.5 PERFORMANCE SINCE BIG BANG: SPREADS AND TURNOVER
Operational efficiency within the ISE is reflected in the costs investors incur in carrying out transactions, the main ones being commission to brokers and the spread (the difference between the market makers' buying and selling prices).
Any collusion amongst member firms (implicit or explicit) in relation to commissions is likely to produce operational inefficiencies.
One of the main arguments for Big Bang was that the abolition of the minimum commission system would result in competition and hence a  reduction in commissions and overall transactions costs for investors.
There were some fears however that only a small number of member firms would survive, and the concentration of business amongst a few firms would lead to higher transactions costs and hence lower turnover and liquidity.
It was also feared that the market maker system might be by-passed by large powerful institutional investors doing negotiated deals with member firms who carry out the trades in-house rather than through market-makers.
If this were to occur the pricing efficiency of the market would worsen.
It was also argued that costs for small investors would rise.
The costs of market-making to the investor are reflected in the bid-offer spread (turn), the difference between what the market maker will buy and sell at.
The narrower is this spread, the greater will be the operational efficiency of the market.
With the increased number of market-makers after Big Bang it would be expected that spreads and commissions would fall,
‘In general, a move from oligopoly to competition, from high, cartel-determined charges, commission and rates to fierce competition in rate and price setting should be welcomed’.
Goodhart (1987)
Average rates of commission have tended to fall for all clients, but particularly for institutions (see Figure 11.1).
Although average rates of commission continue to fall, the minimum commission has tended to rise to around £20-£30, compared with about £10 before Big Bang, showing the extent to which the small investor has lost out.
From Figure 11.2 it can be seen that touches, the difference between best bid and best offer price, almost doubled after the crash of 1987.
The touch in Alphas returned to 1987 levels by the end of 1988, although the touches in Betas and Gammas remained somewhat higher than their previous levels.
Touches rose again in response to the mini-crash of October 1989 and are somewhat above touches immediately post Big Bang.
At June 1990, the average spread in Alphas was 1.9 per cent, 5.1 per cent in Betas, and 8.5 per cent in Gammas (Table 11.5).
Figure 11.1 Commission Rates 1980–9
Turnover rose by about 20–30 per cent p.a. between 1980 and mid 1987 although within this period turnover at times fluctuated by as much as 40 per cent year-on-year.
The dramatic fall in turnover can clearly be seen in Figure 11.3, and it is noticeable that turnover had not reached pre-crash levels by the end of 1989.
Table 11.6 shows the entry and exit of market makers in UK equities.
The number of participants leaving the market since  August 1988 (11 firms) with only one firm entering shows the difficult market conditions firms are facing.
Figure 11.2 Average Best Touch 1987–9
Member firms became profitable again in 1989 after heavy losses following the crash of 1987.
Pre-tax profits were £503 million in 1989 (see Table 11.7), although at 16 per cent return on capital employed this is an extremely poor performance.
Table 11.5 Average Spreads
Table 11.6 History of UK Equity Market Makers
Figure 11.3 UK Equity Average Daily Turnover Customer Business 1965–89
Table 11.7 Financial Results of all ISE Member Firms (£m)
11.6 RECENT DEVELOPMENTS: DEALING CHANGES
The ISE's Special Committee on Market Development recommended in July 1990 that the Alpha, Beta and Gamma classifications on SEAQ should be replaced with a new measure called Normal Market Size (NMS) which is calculated by the stock's liquidity and trading volume.
It also recommended that all equity transactions should be published immediately, except those larger than the value of NMS, whereby publication will occur within 90 minutes.
A central limit order system was also proposed (CLOSE).
CLOSE is a limit order system which allows investors to leave orders which are then publicised in the market, e.g. if an investor wanted British Aerospace at £5.00 when the market price was £5.08 the limit order could be left with the investors' broker, and other brokers could see it.
CLOSE allows buy and sell orders to be matched at a price which both parties are seeking.
An investor can wait for a transaction to match their order by placing it within the limit order system.
The aims of the Committee are to improve the quality of the market by reducing dealing costs in small transactions and by greater ‘visibility’ or transparency of all deals.
The old SEAQ classification did not adequately show the liquidity or quality of the shares, and were a poor guide therefore to marketability.
The 90 minute lapse on large trades has been brought in largely because of smaller volumes and because market makers maintained that large trades would be almost impossible with instant publication.
SAEF (SEAQ Automatic Execution Facility) was introduced to speed up small orders in well known shares in 1989.
Small orders for main equities are entered into the SAEF terminal by the broker and the transaction is carried out on the best price available on SEAQ.
11.7 SETTLEMENT PROCEDURES
Problems have tended to occur in the settlement of transactions.
The ISE still has a paper-based system (in contrast to America and Japan which have electronic systems) that at times (e.g. the 1987 bull market) has been close to collapse.
At several times the backlog of unsettled trades has exceeded £5 billion.
Figure 11.4 shows the complicated web of paper transfers that go to make up a transaction.
A computerised paperless system called TAURUS has been suggested.
The implementation of TAURUS (Transfer and Automated Registration of Uncertified Stock) is a computerised share settlement system that should initially be in place for October 1991, with ‘rolling settlement’(a change from the traditional two week account period to a three to five day rolling system) by October 1992.
The objective behind TAURUS is to eliminate the need for share certificates and transfer forms, or ‘dematerialisation’ of the paper-based system.
Shares will be electronically transferred from the sellers account to the new investor's account, accounts being kept with an account controller, probably a broker or bank.
A disadvantage of moving to a rolling system is that investors will not be able to buy and sell shares within the account period without paying, as happens at present.
The rolling system and TAURUS will, however, reduce the settlement delay, and concomitant risks of non-settlement, which were very real in the back-log of unsettled deals after Big Bang.
The objectives of TAURUS are to reduce settlement risks, reduce costs, move towards international settlement, and to boost the Government's desire for wider share ownership (Watson 1990).
To enhance the globalisation of securities markets an international body known as the Group of Thirty has made recommendations to improve clearance and settlement of securities transactions on an international scale.
The problems identified included incompatibility of systems for matching domestic and international transactions, differences in settlement times, no general requirement for settlement to be made in cash, and excessive amounts of paperwork in settlement procedures.
Recommendations included a trade matching system to which all institutional members should be members by 1992, confirmation and matching of trades one day after the transaction, dematerialisation of share certificates, a delivery-against-payment system by 1992, three-day rolling settlement by 1992, and the ability to borrow and lend securities, which helps in breaking a line of unsettled bargains.
These recommendations, if they can be fully implemented, should go some way to increasing the globalisation of securities markets by smoothing out problems in world clearance and settlement systems.
The Stock Exchange has been criticised for anti-competitive practices in relation to market sensitive information.
Sir Gordon Borrie, the Director General of Fair Trading, argued that the ISE had used its privileged position as the collector of information for regulatory purposes to dominate the news market through TOPIC.
The ISE has plans for a regulatory news service which will sell information to other news services, but Sir Gordon has criticised the high costs of the service to outside competitors.
11.8 THE 1987 CRASH AND MARKET EFFICIENCY
It is important for the economy as a whole that the capital market is allocatively efficient, i.e. that ‘scarce’ funds are channelled towards the most productive companies.
The capital market therefore needs to be efficient in terms of accurately pricing the shares of companies according to their future prospects, i.e. the  present value of the future stream of dividends that the companies will produce.
If shares are priced accurately then the market will be allocatively efficient in terms of channelling funds towards those companies that are the most productive.
The share price of a company affects its ability to raise further funds, and is therefore an important element in the cost of capital for a company.
Figure 11.4 Settlement Procedure (stylised)
Is the Stock Market efficient and what are the implications of the crash of 1987 for market efficiency?
The crash was initially started by fears of trade and fiscal deficits in the USA, apparent disagreement over the Louvre agreement, and the announcement of tax changes in the USA that would adversely affect takeovers.
What does this say about efficiency?
Some would argue that the real problem lies in the fact that shares had been overvalued for some time, and that prices were likely to fall, and that the above events provided the impetus.
It would thus appear that shares were incorrectly priced.
The Efficient Market Hypothesis (EMH) relates to pricing efficiency.
The EMH states that an efficient capital market is one in which share prices always fully reflect all publicly available information concerning those securities.
Therefore share prices adjust instantaneously and in an unbiased manner to any piece of new information released to the market.
The EMH can be analysed at three levels.
The ‘weak’ form test suggests that share price data relating to the past contains no information that can be used to earn profits in excess of those produced by a naive buy and hold strategy.
Research has shown that share prices do indeed follow a ‘random walk’, such that future price changes cannot be predicted from past price changes.
The semi-strong form suggests that all publicly available information is fully and instantaneously reflected in share prices.
Research has shown that over long periods of time, the stock market does tend to exhibit semi-strong efficiency.
The strong form of efficiency states that all information, whether publicly available or not, is taken account of in share prices.
The evidence of recent insider dealer scandals refutes the strong form of efficiency.
Thus research tends to show that the Stock Exchange exhibits weak and semi-strong forms of efficiency.
Under the EMH the price of a share is the present value of expected future dividends (the ‘market fundamentals’ solution)(Bank of England 1988).
The greater the return to shareholders the more attractive it will be to invest in the company and hence the higher the valuation of the company in the view of the Stock Exchange.
Maximisation of shareholder wealth is synonymous with maximising the market (Stock market) value of the company.
An extreme view opposing the ‘market fundamentals’ or ‘true-value’approach is that which argues that it makes no sense to  talk about an inherent value of a share.
Share prices are determined by supply and demand and anticipatory and speculative factors, and the expected earnings of a company are only one of a number of factors which influence investors.
Stock prices may be subject to‘speculative bubbles’ whereby the actual price drifts away from the price warranted on fundamental grounds.
It has been suggested that such a speculative bubble may have been responsible for the rapid rise in equity prices in 1987.
This suggests that the fall in equity prices in October 1987 may have been no more than a correction to the market.
It could be argued that the sharp fall in share prices, perhaps as a result of a ‘speculative bubble’ suggests that, at times, the Stock Exchange is not efficient.
This may represent an anomaly in what is otherwise an efficient market.
It does not suggest that the EMH is invalid, but that the market shows long-run efficiency, combined with short-run anomalous indicators of temporary inefficiency, that tend to be self-correcting.
In other words, the fact that the speculative bubble' existed at all suggests possible short-term inefficiency, but the ‘correction’ could suggest that markets are, in the long term, efficient.
The markets' valuation of the future dividend flow will also depend upon the relative attractiveness of alternative investments.
If it is assumed that the alternative to investing in equity is to invest in bonds, then, in the long run, it would be expected that the returns to these two investments would be equal after allowing for risk differentials.
There has been a reasonably stable relationship between equity earnings yields and real bond yields in the UK for much of the 1980's.
Given the higher risk associated with equity, a positive yield gap (i.e. with earnings yield greater than the bond yield) would be expected.
However, in the period before 19th October the yield gap had become significantly negative and for the earnings yield to rise back to parity with the bond yield a significant fall in equity prices was needed.
The advent of Modern Portfolio Theory (see Chapter 7) may be beneficial to the efficient working of the stock market.
Core holdings in large blue-chip companies that are infrequently traded provide them with a solid investor base and reduces share price volatility, whilst active trading and analysis of smaller company shares adds to the liquidity and marketability of these securities, and ensures accurate pricing.
The question as to whether or not the market has become more volatile (and if it has, why?) since the Big Bang and the crash has not been entirely answered.
It appears that Big Bang had no effect on volatility prior to‘Black Monday’, but that volatility has increased since then (Pope et al 1990).
In other words, Big Bang was not responsible for the increase in volatility since the crash.
There is widespread concern about the effects of the financial futures market on the equity market.
At times arbitrage across the markets has caused extreme volatility on the Stock Exchange, and there has also been accusations of manipulation of equity prices to enable arbitrageurs to sort out their arbitrage positions.
In July 1990, for example, many arbitrageurs who had written futures contracts to buy FTSE 100 Index futures found that they were short of the FTSE contract close to the expiry deadline, and so attempted to reduce share prices to reduce the value of the index.
Some market makers quoted offer prices of shares in the index lower than bid prices, the opposite of normal market practice, and there were accusations that some market makers did not answer their phones, so that quotes were not accurate.
An investigation by the Stock Exchange found that no malpractice occurred, however.
With the increasing growth of the futures market though, it is likely that such problems will occur again.
There has been some suggestion that computer trading techniques have been partly responsible for the crash (or what is called programme trading).
There are two types of programme trading — index arbitrage and portfolio insurance.
Index arbitrage is used to gain risk-free profits from short-term differences in the price of the index futures and the underlying shares.
If, for example, the stock-index futures fall below the prices of the underlying securities, a sample of shares  representing the index are sold, and relatively cheap stock-index futures are bought.
The position can be unwound once the two prices move together (which they will, given this type of arbitrage) by buying the shares and selling the futures, the profit coming from the discount at which the futures were originally bought (minus transactions costs).
With portfolio insurance the objective of the institutional investor or fund manager is to maintain the value of a portfolio.
When the market is falling, futures are sold, and if the market continues to fall, the position can be unwound by buying in the  futures contracts and making profits on them, which are used to offset losses on the value of the share portfolio.
The problem with the stock market crash was that index arbitrage and portfolio insurance had the effect of feeding off each other and driving down share prices.
With prices falling, the stock index futures were below underlying share prices so index arbitrageurs sold shares and bought futures.
As shares were being sold this drove their price down, so portfolio insurers sold futures to protect the value of their portfolios.
This set up the next cycle by index arbitrageurs, and so on.
The importance of computers is that these arbitrage opportunities can be quickly spotted and capitalised upon.
A fund manager could carry out all of the above deals without a computer programme needed, although it would be much slower.
The problem thus does not lie with computers and computer trading but in the link between the futures and equity markets.
11.9 STOCK MARKET REGULATION
The Self-Regulatory Organisation (SRO) for the International Stock Exchange is The Securities Association (TSA).
The International Stock Exchange is a Recognised Investment Exchange (RIE) which means it is authorised by the Securities and Investments Board (SIB) as an exchange for the trading of securities.
The TSA authorises firms to deal in gilts, domestic and foreign equities, fixed interest stocks, international bonds and Eurobonds, financial futures, options and private client advice and management of investments.
The three main problems that affect investors' confidence in the stock market are market manipulation (as in the Guinness affair), insider dealing (Geoffrey Collier, Ivan Boesky), and investment fraud (Barlow Clowes, Dunsdale), all of which are supposed to be eliminated (or at least limited) under the investor protection rules of the Financial Services Act 1986.
One aim of securities market regulation is to ensure that operations in the markets are conducted under transparent rules relating to information on fees, commissions and prices.
11.10 INSIDER DEALING
Insider dealing has been a criminal offence since 1980 under the Companies Act 1980.
The Company Securities (Insider Dealing) Act 1985 re-enacts the earlier legislation and specifically defines insider dealing which is when an individual knowingly transacts in a security whilst in possession of unpublished price sensitive information relating to that security.
The FSA 1986 gives wide powers to the Secretary of State to investigate insider trading, including seizing of documents, inspection of bank accounts, and the ability to demand witnesses to appear.
At the time of writing the Stock Exchange has passed on 185 cases of suspected insider trading to the Department of Trade and Industry since 1980, of which there have been only twenty-two prosecutions and twelve convictions.
This hardly inspires confidence in the system, and emphasises the problem of actually proving that inside information was used, or showing when information stops being ‘unpublished’ and is widely known about.
Contrary to popular belief, it is reported that over half of suspected insider traders are members of the public, which places some doubt on the common perception of city fraudsters being involved in the majority of cases (Quality of Markets Quarterly Review April-June 1990).
Insider dealing can be viewed as a tax on dealing in equities (King and Roell 1988).
Market makers are often faced with losses because of insider dealing, and will tend to widen bid-ask spreads for fear of being ‘hit’.
The costs will thus tend to be passed on to investors.
Insider trading may also lead to a significant loss of confidence in the Stock Exchange, particularly amongst small investors.
Also, some of the profits of companies attempting a takeover may be captured by insiders, and the acquiring company may find it more difficult to buy up shares in the target company as a result of insider dealing.
One of the most common forms of insider dealing, and probably one of the most difficult to detect and bring to court is the share dealing ring.
This is an agreement amongst staff at securities houses who have access to price sensitive information to pool their resources and information in order to profit from insider trading.
They are difficult to investigate as the ones carrying out the  dealing are obviously not the ones who have access to the inside information.
A further technique is known as front-running.
This is where shares are bought in advance of a large transaction that is known about and that will push up the price.
It is thought that there has been some element of a share dealing ring in the Dunsdale case.
It must be noted, however, that the Exchange deals in thousands of transactions each hour, and instances of malpractice must be viewed against both this high-volume background and the importance of the Exchange to the funding of industry.
In general, investors have not been subject to particularly extensive instances where malpractice has damaged the value of their investments.
The detection of insider dealing has increased (although the conviction rate is still poor), and this is likely to be a reflection of better channels of detection rather than any upsurge in the problem as previously it was not a criminal offence (and in some circles was regarded as a perk of the job).
Insider dealing legislation was  strengthened by the FSA, with it being illegal from 1980.
Inspectors are empowered by the Secretary of State to question people and demand to inspect documents.
Non-cooperation is treated as contempt of court.
There is a considerable amount of cooperation by regulators internationally on insider dealing (which is a necessity, given the often international aspect of the insider activity), and particularly between the UK and USA.
One controversial practice that the TSA has allowed to continue is ‘softing’ or soft commissions.
Soft commissions are payments in the form of portfolio valuation, computer hardware and software, to fund managers by brokers in return for a certain amount of business each year.
Cash payments are not allowed.
Warburg, for example, refunds 83 per cent of its commission to fund managers in the form of soft commissions (August 1990).
There is an argument however that soft commissions may increase the practice of ‘churning’(see Chapter 13).
11.11 PRUDENTIAL REGULATION
Like any financial business, Stock Exchange members are subject to prudential regulation.
Adequate capital has to be maintained, of which there are three main types.
The risks of a fall in profitability are covered by base capital (25 per cent of a firm's annual costs), whilst position capital is held to protect against large falls in share prices in those shares held.
The more volatile the shares, the greater the capital requirement which has a corollary with risk weighted assets for banks — the greater the riskiness of the assets, the greater the capital requirement and counterparty capital is used to cover any problems that might occur during settlement procedures.
‘Bought deals’ are becoming increasingly popular amongst large securities houses.
This is the practice of buying a long line of stock from one seller and then selling the shares through the market.
The risk is that the shares may fall in value leaving the securities house with a huge loss.
Bought deals have only been possible with Big Bang and the advent of large well capitalised securities firms, but the risks being taken on are extremely large.
The Stock Exchange is party to the central compensation fund set up under the Financial Services Act, in which losses due to fraud or the collapse of an institution of 100 per cent up to £30 000 and 90 per cent of losses up to £20 000 are recompensed, and then nothing after that.
11.12 TAKEOVER REGULATION
Regulation of takeovers comes under three forms — monopolies and mergers policy, operated by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission and the Office of Fair Trading, company law overseen by the Department of Trade and Industry, and the conduct of companies during bids under the City Code of the Takeover Panel.
The main emphasis here will be on the City Code as it relates directly to the conduct of companies in relation to the Stock Exchange.
The Takeover Panel is largely concerned with the interests of shareholders during takeovers.
The City Code is not backed up by law, but anybody involved in the securities market must abide by it (removal of authorisation under the FSA being the biggest sanction).
The Code sets out a timetable for takeovers and certain standards of conduct, in order that all shareholders receive the same information and time enough to act on that information.
A predator company (the offerer) can buy up to 15 per cent of a company's shares without restrictions, but above that level must then wait seven days before being allowed to buy up to another ten per cent.
Then there is another seven day wait.
Shares can then be bought again, but care must be taken because once 30 per cent of the shares are held a ‘mandatory offer’ must be made — a full offer for the company.
The purpose of course is to obtain more than 50 per cent, when the offer becomes ‘unconditional as to acceptances’.
 The basic timetable for a bid is 60 days from the date of the formal offer to the shareholders of the company to be taken over.
Shareholders must have a fortnight to consider an offer, so that the final offer must come before the 46th day.
The purpose of having a timetable is so that all relevant information can be digested and acted upon, and so that bids do not carry on for an unreasonable length of time.
The basic timetable can be extended if a new bidder emerges, if the target company board agrees (rare) or if the target company announces significant trading information after the 39th day.
Nicholson (1989) argues that hostile takeovers tend to undermine the public's confidence in the operation of the stock market, particularly in terms of dishonest practices (a point of view endorsed by the Guinness case — see Chapter 12).
11.13 OVERSEAS/EUROPEAN COMPETITION
Stock exchanges vary greatly across the EEC in terms of differences in volume, framework and trading mechanics.
The UK exchange is a quote driven market-maker system with electronic trading, whereas many foreign exchanges are order driven and still maintain trading ‘floors’, although again this is rapidly changing as a result of competition.
At present, stock exchange membership in many EC countries is not open to outside interests.
In Germany Universal banks are the only institutions allowed to conduct securities business, whereas in France only stock exchange members are able to, and the UK is somewhere in between, with both banks and non-bank institutions able to compete for security business.
Competition is however forcing most EC members to adopt the UK model, and most have, or are going to have their own versions of the U.K's Big Bang.
There has been a great deal of change in European Securities Exchanges, much of it on the lines of London's Big Bang (abolition of fixed commissions in Paris, for example), and much of it with a view to maintaining or gaining business.
Overseas securities markets, particularly those that are at present relatively expensive and illiquid should grow rapidly in the future with convergence of regulations, possibly at the expense of the London International Stock Exchange, as foreign shares traditionally traded in London move to their increasingly sophisticated domestic markets.
Paris and Frankfurt are growing particularly fast (capitalisation increases of 83 per cent and 64 per cent respectively during 1989), with turnover of domestic equities on German Exchanges being larger than the ISE's for the first time ever in 1989.
The ISE holds nearly 8 per cent of world domestic equity capitalisation however (Table 11.8).
Table 11.8 International Market Statistics
The following aspects of Securities Market Regulation have already been put into place by the EC.
(i)
Collective investments for transferable securities (UCITS) including unit trusts and open-ended mutual funds.
Freedom to deal in these securities has been completed, but mutual recognition of licences is needed.
(ii)
Mutual recognition of listing particulars (including prospectuses).
(iii)
Information on the disposal or acquisition of major holdings in the capital of listed companies.
(iv)
Insider trading.
11.14 THE GILT EDGED MARKET
The gilt-edged market was changed in a very similar way to the stock market in Big Bang, with single capacity jobbers and brokers being replaced by dual capacity gilt-edged market makers (GEMMs).
The changes brought an inflow of new firms, with twenty seven initially at the time of Big Bang, as opposed to eight jobbers previously, and capitalisation was increased.
Three new Stock Exchange money brokers (SEMBs) joined the original six SEMBs to lend stocks and finance to GEMMs, and six inter-dealer brokers (IDBs) were set up to maintain an anonymous transactions service between GEMMs.
In common with the main exchange, the market changed from dealing on the floor to dealing through telecommunications networks.
A computerised transfer system was set up — the Central Gilts Office (CGO).
At the time of writing there are twenty-two Gilt-Edged market makers (GEMMs), compared with twenty-seven when Big Bang began.
The Bank of England (1990) has concluded that the withdrawal of market participants has not led to a reduction in the quality of service or reduced liquidity or competitiveness in the market.
During 1987 and 1988 GEMMs made heavy losses, but have tended to break even in 1989 and early 1990.
With the authorities buying in gilt-edged stock the size of the market has declined — from £142 billion at the end of 1988 to £129 billion at the end of  1989.
The improved financial performance of GEMMs in 1989 and 1990 is largely the result of improvements in the efficiency of operations and better management control.
Turnover has increased since Big Bang, although has tended to fall in 1988 and 1989 relative to 1987 (but it is still above Big Bang levels), and dealing spreads and dealing costs have tended to fall.
GEMMs, IDBs and SEMBs are all under the regulations of The Securities Association (TSA)(see Chapter 12).
In addition, the GEMMs, IDBs and SEMBs report their positions at the close of each day to the Bank of England, which analyses them and provides a risk assessment by the next day, although the Bank also takes other broad factors into consideration for its supervisory functions.
As the gilt market has shrunk, several GEMMs have expressed an interest in making a market in non-gilt fixed-interest sterling securities.
THE REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
12.0 INTRODUCTION
An analysis is made in this chapter of the type of regulation adopted in the UK and Europe and of its effectiveness.
The need for the regulation of financial institutions is recognised, particularly given recent cases of fraud.
Emphasis is placed however on the need for fairness in applying regulations to groups of institutions, given the need to stimulate neutral competitive conditions.
An examination of whether or not financial institutions and markets are over-regulated is made, and the core rules of regulation are set out.
12.1 THE NEED FOR REGULATION
Regulation can best be divided into structural regulation, prudential regulation and investor protection, although there are significant linkages between the three.
Structural regulation refers to the type of activities that different categories of financial institution are permitted to carry out, and prudential regulation refers to  supervision in terms of, inter alia , liquidity, capital adequacy and solvency of financial institutions.
The term ‘supervision’ is used here to mean the monitoring of financial institutions for investor protection, prudential regulation, and structural regulation purposes combined.
Investor protection legislation overlaps with both prudential and structural regulation in that the investor is in theory protected from financial institutions becoming insolvent through excessive risk-taking and protected from conflicts of interest by  separation of types of business, but also extends much further into the manner in which investment business is carried out — the size of commissions, advertising regulations, cold calling etc.
These three types of regulation can all be carried out through formal legal rules, through self-imposed rules or self-regulation, or some combination of all of these.
Regulation has both a micro and a macro aspect (Llewellyn 1986).
The former relates to the interests of the consumer and producer, whilst the latter relates to the interest of the system as a whole — systemic interest.
A further form of regulation is the operation of monetary policy, which may affect financial institutions, either through direct portfolio controls, as with the corset placed on the banks in the 1970s, or through interest rates which affect the environment in which financial institutions operate.
High interest rates are a form of regulation to the extent that they reduce the demand for credit and hence credit granted by institutions.
In standard economic theory it is argued that regulation is required if market failures occur.
In the case of financial services, problems occur through inadequate information, the unique character of financial services (there is no opportunity to ‘try out’ a financial service), ignorance on the part of consumers, and the fear of financial collapse.
Care needs to be taken to ensure that regulation does not impair the efficiency of the financial system.
In other words, it must not damage allocative, operational or dynamic efficiency as described in Chapter 2.
All forms of regulation have come under intense scrutiny in recent years.
Structural regulations have generally been relaxed in order to allow greater competition for financial services, whilst prudential and investor protection regulations have tended to be tightened up and formalised.
The main difficulty is to get the right balance between regulation and competition.
Structural de-regulation has increased competition in the building society industry and the Stock Exchange, but at the same time investor protection has been tightened.
Notice that the regulations do not intend to stop financial institutions taking on risk, as this is a fundamental part of their activities.
Risk taking is fundamental to the efficient operation of financial markets and the economy as a whole.
It is necessary, however, for regulators to deter exceptional risk taking.
The difficulty here of course is to determine what is excessive and what is not.
It may be that in attempting to stamp out over-risky  practices the regulators can become over-zealous and adversely affect risk taking activities that are fundamental to the workings of the financial system.
Any regulatory framework must be judged against the effect it has on the cost of financial intermediation and the allocative efficiency of the financial system.
Prudential regulation is necessary to protect customers and to provide stability to the financial system, and one of its major functions is to deter financial institutions from taking on excessive levels of risk.
Risks can be broadly categorised for financial institutions into a number of areas.
1.
Liquidity risk — problems may come about through changes in asset prices, a badly matched balance sheet, or withdrawal of credit lines by other financial institutions.
2.
Investment risk — sometimes called ‘position’ risk, where changes in foreign exchange rates, interest rates or asset prices cause losses on investments.
3.
Credit risk — bad debts or delays in payment when due.
4.
Earnings risk — increases in operating costs can reduce earnings, provisions for bad debt, changes in interest rates, and changes in asset prices can cause problems.
5.
Operating risk — losses arising from inefficiency and poor management control.
The list above is only meant to be indicative, and to it could be added those that are difficult to categorise because of their broad nature — loss of confidence, which could occur because of any of the above risks, but is also a risk in itself, and fraud.
Loss of confidence will hasten the insolvency of the institution if a ‘run’ occurs, and fraud can occur in any and every function of a financial institution, and the risks involved can often be counted in millions, particularly in cases of computer fraud.
The problem of quantifying risk is an extremely large one:
‘A fundamental task of financial intermediaries is to appraise and assume risk and to charge for it appropriately.
As a result of regulatory change, the growth of derivative product markets, and technological innovation, competitive pressure appears to be increasing the general level of risk assumed by intermediaries, while only partially providing the tools needed to manage that risk.’
IMF (1989)
Credit risk is undoubtedly the most important to banks.
With the move towards disintermediation, it could be argued that many banks are driven to taking on less credit-worthy customers, with associated increases in credit risk.
With liquidity risk, it should be recognised that diversification into new areas of business may reduce the ability of institutions to obtain liquid funds.
The move of the banks into securities business raises the question of how liquid the securities markets are, particularly in a crash.
Most UK institutions charge loans on a floating rate basis such that they match floating rate liabilities, but this merely increases credit risk, as interest rate risk is passed on to the customer, with subsequent greater probability of defaults occurring.
Hedging instruments such as swaps, options and financial futures can of course be used by financial institutions to limit risk, but these also contain (often unknown and unlimited) risks of their own — witness the losses of Midland Bank in its interest rate risk hedging in 1990.
Figure 12.1 outlines the major regulatory responsibilities and enactments relating to financial regulation.
Figure 12.1 Regulation (Simplified)
12.2 INVESTOR PROTECTION
With greater levels of competition as a result of structural  reregulation , it was felt that a tightening up of investor protection was required.
Figure 12.2 shows in chronological order the various recent studies of investor protection carried out and the subsequent system of regulation as embodied in the Financial Services Act, 1986.
The traditional style of regulation involved members ‘clubs’ and the ability of this system to work depended largely on maintaining a relatively small grouping of members through maintaining effective barriers to entry — the Stock Exchange being a prime example here.
As soon as the barriers to entry in this type of regulatory regime are broken down and outside membership is allowed, the effectiveness of self-regulation and the ability to police members on the old club principle tends to be eroded.
Regulation prior to the FSA also tended to be fragmented, and largely on an institutional rather than functional basis — Insurance Company Act 1982, Banking Act 1979, Lloyds of London 1982.
Regulators tended to take an informal stance — particularly the Bank of England and the DTI.
Regulation can also be categorised as formal or informal in that it can be set according to statutes and rules, or set informally through self regulation or some form of implicit agreement.
Implicit agreements or what might be called self-imposed regulation (as in the Building Society sector and the Stock Exchange in the past) have tended to be eroded by competition or the need to compete.
Figure 12.2 Evolution of the Financial Services Act
In general, regulation has become formal with more specific guidelines and rules than in the past, coupled with the abolition of many informal agreements such as the minimum commission system and single capacity of the stock exchange, and the interest rate cartel of the building societies.
With the passing of the FSA 1986 regulation has been placed on a far more formal rule-orientated basis than previously.
A more precise regulatory framework was required, it is argued, to cope with the increasingly competitive markets unleashed through structural deregulation (i.e. through the deregulation of the types of business that categories of firms are permitted to engage in).
Self regulation relies heavily upon the expertise and experience of market practitioners who can formulate rules and regulations that are acceptable to both players and regulators.
The SROs are self-regulators who formulate rules that are acceptable to the SIB (or authorisation could be lost) and that (in theory) are acceptable to members.
It should be recognised that it is in the interests of all firms involved in the provision of financial services that regulation is adequate and seen to be adequate by investors, or custom will be lost for all concerned.
Certainly for honest practitioners, there is a desire for fraudulent firms and individuals to be weeded out, lest they taint the reputation of all firms.
Rules governing investor protection seek to ensure that the investing public is not subjected to fraudulent or manipulative practices and, moreover, that they are given sound advice by competent professionals.
The Financial Services Act 1986 attempted to standardise investor protection through a more formal ‘rule-book’ approach rather than through the previously adopted ‘club’arrangements.
At the same time, the intention was to liberate financial markets through structural de-regulation to allow a greater degree of competition.
Financial institutions have thus been encouraged to move into new areas of business, but at the same time have been regulated on a more formal basis than before.
Indeed, it could be argued that it would not have been possible to allow greater competition without changes in regulation to counteract the increased levels of risk that comes with more intense competition.
Prior to the Financial Services Act regulation was largely aimed at ensuring the honesty of providers of financial services, and to stop fraudulent malpractice.
Ensuring the honesty of those supplying  services and advice has been the main raison d'être for regulation.
The Gower Report extended the concept of regulation further to encompass the competence of suppliers of financial services, as well as their honesty.
The Gower Report and the FSA were also stimulated by instances of the failure of small investment firms, in which investors lost funds (often through fraud or incompetence), such as Norton Warburg in 1981.
The basic concepts in the Gower Report were accepted in the White Paper, and the Financial Services Bill, and were later enshrined in the Financial Services Act 1986.
A system of self-regulatory organisations (SROs) was set up under the auspices of the DTI and the Securities and Investments Board, the latter set up to authorise the SROs and oversee their operations.
The SROs are responsible for the regulation and authorisation of their members, and are required to devise rules that are at least as stringent as those of the SIB itself.
A separate tier of authorisation is through Recognised Professional Bodies (RPBs) for professional organisations which applied to the SIB to be able to authorise their members to give investment advice which is incidental to their main area of business.
It is also possible for financial institutions to be directly authorised by the SIB, and there are also channels through which non-financial companies that carry out investment business that is incidental to their main activity (e.g. Treasury departments of large companies) to be directly authorised by the SIB.
The final area of regulation is through Recognised Investment Exchanges (RIEs) and Recognised Clearing Houses (RCHs), through which securities transactions are carried out in order to be able to monitor investor protection more effectively.
Lloyd's of London and the Bank of England are specifically exempt from authorisation requirements.
Any business that operates within the investment arena that is not authorised can be punished by imprisonment or fines.
Investments are defined as (Part I Schedule 1 FSA 1986):
(1)
Stocks and shares (both UK and foreign).
(2)
Debentures, which includes debenture stock, loan stock bonds and certificates of deposit.
(3)
Government and public securities, which includes gilts, local authority bonds, bonds issued by foreign governments and international organisations.
(4)
Warrants.
(5)
Depository receipts for shares, bonds and warrants.
(6)
Units in collective investment schemes, which includes unit trust schemes and shares in investment trusts.
(7)
Options on currency, gold and silver or any investment within the schedule.
(8)
Futures contracts for commodities and property.
(9)
Contracts linked to the value of property or linked to indices.
(10)
Insurance policies which act as investments which includes endowment and unit linked policies — but not policies which merely protect against risk or pure term assurance policies.
Investment business constitutes (Part II Schedule l FSA 1986):
(1)
Dealing-buying, selling, subscribing for or underwriting investments, either as a principal or as an agent.
(2)
Arranging Deals — making or offering to make arrangements to a person buying, selling, subscribing or underwriting investments.
(3)
Managing — managing or offering to manage assets of another person which include investments.
(4)
Advising — giving or offering advice on the buying, selling, subscription for or underwriting of investments.
(5)
Collective Investment Schemes — establishing, operating, or closing down collective investment schemes, which includes acting as a trustee of an authorised unit trust scheme.
Some activities have been specifically excluded:(Parts III and IV Schedule 1 FSA 1986).
(1)
A person buying and selling investments for their own account.
(2)
Transactions within a company or a company group.
(3)
Trustees and personal representatives who manage investments (unless they hold themselves out as providing professional investment services).
(4)
Those who give investment advice as a consequence of advice on non-investment matters — e.g. an accountant advising the sale of shares for tax purposes.
(5)
Newspapers (but not ‘tipsheets’).
(6)
Employee share schemes and any facility for employees to exchange shares.
(7)
A person without a permanent place of business in the UK.
Also certain wholesale transactions are excluded (as they are deemed for professional investors rather than personal investors) and are regulated by the Bank of England.
It is generally agreed that retail investors need a far higher level of supervision because of their lack of knowledge and because of the severe consequences of loss.
Wholesale markets, by contrast, are operated by large institutions that are well aware of the risks involved.
The SIB only authorises ‘fit and proper’ persons and can withdraw or refuse authorisation if it deems this is not the case.
The SIB has wide powers granted to it by the Secretary of State under the FSA, and has a broad authority in enforcing the Act (and can override the decisions of the SROs).
The SROs regulate particular areas of investment business (see Figure 12.3) and its members are only authorised to carry out that particular business, unless authorised by another SRO.
The SIB is financed by levies on the SROs and firms that are registered with it, and does not receive any funds from the Government.
Those regulations not carried out under the auspices of the SIB include insider dealing, takeovers and mergers, and the listing of new issues.
The framework for investor protection is shown in Figure 12.3, and outlines the channels of authority.
12.3 OVER-REGULATION?
Figure 12.4 shows the links between supervisors and institutions, and emphasises the complexity of the regulatory framework.
Figure 12.3 Investor Protection Framework
The system of self-regulatory organisations is fundamentally different from the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) in the USA.
The SEC is centralised whereas SROs are decentralised and rulemaking is spread out amongst the various SROs.
Such a decentralised system is open to the criticism that there is a large degree of overlap in regulation, and hence an overburden of costs.
The degree of overlap of supervision is a problem, with for example, the Bank of England responsible for the supervision of the banking system as a whole, whilst the SROs are responsible for their various investment activities.
The Bank of England tends to be more concerned with systemic risk whereas the SIB and SROs are more involved with investor protection in relation to different areas of activity, although as mentioned earlier there are significant linkages and overlaps between the two.
The Bank of England has special responsibility for regulation of the markets that are in any way involved in the operation of the payments mechanism and that might affect monetary policy.
Figure 12.4 Regulatory Framework (Simplified)
With financial conglomerates, a supervisor is nominated as lead regulator to oversee the exchange of information and data by the individual supervisors involved.
The individual supervisors will still carry out their duties, but the lead supervisor will ultimately be responsible for the regulation of conglomerates.
It is probably better to start off with too many regulators which can then merge, rather than starting off with too few and attempting to build on them.
Indeed, there has already been some degree of rationalisation of SROs.
The Association of Futures Brokers and Dealers (AFBD) has merged with The Securities Association (TSA) in order to reduce bureaucracy and to decrease costs to member firms, many of whom were members of both SROs.
The merger of the TSA with the AFBD is also rationalised in terms of the increasing linkages between the securities and futures markets and the desire for both markets to set up a system for trading futures and options on a Euroindex of stocks.
This would be in competition with the European Option Exchange and the Matif Futures Exchange in France.
IMRO (Investment Managers Regulatory Organisation) has a degree of commonality with the TSA and AFDB and may be the subject of further consolidation of SROs in the future.
The four SROs have evolved largely through the choice of the financial institutions and intermediaries themselves, and there is no suggestion that these were arbitrarily placed on the financial system.
Some would argue that only two SROs are necessary (Mortimer 1988).
There has, however, been considerable unease amongst institutions as to the complexity of the rule books, the cost of regulation, and the wide range of regulators involved within the system.
The complexity of the regulatory framework and the issue of overlapping responsibility is shown in various frauds.
At times there has been no less than five organisations conducting investigations into cases: the Department of Trade and Industry, the Securities and Investments Board, the Financial Intermediaries Managers and Brokers Regulatory Association, the Serious Fraud Office and the Metropolitan Police fraud squad.
Such a situation appears to face problems of cooperation amongst the relevant authorities, questions of who is ultimately responsible, and concern as to the cost of regulation.
The DTI has three main investigation wings.
One carries out investigations under the Companies Acts, one under the Financial Services Acts, and there is a team of lawyers that carry out the prosecutions and advise the investigators.
The Serious Fraud Office (SFO) was set up under the 1987 Criminal Justice Act in response to a report by the Fraud Trials Committee formed in 1983 as a result of dissatisfaction with the ability of the City of London Fraud Squad to get convictions.
Its main objectives are:
(i)
to gain expertise in specialist financial areas,
(ii)
to carry out a coherent approach to investigating fraud,
(iii)
to speed up investigations and criminal proceedings,
(iv)
to present evidence in laymans terms,
(v)
to increase successful prosecutions.
The SFO only becomes involved in cases where more than £1 million is involved, and most cases tend to come from the DTI.
The SFO has very wide powers to examine personal bank accounts, examine documents and demand interviews, and call for fines in the courts if necessary.
One of the main criticisms of the recommendations of the Gower Report is largely one of methodology, in that no formal (or even informal) approach was taken to attempt to find out how much the self-regulatory framework proposal would cost.
In particular, cost benefit analysis was not used, largely because Gower professed that as a lawyer he was not competent to carry out such an appraisal (Gower Report paragraph 1.16).
Gower also doubted the usefulness of cost benefit analysis, and although it should be recognised that there are indeed limitations to such a technique, as Veljanovski (1988) points out, this is not a valid excuse for the total disregard of the appraisal of the cost of alternative systems.
Gower argued that the evidence from the United States shows that regulation does not affect market efficiency either beneficially or adversely.
In the UK, as the new system of regulation is being put in place at a time of considerable liberalisation in financial markets it is difficult to separate the different factors that impinge on market efficiency.
Increased competition should certainly lead to greater levels of efficiency, so long as the competition does not destabilise the financial system, and the new regulatory system is designed to allow competition to increase whilst improving on investor protection.
Indeed, many of the new rules ought to increase efficiency as they sweep away examples of market failure or cartels that distort competition.
In analysing the regulatory system it is probably useful to divide the concept of investor protection into the two broad categorisations as used by Gower — honesty and competence.
It is important to discuss whether the self-regulatory regime has increased the level of either.
With regard to honesty, it could be argued that no system of regulation can ever deter the truly criminally minded from attempting to defraud the investing public.
Whatever rules and regulations are enforced, no matter how comprehensive, there will always be unscrupulous people who attempt to pervert the rules for their own gains.
The important factors in a regulatory system are the degree to which such practices can be limited (with the proviso that no system can totally eliminate fraud), and secondly, when a fraud does occur or is occurring, the speed with which the regulatory system can detect it and put a stop to it.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that the current system of regulation has failed on both counts.
Fraud appears to have increased rather than decreased, and it cannot be argued that this is merely a matter of greater success in detection, as many of the frauds only come to light when investors find that they are unable to obtain their funds (or the directors of the institution are found to be in sunny climes abroad, with little intention of returning to the UK).
It appears that the regulatory authorities are extremely slow at detecting fraud.
One of the recent cases — Dunsdale Securities, is worryingly similar to that of an earlier case of fraud at Barlow Clowes.
At Barlow Clowes approximately £190m was lost by investors who thought they were investing in safe gilts, whereas in fact very few gilts were bought.
At Dunsdale, around £17m of investors funds have gone missing, and again the investors thought they were investing in gilts.
It appears that regulation has not been tightened after the Barlow Clowes affair, nor have the lessons been learned.
The number of frauds has led to calls for tightening up of audits of investment businesses, and particularly a reduction in the number of many thousands of auditors who examine investment firms so that the ones left can develop greater expertise.
A further improvement could be an approved panel of investment business auditors, although this would mean potential members of the panel would be excluded because of lack of experience, and they would not be provided with the chance of obtaining it.
The failure of the authorities to stop such occurrences can be interpreted in at least two ways.
Firstly, that the regulatory system is already too costly and still cannot adequately carry out its responsibilities and ought to be scrapped for some other (unspecified) scheme.
Secondly, that the framework of current investor protection is adequate but that the self-regulatory organisations are not sufficiently funded and hence lack the resources to fully police the financial system.
This latter implicitly calls for more funding and hence an even more costly burden of regulation.
The Building Societies Act was a response to structural changes in the financial services market, whereas the Banking Act and the Financial Services Act were responses to cases of fraud and bad practice, and as such are ‘defensive’ forms of regulation that might have been expected to be overdetailed and expensive to implement (Goodhart 1988).
Barclay (1978) argues that the existence of surplus profits in the financial services industry will attract new entrants, and that it is the influx of new entrants that tend to cause problems for  regulators.
Certainly the fringe banking crisis of 1973–74 occurred at a time of a large inflow of new institutions into the market as a result of the perceived liberal market conditions brought about through competition and credit control.
With the liberalisation of financial markets in the 1980s and 1990s, and the growth of new entrants (many of them from overseas) there again seems to have been an increase in institutional failures and frauds.
There is some debate as to the actual role of SROs.
Should they be seen as the overall enforcers of the regulations, or should they merely be ombudsmen or watchdogs that only act on customer complaints?
This is a fundamental point because if they are merely to be ombudsmen then the emphasis of ensuring regulations have been adhered to and best advice  proffered rests in the first instance heavily upon the customer, and it is up to the customer to complain.
Responsibility lies with the SROs, but it could be argued that they have insufficient resources to carry out this role, and should merely be ombudsmen (although there is also some doubt as to their ability to act in this limited capacity given their degree of underfunding).
The SROs may in fact be subject to‘regulatory capture’, where an initially independent body set up to police a particular form of business is ‘captured’ by the very institutions it is trying to regulate, and becomes a lobby or mouthpiece working on behalf of the industry.
It could be argued that this is far more likely to occur to a self-regulatory body than to a statutory body.
It should also be remembered that if an SRO is thought to be acting inappropriately, i.e. if it is subject to regulatory capture, then the SIB can simply revoke its status.
An extreme area of concern is the extent to which the regulatory system will stifle financial innovation.
The more rules that exist, then the more likely it is that a new product or service will impinge upon or be prohibited in some way by those rules.
If innovation is stifled then efficiency of the markets may be impaired.
Excessive regulation may also be an effective barrier to entry, thus reducing competition and providing large profits for the incumbents.
Moreover those institutions excluded will be tempted to take their business elsewhere and the UK could lose business to overseas markets.
Lloyd's provides an example of a self-regulatory ‘club’ and the extent to which Lloyd's carries out its self-regulatory role is  questionable.
Marine Syndicate 317/661 underwritten by Outhwaite underwriting agency experienced problems when writing a number of runoff contracts.
In these (legitimate) deals syndicates transferred their liabilities in particular areas to Outhwaite, allowing the syndicates to close their three-year account period.
The premiums charged by Outhwaite should have been sufficient to cover future claims, but in fact were not because of a heavy spate of asbestos and professional liability claims after 1982.
The question is whether or not the syndicates running off their future liabilities did so in utmost good faith by revealing all pertinent facts about the contract.
Suspicions have arisen as to the volume of such contracts transferred over 1979–1982, and the sudden huge claims after that period.
If the syndicates running off their contracts were aware of the problems that were going to occur and did not inform Outhwaite, then they were not acting in utmost good faith.
There is some debate as to the omission of Lloyd's of London from the FSA, given the nature of such recent scandals at Lloyd's (and the fact that to some extent these scandals prompted the FSA).
The Neill Report (1987) recommended that:
(1)
An ombudsman and arbitration procedure be set up for disputes between names and Lloyd's, and between names and agents
(2)
Compensation of names for losses should be equal to that of the SIB
(3)
Registration for underwriting agents should be the same as the SIB ‘fit and proper’ test.
Lloyd's is self-regulated and aims to protect the ‘members’ or suppliers of funds, protect policy holders, and the reputation of Lloyd's as a whole.
To ensure this, minimum standards of competence are set, proper records have to be kept, limits to risk exposure, disclosure rules, and a disciplinary system.
Checks are made as to the size of members' deposits in relation to their underwriting activities, and ensuring directors and partners are ‘fit and proper’ persons.
Concern has been raised about the costs of regulation.
Hall (1987) argues that most regulation is simply added on to existing frameworks (often as the result of specific frauds or crises) rather than building up new systems, and that the efficiency of regulation suffers as a result and costs escalate.
The direct costs of financial regulation are estimated at over £100 million per year in running costs (Lomax 1987), and some (e.g. Goodhart 1987) would regard this as a conservative estimate.
It is often argued that the costs of regulation are front-end loaded, with the majority of costs being met with the startup of the SROs, subsequent running costs being minimal compared with the turnover of most financial institutions.
It would seem however that the costs hit small financial firms far harder than larger ones, and may create a powerful barrier to entry to new firms.
Independent advisers regulated under FIMBRA probably feel the costs of regulation the hardest, as they are generally small in size.
Concerning costs, it has been reported in the financial press that FIMBRA merely had to take the word of Dunsdale that it was investing in gilts, as the SRO had too few staff to adequately deal with each individual firm.
It is likely that for regulation to be tightened, more funds are needed for the SROs to improve staffing levels, which inevitably means an increase in the costs of regulation.
The combination of a new regulatory system and increased competition ought to lead to an increase in efficiency in the provision of financial services, although this still ignores the cost of the overall regulatory framework.
The prime question is whether the gains in efficiency from having a more competitive financial system that involves a degree of consumer protection are outweighed by the costs of setting up and maintaining that regulatory system.
A further question is whether or not a less costly form of regulation could be devised that still allows the same degree of competition in the markets with the same level of investor protection.
Some of the above criticisms have been recognised by the SIB, and a restructuring of the rule books is occurring with the aim of simplifying the rules and setting out a set of core rules.
David Walker, the Chairman of the SIB, has argued that the regulatory system is overcomplicated:
‘We do have a problem with regulatory fatigue at the moment.
The fact is, transition to the simpler rules will involve costs, though at the end of the day it will make for more cost effective regulation than the present encyclopedias.’
Financial Times August 1990.
12.4 THE CORE RULES
The proposed core rules contain a common core of conduct of business rules (SIB 1990).
The simplified rules run to 40 in all.
Some of the rules which have caused considerable debate are reproduced below:
Polarisation
(1)
A firm which is not a tied firm and which provides investment services in respect of packaged products must act as an independent adviser in respect of those products.
(2)
A tied firm must ensure that:
(a)
a private customer to whom it or anyone acting on its behalf provides an investment service is informed of its and that persons status; and
(b)
neither it nor anyone acting on its behalf promotes a packaged product of (or arranged by) a person outside the marketing group of that tied firm.
The FSA has made a distinction between those who are independent intermediaries and those who are tied to a particular company.
The distinction, termed ‘polarisation’ was deemed necessary to make more transparent to customers the possible ties of their advisers, and to eliminate the ability of an intermediary to pass off as an independent adviser yet suggest the policies of the  advisers' own company (or those which provide the highest commission).
Polarisation means there will be an end to the practice of claiming to be an independent financial intermediary when in fact 80–90 per cent of a firms policies are set up with a parent  organisation.
Such a change in the rules should be beneficial for intermediaries that are really independent.
Suitability
A firm must take all reasonable steps to ensure that it does not give investment advice to, nor effect, a discretionary transaction with or for, a private customer, unless that advice or transaction is suitable for him having regard to the facts disclosed by that customer or other relevant facts about the customer of which the firm is or ought reasonably to be aware.
[Notice that ‘best advice’ has now been downgraded to ‘suitability'].
Customer's Understanding
A firm must not:
(a)
recommend a transaction to a private customer, or effect a discretionary transaction with or for him, unless it has taken all reasonable steps to enable the customer to understand the risks involved; or
(b)
mislead a private customer as to any advantages or disadvantages of a contemplated transaction.
Standards of Advice on Packaged Products
(1)
A firm which is an independent adviser must take all reasonable steps to inform itself, and all others acting on its behalf fully about what packaged products are available on the market and:
(a)
must not proceed for a private customer with any one packaged product if it is aware of another packaged product on the market which will meet the customer's requirements better; and
(b)
must not proceed for a private customer with a packaged product of, or arranged by, any person with whom the firm has a connection unless the firm believes on reasonable grounds that the product will meet the customer's requirements better than any other packaged product on the market.
(2)
A firm which is a tied firm must take all reasonable steps to inform itself and others acting on its behalf fully about what packaged products are available from the marketing group to which it belongs, and must not proceed with a packaged product for a private customer if it is aware of another packaged product from the marketing group's product range which would meet the customer's requirements better.
Best Execution
Where a firm deals with or for a customer it must take all reasonable steps to deal on the terms which are the best available for the customer in the circumstances.
The SIB established an Investors Compensation Scheme in 1988.
Investors would be compensated in the event of the failure of an authorised investment firm of 100 per cent on the first £30 000 invested, 90 per cent the next £20 000 and nothing on the excess, providing a maximum cover of £48 000 on £50 000 or more invested.