

Introduction to the economy as a whole
Introducing macroeconomics
Introduction
We now start our study of the economy as a whole and in the remainder of the book we consider many of the world's most pressing macroeconomic problems — problems like persistent unemployment, rapid inflation, balance of payments difficulties, economic stagnation and unequal distributions of income and wealth.
In order to analyse these problems, we must first identify, measure and consider the determinants of the main aggregates in the economy.
The most important aggregates we examine are:(a) the economy's total output of goods and services;(b) the total demand for this output;(c) total employment and unemployment;(d) the general price level;(e) the balance of payments;(f) the rate of economic growth.
To begin with, it is important to gain a good understanding of the meaning of these aggregates.
Defining and explaining them and showing how they may be measured are the major objectives of this and the following chapter.
In this chapter, we concentrate on the meaning and measurement of an economy's total output and the total demand for that output.
The other main aggregates are dealt with in the next chapter where the major macroeconomic policy objectives are discussed.
All aggregates are made up of their constituent parts — for example, we see later that the total demand for a country's output consists of the sum of individual demands and can be written as follows: where AD is total (or aggregate) demand, C is the sum of all individual consumers' demands for goods and services, I is the sum of all individual firms' demands for investment goods, C is the government's demand for goods and services, X is the total foreign demand for the country's exports and M is the demand for imports.
To analyse the main determinants of aggregates like this, it is necessary first to have an understanding of the behaviour of the individual economic agents.
This means that we must be aware of the microeconomic theories of consumer behaviour, of the firm, of public sector activity and of distribution.
For this reason, we started the book with microeconomics and only now turn to the study of macroeconomics.
Micro- and macroeconomics are intimately linked and, where appropriate, we shall point out the microeconomic foundations of the macroeconomic analyses that we develop and apply.
The problems of aggregation
Problems arise in aggregation largely because of the difficulty of finding an appropriate unit of measurement.
In adding up the total output of the United  Kingdom, for instance, there is no single physical unit of measurement that can be used: the millions of different types of goods and services are all measured in different units — for example , steel is measured in tonnes and cloth is measured in metres and it is, of course , impossible to add tonnes to metres.
The problem is overcome, at least partially, by using money as the unit of measurement — this greatly simplifies the adding up, but it gives rise to the problem of distinguishing between real and nominal values.
If the value of total output should double from, say, £10 billion to £20 billion, this does not necessarily mean that total output itself has doubled: part of the increase may indeed be due to an increase in physical output, but part may be due to an increase in prices.
The problem with value measurements is that they necessarily have a price and quantity component and it is not always easy to separate the two.
To estimate real output, it is necessary to deflate the value of total output by an appropriate price index.
This converts total output measured in current prices to total output measured in constant prices.
(The actual way in which this calculation is done is illustrated later in this chapter.)
There is, however, the problem of deciding which price index to use.
In the United Kingdom, two main price indices are calculated: the Index of Retail Prices and the Producer Price Index.
Each one is a weighted average of the prices of a number of selected goods neither provides a completely true average price of all the goods and services included in the country's total output.
Changes in the deflated total output figures, therefore, can really only give us an estimate of the true changes in the nation's physical output.
Another problem with aggregates is that they hide their constituent elements.
For example, an increase in the economy's total output tells us nothing about who receives that output.
Indeed, as we shall see later, a rise in total output accompanied by a change in the distribution of income which makes some people better off and others worse off cannot necessarily be interpreted as an improvement in the country's living standards.
Distributional factors should always be borne in mind when considering the effects of changes in aggregate variables.
Total output: national product, national expenditure, national income
In principle, the value of an economy's total output can be measured in three ways.
These can be seen by examining Fig. 1 which shows the flow of income and spending in a simple model of an economy.
The two main economic agents in the flow diagram are households and firms.
The households can be thought of as the owners of factors of production, the services of which they sell to firms in exchange for income (in the form of wages, salaries, interest, rent and profit).
Note that, in the model, all profits are assumed to be distributed to households and not retained by the firms.
The firms use the factors of production to produce the many different types of goods and services which they then sell to households (whose spending is called consumption), the government, foreigners (who buy exports) and other firms (whose spending on capital goods is called investment).
The diagram also shows that the part of household income which is not spent on consumption is either saved, spent on imports or is taken in taxes by the government.
The  government itself uses its tax revenue (as well as money from other sources see Ch. 13) to finance government spending, including transfer payments (such as pensions, unemployment benefits and student grants).
Fig. 1.
The circular flow of income and spending.
Before proceeding, we must define the terms consumption, investment and saving more fully.
Definition: Consumption can be regarded as total expenditure by households on goods and services which yield utility in the current period.
Definition: Saving is that part of disposable income (that is, total income less taxes) which is not spent in the current period.
It follows that disposable income minus saving equals consumption.
Definition: Investment is the production of or expenditure by firms on goods and services which are not for current consumption: that is, real capital goods, like factories, machines, bridges and motorways, all goods which yield a flow of consumer goods and services in future periods.
The three ways of measuring the annual value of total output in an economy are by calculating its national product, national expenditure and national income.
Consider these in turn.
National product
This is found by adding up the value of all final goods and services produced by firms during the year.
Note that all final goods and services produced must be included, whether they are to be sold to consumers or to the government, whether they are to be sold abroad as exports, or whether they are capital goods to be sold to other firms.
It is, however, important to include only final goods and services: all intermediate goods must be excluded so that double-counting is avoided.
For example, in the production of a woollen coat, only the value of the final coat should be counted.
The values of the raw wool and the woollen cloth are included in the value of the coat.
If we were to count them as well we should be guilty of double- or even triple-counting.
If all intermediate goods were included in the calculation of the national product, therefore, we would seriously overestimate the value of the country's total output.
One way of avoiding double-counting is to sum the values-added by all firms at the different stages of production.
To illustrate this, consider a simple example in which producing a woollen coat involves the following three stages of production:
1.
A sheep farmer produces raw wool and sells it to a mill for £10.
This represents an income of £10 for the farmer.
Value-added = £10.
2.
The mill uses the raw wool to produce cloth which it sells to a coat factory for £21.
This represents income (including profit) of £11 for the mill — remember that £10 has had to be paid for the raw wool.
Value-added = £11.
3.
The coat factory produces the coat and sells it for £40.
This includes £21 to cover the cost of the cloth and £19 to pay incomes, including profits.
Value-added = £19.
The total value-added in this example (£40) is just equal to the value of the final coat.
National expenditure
This is found by adding up all the spending on the final goods and services produced by firms.
Such an aggregate will only equal the value of total output if those goods which are produced but not sold are also included — this item, which is called ‘net changes in stocks and work in progress’, is normally counted as part of firms' investment spending (which is logical since such goods are for future rather than current consumption).
National expenditure, then, is the sum of consumption of domestically produced goods, investment (including changes in stocks and work in progress), government expenditure and exports.
Notice that, as before, in order to avoid double-counting, only spending on final goods and services is included.
National income
It is because goods and services are produced by factors of production that income is created in an economy, so another way of calculating the value of total output is to add up all the incomes (that is, wages, salaries, interest, rent and profits) of all factors of production, those producing intermediate goods as well as those producing final goods.
It is important in using this method to exclude all transfer payments as these represent nothing more than a redistribution of income from taxpayers to the transfer recipients; including them, therefore, would involve double-counting.
Assuming:(a) that all three measures are calculated accurately;(b) that only final goods and services are counted in the national product and national expenditure figures;(c) that any changes in unsold stocks are included in the national expenditure figures; and (d) that all incomes, including profits but excluding transfer payments, are counted in the national income figures, then it must follow that all three measures will provide an identical figure for the value of the country's total output.
That is,
In principle, then, these three aggregates simply represent different ways of measuring the flow of output or income being created in an economy over a period of time.
Complications
In the attempt to calculate a country's total output using the above methods, a number of complications arise.
For example, how to deal with capital depreciation and stock appreciation; whether to value output at market prices or at factor cost; whether to include net property income from abroad.
Consider these problems in turn.
Depreciation
When investment takes place during a year, new capital is created and it is correct that this should be included in our calculation of the value of total output for that year.
Some investment occurs, though, simply to replace capital which has worn out during the year — such ‘wearing out’ of capital is called ‘depreciation’or ‘capital consumption’.
Where no allowance is made for this depreciation in the calculation of investment, the resulting figure is called gross investment.
When depreciation is deducted from gross investment, we have what is called net investment and it is this which measures the true addition to the country's capital stock during the year.
Where no allowance is made for depreciation in calculating the value of total output, the resulting figures are also referred to as gross.
Thus, we have: For two main reasons, economists are usually quite happy to work with ‘gross’ rather than‘net’figures: first, depreciation tends to change only slowly over time so that the ‘gross’and ‘net’figures move closely together over any period of a few years; and secondly, depreciation figures are notoriously difficult to estimate with any accuracy.
Stock appreciation
We have noted before that all three measurements of total output include the value of the net change in stocks of unsold goods.
If prices are rising, the value of firms' stocks will be rising even if there are no net physical additions to them.
To take account of this so-called ‘stock appreciation’, it is necessary to subtract an appropriate amount in computing the national income.
Market prices and factor cost
When national expenditure is computed, it is measured initially in market prices — for example, the total spending on beer is equal to the quantity of beer bought times its average market price.
Unfortunately, many market prices are distorted by indirect taxes and subsidies: indirect taxes have the effect of raising the prices of goods above what would otherwise have been set, while subsidies lower such prices.
National income and national product, however, are both measured at ‘factor cost’— that is, in terms of the sums paid out to the owners of factors of production — and this excludes indirect taxes and subsidies.
To ensure that national expenditure is the same as national income and national product, it is necessary to convert market prices to factor cost by subtracting indirect taxes and adding subsidies.
In other words, we can write: It is preferable (and usual) to measure the value of total output at factor cost rather than in market prices, otherwise an increase in indirect taxation or a reduction in subsidies would have the effect of raising the estimate of total output even when no greater quantity of goods and services was being produced.
Net property income from abroad
Some of the output produced within the United Kingdom is actually produced by firms which are owned by overseas residents.
Similarly, some output produced overseas is produced by firms owned by United Kingdom residents or United Kingdom companies.
Whether this should be taken into account or not in calculating the value of total output depends on whether we require a measurement of the domestic output of the United Kingdom or a measurement of the output produced by all the factors of production owned by United Kingdom residents.
In the former case, we need make no adjustment but the figures are renamed domestic product, income and expenditure.
In the latter case, ‘net property income from abroad’ has to be added, where the term ‘net property income from abroad’is equal to that income received by United Kingdom residents from the production of output by firms overseas minus that income paid to overseas residents from the production of output by domestic firms.
We can thus write:
The United Kingdom accounts
A detailed breakdown of the national product, national expenditure and national income figures for the United Kingdom in 1987 is shown in Tables 1, 2 and 3.
All the terms used have been explained in the previous section with the exception of the statistical discrepancy.
This is a figure included to ensure that all three methods yield identical results which, of course, they should do in principle, but which they invariably fail to do in practice because of errors and omissions which arise through imperfect data collection.
The Central Statistical Office regards the definitive estimate of gross domestic product to be the average of the three figures obtained using the different methods.
Thus, the statistical discrepancy is simply the difference between each GDP figure and the average.
Since we now have three different measures for the value of a country's total output, we also have three different names which we could use to describe that output.
In the remainder of the book, we follow convention and use the term national income.
It will be understood that when this term is used, the terms national product and national expenditure could have been used equally well.
The ‘black’ economy
It should be pointed out that official statistics tend to underestimate the actual volume of economic activity that occurs.
This is because of the  operation of the so-called ‘black’ or underground economy.
The black economy refers to those unrecorded economic transactions conducted on a cash basis with a view to illegal evasion of tax.
In 1985, the Liverpool University Research Group estimated that the black economy in the United Kingdom amounted to 14.5 per cent of national income.
It appears that in electrical repairs ), it is common for two prices to be quoted.
The lower price is quoted on the understanding that payment will be made in cash and that no receipt or other record of the transaction will be issued.
The existence of a black economy is, of course, not confined to the United Kingdom.
It has been widely reported that in Italy, for example, whole industries operate outside the officially recorded economy.
Some estimates suggest that the Italian black economy has an output valued at 30 per cent of national income.
In 1987, Italian statisticians added 18 per cent to their estimate of Italy's national income to account for unrecorded economic activity.
Table 1.
Gross and net national product for the United Kingdom, 1987.
Table 2.
Gross and net national expenditure for the United Kingdom, 1987.
Table 3.
Gross and net national income for the United Kingdom, 1987.
The borderline between the officially recorded economy and the black economy is not always clear-cut.
If a painter decorates his own house, nobody would argue that he should pay tax on the non-existent earnings; but what if he decorates a friend's house in return for some help with fixing his car?
Or what if the painter works for other people in his free time in return for cash?
Many would exclude the second example, but would include the third example in a definition of the black economy.
By its very nature it is impossible to quantify exactly the extent of the black economy.
There is some partial evidence of its existence as the expenditure estimates of gross national product (based on the Family Expenditure Survey) regularly exceed the estimates from the income side.
Indeed, some estimates have suggested that if the Exchequer received all the tax due to it from the black economy, the basic rate of income tax might be cut by 10 per cent.
National income and economic welfare
Since the national income of a country is a measurement of the output of the final goods and services produced by that country in a year, can we conclude that if national income rises from one year to the next, economic welfare  must also rise?
We certainly can make no statements about economic welfare unless we first convert national income into real national income per capita.
In this section, we first show how this is done and secondly, we consider under what circumstances a rise in real output per capita can be interpreted as an actual, potential or pseudo-improvement in economic welfare.
National income and real output per capita To convert national income into real output per capita, it is necessary to make two adjustments:(i) national income must be deflated by an appropriate price index to convert it to real terms;(ii) the figure must then be divided by the population to convert it to per capita terms.
To show how these adjustments are made, consider a simple numerical example.
Examine the figures in Table 4 where the two years 1983 and 1988 are being compared for a hypothetical economy.
Notice that money national income has increased by 100 per cent during the period, but prices have risen by 20 per cent from the base year figure of 100 in 1983 to 120 in 1988, and population has risen by 33⅓ per cent from 3,000 to 4,000 inhabitants.
Table 4.
Comparing national income figures.
The first step is to deflate the national income figures to eliminate the effects of the rise in prices.
As 1983 is the base year, the money value and the real value of national income are the same in that year.
In 1988, though, the price index is 120 and this means that part of the increase in national income is a result of the rise in prices rather than the rise in physical output.
This rise in prices is eliminated from the figures by dividing national income by the price index and multiplying by 100.
This calculation is called deflating the national income.
Comparing the deflated figures, we see that real national income (or national income in constant prices) has increased by 66⅔ per cent during the period.
The next step is to take account of the increased size of population because, although real national income has risen, it has to be shared out among more people.
Dividing the real national income figures by population for the two years, we obtain a figure for ‘real output per capita’ of £4,000 in 1983 and £5,000 in 1988, an increase of 25 per cent .
So, in this example, although money national income rose by 100 per cent, real output per capita rose by only 25 per cent .
We can conclude that an increase in national income will only be equivalent to an increase in real output per capita if both prices and the population remain unchanged.
Since prices and populations generally change over time, it is crucially important to compare real output per capita figures rather than money national income figures before coming to any conclusions about changes in economic welfare.
Actual, potential and pseudo-improvements in economic welfare
Even if real output per capita rises, it is not necessarily true that actual economic welfare will have improved.
If changes in the distribution of income have also occurred, the improvement may only be a potential one.
The improvement may only be apparent (or pseudo) if, in addition, the increase in real output per capita is accompanied by negative externalities or is caused by increased production of goods and services which are not for current consumption.
Consider now these three types of ‘improvements’ in turn.
An actual improvement.
In Chapter 8, where welfare economics was introduced, we stated a very important condition for an increase in economic welfare.
This was the Pareto condition that at least one consumer must be made better off without at the same time any others being made worse off.
Adopting this condition, we can only interpret an increase in real output per capita as an actual improvement in economic welfare if no distributional changes occur which make any individuals or groups worse off.
A potential improvement.
Unfortunately, increases in real output per capita often do leave some individuals or groups in society worse off.
For example, suppose that there were a big new discovery of a fuel, like oil, whose production considerably boosted a country's real national income.
An unfavourable side-effect of this may be a reduction in demand for some other fuel, like coal.
Some coal-workers may then lose their jobs or be put on short-time.
These people will have been made worse off by the oil discovery which, on average, increased real output per capita, making many other people better off.
By applying the Pareto condition, we cannot say that the oil discovery improves actual economic welfare.
What we can do in cases like this is to apply the Hicks-Kaldor condition for a potential improvement.
Recall from Chapter 8 that, according to the Hicks-Kaldor condition, if any change occurs which redistributes income in such a way that the gainers can potentially compensate the losers and still be better off than they were before, then we can conclude that potential economic welfare has increased.
Clearly, when real output per capita rises, it must be theoretically possible for the gainers to compensate any losers, but this could only be interpreted as an actual improvement if full compensation were actually paid.
Since workers made unemployed in general find themselves worse off receiving unemployment benefits than they were when working, we can say that only very rarely is full compensation ever paid.
A pseudo-improvement.
An increase in real output per capita may not even increase potential economic welfare if it is accompanied by negative externalities, an increase in the number of hours worked or increased production of investment goods at the expense of consumer goods.
Some negative externalities, in the shape of pollution, congestion and less pleasant working conditions, are likely to arise as output expands and these factors will tend to offset the effects of any increase in average income.
So although consumers may on average be better off so far as their spending power is concerned, they may be worse off overall when environmental factors are taken into account.
As an example, consider the building of a large chemical factory in the heart of the countryside: the extra production may increase real output per capita in the United Kingdom, but the factory  may pollute the air and water and cause severe visual pollution in an area of natural beauty.
If these external costs offset the increase in real output per capita, then any overall improvement in economic welfare would only be apparent and not real.
We call this a pseudo-improvement.
The same argument applies if output has been increased only through the work-force taking fewer hours of leisure and putting in more hours of work.
Again, the improvement in welfare resulting from increased spending power may be offset by a reduction in welfare resulting from loss of leisure.
Overall, there may be no real improvement in welfare.
Finally, if the rise in real output per capita is caused by an expansion of investment goods industries and public sector expenditures on the civil service and defence, while at the same time there is a decline in consumer goods industries, then current economic welfare may fall rather than rise.
The reason for this is that economic welfare stems from the activity of consumption.
The production of investment goods does not in itself add to welfare in the current period, though it should do so in future periods.
Other uses of the national income statistics
We can conclude from the previous section that a change in national income (even when adjusted for price and population increases) can only be used as an indicator, and not an accurate measure, of a change in economic welfare.
There are two other possible uses of the national income figures that we should mention.
Making international comparisons
Great care should be taken in using real output per capita figures to compare different countries' standards of living.
First, a further adjustment is necessary to convert the figures to the same currency using a rate of exchange.
This poses problems because the market rate of exchange is not necessarily the ideal measure of the relative values of the goods and services consumed in each country.
Secondly, different countries have different needs and tastes which cannot easily be taken into account in making comparisons.
Notwithstanding these problems, Table 5 compares the per capita gross domestic products at market prices for the twelve EC countries in 1986, measured at current prices and ‘purchasing power parities’.
For further performance indicators for the EC states, see the comparative unemployment rates in Table 2 of Chapter 26 and the comparative inflation rates in Table 3 of Chapter 27.
Government planning
We shall see later that there is a close connection, at least in the short-term, between real national income and the level of employment in an economy.
A rising real national income with a fairly constant capital stock will generally be associated with a fall in unemployment.
Similarly, there is likely to be a direct relationship between the level of real national income and the rate of inflation — as the equilibrium level of national income approaches the ‘full employment’ level of national income, so inflationary pressure is likely to build up in an economy.
To devise appropriate government policies to combat unemployment and inflation and to estimate the effects of such policies, accurate national income statistics are essential.
Table 5.
Comparing per capita gross domestic products in the EC in 1986.
A rising level of real national income in the long-run is called economic growth and this is yet another policy objective of governments.
We can conclude that the national income figures play an important role in the planning of both short- and long-run government policies.
Economic growth is dealt with in Chapter 24.
Unemployment and inflation are dealt with in Chapters 26 and 27 respectively.
Macroeconomic equilibrium
Aggregate demand
As we mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, aggregate demand is the total demand for all final goods and services in an economy over a period of time and consists of the sum of the demands of consumers, firms, the government and foreigners.
At first sight, it may appear that the value of aggregate demand for a country should be the same as its national expenditure.
This, however, is not necessarily so.
National expenditure is the actual amount of money spent on goods and services over a given period of time, whereas aggregate demand is the total value that households, firms, the government and foreigners plan to spend out of their respective incomes over that time period: in other words, it is the total amount they are willing and able to spend.
National expenditure, then, can be called actual expenditure, while aggregate demand can be called planned expenditure.
The actual and planned measurements will differ if total output should fall short of or exceed total demand — in the former case, some demand will be unsatisfied because insufficient goods have been produced; in the latter case, some net addition to stocks will occur since too many goods have been produced.
The equilibrium level of national income
In the microeconomic market for a single good, an equilibrium is said to exist when the demand for the good is equal to the supply of it.
Similarly, in macroeconomics, we can say that the equilibrium level of national income has been reached when there are no economic forces operating to change the level of national income.
This occurs when the total demand for all goods and services (aggregate demand) is equal to the total supply of these goods and services (aggregate supply).
That is, for the equilibrium level of income to be achieved, we require that:
Aggregate demand = Aggregate supply Only when this condition is satisfied can we say that the total value of goods and services that households and the other economic agents want to buy is equal to the total value that firms want to produce.
Note that aggregate supply cannot strictly be regarded as being the same as national income.
National income is the value of the actual amount produced and so is necessarily equal to the national product and expenditure.
Aggregate supply, on the other hand, is the amount that firms want to produce given the general level of wages and prices.
The two will only be equal:(a) if wages and prices are such that firms plan to produce what is currently being produced; and (b) if firms are able to implement their production plans successfully.
Conclusion
In this chapter, the notion of national income accounting has been introduced and the equivalence of national income, product and expenditure demonstrated.
We highlighted the problems of using national income as an indicator of economic welfare.
Finally, we considered briefly the meaning of an equilibrium in macroeconomics.
The determination of the equilibrium level of national income is of central importance in macroeconomic analysis because it is this which determines to a large extent the level of employment in the economy.
It is the debate about the forces which determine this equilibrium which fundamentally separates the various schools of thought in macroeconomics.
Further reading
Exercises
l.
Review your understanding of the following terms:
economic aggregate
current prices
constant prices
national product
national expenditure
national income
consumption
savings
investment
value-added
market prices
factor cost
net property income from abroad
gross domestic product
gross national product
residual error
black economy
actual expenditure
planned expenditure
aggregate demand 
depreciation
stock appreciation
aggregate supply
equilibrium level of income
2.
The following data show the national income figures, price indices and population for a hypothetical country in 1988 and 1989:
(a)
Calculate real national income in both years.
(b)
Find real national income per capita in both years.
(c)
Comment on the change in potential economic welfare.
What other data would be useful in determining the change in economic welfare?
3.
Consider the problems involved in using national income statistics to make international comparisons of living standards.
4.
Use the following figures to compute national income (that is, net national product at factor cost):
Value of physical increase in stocks and work in progress
Imports of goods and services
General government final consumption
Gross domestic fixed capital formation
Exports of goods and services
Depreciation
Taxes on expenditure
Net property income from abroad
Consumer expenditure
Subsidies
£400m.
£37,000m.
£27,000m.
£23,000m.
£35,000m.
£14,000m.
£17,000m.
£1,000m.
£74,000m.
£3,000m.
5.
Explain the distinction between microeconomics and macroeconomics.
Give examples of economic problems that have both microeconomic and macroeconomic dimensions.
Macroeconomic theory
National income and employment
Introduction
In this chapter, we are concerned with the very important question of what determines the level of national income and the level of employment in an economy.
We start with a brief summary of the ‘classical’ economics which J.M. Keynes attacked in his book, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money in 1936.
Secondly, we outline what has become known as the Keynesian theory of national income determination.
Thirdly, we develop two extensions of the Keynesian model: the multiplier and gap analysis.
Finally, we point out the main limitations of the theory and briefly introduce the more recent ‘neo-classical’ resurgence in the shape of ‘monetarism’.
The classical theory of full employment
A basic result of classical economics was that, given flexible wages and prices, a competitive market economy would operate at full employment.
That is, economic forces would always be generated to ensure that the demand for labour would always equal its supply.
The equilibrium levels of income and employment were believed to be determined largely in the labour market.
The demand curve for labour shows the relationship between the real wage (equal to the value of the marginal product of labour in a competitive economy) and the demand for labour by employers.
This relationship is indirect: the lower the real wage, the more workers employers will want to employ.
The supply curve of labour shows the relationship between the real wage and households' supply of labour and this is a direct relationship: the higher the real wage, the greater the supply of labour.
Now consider Fig. 1, where the upper graph shows the aggregate labour market in equilibrium at a real wage of (W/P)1 and a level of employment equal to OL l .
The lower graph shows the total output that is produced when different quantities of labour are employed (it illustrates, in fact, the short-run production function).
With OL 1 , units of labour employed, output in the economy will be OQ l .
The classical economists called the equilibrium level of employment the ‘full employment’ level.
According to them, any unemployment which existed at the wage rate (W/P)1 must be due to frictions or restrictive practices in the economy or must be voluntary.
Suppose, then, that the wage rate is flexible and that the economy is sufficiently competitive to ensure that labour market equilibrium is achieved.
Can we be certain that aggregate demand will be sufficient to take up the OQ 1 units of output produced?
The classical economists answered yes — whatever the full employment level of output, the income created in producing it will necessarily lead to spending which will be just sufficient to purchase the  goods produced.
In other words, the supply of goods and services creates its own demand and there can be no overproduction.
This became known as Say's Law, named after the French economist Jean Baptiste Say (1767–1832).
Fig. 1.
The labour market and short-run production function.
Fig. 2.
A simplified flow diagram of an economy.
To illustrate Say's Law, consider e. 2 which shows a simplified version of the circular flow of income diagram.
It is simplified mainly by the omission of government and foreign trade activities.
Households receive income equal to the value of goods and services produced; part of this income they spend and part they save.
Consumption demand, then, falls short of the total value of production by the amount of saving.
This shortfall is made up by investment demand and so long as investment and saving are equal, aggregate demand (which in this simple model is consumption plus investment) will necessarily equal the total value of production.
The classical economists argued that, given a flexible rate of interest and a competitive market for loanable funds, saving and investment would always be made equal by changes in interest rates.
For example, if  investment exceeded saving, the demand for loanable funds would exceed their supply and this would push interest rates upwards, bringing forth more saving and curbing investment until they were equal again.
Similarly, if saving exceeded investment, interest rates would fall, causing investment to rise and saving to be reduced.
Recall that this mechanism was discussed in Chapter 16 and illustrated in Fig. 7 of that chapter.
In conclusion, we can say that the classical system depends crucially upon:(a) the dependence of investment and saving on the rate of interest;(b) the upward and downward flexibility of wages, prices and interest rates;(c) the existence of competitive forces in the economy.
Given these conditions, there could be no overproduction (or, in other words, no general deficiency of aggregate demand) and full employment would be assured.
Keynes' attack on the classical theory
Keynes levelled the following main arguments against the classical theory:
(a)
Saving, he maintained, depends mainly on the level of national income and is not much affected by changes in interest rates.
Investment may be influenced by interest rates, but also depends on more volatile factors in the economy like businessmen's expectations.
Given this, it is no longer possible for the rate of interest to ensure equality between planned saving and planned investment and so Say's Law will no longer hold.
(b)
He argued that, because of monopoly power in both the goods and labour markets, wages and prices will tend to be inflexible, at least in the short-run and particularly in the downward direction.
This means that in a situation where saving exceeds investment, so that aggregate demand is less than the total value of production, firms will reduce output and lay off workers.
It is in this way that demand-deficient unemployment is created.
(c)
He argued that even if wages and prices were flexible, aggregate demand would not necessarily be sufficient to ensure full employment.
This has been the subject of much debate and controversy, however, and we consider it in Chapter 22.
The Keynesian theory of employment
The main result of the Keynesian theory is that the level of real national income and therefore employment is determined largely by the level of aggregate demand.
This is, of course, very different from the classical model where ‘supply created its own demand’: in the Keynesian model, it is demand which determines how much is supplied.
The argument is that if firms find that they are producing more than is being demanded, they will observe an involuntary increase in their inventories of unsold goods and so will rectify this by cutting back on production and laying off workers.
National income will then fall until the value of what is produced is equal to the value of aggregate demand.
If firms find that they are not producing enough to satisfy demand, they will experience an unwanted fall in their inventories and so this time will attempt to increase production and hire more workers.
It follows that there will only be one level of national income at which aggregate demand is equal to the total value of production.
This is called the equilibrium level of income.
An important point to remember is that in the  Keynesian model, the equilibrium level of income is not necessarily the same as the full employment level of income.
This is the reason Keynes called his theory a general theory — he regarded the classical theory as no more than the ‘special case’ where the equilibrium and full employment levels of income coincided.
Determination of the equilibrium level of income
In order to set out the Keynesian theory more formally, we must first make a number of assumptions.
The following assumptions are intended to conform with the Keynesian view of the economy and to simplify the analysis in such a way that enables us to make useful predictions.
Notice in particular that we set out the Keynesian theory more generally than we did the classical theory where we assumed no government and no foreign trade.
The reason is that we want to deal with the Keynesian model in greater detail and derive policy implications from it.
Assumption 1: Wages and prices are fixed.
The model is a short-run model and this assumption means that, in the short-run, producers will respond to changes in demand by changing the quantity they produce rather than price.
This implies that the economy is at less than full employment.
Assumption 2: We ignore the money market.
For now, we concentrate on the real sector of the economy (that is, the markets for goods and services and for labour).
We consider the impact of money and the rate of interest in Chapters 20–22.
Assumption 3: Consumption (C) and saving (S) are both directly related to income (Y).
For simplicity, we assume that both relationships are linear and so can be drawn as straight lines as in Fig. 3.
The consumption line C represents the relationship between consumption and income.
This is the ‘absolute income’ hypothesis of consumption, outlined in greater detail in Chapter 19.
Notice that the slope of the consumption line measures the increase in consumption brought about by a one pound increase in income — this is called the marginal propensity to consume (mpc).
Similarly, the slope of  the saving line measures the increase in saving brought about by a one pound increase in income — this is called the marginal propensity to save (mps).
Fig. 3 Consumption and saving
Assumption 4: Investment (I) and government spending (C) are autonomous.
This means that they are both independent of income changes.
Government spending is determined by government policy and investment depends to some extent on the rate of interest (which for now does not appear in the model) and businessmen's expectations.
Plotted against income on a graph, therefore, they would simply be represented by horizontal straight lines, as shown in Fig. 4.
Assumption 5: Taxation (T) is in the form of lump-sum taxes only.
This is a purely simplifying assumption: it enables us to see the role played by taxes in the model, but at the same time the analysis is kept simple.
Assumption 6: Exports (X) are autonomous, but imports (M) depend directly on income.
Exports depend on such factors as incomes in other countries and the rate of exchange (which for now we assume fixed).
The demand for imports, though, will be directly and, for simplicity, linearly related to income.
These relationships are shown in Fig. 5.
Notice that the slope of the import line is called the marginal propensity to import (mpm), this is the fraction of extra income spent on imports.
Assumption 7: There is no economic growth.
This assumption is reasonable because the model is concerned with the short-run only.
We extend the model into the long-run and take account of economic growth in Chapter 24 where we deal with the Harrod-Domar growth model.
Fig. 4.
Autonomous government spending and investment
Fig. 5.
Imports and exports
For equilibrium, we require that the aggregate demand for the economy's goods and services should be just equal to the total value of goods and services produced.
As we saw in Chapter 17, aggregate demand consists of consumption, investment, government spending, exports minus imports (that is, AD = C + I + C + X -M).
The total value of goods and services produced is measured by the national income (Y).
The income received is either spent on consumer goods, or withdrawn in the form of savings and taxes (that is, Y = C + S + T).
So, as a condition for equilibrium, we can write:
Investment, government spending and exports are sometimes called injections (J) into the flow of income, while savings, taxes and imports are sometimes called withdrawals (W) from that flow.
Thus, the condition for equilibrium could be written more simply as:
We have assumed that all the injections (I, G and X) are autonomous.
This means that total injections will also be autonomous so that when plotted against income on a graph, we have a horizontal straight line.
Of the withdrawals, we have assumed that savings and imports are both directly related to income but that taxes are lump-sum taxes.
This means that total withdrawals will be directly related to income and when plotted against income on a graph will be an upward-sloping line with a slope equal to the sum of the marginal propensity to save and the marginal propensity to import.
Table 1.
Hypothetical statistics tor a simple economy.
To illustrate these results, consider a simple numerical example.
Table 1 gives hypothetical figures for consumption, savings, taxes, imports, investment, government spending and exports at different levels of national  income for a simple economy.
All the relationships conform to the assumptions we have already made.
Note that the marginal propensity to consume is 0.8 (because for every £10 million rise in income, consumption rises by £8 million) and the marginal propensity to save is 0.2.
The marginal propensity to import is also 0.2, so that for every £10 million rise in income, spending on imports rises by £2 million and the consumption of home-produced goods and services rises by £6 million.
The total injections, total withdrawals and aggregate demand lines for this economy are drawn together with a 45° line in Fig. 6.
The 45° line joins together all those points which are equidistant from the two axes.
The graph shows that there are two ways of identifying the equilibrium level of income:(a) where aggregate demand is equal to national income (that is, where the AD line cuts the 45° line);(b) where total injections equal total withdrawals.
The equilibrium level of income (Y e ) in the example, then, is £40 million.
At this level of national income, and only at this level, aggregate demand in the economy is just equal to the total value of goods and services produced.
This can also be seen from Table l: when Y equals £40 million, J and W are equal at £16 million, and AD equals Y. 
Fig. 6.
Determination of the equilibrium level of income.
This equilibrium can also be described as a stable one because at any other income level, economic forces will be generated to push the economy back towards the equilibrium position.
For example, suppose that the prevailing level of income were £50 million: as can be seen from Table 1, this would mean that £50 million worth of goods and services were being produced when aggregate demand was only £46 million.
Firms would find their inventories involuntarily building up and so would cut back production thereby reducing national income.
Similarly, if income were £30 million, aggregate demand would be £34 million and so would exceed the total value of production, inventories would be run down causing firms to attempt to step up production and so increase national income.
Note that the ability of firms to expand output in this situation depends upon the existence of unemployed resources in the economy.
We have already indicated that investment depends to some extent on the rate of interest and businessmen's expectations, government spending depends on government policy and exports depend largely on incomes overseas.
If any of these should change, there will be an effect on the equilibrium level of income.
Similarly, a change in taxation and autonomous changes in consumption, savings and imports will also affect national income.
Consider first the effects of an increase in one of the injections.
Suppose that firms increase their investment spending on new machinery by £2 million (that is, from £8m. to £10m. in our numerical example).
The immediate effect of this increased spending will be to raise national income by the full £2 million because the spending of one group in the economy is necessarily the income of some other group.
Increased spending on machinery represents higher incomes for those involved in manufacturing the machines.
The process does not end here, however, because the increase in income will bring forth additional consumption spending in the next period.
In fact, since the mpc is 0.8 and the mpm is 0.2, we know that consumption will rise by £1.6 million of which £0.4 million will be additional expenditure on imports.
Thus, consumption of home-produced goods will rise by £1.2 million.
This rise in consumption will create a further increase in income in the next period of £1.2 million over and above the initial increase and this in turn will bring forth more consumption spending.
This process will continue with both consumption and income rising, but with the actual increase becoming smaller and smaller over time until eventually they become insignificant.
The first few stages of this process are summarised in Table 2, where C *; represents consumption of home-produced goods and the subscripts refer to time periods.
Table 2.
The first few stages of the multiplier process.
The total increase in national income () will clearly be much bigger than the initial increase in investment spending.
To see how much bigger, consider Fig. 7 which shows the movement from the original equilibrium position (Y e = £40 million) to the new one after the entire process has worked itself out.
We can work out the total increase in income by recalling that the slope of the withdrawals line is equal to the sum  of the marginal propensities to save and import (given that, in this model, the marginal propensity to tax is zero).
As can be seen from Fig. 7, this slope can also be written as ΔI/ΔY.
It follows that if ΔI/ΔY = mps + mpm, then, by a simple rearrangement, we can write:
Substituting the figures from our example, we have:
In other words, national income rises by £5 million following an increase in investment of only £2 million.
This is called the multiplier effect, and the multiplier itself is the amount that the change in spending has to be multiplied by to obtain the change in income.
That is, and this is equal to 2½ in our example.
An important point to remember is that the size of the multiplier depends on the marginal propensities to save and import.
The bigger these withdrawals from increases in income, the smaller will be the multiplier.
To take an extreme example, if all the additional income received were withdrawn from the circular flow of income, the multiplier would be equal to l and the final rise in income would be just equal to the initial rise in spending and no more.
Fig. 7.
The multiplier effect.
Now note the following important points about the multiplier:
(a)
it comes into operation for any autonomous change in spending.
So autonomous changes in investment, government spending, exports and consumption will all have the same multiplier effect on an economy's national income.
(b)
The multiplier, l/ (mps + mpm), is derived on the assumption that taxes are lump-sum only.
If we had an income tax in the model so that some part of any extra income received was taken in taxes by the government, total  withdrawals would rise and the multiplier would be smaller.
This multiplier is derived algebraically in Appendix l.
(c)
The multiplier, 1/ (mps + mpm), ignores foreign repercussions which could be significant for a country with a large foreign trade sector.
Consider the effects of an increase in investment in the United Kingdom.
As national income rises, some of it is spent on imports and this is equivalent to a rise in other countries' exports.
So incomes in other countries rise (also by a multiplier effect) and some of this rise may in turn be spent on United Kingdom exports.
As United Kingdom exports increase, there will be a multiplier effect on national income which we have not so far taken into account.
.
Fig. 8.
The multiplier effect of a tax change
Finally, we must consider the effect on national income of a change in the lump-sum tax (T) on the assumption that consumption, saving and imports depend on disposable income (Y d ) rather than national income (Y): recall that Y d = Y -T. Suppose that the lump-sum tax is raised by £2 million (from £2m. to £4m.).
What will happen to the withdrawals line?
The rise in taxes will reduce disposable income by £2 million so that saving will fall at every level of national income by £ (mps × ΔY d ) or 0.2 x× £2m. = £0.4 million.
Similarly, imports will fall at every level of national income by £ (mpm × ΔY d ) which is also equal to £0.4 million.
The withdrawals line, then, which is an aggregation of the saving, taxation and import lines, will be pushed upwards by £2 million because of the tax rise and downwards by £0.8 million because of the fall in saving and imports.
Overall, it shifts upwards by only £1.2 million, as shown in Fig. 8.
Given that ΔT = ΔY d , we can write the change in total withdrawals (ΔW) more generally as 
Notice from the graph that the slope of the withdrawals line is equal to ΔW/ — ΔY = mps + mpm.
Rearranging this expression, we have  
So raising the lump-sum tax by £2 million will reduce national income by £3 million to £37 million.
The general formula for the effect of a change in a lump-sum tax on national income is 
Notice that an increase in government spending of £2 million would increase national income by £5 million (via the ordinary multiplier), whereas an increase in lump-sum taxation of £2 million (to finance the government spending, say) would reduce national income by only £3 million.
This means that a policy of increasing government spending but maintaining a balanced budget will have a net expansionary effect on the economy.
This is because the government spends all of the tax revenues raised, whereas households would have withdrawn part of this sum in the form of savings and imports.
It is no coincidence, either, that increasing both C and T by £2 million raises national income by £2 million also.
In other words, in this model, the balanced budget multiplier is equal to 1.
This result is derived algebraically in Appendix 11.
Gap analysis
Fig. 9.
A deflationary gap.
Deflationary gap Gap analysis is a simple way of describing the main policy implications of the Keynesian theory.
Consider Fig. 9 which illustrates a deflationary gap.
Since the equilibrium level of income (Y e )(the one towards which the economy tends) is below the full employment level of income (Y f ), the economy will be suffering from demand-deficient unemployment.
The deflationary gap is the amount by which aggregate demand must be increased to push the equilibrium level of income, via the multiplier, to the full employment level.
How can this increase in aggregate  demand be achieved?
The government has a number of possible policy instruments which it can use for this purpose.
Consider the following:
(a)
Increase government spending.
This will raise aggregate demand directly and, by increasing total injections, will have a multiplier effect on income.
To achieve full employment in Fig. 9, it is necessary to shift the injections line upwards by the full amount of deflationary gap.
If taxes are raised to finance the spending, the policy will still be expansionary and so reduce unemployment so long as the taxes raised do not exceed the increase in government spending by a certain amount.
(b)
Reduce taxes.
This will increase disposable income so that consumption spending will rise at every level of national income.
Once again, the multiplier will come into operation and the equilibrium level of income and employment will rise.
To achieve full employment in Fig. 9, the withdrawals line must be shifted downwards by the full amount of the deflationary gap.
Note that, if the government's budget is balanced to start with, cutting taxes while leaving government spending unchanged means running a budget deficit.
It should be noted that changing the level of government spending and/or taxation is known as fiscal policy.
In practice, governments can also use monetary policy and exchange rate policy to influence the level of aggregate demand.
Monetary policy is considered in Chapters 20–22 and exchange rate policy in Chapter 28.
The major policy implication of the Keynesian theory, then, is that aggregate demand must be increased in order to combat demand-deficient unemployment.
Fig. 10.
An inflationary gap.
Inflationary gap Now relax the assumption that wages and prices are fixed, and consider Fig. 10 which illustrates an inflationary gap.
This time the equilibrium level of income is above the full employment level and so cannot actually be attained.
The economy will be at the full employment level of  output, but excess demand (equal to the inflationary gap) will still exist so that the general price level will be forced upwards.
Appropriate fiscal policies to combat this demand-pull inflation would be a cut in government spending, or an increase in taxation.
The objective this time is to shift down the injections line or to shift up the withdrawals line by the full amount of the inflationary gap.
Limitations of the Keynsian theory
After the Second World War, Keynesian demand-management policies were used by the governments of most western countries in the attempt to keep unemployment levels down.
Generally, these policies were successful in preventing heavy unemployment like that experienced in the 1930s, but unfortunately they tended to give rise to the phenomenon known as ‘stop-go’.
That is, in periods of high unemployment, the government would expand aggregate demand: this would reduce the unemployment but at the same time tend to create inflationary pressure so that eventually the government would have to reduce aggregate demand again.
Thus, all ‘go’ periods tended to be followed by ‘stop’periods and it became difficult to achieve long-term economic growth.
Possibly the main problem is that the Keynesian model is only short-term and in the short-run, it is not always easy to predict the effects of policy changes, and the management of the economy, therefore, may become very erratic.
A second limitation of the Keynesian model as we have outlined it in this chapter is that it fails to take adequately into account the problem of inflation.
Indeed, the basic model assumes that wages and prices are fixed and the only time we allowed them to rise was after the attainment of full employment.
Experience in the 1970s in particular has shown us that high rates of inflation can coexist with high rates of unemployment and no explanation of this is provided by the Keynesian theory.
Furthermore, the coincidence of inflation and unemployment makes the Keynesian policy recommendations very questionable.
For example, if the economy is in the deflationary gap situation illustrated in Fig. 9, but is also suffering from a 15 per cent rate of inflation, an increase in government spending or a cut in taxation designed to combat the unemployment is likely to worsen the rate of inflation.
We consider the modern theories of unemployment and inflation in Chapters 26 and 27 respectively.
A further criticism which has been levelled at the Keynesian model is that it tends to understate the influence of money on the real variables in the economy.
Indeed, the model outlined in this chapter has taken no explicit account of the monetary sector and as such is sometimes called the ‘simple’ Keynesian model.
We discuss the role of money in the Keynesian model in Chapter 22 where we see that a change in the money supply, according to this model, only affects national income through its effect on the rate of interest; it is because of this that Keynesians have usually put more faith in fiscal rather than monetary policy.
A group of economists known as ‘monetarists’ have been particularly concerned to make these three main criticisms of the Keynesian theory.
Before we can describe their views in detail, we need to take a closer look at the role of money in the economy.
However, we shall see that the upshot of the monetarist position is:(a) that short-term demand management may do more harm than good;(b) that there is a close relationship between changes in the money supply and changes in money national income in the long-run;(c) that without government interference the economy will tend towards its ‘natural’ rate of unemployment.
We are particularly concerned with the views of the monetarists and their policy prescriptions vis-à-vis those of the Keynesians in Chapters 22, 26 and 27.
Conclusion
This chapter has considered some of the major advances in macroeconomic thought in the twentieth century.
The ascendancy of Keynesian economics, which was reflected in policy-making in the 1950s and 1960s, has become increasingly challenged in recent years.
The disenchantment with Keynesian demand-management among policy-makers was due to its failure to overcome the coexistence of high rates of inflation and high unemployment.
Nevertheless, the way in which modern economists view macroeconomic problems owes much to the Keynesian framework.
We turn now to an analysis of the main determinants of consumption and investment, two of the main components of aggregate demand.
Further reading
Exercises
l.
Review your understanding of the following terms:
Say's Law
loanable funds
equilibrium level of income
consumption
savings
investment
marginal propensity to consume
marginal propensity to save
marginal propensity to import
injections
withdrawals
lump-sum tax
proportional income tax
multiplier
foreign repercussions
balanced budget multiplier
inflationary gap
deflationary gap
2.
Consider a closed economy in which investment (I) and government spending (C) are assumed to be autonomous and taxes (T) are all lump-sum.
Consumption (C) and savings (S) are both directly and linearly related to disposable income (Y d ).
You are given the following information:
(a)
Write down the equations relating consumption and savings to national income and plot these relationships on a graph.
(b)
On the same graph, plot the S + T and I + C lines and identify the equilibrium level of income.
(c)
Calculate the net effect on national income of an increase in C of 12 and a simultaneous increase in T of 20.
Briefly explain the result.
3.
Outline Keynes' criticisms of the classical theory of full employment.
4.
Explain why a £10 million increase in government expenditure financed by a £10 million increase in taxation has a net expansionary effect on the economy.
5.
Explain why the Keynesian model has come under increasing attack in recent years.
6.
Discuss the effect on the equilibrium level of income and the level of total savings of an autonomous increase in the community's desire to save.
Appendix I
Algebraic derivation of the multiplier in a model with an income tax
In equilibrium,[1]
Consumption function,[2]
Autonomous investment,[3]
Government spending,[4]
Income tax,[5]
Autonomous exports,[6]
Import function,[7]
where a and d are constants, b is the marginal propensity to consume, m is the marginal propensity to import and t is a proportional tax rate.
Substituting [2]—[7]into [1], we have 
The effect of a change in investment is 
Thus, the injections multiplier in this model is  
Appendix II
The ‘balanced budget’ multiplier
The increase in the equilibrium level of national income following an increase in government spending (in a closed economy with lump-sum taxes only) is  where b is the marginal propensity to consume.
The fall in the equilibrium level of income following an increase in lump-sum taxation is 
If the tax and government spending changes occur simultaneously, the combined effect on income is:
But if the budget is kept balanced, so that ΔG = ΔT, we can write  The balanced budget multiplier, therefore, is equal to 1.
Consumption and Investment
Introduction
Consumption and investment are two extremely important aggregates in the economy.
It should be clear from the last chapter that they both play a role in determining the equilibrium level of income and employment and that a change in any one of them will cause the level of national income to change via the multiplier effect.
It follows, therefore, that if we are interested in deriving policies designed to secure full employment, we should first analyse the determinants of these variables.
That is the purpose of this chapter.
First, we reconsider the definitions of consumption, saving and investment and discuss the distinction between consumption and investment.
Secondly, we examine the Keynesian theory of consumption and saving: that is, the view that consumption and saving are both directly related to current disposable income.
Thirdly, we make use of indifference curve analysis to examine the microeconomic foundations of aggregate consumption and we outline the ‘permanent income’ and ‘relative income’hypotheses.
Finally, we turn our attention to the determination of investment and outline the views that investment depends on:(a) the rate of interest; and (b) changes in national income (that is, the so-called ‘accelerator’ theory).
Definitions
Recall the definitions of consumption, savings and investment given in Chapter 18.
Consumption is seen as households' spending on goods and services which yield utility in the current period, while saving is defined as that part of disposable income which is not spent.
In a closed economy, it follows that by definition,
Investment is seen as an activity of firms.
It is firms' spending on goods which are not for current consumption but which yield a flow of consumer goods and services in the future.
These definitions enable us to say quite categorically that a household's expenditure on food is consumption — the food will be eaten within a short period of time and that will be an end of the matter.
Similarly, we can say that the purchase of a new machine by a firm is investment — the machine itself will not yield utility to anyone in the current period but will produce (or help to produce) consumer goods probably for a long time into the future.
The distinction between consumption and investment is not so clear-cut, however, when we consider household expenditure on consumer durables, like cars and washing machines.
These are goods which last for a long time and which yield the household utility-creating services both in the current  period and in future periods.
In a sense, then, the purchase of consumer durables is both consumption and a form of investment.
Furthermore, it is sometimes useful to distinguish between consumption spending (meaning the actual amount spent on new consumer goods in the current period) and total consumption (meaning the ‘using up’ of consumer goods — both those purchased in the current period and those purchased in past periods but which are still providing services to the household).
To keep our analysis fairly simple in this chapter, we adhere to the definitions given above and ignore the complications created by durable consumer goods.
For more advanced study, it is important for the reader at least to be aware of these complications.
Consumption and saving
It can be seen from Table 2 in Chapter 17 that consumption spending accounted for over two-thirds of total expenditure in the United Kingdom in 1987 and consequently is a very important component of aggregate demand.
Small percentage changes in consumption can have a considerable effect on the equilibrium level of national income and therefore on employment.
It is of some importance, therefore, to know what factors determine consumption so that appropriate policies to combat unemployment can be devised.
The ‘absolute income’ hypothesis
The Keynesian model we constructed in the last chapter was based on the assumption that both consumption and saving were directly and linearly related to current disposable income.
This is sometimes called the ‘absolute income’ hypothesis to distinguish it from other hypotheses of consumption: in particular, the ‘relative’and ‘permanent’income hypotheses.
Table 1.
Income, consumption and savings for a hypothetical economy.
The consumption and saving functions of the ‘absolute income’ hypothesis can be illustrated either numerically, graphically or algebraically.
To show this, consider Table 1 which sets out a simple numerical example in which there is a direct linear relationship between disposable income and consumption, and between disposable income and saving.
These linear relationships are plotted in Fig. 1 where both the consumption and saving relationships are seen to be straight lines.
Notice that the slope of the consumption line is 0.8: this represents the fraction of additional disposable income which will be consumed and, as we saw in the last chapter, is called  the marginal propensity to consume (mpc).
Similarly, the slope of the saving line (= 0.2) represents the fraction of additional disposable income that will be saved and is called the marginal propensity to save (mps).
Since the consumption and saving lines are straight lines and so have constant slopes, the mpc and mps are also constant in this example.
The average propensity to consume (apc) is equal to total consumption divided by total disposable income (C/Y d ) and this varies as disposable income varies.
At point A on the graph, for example, the apc = 50/50 = 1; but at point B, the apc = 90/100 = 0.9.
The apc is in fact equal to the slope of the ray from the origin to the appropriate point on the consumption line, so that at point A, the apc is equal to the slope of OA (= 1) and at point B, the apc is equal to the slope of OB (= 0.9).
Exactly the same applies to the average propensity to save which is equal to total saving divided by total disposal income (S/Y d ).
Fig. 1.
The consumption and saving lines.
Algebraically, the relationships can be expressed in general form as follows:
It should be clear from Fig. 1 that the constant a is the intercept term for the consumption line (that is, the point where the consumption line cuts the vertical axis) and is equal to 10 in the example.
Also, the coefficient b is the slope of the consumption line and so is equal to the mpc (0.8).
Thus, the equation of the consumption line is  And the equation of the saving line is   Notice that it must always be true that mpc + mps = 1.
The following points represent the major characteristics of the ‘absolute income’ hypothesis:
(a)
Consumption and saving are stable functions of current disposable income.
The relationships are direct ones.
(b)
In our example, the relationships are linear.
It is also possible in the ‘absolute income’ hypothesis for the consumption and saving lines to be curved in such a way that the mpc falls as income rises and the mps rises as income rises.
This is illustrated in Fig. 2.
(c)
The mpc lies between 0 and 1 (0 < mpc < 1).
This means that for every additional pound of income received, consumption rises by some fraction of a pound.
Of course, it is not impossible for the mpc to be greater than 1 or even less than 0, but such values are unlikely.
(d)
The apc falls as income rises and is greater than the mpc.
The hypothesis has this characteristic because the consumption line cuts the vertical axis at some positive point (that is to say, consumption spending actually exceeds income at very low levels of income).
This is illustrated in Fig. 3 where the  slopes of the dashed lines OA, OB and OC represent the apc's at points A, B and C respectively and the slope of the consumption line itself represents the mpc.
Clearly, the apc's are all greater than the mpc and are diminishing as income rises.
This characteristic is an important one because it is empirically testable.
We turn now to a consideration of the different types of data that can be collected on the income-consumption relationship.
Fig. 2.
Non-linear consumption and saving lines.
Fig. 3.
Comparison of the apc with the mpc.
Different types of data
Statistics on the relationship between income and consumption can be collected by means of three main types of empirical study:
(a)
Cross-section budget study.
This involves taking a sample of households and classifying them according to their income groups.
Dividing the average levels of consumption spending for each income group by the corresponding average level of income gives each group's apc.
As can be seen from Table 2, which shows figures from the United Kingdom Family Expenditure Survey of 1986, the apc has a marked tendency to fall as we move from lower to higher income groups; also, the apc is greater than the mpc in every case.
This is a typical result and supports the ‘absolute income’ hypothesis.
(b)
Short-run time-series study.
This involves collecting annual data of real disposable income and consumption for the economy as a whole.
Dividing consumption by disposable income for each year gives the apc and this is done for United Kingdom data (1976–87) in Table 3.
This time, the  results are not quite so clear-cut, particularly in the period 1982–87 when the apc rose steadily in spite of rising incomes.
But in the earlier period there is a clear tendency for the apc to fall as income rises and to rise as income falls.
These figures, therefore, also tend to support the ‘absolute income’ hypothesis.
(c)
Long-run time-series study.
In this type of study, trend values of consumption and income are collected over a long period of time so that most cyclical fluctuations are smoothed out.
The most famous studies of this kind were carried out by Simon Kuznets in the 1940s for the United States (1869–1928).
The results of his study tended not to support the ‘absolute income’ hypothesis as outlined above.
Instead, they exhibited an apc which was remarkably constant and had no tendency to fall as income rose or rise as income fell.
His results are shown in Table 4.
According to these results, the long-run consumption function is proportional, as illustrated in Fig. 4.
Table 2.
Cross-section budget study for the United Kingdom.
Table 3.
Short-run time-series study for the United Kingdom, 1976–87.
Table 4.
National income and the average propensity to consume in the United States, 1869- 1928.
Fig. 4.
A proportional long-run consumption line.
The ‘absolute income’ hypothesis appears to explain the cross-section and short-run time-series data well, but fails to explain the long-run time-series data.
One objective of the more recent theories has been to try and reconcile this apparent conflict in the different sets of statistical results.
The influence of wealth on consumption
To consider the influence of wealth on aggregate consumption, we should first examine the microeconomic analysis of an individual consumer choosing between present and future consumption.
(This is, therefore, a good time to review your understanding of budget lines and indifference curves from Chapter 4.)
To simplify, we restrict the analysis to two time periods only: the present period, t, and the future period, t + 1.
Suppose that we denote the individual's present income by Y, and his expected future income by Y t + 1;
Now consider Fig. 5 where the individual's present consumption is measured along the horizontal axis and his future consumption along the vertical axis.
Point A represents the combination of present income (Y t ) and expected future income (Y t + 1;) This is clearly one consumption possibility for the consumer — he can consume all of his present income in the present period and all of his future income in the future period.
Point A must, therefore, be on the individual's budget line (or, as it may be called in this case, his consumption possibilities line).
Other consumption possibilities exist as well and these are determined by the consumer's ability to lend and borrow.
Suppose that the rate of interest for lending and borrowing is the same and equal to i.
At one extreme, the consumer could spend nothing in the present period and save all of his present income so that in the future period he can spend as much as Y t + 1; + (1 + i) Y t ; that is, his future income plus his saved present income plus interest.
This is point R in Fig. 5 and represents another point on the budget line.
Fig. 5.
The choice between present and future consumption.
Alternatively, instead of saving, the individual could borrow and so spend more than his present income in the present period.
The most he could borrow and be sure of just being able to pay back the debt out of his future income is (1/1 + i) Y t+1;; this is his discounted future income.
In the present period, then, he could just spend Y t + (1/1 + i) Y t+ 1;, and this is shown as point Z on the graph.
The line RAZ is the individual's budget line — it shows all the combinations of present and future consumption that the individual can just attain, given his present and future incomes and the rate of interest.
Since wealth is the source of the individual's present and future incomes, we can say that the position of the individual's budget line is determined by his wealth and its slope is determined by the rate of interest.
Which point on the budget line will the consumer choose?
This depends on his time preference for present and future consumption which, to some extent, depends on how patient or impatient he is.
His preferences can be illustrated by means of a set of indifference curves which are likely to have the same shape as those depicted in Chapter 4 for the case of an individual choosing between two goods.
The rational consumer will choose point W on the budget line which places him on the highest attainable indifference curve, I 1 ,.
in Fig. 6.
Fig. 6.
The consumer ‘equilibrium’ position.
At point W, the individual is consuming OC t and saving C t Y t in the present period.
This consumption and saving will change in the following circumstances:
(a)
If there is a change in the individual's wealth which affects his present and/or future income.
Such a change would cause the budget line to shift but remain parallel to the original one, as shown by line R'Z' in Fig. 6, for an increase in wealth.
The new utility-maximising point is V where the increase in wealth has caused present consumption to rise.
(b)
If there is a change in the rate of interest which will influence the lending and borrowing possibilities.
In this case the budget line would pivot around point A, becoming steeper for an increase in the rate of interest, as shown in Fig. 6.
According to this microeconomic analysis of an individual consumer's behaviour, then, present consumption depends on wealth (which is the source of both present and future incomes) and the rate of interest.
This result, however, is not reflected in the ‘absolute income’ hypothesis where consumption depends on present income alone.
To summarise, the ‘absolute income’ hypothesis may be criticised on two major grounds:(a) for not providing an adequate explanation of the  different sets of income-consumption data;(b) for not taking into account the influence of wealth and the rate of interest on consumption, and so for not being consistent with the microeconomic analysis of consumer behaviour.
Perhaps the most famous of the theories which attempt to overcome both of these criticisms is Milton Friedman's ‘permanent income’ hypothesis.
‘Permanent income’ hypothesis
The basic proposition of Friedman's ‘permanent income’ hypothesis is that permanent consumption (C p ) is proportional to permanent income (Y p ): that is, C p = kY p , where k is constant and equal to the average and marginal propensities to consume.
Permanent consumption and permanent income are long-run trend values of consumption and income, so the hypothesis is consistent with long-run time-series data (like that collected by Kuznets) which suggests that the apc is constant.
Now consider the following definitions of the new terms.
Permanent income can be thought of as the present value of the expected flow of income from the existing stock of both ‘human’ and ‘non-human’wealth over a long period of time.
Human wealth is the source of income received from the sale of labour services, while non-human wealth is the source of all other incomes (that is, incomes received from the ownership of all kinds of assets, like government bonds, company stocks and shares, and property).
Friedman points out that current measured income (Y) for a household or for the economy as a whole could be greater or less than permanent income.
The difference between the two he calls transitory income (Y T ).
which can be thought of as a temporary, unexpected rise or fall in income (for example, an unexpected increase in income resulting from a win at the races, or a temporary fall in income resulting from a short period of unemployment).
Consequently, we can write  An important assumption of the hypothesis is that Y T is not correlated with Y p .
In other words, a high permanent income is not necessarily associated with a high transitory income and a low permanent income is not necessarily associated with a low transitory income.
This means that if we were to take a sufficiently large and completely random sample of households from all income groups, we would expect to find that the negative and positive transitory incomes would just cancel each other out so that the aggregate or average transitory income level (Y T ) would be equal to zero.
In this case, of course, the average permanent income would be just equal to the average measured income (that is , Y p = Y).
On the other hand, if we were to take our sample from those families with above-average measured incomes, we would expect to find that many of them had only temporarily high incomes so that average transitory income would be positive and Y p < Y. Similarly, for a sample of families with below-average measured incomes, we should expect to find that Y T < 0 and Y p > Y.
Much the same results apply to the economy as a whole.
In a normal year (that is, not a boom year or a slump year), we should expect aggregate transitory income to be zero, so that aggregate measured and permanent incomes would be equal.
In a boom year, though, when many people would  be experiencing unexpectedly high incomes, aggregate measured income should exceed aggregate permanent income.
Exactly the opposite would apply in a slump year.
All these results are important because, as we see later, they help to explain the cross-section and short-run time-series data.
Permanent consumption can be thought of as the normal or planned level of spending out of permanent income and can differ from measured consumption (C) by any unplanned, temporary increases or decreases in consumer spending, called transitory consumption (CT).
We can write  Friedman makes two important assumptions about transitory consumption.
First, he assumes that it is not correlated with permanent consumption.
Secondly, and more questionably, he argues that transitory consumption is not correlated with transitory income — in other words, temporary increases in income do not cause temporary increases in consumption.
These assumptions make transitory consumption completely random, so that for any sufficiently large sample from any measured income group or in any year, we can expect the average and aggregate levels of transitory consumption to be zero.
This means that average and aggregate levels of measured consumption must equal permanent consumption.
Since we are concerned with average or aggregate data in macroeconomics, we need no longer make any distinction between measured consumption and permanent consumption.
This means that we can write the basic consumption function in the ‘permanent income’ hypothesis as  This is illustrated in Fig. 7.
Fig. 7.
Friedman's consumption function.
Friedman, then, has succeeded in introducing wealth into the consumption function, as the source of permanent income upon which consumption depends.
The next question to be considered is how he explains the cross-section and short-run time-series data which yield an apc which falls as measured income rises.
Consider first a cross-section budget study in which a sample of families is classified according to their incomes.
Recall that in a group of families with above-average measured incomes, Y > Y p — this means that the measured  apc (= C/ Y) will necessarily be less than the long-run apc (= C/ Y p ).
Now compare this with a sample of families with below-average measured incomes for which Y < Y p — in this case, C/ Y will be greater than the long-run C/ Y p .
Since the long-run apc is the same for both samples, we would predict that the measured apc of the families with above-average measured incomes would be less than the measured apc of the families with below-average measured incomes.
As we have seen, this result is supported by cross-section budget studies.
Next, consider the short-run time-series studies.
Recall that in a boom year, aggregate measured income exceeds aggregate permanent income so that the measured apc is less than the long-run apc, while in a slump year (where Y < Y p ) the measured apc is greater than the long-run apc.
So again we would predict that the measured apc would be higher in a slump year than in a boom year.
This is the result supported by short-run time-series data.
In conclusion, we can say that the ‘permanent income’ hypothesis takes a long-term, wide measure of income as the main determinant of consumption.
It proposes that the basic long-run relationship is proportional, yet predicts a non-proportional relationship in the short-run and for cross-section data.
‘Relative income’ hypothesis
The ‘relative income’ hypothesis was proposed by the American economist J.S. Duesenberry in 1949 and this theory can also be used to explain the apparent conflict in income-consumption data.
Like Friedman, Duesenberry believed that the basic consumption function was long-run and proportional, as illustrated in Fig. 7.
How, then, does the theory explain the non-proportionality of cross-section and short-run time-series data?
Consider each one in turn.
Cross-section data
To explain the observed non-proportionality of cross-section data, such as that in Table 2, Duesenberry argues that a household's consumption spending depends not only on its own income, but also on the incomes earned by neighbouring households.
In other words, it is the household's relative income that determines its consumption spending.
It follows that a household will spend more on consumption if it lives in a neighbourhood in which its income is relatively low than if it lives in a neighbourhood in which its income is relatively high.
This is because poorer families who see the superior goods being consumed by their richer neighbours will attempt to ‘keep up with the Joneses’ and so spend a large fraction of their incomes.
Duesenberry called this the ‘demonstration effect’.
Given the existence of demonstration effects, it is not surprising that households with relatively high incomes have lower apc's and households with relatively low incomes have high apc's.
Notice, though, that when all households' incomes rise (keeping each households relative position unchanged) there will be no change in the overall apc.
So there is no conflict between the non-proportional cross-section data and the proportional long-run data.
Short-run time-series data
To explain the non-proportionality of annual time-series data, such as that in Table 3, Duesenberry suggests that aggregate  consumption depends not just on current income, but also on the highest level of income previously attained.
To illustrate this, consider Fig. 8.
As national income rises, consumption rises along the long-run consumption line LC.
Suppose that national income reaches OY and then begins to fall.
Duesenberry argues that consumers (who have become accustomed to the income level of OY and the standard of living that goes with it) will increase their apc in an attempt to maintain their level of consumption and will move down the consumption line SC.
If national income rises again, consumers will move back along SC until OY is reached.
Fig. 8.
The ratchet effect.
Now suppose that income reaches OY 1 , and then again begins to fall.
Consumers again will try to maintain their accustomed standard of living by reducing their spending along the consumption line SC 1 .
Duesenberry called this the ratchet effect.
It explains the observed rises in the apc when income falls over the period of a trade cycle.
Investment
Total investment, which includes spending on all types of capital goods by firms, accounts for about a fifth of total expenditure in the United Kingdom.
This is a relatively small proportion, but investment fluctuates more than any other component of national income and these fluctuations generate changes in income through the multiplier.
Investment is sometimes thought of as the most dynamic element in the economy — it probably accounts for much of the cyclical instability in the economy and is an important determinant of economic growth.
Investment and the rate of interest
‘Classical’ economists viewed the rate of interest as the main determinant of investment.
To summarise this approach, consider first the microeconomic analysis of a single profit-maximising firm deciding whether or not to undertake an investment (for example, to buy a new machine).
When a firm buys a new machine, it presumably expects the yield of the investment to exceed its cost.
Calculating the expected yield from a new machine, however, is not easy because yields are spread over a number of years in the future.
Recall from Chapter 12 that an allowance has to be made for the fact that a given sum of money to be received in the future is worth less than the same sum received now.
One way of comparing the expected yield of an investment to its cost is to calculate the present value of the investment and to compare that with the present cost.
If present value > present cost, the investment can be regarded as profitable; otherwise, it is unprofitable.
Example I:
Suppose a machine which has a known life of only two years is expected to yield £242 each year.
The machine's present cost is £400 and the rate of interest is 10 per cent.
Is the investment profitable?
Present value > present cost.
The investment is profitable.
A second way of comparing the expected yield of an investment to its cost is to calculate the investment's expected rate of return and to compare this with the prevailing rate of interest.
If the rate of return exceeds the rate of interest, the investment will be profitable.
Example II:
Suppose a machine has a known life of only one year and is expected to yield £450 at the end of that year.
The machine's present cost is £400 and the rate of interest is 10 per cent.
Is the investment profitable?
We have to find the rate of return, r, which raises £400 to £450 in one year: Rate of return > rate of interest.
The investment is profitable.
It follows from the above examples that profit-maximising firms, operating under conditions of certainty, will invest in projects where the rate of return on the investment exceeds the market rate of interest.
(The rate of return on an additional investment is sometimes called the marginal efficiency of investment or MEI.)
A fall in the market rate of interest should make profitable some investments in the economy which were previously unprofitable, so that aggregate investment should increase.
Similarly, a rise in the market rate of interest should make unprofitable some investments which were previously profitable, so that aggregate investment should fall.
In other words, our microeconomic analysis of a single profit-maximising firm leads us to the conclusion that aggregate investment is inversely related to the rate of interest.
This is illustrated in Fig. 9, where the curve II can be referred  to as the demand for investment curve or the MEI curve.
Fig. 9.
The aggregate investment curve.
Empirical evidence on aggregate investment tends to confirm that it is indeed inversely related to the rate of interest, but most evidence suggests that the relationship is a fairly weak one — for example, M. Evans estimated (for United States data) that a 25 per cent fall in interest rates would cause net investment to rise by 5–10 per cent over a two-year period after a one-year lag.
Also, the results of many surveys in both the United States and the United Kingdom suggest that only a few firms explicitly take the rate of interest into account in deciding whether or not to carry out an investment project.
There are two main reasons why investment tends to be fairly interest-inelastic:
(a)
Investment is probably strongly influenced by businessmen's expectations of future economic activity.
If businessmen are very pessimistic about the future, it is unlikely that even very low interest rates would induce them to increase their rate of investment.
Similarly, if they are generally very optimistic about the future, high interest rates will not discourage them from investing.
(b)
Yields on investment projects are notoriously difficult to estimate since they depend on the future demand for the firm's products.
It could be that a firm may only be able to say with any certainty that it expects the rate of return on an investment project to be within a particular range, say 10 to 15 per cent.
A small rise in interest rates would be unlikely to dissuade the firm from investing in this case.
This would be particularly true if the investment were part of a long-term plan of expansion for the firm.
Now consider a second approach to the theory of investment — the view that it depends on changes in national income.
The accelerator theory
According to the ‘accelerator’ theory, the level of current net investment depends on past income changes.
In its simplest form, this can be written as follows: where I 1 , is net investment in the current period, Y t is current national income, Y t-1: is national income in the previous period and v is a constant known as the ‘accelerator’.
Gross investment is equal to net investment plus any replacement investment which takes place because of depreciation.
So we can write  where GI t is current gross investment and R t is current replacement investment.
For the ‘accelerator’ theory to be valid, it is necessary that firms behave in a particular way.
In fact, firms must demand additional capital to meet any increases in demand for their product.
Consider the following simplified example.
Consider a single firm which initially has a stock of ten machines each of which is capable of producing 100 units of output per year.
To keep the example simple, assume that there is no depreciation so that we do not need to worry about replacement investment.
Suppose that to start with the total demand for the firm's product is 1, 000 units.
This is shown for year 1 in Table 5: notice that the desired capital stock to meet this demand is ten machines and since the firm already has ten machines, no net investment is necessary.
So long as demand stays at 1,000 units, no net investment will take place.
But now suppose that in year 2, demand increases to 2,000 units — the desired capital stock will rise to twenty machines and to achieve this, net investment of ten machines is necessary.
In year 3, demand has risen to 3,000 units so that the desired capital stock goes up to thirty machines — since the firm already has twenty, another ten must be purchased.
Notice here that although demand has risen from year 2 to year 3, net investment has remained the same.
In year 4, demand continues to increase, but this time by only 500 units to 3,500 units: the desired capital stock goes up to thirty-five and so net investment of only five machines is necessary.
Since demand has risen by a smaller amount than previously, investment has actually fallen.
In year 5, demand levels off at 3,500 units — the firm, though, already has the thirty-five machines necessary to meet this demand and so no new investment is necessary..
Table 5.
An example of the accelerator principle
The example highlights the following important points about the ‘accelerator’ theory:
(a)
To maintain net investment at a constant positive level, demand for the firm's product must be rising at a steady rate.
(b)
For net investment to increase, demand must be increasing at an increasing rate.
(c)
If demand should level off and remain constant, net investment will fall to zero.
Notice that the relationship expressed in Table 5 can be written algebraically as follows: where NI is the firm's net investment measured in numbers of machines, D, is the current demand for the firm's product and D t is last year's demand for the firm's product.
If all firms behave in a similar way to this, then we can say that aggregate investment in the economy will depend on changes in aggregate demand — both of these have to be measured in value terms and since the value of aggregate demand in equilibrium is the same as national income, we have  which is the expression we started with.
Two main criticisms can be made of the accelerator theory as we have outlined it.
(a)
It assumes that firms faced with increased demand for their products will immediately attempt to increase their capital stocks.
This implies that there is no excess capacity (that is to say, all existing machines must be fully employed and there must be no possibility of overtime or shift working).
This is extremely unrealistic — it is more likely that firms will be able to meet some of the increased demand by working existing machines harder and using whatever excess capacity does exist.
(b)
It fails to take into account businessmen's expectations.
If businessmen regard the increase in demand as temporary, they may not respond to it at all: this will be the case if they are generally pessimistic about the future level of economic activity.
If, on the other hand, businessmen are generally optimistic and see the increase in demand as a signal for further increases, they may actually buy more machines than predicted by the accelerator theory.
Overall view of investment
In conclusion, we can combine our two approaches to investment theory and say that the level of net investment in an economy will depend on three major factors: the rate of interest (i), past national income changes and the state of businessmen's expectations (B).
Using functional notation, we can write  However, since it takes time for firms to adjust their capital stocks in response to changes in demand (remember that capital is a variable factor of production only in the long-run), it may be more realistic to introduce a lag into the accelerator part of the function and write   Only empirical testing can determine which of the three independent variables is the most important.
Conclusion
Consumption and investment are two major components of aggregate demand.
In this chapter, we have outlined the main theories which seek to explain the aggregate levels of consumption and investment.
The chapter showed that these theories are based on microeconomic foundations.
An important point to note is that the existing theories are sometimes in conflict and the empirical tests have so far proved inconclusive.
Further reading
Exercises
1.
Review your understanding of the following terms:
absolute income
marginal propensity to consume
average propensity to consume
marginal propensity to save
average propensity to save
cross-section data
time-series data
discounted future income
time preference
permanent income
transitory income
permanent consumption
transitory consumption
relative income
present value
marginal efficiency of investment
accelerator
replacement investment
2.
Consider Table 6 which shows the results of a cross-section budget study.
Calculate the average and marginal propensities to consume for each income group and comment on the significance of your results for the theories of consumption outlined in this chapter.
Table 6.
Cross-section budget study for the United Kingdom, 1971.
3.
Consider the view that the link between aggregate consumption and current measured income is a tenuous one.
4.
In the permanent income hypothesis, Friedman makes a series of assumptions regarding the statistical relationships that exist between permanent and transitory consumption, permanent and transitory income and transitory income and consumption.
Explain these assumptions and discuss their importance to the theory.
5.
Consider a firm which initially has a stock of 100 machines, each of which can produce 50 units of output per time period.
Assume that the 100 machines have been acquired at the rate of ten per time period for the last ten periods, so that from now on depreciation is equal to ten machines per time period.
Table 7 shows the demand for the firm's product in time periods 0 to 5.
(a)
Calculate the firm's gross investment in time periods 0 to 5.
(b)
Write down the equations of the relationship between gross investment and changes in demand.
(c)
Comment on the applicability of this model to the real world.
6.
Discuss the influence of changes in interest rates on aggregate investment in the United Kingdom.
Table 7.
The demand for the firm's product over time.
Money — I
Introduction
The objectives of this and the following two chapters are, first, to explain the meaning of money in a modern economy; secondly, to show how the supply of money might be influenced by government policy and other factors; and finally, to discuss the role of money in an economy.
As we shall see, this is an area which has been central to the most fundamental controversies in macroeconomics.
It is in the field of monetary theory and policy that many of the differences between Keynesians and monetarists are debated.
In this chapter, we are concerned primarily with the problems of defining and measuring a country's stock of money and with describing the methods employed in the United Kingdom to influence the money supply.
To enable the reader to gain a good understanding of these methods of implementing monetary policy, we also outline the main functions of the more important financial institutions in the United Kingdom.
The nature of money
Money can be defined as any asset that is generally acceptable in transactions and in the settlement of debts.
The key word is ‘generally’ and its interpretation does leave some room for discussion as to exactly which assets should be included as money.
In a modern economy, banknotes and coins clearly form part of the money supply as they are generally acceptable in the settlement of all transactions.
In addition, many transactions can be settled by the use of cheques drawn on bank deposits.
Note that cheques are drawn on bank deposits in current accounts (sometimes called sight or demand deposits).
Current account deposits, therefore, also form part of the money supply.
It must be pointed out, furthermore, that people can readily transfer funds from deposit accounts (sometimes called time deposits) into current accounts or cash.
Consequently, it can be argued that deposit accounts with banks or other financial institutions should also be included as part of the stock of money.
For official purposes in the United Kingdom, the following are the major alternative definitions of money.
‘Narrow’ money refers to money balances which are easily available to finance day-to-day spending, that is, for transactions  purposes .
The main official definitions of narrow money are M0, M1 and M2.
M0 includes notes and coins held by the public plus cash in banks' tills plus banks' operational balances at the Bank of England.
M0 is sometimes called the wide monetary base as it includes those assets that are, or could be, used as cash reserves by the banking system.
Notes and coins held by the public account for about 90 per cent of M0.
M1 includes notes and  coins held by the public plus all sterling sight deposits held by the private sector in United Kingdom banks.
M2 includes notes and coins, plus non-interest-bearing sterling sight deposits held by the private sector in United Kingdom banks plus interest-bearing deposits held by the private sector in United Kingdom banks and building societies for transactions purposes.
Thus, in addition to notes and coins, M2 includes ‘retail deposits’, which broadly speaking are all bank deposits of less than £100,000, and building societies deposits, both withdrawable within one month.
‘Broad’ money refers to money held both for transactions purposes and as a form of saving.
It includes assets which could be converted with relative ease and without capital loss into spending on goods and services.
The official definitions of broad money were reclassified in May 1987, mainly to take account of institutional changes in financial markets.
The main definitions of broad money are:
M3 (formerly known as Sterling M3) includes notes and coins in circulation with the public plus all private sterling deposits held by UK residents in United Kingdom banks.
Note that M3 includes time deposits in addition to sight deposits, and private sector holdings of sterling bank certificates of deposit (CDs).
CDs are interest-bearing deposits of a fixed maturity.
The depositors receive a negotiable certificate which states the amount deposited and the date on which the bank will redeem the certificate.
In this way, the depositor is able to maintain a degree of liquidity on the sum deposited as he can sell the CD on the secondary market.
M4 includes all items included in M3 plus private sector holdings of building society shares, deposits and CDs minus building society holdings of bank deposits, bank CDs and notes and coins.
These items are subtracted to avoid double-counting.
In February 1989, M0 totalled £16.5 billion; M3 totalled £226 billion; and M4 was measured at £363 billion.
In February 1989, while currency in circulation totalled £13.7 billion, private sector sterling sight deposits totalled £93.0 billion and private sector sterling time deposits totalled £122.5 billion.
It is obvious from these figures that the financial system operates on the basis of confidence: if all the account holders decided to withdraw their deposits in the form of currency on a particular day (an event with a probability value indistinguishable from zero), there would be a large number of disappointed account holders.
Note that with effect from July 1989, the Bank of England decided to discontinue the publication of statistics for M1 and M3.
Functions of money
The use of money in a complex economy, such as the United Kingdom, fulfils four main functions.
Medium of exchange
Obviously, the use of money greatly eases the carrying out of everyday transactions.
Without money, we would have to resort to barter: that is, the exchange of goods for goods.
Barter is clearly inefficient  and troublesome as it requires a ‘double coincidence of wants’.
Someone who wishes to obtain some food in return for some clothes, not only has to find someone who has some food, but who is also seeking some clothes.
This might involve a prolonged search and thus discourage the specialisation that is so important in increasing output: in a barter economy, an individual would try to be as self-sufficient as possible because of the problems of trading.
In a money economy, these problems are considerably reduced: clothes, for example, are exchanged for money which can then be used to purchase food.
The food seller is willing to accept money in the knowledge that he in turn can use it in his purchases.
Thus, with money there is no need for a double coincidence of wants.
Store of value
Money enables an individual to delay a potential purchase to the most convenient time by providing him with a way in which to store his purchasing power.
Clearly, if there is inflation, the efficiency of money as a store of value is reduced.
Unit of account
The use of money with its units of measurement (pounds and pence in the United Kingdom) enables the prices of all goods to be quoted in these units.
This facilitates the quick comparison of the respective values of different goods.
In addition, money is the unit used in the financial accounts of all businesses and, for example , in expressing the values of a country's national income and balance of payments.
Standard of deferred payment
Many transactions are conducted on the basis of credit.
Thus, payment for work carried out now might be made several months later and it is convenient for the debt to be expressed and for the payment to be made in money terms rather than in terms of some commodity.
For example, a sub-contractor on a building site may agree to do some work for the developer in return for a certain sum of money to be paid when the work is finished.
Both parties to the agreement know how much money will change hands at the agreed date in the future.
Once again, if there is inflation, money performs less efficiently as a standard of deferred payment.
Some contracts, however, have cost-escalation clauses allowing the passing on of any increased costs.
Inflation and the functions of money
The efficiency with which money performs its functions is greatly dependent upon the stability of its purchasing power.
Inflation, especially unanticipated inflation, adversely affects the functions of money by undermining wealth-holders' confidence in its ability to be used as a medium of exchange and a store of value.
In its medium of exchange role, money provides wealth-holders with a convenience yield in the sense of saving time and effort in undertaking transactions.
This yield will fall in a period of inflation because a progressively larger amount of money will be needed to pay for the same quantity of goods and services.
Money holders will, therefore, suffer a loss of purchasing power.
The store of value function is equally threatened by inflation.
As the real value of falls, wealth-holders are induced to switch to real assets, such as houses, cars and other consumer durables: this will exert upward pressure on prices of real assets and so make inflationary conditions worse.
The undesirable effects of inflation are considered in greater detail Chapter 27.
The development of money
In the course of history, many different commodities have been used as money — for example shells, animals and metals.
Over a period of time, the use of precious metals, such as silver and gold, became increasingly important.
In the seventeenth century, goldsmiths acted as depositaries for the gold of the rich.
The goldsmiths issued receipts for the gold deposited with them.
When individuals wanted to settle debts, they came to realise that rather than withdrawing their gold, they could endorse the receipts instructing the goldsmith to transfer the deposits to the named creditor.
In the course of time, the goldsmiths began to issue receipts for gold payable to the bearer rather than to any named person.
As a consequence, the goldsmiths' receipts began to circulate as generally acceptable means of payment.
The goldsmiths noticed that a large proportion of the gold was not withdrawn from the vaults and as a result they seized the opportunity of making profits by granting loans through the issue of ‘receipts’ in excess of actual gold deposits.
This was the origin of paper currency (or banknotes) as used in modern societies today.
Note that by issuing ‘receipts’ in excess of gold holdings, the goldsmiths were acting as bankers and so laid the foundations of the modern ‘fractional reserve’banking system.
The goldsmiths learnt from experience what proportion of gold reserves they had to keep in order to meet day-to-day demands for gold withdrawals.
Several goldsmiths developed into fully fledged banks and issued banknotes.
In the nineteenth century, however, the Bank of England, as the central bank, was granted a monopoly of banknote-issue.
In modern times, commercial banks are still able to create money, but only in the form of bank deposits.
This process of credit creation by banks is discussed below.
The central bank
In most countries, the central bank is at the apex of the financial system.
It is responsible for ensuring the smooth working of the banking sector and other financial institutions.
The primary aim of the central bank is to work closely with the government and so to operate in the public interest.
The Federal Reserve System of the United States, the Bundesbank of West Germany and the Reserve Bank of India are all examples of central banks.
The Bank of England is the central bank of the United Kingdom monetary system.
It was nationalised in 1946, and has the power to direct the actions of other banks.
The Bank itself is subject to the direction of the Treasury.
As far as is known the Bank of England has not issued any direction to any bank: it relies on ‘moral suasion’ and the co-operation of the banks.
Functions of the Bank of England
The Bank of England has several functions.
Consider the following.
Responsibility for the implementation of monetary policy
Monetary policy refers to control of the money supply by influencing the availability and cost of credit.
The role of the Bank of England is to ensure that the supply of money is consistent with the attainment of the government's policy objectives.
The government may, for example, specify a target rate of growth for the money supply and it will then be the Bank of England's responsibility to achieve that target.
The government's bank
The Bank of England is responsible for looking after the government's finances.
For example, it receives payments of taxes due to the government and pays out interest to the holders of the National Debt.
The bankers' bank
The Bank holds accounts for other banks which use this facility to effect inter-bank settlements.
Bankers' deposits at the Bank of England are regarded as being as good as cash by the banks because they can be turned into cash without delay.
Management of the foreign exchange reserves
The Bank is responsible for the custody and use of the United Kingdom's foreign exchange reserves.
These reserves, which are held in the Exchange Equalisation Fund, may be used to intervene in the foreign exchange market to influence the exchange rate between sterling and other currencies.
Until the abolition of exchange controls in 1979, the Bank of England was also responsible for the enforcement of the exchange control regulations.
Management of the monetary system
The Bank has among its responsibilities the management of the monetary system and the duty to ensure that sound banking principles are observed.
It has a watching brief to keep its eye on the activities of banks and other financial institutions which are required to submit monthly returns to the Bank.
The Bank also offers advice on monetary matters to the government.
Management and administration of the National Debt
The Bank is responsible for issuing new government debt and arranging for its redemption.
It aims to maintain an orderly market and the public's confidence in government debt.
Banking supervision
As noted above, one of the Bank's functions is the supervision of the banking system.
Doubts about the effectiveness of the 1979 Banking Act in ensuring an adequate supervision of banks developed after the collapse of Johnson Matthey Bankers (JMB) in 1984.
The Bank of England assumed ownership of JMB and put up a £75 million indemnity to cover claims and a £100 million loan to strengthen JMB's balance sheet.
The government's view was that it was necessary for JMB to continue in operation to maintain international confidence in the banking system and in the London gold market.
JMB is a member of the London gold market that fixes the price of gold.
The Chancellor later announced that evidence of fraud had been uncovered after an investigation into JMB's banking activities.
The Treasury published a White Paper on Banking Supervision in December 1985.
The proposals were enacted in a new Banking Act in 1987.
The Bank of England now has a statutory right to information about a bank at any time.
The Bank also has the power to carry out regular investigations of a bank's business.
It is a criminal offence for the directors of a bank to withhold information to which the Bank is entitled as supervisor.
A Board of Banking Supervision operates within the Bank of England and advises the governor of the Bank on banking supervisory matters.
The Board has the power to revoke the licence of any bank to take deposits.
Lending to individual borrowers in excess of 10 per cent of a bank's capital base has to be notified to the Bank; all exposures in excess of 25 per cent require prior notification.
The Bank of England's balance sheet
The weekly return in Table 1 illustrates the Bank's assets and liabilities: the division between the Issue Department and Banking Department is largely for historic reasons and has no real economic significance.
The Issue Department is responsible for the note issue.
When notes are issued, the Issue Department receives interest-bearing government securities in return.
The Issue Department frequently engages in open-market operations as part of the Bank's debt management.
In order to avoid large cash payments to the public on a particular date, the Bank purchases government securities before they mature.
If an issue of a government security is under-subscribed the Issue Department will purchase the remainder, which it will gradually sell to the public.
Turning to the Banking Department, public deposits refer to the government's account.
The balance is kept to a minimum, and any temporary surplus is used to reduce government borrowing.
Special deposits are deposits of banks from time to time required by the Bank of England to be lodged in addition to normal reserve requirements.
The Bank may use them to help control the level of bank lending.
Table 1.
Bank of England's balance sheet, 15 March 1989.
Bankers' deposits are the deposits of the commercial banks, to which reference has already been made.
Other accounts include the few private accounts the Bank still maintains for historical reasons, the accounts of overseas central banks and the accounts of its own staff.
The discount houses
The discount houses are unique to the British monetary system.
In a sense, they are intermediaries between the Bank of England and the commercial banks.
The discount houses attempt to make profits by creating a market in short-term financial instruments.
They borrow short-term funds and use these funds to purchase higher yielding assets, such as Treasury Bills and commercial bills.
Definition: A Treasury Bill is an instrument of short-term borrowing by the government, normally having a life of ninety-one days.
Treasury Bills enable the government to cover the difference between its revenues and expenditures on a week-to-week basis.
Definition: A trade bill is an instrument of short-term borrowing by industrial and commercial companies.
The discount houses borrow funds from commercial banks, accepting houses, overseas and other banks and from industrial and commercial companies.
The banks are willing to lend funds to the discount houses at call, overnight, or at short notice because the banks earn some interest on these funds, while at the same time retaining a pool of liquidity.
The discount houses have an arrangement with the Bank of England whereby they agree to tender for the whole of the weekly Treasury Bill issue.
The price at which they bid for these bills determines the Treasury Bill rate.
The higher the bid-price the lower is the rate of interest earned by holding them.
For example, if the bid-price were £95 for a Bill with a face value of £100, the government would be paying a 3-monthly interest rate of about 5 per cent ; if the bid-price rose to £98, the 3-monthly interest rate would fall to about 2 per cent .
Note that purchasing an asset for less than its face value is known as ‘discounting’.
In return for guaranteeing the sale of the whole Treasury Bill issue, the discount houses have the privilege of borrowing from the Bank of England as ‘lender of last resort’.
If the commercial banks are short of cash they will recall some of their money at call or short notice from the discount houses.
As these funds are tied up in Treasury Bills, commercial bills and other assets, the houses may be forced to turn to the lender of last resort — the Bank of England.
The Bank will either rediscount (that is, buy) some of the bills or make loans against the security of such bills.
The Bank will only deal in ‘first class bills’— either Treasury Bills or commercial bills which bear at least two signatures of persons of an acceptable credit standing.
Since 1981, the Bank no longer continuously ‘posts’ or announces the terms on which it will deal in bills.
The Bank has made it clear that the implied interest rate in such deals will be designed to discourage the use of the lender of last resort facility by the discount houses.
Thus, when the discount houses offer to sell bills to the Bank, the latter is in a strong  position to influence rates of interest in the bill market by refusing to buy at the rates quoted.
The implied interest rate charged by the Bank on loans to the discount houses will usually be higher than the market rate on bills.
Thus, the discount houses may be making losses on the loans they are repaying to the commercial banks.
The discount houses will want to repay the loans from the Bank quickly, and so will reduce the price at which they bid for the next issue of Treasury Bills, thus increasing the Treasury Bill rate.
As funds are attracted into the market for Treasury Bills from other parts of the money market, the reduced supply of loanable funds in these other markets will tend to push up other interest rates.
This is one way, then, in which the Bank of England can influence interest rates.
The discount houses' main assets are shown for February 1989 in Table 2.
Table 2.
Distribution of discount houses' assets, February 1989.
Commercial banks
Commercial banks are deposit-taking institutions.
They make profits by lending at a higher rate of interest than the rate they pay on deposits.
Indeed, banks usually pay no interest on current account deposits.
The banks operate the system of payment by cheques and offer a wide range of financial services to their customers.
The retail commercial banks' assets are illustrated in Table 3.
Monetary control arrangements
In 1981 the Bank of England introduced monetary control arrangements designed to allow market forces a greater role in determining the structure of short-term interest rates.
There is a requirement on all banks to hold 0.45 per cent of their eligible liabilities with the Bank.
The clearing banks, in addition, hold at the Bank whatever operational balances they deem necessary.
A commercial bank operating in the United Kingdom will, of course, have to decide on its desired cash ratio — that is , the ratio of cash to deposit liabilities at which it wishes to operate.
All banks need to maintain a cash ratio large enough to meet the cash requirements of their depositors.
On the other hand, cash reserves do not earn any return for the bank.
Thus, one of the arts of banking is to balance the potential cash requirements of depositors with the bank's desire to hold a spectrum of profit-earning assets, some of which may be relatively illiquid.
Table 3.
Retail banks' assets, December 1988.
Fractional reserve banking
In managing their portfolios, the commercial banks have two aims that may conflict: first, they wish to maintain an adequate stock of liquid assets in case their cash reserves ratio comes under pressure; secondly, they wish to earn a high rate of return on their assets in order to maximise their profits.
Generally, banks earn larger profits from long-term loans than from short-term loans as they are able to charge a higher interest rate on long-term loans.
Similarly, banks charge higher interest rates to high-risk borrowers than to low-risk borrowers.
In general, then, a bank's highest yielding assets tend to be illiquid — for example , a large proportion of advances to customers, though profitable, are illiquid; similarly, equities are illiquid in that any attempt to sell a large amount of stock would depress stock prices and cause capital losses.
Balance between liquidity and profitability
In pursuit of profits, banks wish to hold as small a proportion of their assets as possible in liquid form.
At the same time, financial prudence requires that they hold adequate cash and other liquid assets to meet customers' demand for cash withdrawals.
This means that banks (in common with all other profit-seeking financial institutions) are faced with a conflict between liquidity and profitability.
To reconcile this conflict, commercial prudence dictates that a bank operates an efficient portfolio of assets.
As shown in Table 3, the most liquid end of the portfolio comprises non-profitable assets, such as till money (notes and coins) and operational balances at the Bank of England.
These are followed by other low-profit short-term liquid assets, such as‘call money’, Treasury Bills and trade bills, that ensure a constant stream of cash to meet customers' demands for cash withdrawals.
The least liquid end of the portfolio includes high-profit assets, such as loans to individuals and companies.
Such a portfolio may be illustrated by an inverted pyramid with the most liquid assets at the base, as shown in Fig. 1.
The assets are  arranged in descending order of liquidity and ascending order of profitability.
The figure is illustrated with data for the United Kingdom retail banks.
It might be noted at this point that in recent years there has been a dramatic growth in the volume of business conducted in the interbank market and this has become a major source of liquidity for banks.
Note: The percentages are merely illustrative and exclude miscellaneous and other currency assets.
Fig. 1.
Sterling assets of the retail banks.
Credit creation
To illustrate the principle of credit creation, consider a hypothetical example of a closed economy with a single monopoly bank which observes a minimum cash ratio.
Suppose, in fact, that the bank wishes to maintain 10 per cent of its total deposits in cash in order to be able to meet the day-to-day demands of its customers.
Table 4 shows the bank's initial position; it has total deposits amounting to £10,000 and is just maintaining its 10 per cent cash ratio by holding in its tills £1,000 in cash.
Table 4.
The bank's initial balance sheet.
Suppose now that a customer deposits an extra £2,000 in cash.
The bank's new balance sheet is shown in Table 5.
Notice that the ratio of cash to deposits is no longer 10 per cent, but is now as high as 25 per cent .
Given that the bank's desired cash ratio is 10 per cent and that the bank wishes to maximise its profits, it will increase its total deposits to £30,000 so as to restore the desired ratio.
The bank does this by granting new loans amounting to £18,000.
Table 5.
The bank's balance sheet after new cash deposit of £2,000.
The final position is shown in Table 6.
The cash deposit of £2,000 has led to an increase in loans and investments of £18,000, so that total deposits have risen by £20,000 — that is, by ten times the amount of the cash deposit.
Thus, in this example, the credit multiplier (the figure any increase in cash deposits has to be multiplied by to obtain the increase in total deposits) is ten.
This means that every £1 held by the bank in cash is capable of supporting total deposits of £10.
Table 6.
The bank's final balance sheet.
If, however, the bank's desired cash ratio rose to 12½ per cent, cash holdings of £3,000 would only support total deposits of £24,000 (because £3,000 is 12½ per cent of £24,000).
Note that the credit multiplier in this case is only eight.
It follows that there is an inverse relationship between the cash ratio and the credit multiplier and, therefore, the volume of bank credit.
Although this important principle of credit creation has been illustrated above for a single bank system, the same principle will operate in an economy with many banks provided that there is an efficient clearing system.
When a bank creates a loan in a multi-bank system, the customers may write cheques in favour of customers of other banks and at the end of the day, all the banks have claims against each other.
Most of these claims will be offset by counter-claims, so that only the net indebtedness has to be settled by using the banks' balances at the central bank.
In practice, the credit multiplier in the United Kingdom is not as large as the above example suggests because of leakages.
As stated above, if an individual bank creates loans, some of the new deposits will end up in different banks.
If any individual bank expands lending faster than the other banks in the system, it will experience a drain of its cash reserves.
This reduces the bank's capacity to create credit.
Other leakages include:(a) the holding of excess reserves by banks — that is holding more than the minimum reserve requirement;(b) an increase in the public's desired cash holdings; and (c) a net outflow of currency overseas as a result of a balance of payments deficit.
Control of the money supply
There are several ways in which the Bank of England can seek to control the supply of money and to influence credit conditions.
Open-market operations
This refers to sales and purchases of government securities on the open market by the Bank of England.
If the Bank wishes to reduce the money supply it will sell securities through its broker on the open market.
The buyers will pay for these securities with cheques drawn on their accounts with the commercial banks.
The Bank of England which now holds these cheques will thus debit the accounts of the commercial banks with itself.
This fall in bankers' deposits represents a fall in the commercial banks' cash reserves.
If they were previously operating at the desired ratio, the banks will now reduce their deposit liabilities, say, by calling in advances to their customers, by selling assets or by refusing to grant new advances.
If the banks were previously operating with a cash reserves ratio above their desired ratio, however, the potential that exists for them to expand their deposits is reduced.
Note that in this case if the Bank of England uses open-market operations to reduce the money supply, the official intention may be frustrated as long as the banks' cash reserves ratio remains above the desired level.
Conversely, if the Bank of England wishes to expand the money supply, it will instruct its broker to buy securities on the open market and will pay for them with cheques drawn on itself.
The sellers of the securities will deposit these cheques with the commercial banks, which will present them for payment to the Bank.
The Bank will credit the commercial banks' accounts and this represents an increase in their cash reserves.
The commercial banks will now be in a position to undertake a multiple expansion of bank deposits.
Interest rate policy
Changes in the rate of interest at which the Bank of England conducts business with the discount houses are often linked with the use of open-market operations.
Consider the case where the Bank of England sells securities in an attempt to reduce the money supply.
The sale of securities depresses their price and so raises interest rates.
As explained above, the commercial banks' cash reserves are reduced so that they may recall their loans from the discount houses.
The discount houses may be forced to borrow from the Bank of England as lender of last resort.
In order to influence the upward movement of interest rates generally, the Bank of England may force an increase in the interest rate in the bill market.
Special deposits
The Bank of England has the power to require banks to lodge ‘special deposits’ with it.
Calls for special deposits are normally expressed as a uniform percentage of each bank's total eligible liabilities.
Special deposits normally earn interest at a rate equivalent to the Treasury Bill rate.
As special deposits are compulsory, by using them the Bank can be sure of reducing the banks' liquid assets, and they are equivalent to an open-market sale, in that they reduce the banks' ability to increase credit (and hence the money supply).
Ceilings
The Bank of England can lay down quantitative limits on the growth of bank deposits.
While ceilings have been used in the past (for example, in the late 1960s), after the introduction of the Competition and Credit Control System in 1971, their use was discouraged.
The banks argued that the overdraft system meant that it was impossible to control  bank lending as precisely as quantitative limits would imply.
Quantitative limits were also thought to restrict competition as they hampered efficient banks who were in a position to create new deposits.
Funding
Funding is the term applied when the Bank of England attempts to lengthen the maturity of outstanding government debt.
If the Bank restricts its Treasury Bill issue and sells longer-dated securities, this reduces the commercial banks' cash reserves, and thus restricts their capability of expanding bank deposits.
Requests
From time to time, the Bank of England requests banks to channel their lending into or away from certain areas.
For example, in April 1978, the Bank of England asked banks to provide finance ‘for both working capital and fixed investment by manufacturing industry and for the expansion of exports and the saving of imports’.
To achieve these goals, banks were asked to restrain other lending, in particular‘to persons and property companies and for purely financial transactions’.
Changing the cash reserves ratio
Of course, it is possible for the Bank of England to control the money supply by changing the minimum cash reserves ratio.
As shown above, an increase in the cash reserves ratio reduces the credit multiplier.
In practice, this action is not likely to be taken very often because it may have undesirable disruptive effects on the financial system.
Other sources of changes in the money supply
In addition to the methods of control used by the central bank, there are a number of other sources of changes in the money supply.
Consider the following.
Government expenditure financed by borrowing from the central bank
When the Bank of England issues new currency it obtains interest-earning government securities in return.
The issue of currency may be regarded as helping the government to finance its expenditure.
This method of government borrowing is sometimes described as ‘turning the printing press’.
In practice, the issue of new currency in the United Kingdom is geared towards meeting the expenditure requirements of consumers.
Thus, there are seasonal variations in the issue of banknotes: in the holiday season and before Christmas, for example, the issue of banknotes is increased to meet the extra demand.
Government borrowing from the banking system
If the public sector is running a deficit, the other sectors of the economy may deposit part of their consequent financial surplus with the banking system.
These deposits form part of the money supply.
The government might then borrow these funds from the banking system.
This may lead to a further expansion of the money supply, as the public sector borrowing will increase banks' deposits with the Bank of England.
Given the demand for borrowing by customers and  assuming no offsetting action by the central bank, this increase in bankers' deposits may lead to an increase in the money supply.
A change in the public's desired cash holdings
If the public decides to hold more cash and smaller bank deposits, the banks will need to replenish the cash in their tills by drawing on their balances at the Bank of England.
As cash reserves fall, the banks may be forced to reduce further the level of bank deposits.
This mechanism would work in reverse if the public decided to hold less cash and bigger bank deposits.
A change in the banks' demand for excess reserves
Most mechanical models of the determination of the money supply assume that the banks will adhere to a constant ratio of cash reserves to deposits.
More precisely, it is assumed that the banks will adhere to the minimum legal ratio, on the assumption that the banks will wish to expand bank deposits to the maximum.
In practice, however, the banks may decide, or be forced, to hold cash reserves in excess of the legal requirement.
This might happen, for example, if there were not enough potential borrowers of a satisfactory credit standing.
This means that the Bank of England cannot be sure of success if it uses open-market operations to expand the money supply.
The banks may simply allow their cash reserves ratio to rise.
Balance of payments disequilibrium
A balance of payments deficit involves a net outflow of currency.
In effect, the Bank of England has to finance the deficit by providing foreign currencies in exchange for domestic currency.
Unless offset by an expansionary open-market operation, this will result in a contraction of the money supply.
Conversely, a balance of payments surplus involves a net inflow of currency, and unless offset by a contractionary open-market operation, this will result in an expansion of the money supply.
Competition between banks and building societies
In the 1980s, competition between banks and building societies has turned out to be a major factor in the development of financial markets in the United Kingdom.
The building societies have been very successful in attracting savings from the personal sector.
In 1970 building societies accounted for almost 35 per cent of total personal sector liquid savings.
They managed to increase this share to almost 53 per cent of the personal sector's liquid savings by the mid-1980s.
There are a number of reasons that help to account for the success of building societies in the retail savings market.
First, building societies have developed a friendly image, which they have emphasised in their marketing.
Secondly, longer opening hours, including Saturday mornings, gave them a competitive advantage over banks.
Thirdly, the composite tax arrangements with the Inland Revenue, whereby a depositor's liability to income tax at the standard rate on interest payments was settled by the society, were attractive to many depositors.
This scheme was not applied to tax due on interest earned from bank accounts until 1985.
This meant that before 1985 societies were able to offer highly competitive interest rates to the typical saver who was liable to income tax.
Another factor that helped  societies to offer competitive interest rates was the relative simplicity of their operations, and consequently low administrative costs.
An additional attractive feature for savers was the fact that societies did not normally levy transactions charges on accounts.
Faced with this threat from building societies to their share in the savings market, banks have come to attach greater significance to the personal sector and to its importance as a source of profits.
As a result, banks have offered a broader range of accounts offering more competitive interest rates.
They have also reintroduced selective Saturday opening of branches, together with longer weekday opening.
The marketing strategies of banks have been aimed in some cases at attracting young customers, especially the student market.
With the coming into effect in January 1987 of the Building Societies Act 1986, some societies began to offer interest-bearing current accounts.
These accounts succeeded in attracting a large number of customers, so that the banks were forced to respond by offering interest-bearing current accounts with effect from 1989.
Apart from intense competition in the retail savings market, banks and building societies also compete strongly in the market for house finance.
Banks entered this market in a big way in the early 1980s, after the abolition of the ‘corset’ scheme, which inhibited the growth of their interest-bearing deposits and made it difficult for them to lend large sums without incurring financial penalties imposed by the Bank of England.
Deregulation of financial institutions and markets
During the 1980s, the deregulation of the financial services industry and the liberalisation of financial institutions and markets are two major developments that have been observed in the United Kingdom, France, Luxemburg and in other main financial centres in the world.
In the United Kingdom, the term deregulation can be applied to:
(a)
The easing of restrictions which hindered competition between firms dealing in securities on the Stock Exchange.
This involved the abolition of the traditional distinction between ‘jobbers’ and ‘brokers’and the ending of the practice of fixed commissions on the sale and purchase of securities.
It also included the lowering of barriers to entry into the Stock Exchange by British and overseas banks and other international dealers in securities.
These changes, which came into effect on 27 October 1986, were given the name of the Big Bang.
(b)
The relaxation of restrictions on competition between banks and building societies.
The Building Societies Act 1986 conferred a greater degree of freedom on societies to compete with banks for loans and deposits in the personal sector and to offer a wider range of services.
In the field of investment advice, the Financial Services Act 1986 gave legal backing to the principle of self-regulation by industry practitioners.
The Act has given rise to the setting up of self-regulatory organisations by financial institutions and others concerned with the provision of financial services.
The Medium-Term Financial Strategy
The Medium-Term Financial Strategy (MTFS) introduced in 1980 aimed to set out a medium-term financial framework for the monetary and fiscal policies consistent with the government's overall strategy for reducing inflation and laying the foundations for sustainable economic growth.
In 1980, the Financial Secretary to the Treasury argued that ‘the PSBR and the growth of the money supply and interest rates are very closely related.
Too high a PSBR requires either that the government borrow heavily from the banks — which adds directly to the money supply — or, failing this, that it borrows from individuals and institutions, but at ever-increasing rates of interest, which place an unacceptable squeeze on the private sector.’
It can be seen that the central position of the MTFS is the ‘monetarist view’ of inflation that controlling the rate of growth of the money supply is a necessary and sufficient condition for bringing inflation under control over the medium term, covering a period of 3–4 years.
Notice that throughout the 1980s, the objectives of the MTFS have remained the same: that is, to control inflation, to reduce the government's budget deficit and to lay down the foundation for sustainable economic growth.
But its strategy, which is reviewed annually, has changed in the light of the changing needs and circumstances in the domestic and international economy.
In the 1980 Budget, the Chancellor announced target ranges for the growth of M3 (then called sterling M3) and targets for the PSBR as a percentage of GDP at market prices.
These targets were the key elements of the MTFS.
They are shown in Table 7.
It may be noted that the outturn figure for the growth of M3 in 1980–81 was in fact 20.1 per cent and the corresponding figure for the PSBR as a percentage of GDP came out at 5.75 per cent.
There have been several other occasions on which the government's monetary targets have not been achieved.
Table 7.
Medium-Term Financial Strategy announced March 1980.
Considerable importance was placed by the government on the favourable effects that the MTFS would have on expectations about prices and employment, and therefore on wage claims.
As seen above, initially the monetary target was fixed in terms of M3.
For a government concerned with the size of the public sector and with the PSBR, an advantage of a target expressed in terms of the growth in M3 was the accounting relationship of this concept with the PSBR, with bank lending to the private sector and with external monetary flows.
It has been suggested that the methods of controlling the money supply were at fault.
Over 50 per cent of M3 consists of deposits on which  interest is paid.
An increase in interest rates may result in a flow of funds into interest-bearing deposits.
Those with loans from banks may borrow more in order to pay the higher interest charges.
The short-term effects may, therefore be perverse in the sense that a higher interest rate regime is intended to exert downward pressure on the growth of M3.
But, instead, the higher interest rate regime may cause an increased demand for loans in the short-term as debtors borrow more in order to pay the higher interest charges on existing loans.
In such a situation, contrary to the government's intention, there may be a positive relationship between the rate of interest and the money supply.
The monetarist assumption is that the velocity of circulation of broad money is more or less constant.
Given this assumption, there exists a direct relationship between M3 and money GDP at market prices.
Thus, setting annual targets for M3 would lead directly to bringing inflation under control.
But, as shown in Table 8, the velocity of circulation of M3 (and M4), in fact, fell considerably in the period between 1982 and 1988.
The essential point to note is that broad money recorded increases significantly above their target limits in most years.
Over the same period, the rate of inflation was falling.
This suggests that there was not a close link between the growth of broad money and the rate of inflation for most of the 1980s.
Table 8.
Velocity of circulation ratios of M3 and M4.
This fall in the velocity of circulation of broad money may be explained in terms of several factors.
These include greater competition between financial institutions for deposits.
This followed the abolition of exchange controls in 1979, which made it easier to move funds between financial centres in different countries.
The ‘corset’(or supplementary special deposits) scheme was abolished in 1980, and the interest rate cartel in the building society industry was abolished in the early 1980s.
The increased level of competition between banks and building societies led to a greater degree of diversification of products.
Banks and building societies offered a much wider range of interest-bearing deposits with cheque book and improved withdrawal facilities.
This meant that from the standpoint of the MTFS, broad money could no longer be relied upon as an indicator of the direct relationship between the money supply and the spending behaviour of the economy.
As a result, in the 1987 Budget, the growth target for M3 was formally abandoned.
The emphasis was switched to the growth of narrow money, as measured by M0.
As a target aggregate, M0 was first introduced alongside M3 in 1984.
Since 1987, it has been the only monetary aggregate with a target range set annually.
In the 1989 Budget, the target range for the growth of M0 was set at 1–5 per cent.
The choice of M0 is supported on the grounds that it is a reliable and predictable indicator of the economy's transactions demand for cash for immediate spending on goods and services.
Thus, its growth rate is thought to be a useful guide to the future rate of inflation.
An assessment of the MTFS
The MTFS has remained a controversial strategy throughout the 1980s as it has sought to establish simple rules for the links between monetary aggregates (such as M3 and M0), interest rates and inflation.
Financial markets have demonstrated their lack of confidence in the monetary targetry embodied in the MTFS.
The misbehaviour of M3 as an indicator of the performance of the economy (as regards inflation) bears this out.
Since 1987, the MTFS has become more an official pronouncement of the growth path of M0 than a useful guide to the methods of achieving policy objectives.
Instead, interest rate changes and exchange rate changes have become powerful weapons in the government's armoury.
These weapons are not used to restrain the growth rates of broad or narrow money.
High interest rates are used to control the growth of aggregate demand in the economy by increasing the cost of borrowing.
Also, a high interest rate strategy is partly the result of a high level of world interest rates and partly because of an adverse balance of payments position.
The threat of a further deterioration in the balance of payments has led to the strategy of active intervention in foreign exchange markets as an important adjunct to the high interest rate policy.
Interest rates
Nominal and real interest rates
Interest rates, defined simply as the cost of borrowing, reflect the market rates prevailing at the time of obtaining a loan.
A company seeking to raise funds through a bond issue, for example, will pay a coupon rate (a rate stated on the bond) that corresponds to the current market rate.
Similarly, the government, raising money on Treasury Bills and gilts, will have to offer interest rates that reflect market rates at the time of borrowing.
The rate of interest on a new loan is referred to as the nominal interest rate.
This is the rate of interest expressed in money terms and is also known as the money rate of interest.
The nominal rate of interest has two components.
One is the expected rate of inflation, and the other is the real rate of interest.
It is argued that lenders wish to be compensated for future inflation, and that the real rate of interest is a reward for postponing consumption to a future date.
So we can write Nominal interest rate = Real interest rate + Expected inflation rate  In practice, it is not possible to observe the expected rate of inflation so, for simplicity, the real interest rate is often defined as the nominal interest rate minus the actual inflation rate over a relevant period.
As an example, suppose the nominal interest rate is 15 per cent per annum and that the rate of inflation over the past year has been 10 per cent.
The real interest rate would be estimated to be 5 per cent per annum.
It must be noted that the use of a past inflation rate, rather than the expected future inflation rate, may lead to an incorrect estimate of the real rate of interest to the extent that past inflation rates are not a satisfactory guide to future inflation rates.
In the United Kingdom, one method of estimating the real rate of interest is to note the yield on index-linked gilt-edged securities.
Such securities have been issued by the British government since 1981 and enable investors to maintain the value of their investment as well as the real rate of return.
Do interest rates matter?
Amongst the many economic indicators in an economy, interest rates arouse a great deal of public attention.
Changes in their general pattern have widespread repercussions on individuals, families, businesses and governments.
Interest rate changes affect individuals' decisions to save and spend.
Business decisions whether to buy equipment or to build a new factory depend on the relationship between the rate of interest and the expected rate of return on the project.
Similarly, a government's decision about the proportion of its budget deficit to be financed by borrowing is affected by interest movements.
In spite of the far-reaching effects of changes in the pattern of interest rates, much of the theory of interest rates starts from the premise that there is one single interest rate.
This notion is based on the assumption of a perfect financial market, with perfect knowledge and complete certainty about the future.
In the imperfect world in which we live, however, there exists a whole range of different interest rates.
We have, for instance, mortgage interest rates, banks' and building societies' deposit rates, interest rates on national savings, personal loan rates, Treasury Bill rates, gilt-edged rates and so on .
As we see below, one important factor influencing the interest rate charged on a loan is the term or duration of the loan.
Although generally short- and long-term interest rates move up and down more or less in unison, this is not always the case.
Observed changes in interest rates are triggered frequently by changes in rates on very short-term (e.g. overnight) loans in the inter-bank market with rippling effects on all other rates.
In other cases, the Bank of England may influence very short-term rates through its operations in the discount markets.
Why are there so many different interest rates?
The financial press reports daily a whole range of interest rates.
These are the outcome of the flow of funds between and within different sectors of the economy, as well as between the short-term and long-term financial markets.
Different interest rates perform vital economic functions and respond to an array of influencing factors.
Consider the following.
Risk
This is a most important factor.
A lender classifies a borrower on the basis of credit-worthiness which, in turn, depends on the borrower's status, income, current loan commitments, purpose of the loan and so on.
These considerations lead lenders to charge different rates for the same amount loaned for a given time period to, say, the government, a commercial company and a private individual.
For instance, the default risk on a loan to the United Kingdom government is practically nil.
In contrast, lending to a private individual, especially unsecured lending, is extremely risky and lenders would wish to be compensated by charging a much higher rate.
The risk factor is also significant in relation to the purpose of the loan.
Loans for risky projects like the Channel Tunnel and North Sea oil exploration, for example, are likely to attract a higher interest rate than the rate on a loan to finance the construction of, say, a foodstore.
Likewise lending abroad may expose the lender to exchange rate risk, so foreign loans, in principle, command a higher interest rate than that on domestic lending.
Duration of loan
In general, the longer the term of a loan the higher the interest rate.
This means that short-term interest rates on loans due to mature in a year tend to be generally lower than the long-term interest rate on loans of longer maturity.
This is because of the greater uncertainty about the future rate of inflation and future interest rate movements.
The implication is that lenders have a myopic outlook with a tendency to discount the future more heavily.
A long-term borrower has, therefore, to pay lenders a premium, for loss of liquidity.
If, however, there are strong expectations that the general level of interest rates will fall in the future, it is possible for long-term interest rates to be lower than short-term rates.
As a result of these expectations, funds flow from short-term markets to long-term markets, thereby driving down long-term interest rates.
Competition between financial institutions
In their intermediation role between savers and borrowers, banks, building societies and other financial institutions earn profits by paying savers a lower rate of interest on deposits and charging a higher rate on loans to customers.
As the competition for deposits between profit-seeking banks and building societies has intensified, these institutions have started to offer a wide range of accounts, with varying terms and conditions, including different interest rates.
Similarly, competition in the market for loans results in variations in interest rates on loans.
Range of financial products
Closely allied to the above is the availability of different types of financial instruments, such as interest-bearing deposits, bills, bonds, gilts and equities.
These instruments meet the differing needs of savers for income, liquidity and tax considerations: for example the National Savings movement alone pays interest gross to United Kingdom residents.
In addition, interest rates on foreign currency deposits might differ from those on sterling deposits, partly because of expectations about future exchange rates.
Size of loans and deposits
Wholesale and retail deposits command different interest rates partly because of the relative administrative convenience of handling wholesale funds on a large scale rather than handling large numbers of small deposits.
Analogously, large loans attract a lower interest rate than small loans because of the administrative economies of scale.
Money and banking in less developed countries
The role of money
The stock of money has a relatively narrow base in less developed countries (LDCs) as it consists mainly of banknotes and coins in circulation.
In these countries, habits of payment by cheque are still in their infancy so that bank deposits constitute a relatively small proportion of the total money supply.
As a consequence, the volume of bank deposits has a minor influence on the general price level and total expenditure.
The scope of monetary policy measures (such as discount rates, open-market operations and changes in reserve requirements) in regulating total expenditure is therefore limited.
Given the paucity of aggregate savings and the narrow base for taxation, most governments in LDCs resort to budgetary deficits, financed through the printing of money, as a means of speeding up the process of economic development.
The resulting increase in the money supply can lead to a faster rate of inflation and a deterioration in the balance of payments.
This is because domestic inflationary pressures generally lead to the diversion of foreign currency meant to be spent on imported plant and equipment to the importation of foodstuffs and other consumer goods.
There is, however, a counter-argument that the printing of money within ‘safe’ limits may not be inflationary.
This is because in a growing economy, business units multiply and existing businesses expand, leading to an increased demand for cash holdings for reasons of safety and liquidity.
In addition, part of the increased money supply may be hoarded as the non-monetised sector (in some cases as large as 20 to 30 per cent of the economy) is brought within the monetary sector of the LDCs economy.
The non-monetised sector is characterised by barter and is known to have high hoarding propensities with respect to both commodities and precious metals.
The role of banking
In several Asian and African countries, central banks have been set up by statute and are based on the model of the Bank of England.
Like the Bank of England, these central banks maintain two separate departments for the transaction of business: the banking department concerned purely with banking business; and the issue department concerned with the issue of notes.
In a number of LDCs commercial banks have also followed the English orthodoxy of branch banking.
The operations of commercial banks in LDCs, however, are concentrated in major cities and towns.
Additionally, loans and advances are concentrated on major industrial borrowers.
The banks generally maintain large excess reserves with consequent loss of potential profits.
The demand for personal loans and agricultural credit remains largely unsatisfied.
Thus, small traders, indigenous producers and small  farmers have to depend upon friends, relatives, landlords and money-lenders for loans.
It is well known that money-lenders typically charge exorbitant interest rates which are insensitive to interest rates in the organised money markets.
As indicated above, banks and financial institutions in most LDCs have not reached the same stage of development as those in the industrially advanced countries.
Therefore, central banks in most LDCs have a statutory responsibility to promote the growth of financial institutions so that the latter can mobilise and channel the community's savings into planned investment.
A notable feature of this policy has been the rapid increase in the number of industrial and agricultural banks and finance corporations during the past two decades.
Some central banks also give positive encouragement to the growth of co-operative banks and credit societies and thus promote ‘thrift’ and ‘self-help’at local and regional levels in the LDCs.
Conclusion
This chapter has considered the important topic of money: we examined the definition of money, its functions and traced its evolution from the days of the goldsmiths.
Next the main activities of the central bank and the commercial banks were described, highlighting their roles in influencing the money supply.
In order to appreciate fully the implications of changes in the money supply on other variables in the economy, we must first consider the factors influencing the demand for money.
This is our objective in the next chapter.
Further reading
Exercises
1.
Review your understanding of the following terms:
‘narrow’ money
‘broad’ money
medium of exchange
store of value
unit of account
standard of deferred payment
central bank
discount houses
Treasury Bills
open-market operations
special deposits
cash reserves ratio
excess reserves
real rate of interest
2.
A monopoly bank has the following balance sheet.
It is required to maintain a ratio of cash to total deposits of 10 per cent.
(a)
Illustrate the bank's profit-maximising balance sheet on the assumption that it grants new advances.
(b)
Suppose the bank has the original balance sheet and that the minimum cash ratio is increased to 12½ per cent.
Illustrate the bank's new profit-maximising balance sheet on the assumption that it wishes to maintain a 50 per cent liquidity ratio — that is, the ratio of cash and bills to total deposits.
3.
Discuss the main disadvantages of an economy in which incomes are paid in kind and transactions are carried out by barter.
4.
‘Money can only be defined in terms of its functions.’
Discuss.
5.
Consider the view that no banking and financial system can operate effectively without a central bank.
6.
Describe the methods available to the Bank of England to control the supply of money in the United Kingdom.
What are the limitations on these methods of controlling the money supply?
Money — II
Introduction
In this chapter, we examine the factors which influence the demand for money and the important question of how the economy reacts to changes in the supply of money.
Economists are interested in the economy's reactions to such changes because society's ability to purchase goods and services may be affected.
Additionally, changes in the money supply not only affect individual holders of money, but may also lead to inflation and so inject a degree of instability into the economy.
Discussion of the effects of changes in the stock of money goes back hundreds of years.
In 1750, David Hume (in his essay, ‘Of money’) gave an early account of the relationship between a country's stock of money and level of prices.
This relationship is generally described as the ‘quantity theory of money’.
In 1911, an influential exposition of the theory was presented by the American economist, Irving Fisher.
In more recent times, there has been a long-running debate between monetarists and Keynesians as to the precise influence of money on individuals, businesses and the economy as a whole.
This chapter starts with a discussion of the quantity theory of money, setting out first the Fisher version and secondly, the Cambridge cash-balance version.
The Keynesian theory of money is then considered and the liquidity-preference theory of the determination of the rate of interest is explained.
Finally, we consider the ‘modern quantity theory’ which is the basis of the views put forward by monetarists.
The quantity theory of money
Fisher's version
Irving Fisher's version of the quantity theory can be explained in terms of the following ‘equation of exchange’: where M is the nominal stock of money in circulation and V is the transactions velocity of circulation of money (that is, the average number of times the given quantity of money changes hands in transactions); P is the average price of all transactions and T is the number of transactions that take place during the time period.
Both MV and PT measure the total value of transactions during the time period and so must be identical.
Thus, the ‘equation’ is really an identity which must always be true: it tells us only that the total amount of money handed over in transactions is equal to the value of what is sold.
As an example, suppose that during a given time period, the number of transactions (T) is 1,000 and that the average price of these transactions (P) is £5, then it follows that the value of what is sold (PT) is £5,000.
If the money stock (M) is only £500, then the average number of  times each pound changes hands, the velocity of circulation (V) must be 10.
As an identity, the quantity theory is no more than a way of calculating the velocity of circulation.
The identity, however, is converted into a theory of the determination of the price level by assuming:(a) that the money supply is determined by the monetary authorities;(b) that the number of transactions is fixed in the short-run because of the classical presumption that the economy operates automatically at full employment; and (c) that the velocity of circulation is also fixed in the short-run because it depends largely on institutional factors (such as whether workers are paid weekly or monthly) which themselves tend to remain constant for long periods of time.
With T and V constant, the identity can be rewritten as follows: It now follows that changes in M, initiated by the monetary authorities, will cause proportionate changes in P. Notice that the direction of causation runs from changes in the stock of money to changes in the general price level.
Definition: The quantity theory of money states that the average price of transactions in an economy is proportional to the nominal quantity of money in circulation.
According to the quantity theory, money is held only for the purpose of making payments for current transactions.
Thus, the demand for money is called a transactions demand.
When the money supply is increased, people find themselves holding more than they need for current transactions and so attempt to spend the excess.
It is this extra spending which, given full employment and consequent constant number of transactions, pushes up the price level.
As prices rise, the value of transactions rises and so the demand for money rises.
This mechanism ceases when the demand for money and supply of money are equal again.
Cambridge version
A version of the quantity theory which concentrates on the factors that determine the demand for money was developed by economists at the University of Cambridge.
These economists argued that an individual's demand for cash balances (or nominal money) is proportional to the individual's money income.
If this were true of all individuals, then the aggregate demand for money (MD) could be written as proportional to money national income (Y): where k is a constant.
Notice that Y in this version represents the money value of spending on all final goods and services produced during the time period.
This is much narrower than Fisher's notion of the value of all transactions (PT) which included spending on intermediate goods and financial assets, as well as final goods and services.
Since Y is money national income, it can be divided into its price and quantity components, so that where P is the general price level and Q is real income (or output).
Notice that k is the reciprocal of the income velocity of circulation of money (which can be defined as the average number of times the money supply changes hands in financing the national income).
This demand for money arises to enable the community to fulfil its planned expenditures during the intervening periods between receipts of wages, salaries or other forms of income.
If we continue to assume that the money supply (M) is under the control of the monetary authorities, we can write that in equilibrium, Substituting from above, we have  With k constant, and Q fixed because the economy is assumed to remain at full employment, an increase in M will create an excess supply of money.
This leads people to increase their spending directly on goods and services so that the general price level is pulled upwards.
As this happens, the demand for money increases and eventually becomes equal to the money supply again.
Thus, both the Fisher and Cambridge versions of the quantity theory come to the same important conclusion: that an increase in the money supply leads directly to an increase in spending and, with full employment, the general price level is proportional to the quantity of money in circulation.
Keynesian theory of money
Keynes divided the demand for money into three types:(a) the transactions demand, which is the demand by firms and households for holdings of money to finance day-to-day transactions;(b) precautionary demand, which arises out of uncertainty and the desire not to be caught short of ready cash; and (c) the speculative demand, which is the demand for money as a financial asset and therefore part of a wealth portfolio.
In (a) and (b), money is clearly held mainly for its role as a medium of exchange.
In (c), it is held mainly for its role as a store of wealth.
What factors influence these three demands for money?
Consider them in turn.
Transactions demand
The transactions demand for money arises because individuals receive their incomes weekly or monthly and yet have to pay for many of the goods and services they buy on a day-to-day basis.
The amount of money held by an individual to finance these transactions, therefore, is likely to depend on the size of the individual's money income and on institutional arrangements, such as how often the individual is paid and how often he pays his bills and engages in monetary transactions.
If we assume that these institutional arrangements remain unchanged, then money income is the main determinant.
For the economy as a whole, we can expect the total demand for money for transactions purposes to depend directly on money national  income.
Using functional notation, we can write  where L, is the transactions demand for money.
Note that for a given level of income, the transactions demand for money would rise if more households were paid fortnightly or monthly rather than weekly.
This is because such households would find themselves holding more money on average to finance the same total value of transactions.
This is illustrated in Fig. 1 where a household, which at first is paid an income of £100 per week, is assumed to spend all of its income in a steady stream until, at the end of each week, it has nothing left until it receives its next £100.
The household's average holding of money (that is, its transactions demand for money) is £50.
If the household should now be paid £200 fortnightly, it can be seen that its average money holding increases to £100.
So the household's demand for money has risen even though its income has remained unchanged.
Fig. 1.
The transactions demand for money.
In what follows, we ignore the possibility of such institutional changes and assume that the transactions demand for money depends only on money national income.
Precautionary demand
This demand for money arises out of consumers' desires to provide for unexpected, and therefore unplanned, expenditures.
For example, a salesman on a business trip may carry some extra cash with him, not for expected transactions, but to guard against any unforeseen contingencies, such as his car breaking down, or the possibility of his coming across a cash bargain.
This demand for money is also likely to depend on national income: the higher the total value of transactions, the more money will be needed to guard against unexpected transactions.
It can be argued that rates of interest may also influence the precautionary demand.
The rate of interest is the opportunity cost of holding money: thus, if interest rates rise, consumers and firms may be tempted to reduce their precautionary holdings and hold interest-bearing assets instead.
For simplicity, however, it is convenient to assume that the precautionary demand does not respond to changes in interest rates (that is, it is completely  interest-inelastic).
This enables us to combine it with the transactions demand and to suppose that the total transactions and precautionary demand for money is a function of money national income.
Indeed, in what follows, wherever we refer to the transactions demand, L t , it should be understood that this includes the precautionary demand.
Speculative demand
It was in his analysis of the speculative demand for money that Keynes differed fundamentally from his predecessors.
Before examining the nature of this demand for money, however, we first have to understand the relationship between the price of a bond and the rate of interest.
Recall that a bond is an asset that earns a fixed sum of money for its owner each year.
In a perfect capital market, the price of a perpetual bond (that is, one which is never redeemed) which earns £5 per annum for its owner will be £100 when the rate of interest is 5 per cent — this is because £100 invested in any other income-earning asset would earn a return of £5.
If the market rate of interest now rises to 10 per cent, the price of the bond will fall to £50, because £50 invested in any income-earning asset will now yield £5.
Similarly, if the rate of interest should fall to 2 per cent, the price of the bond would rise to £250.
There is, then, an inverse relationship between the price of a bond and the rate of interest.
It follows that an increase in the rate of interest, which reduces the saleable value of a bond, means a potential capital loss for an investor who purchased the bond at a higher price.
Similarly, a fall in the rate of interest means a potential capital gain for investors.
Keynes argued that individuals would have some expectation or conception of the ‘normal’ rate of interest, although each individual's conception of what was normal might differ.
If the prevailing rate of interest were greater than an individual's conception of the normal rate, that individual would expect the rate of interest to fall in the near future.
It follows that the higher the prevailing rate of interest, the more people will anticipate that the next change will be downwards.
Since a fall in the rate of interest implies capital gains for bond-holders, the theory predicts that an abnormally high interest rate will lead to a large demand for bonds and, consequently, a small demand for speculative money balances.
The analysis applies in reverse if the actual rate of interest is thought to be abnormally low.
In this case, individuals will expect the rate to rise in the near future and so will expect potential capital losses for bond-holders.
In this situation, bonds will appear less attractive and potential buyers will postpone intended purchases and bond-holders themselves will attempt to sell bonds before the fall in bond prices.
Thus, if the prevailing interest rate is low, the theory predicts a low demand for bonds and, consequently, a high demand for speculative money balances.
In this way, Keynes derived an inverse relationship between the rate of interest and the speculative demand for money, as illustrated in Fig. 2.
Notice that as the rate of interest falls from Oi l to Oi 2 , the speculative demand for money increases from OL 1 s to OL 2 s .
But at the low interest rate, Oi 3 , bonds become so unattractive (because their prices are high and expected to fall) that the speculative demand for money becomes perfectly elastic.
Fig. 2.
The speculative demand for money.
Total demand for money
The total demand for money (or total liquidity preference) is found by adding together the transactions, precautionary and speculative demands.
Figure 3 shows the total demand for money plotted against the rate of interest: L s represents the speculative demand and L t represents the transactions and precautionary demands for a given level of income.
The horizontal summation of L s and L t yields the total demand for money curve, L. Note that a rise in income, which would cause L t to increase, would shift the total demand for money curve to the right.
Similarly, a fall in income would shift it to the left.
Fig. 3.
The total demand for money.
Effects of a change in the money supply
In Fig. 4, L represents the total demand for money and M 1 s the initial supply of money.
Given competitive forces in the money market, the interaction of this demand and supply will determine the market rate of interest at its equilibrium level Oi 1 .
This is the Keynesian liquidity-preference theory of interest.
Should the prevailing interest rate be greater than Oi l , there would be an excess supply of money (or excess demand for bonds) which would push up the price of bonds and push down interest rates, back towards the equilibrium.
Similarly, at interest rates below Oi l , the excess demand for money exerts upward pressure on interest rates.
The equilibrium at Oi l can, therefore, be described as a stable one.
Fig. 4.
Effect of a change in the money supply on the rate of interest.
Now suppose that the money supply is increased to M 2 s .
This creates an excess supply of money at the interest rate Oi l .
According to the Keynesian theory, firms and households will attempt to run down the excess money balances they are being forced to hold by buying bonds.
But, in the aggregate, they are unable to increase their holdings of bonds and they only succeed in driving up the price of bonds.
As we have seen, an increase in the price of bonds implies a fall in the rate of interest.
As the rate of interest falls, so the speculative demand for money increases.
Eventually, the rate of interest will reach Oi 2 at which point firms and households are induced to hold the increased money supply in speculative balances.
Note that the major effect of the change in the money supply is on the rate of interest.
National income and employment will only be affected if the fall in the rate of interest causes a rise in investment and, possibly, consumption.
In the Keynesian model, consumption and investment only respond weakly to changes in the rate of interest — that is to say, they are interest-inelastic.
This implies that monetary policy is not very powerful as a means of influencing output and employment.
The analysis applies in reverse for a fall in the money supply.
This time, firms and households find that their actual money balances are below their desired money balances.
They attempt to build them up by selling bonds.
In the aggregate, however, the community cannot reduce its bond holdings and the attempt to do so only drives down bond prices and, therefore, leads to an increase in interest rates.
As the interest rate rises, the speculative demand for money falls and money market equilibrium is eventually restored.
The liquidity trap
The horizontal part of the total demand for money curve shown in Fig. 4 is sometimes referred to as the liquidity trap, a theoretical possibility pointed out by Keynes in the General Theory.
The liquidity trap occurs where the demand for money becomes perfectly interest-elastic at some very low interest rate.
The argument is that at abnormally low interest rates (at or below Oi 2 in Fig. 4) virtually everyone would expect the interest rate to rise towards its normal level in the near future.
In this situation, then, virtually everyone would be expecting a fall in the price of bonds and, therefore, capital losses for bond-holders.
Thus, if the monetary authorities  increased the money supply, the whole of the increase would be added to speculative balances and the interest rate would remain unchanged.
This is shown in Fig. 4 where the increase in the money supply from M 2 s to M 3 s leaves the interest rate unchanged at Oi 2 .
In this extreme case, the velocity of circulation falls as all increases in the money supply are added to ‘idle’ balances, and monetary policy is powerless to drive down interest rates and, therefore, is unable to give any stimulus to investment or consumption.
In retrospect, it might be argued that the significance of the liquidity trap was over-emphasised.
Modern econometric work has found no conclusive evidence for the existence of a liquidity trap.
However, the major weakness of the Keynesian theory of the demand for money is that it is couched in terms of a choice simply between money and bonds.
More recent work has attempted to allow for the fact that holders of money balances may switch into a whole spectrum of assets, such as equities, trade bills and certificates of deposit.
The modern quantity theory
Milton Friedman restated the quantity theory of money in 1956 as a theory of the demand for money, and this ‘modern quantity theory’ has become the basis of views put forward by monetarists.
In this theory, money is seen as just one of a number of ways in which wealth can be held, along with all kinds of financial assets, consumer durables, property and ‘human wealth’.
According to Friedman, money has a convenience yield in the sense that its holding saves time and effort in carrying out transactions.
Friedman sees the real demand for money (M D /P) as depending on total wealth (W), the expected rates of return on the various forms of wealth (r), the ratio of human wealth to non-human wealth (w) and society's tastes and preferences (T).
Using functional notation, we can write: Consider each of the independent variables in turn.
Total wealth
The demand for money will be directly related to total wealth (which is the sum of human and non-human wealth) so long as money is regarded as a ‘normal good’ by wealth holders.
Thus, as total wealth increases, the desire to hold money (one of the components of total wealth) will also increase.
Expected rates of return on wealth
Since the rates of return on bonds and equities represent the opportunity cost of holding money, we can expect an inverse relationship between these expected rates of return and the demand for money.
Notice that, in addition to the various market rates of interest, the expected rate of inflation should also be taken into account here.
The higher is the rate of inflation, the greater is the negative return from holding money and the more attractive are the alternative interest-bearing assets.
Thus, there is also an inverse relationship between the rate of inflation and the real demand for money.
The ratio of human wealth to non-human wealth
Friedman includes this variable because human wealth is so illiquid.
It cannot be sold (in the absence of slavery) and individuals have only a limited ability to transfer non-human wealth into human wealth (though an individual can, of course, invest in himself through education or by undertaking training courses).
The higher the w ratio, the greater will be the demand for money in order to compensate for the limited marketability of human wealth.
Tastes and preferences
Friedman argues that the demand for money also depends on a number of factors which are likely to influence wealth holders' tastes and preferences for money.
The main problem with this demand for money function is that of finding a method of measuring total wealth.
Friedman suggested that permanent income (Y p ) may provide an acceptable proxy variable.
Recall from Chapter 19 that this is a long-run measure of income which can be thought of as the present value of the expected flow of income from the stock of human and non-human wealth over a long period of time.
It can be estimated as an average of past, present and expected future incomes.
Incorporating this into the function, and assuming that w and T are constant in the short-run, we can write:
This formulation is not dissimilar in appearance from the Keynesian liquidity-preference function, L = f (Y, i).
There are, however, two crucial differences.
First, the Keynesian function includes current national income, whereas Friedman is using permanent income as a proxy for total wealth.
Secondly, in the Keynesian function (where money is a close substitute for bonds), the demand for money is interest-elastic because if the rate of interest earned from holding bonds changes, wealth holders are assumed to react only by changing their money holdings; but in Friedman's function (where money is a substitute for all other assets, both financial and real), the demand for money is believed to exhibit low interest-elasticity.
Effects of a change in the money supply
Now suppose that the central bank increases the money supply — for example, by purchasing government securities on the open market.
Assuming that the money market is in equilibrium initially, the policy will raise the supply of money above the demand for money, and wealth holders will find themselves holding more money than they desire in their portfolios.
They will attempt to adjust their portfolios by spending their excess money balances on a wide range of assets, financial and real.
This brings us to the key difference between the Keynesian and monetarist models.
In the Keynesian model, wealth holders attempt to spend their excess money balances on bonds, thereby forcing down interest rates.
In the monetarist case, wealth holders attempt to spend their excess money balances on all types of assets, including physical goods.
Thus, there is an effect on interest rates downwards (as in the Keynesian model), but also a direct effect  upwards on the output or prices of goods and services.
This is illustrated in Fig. 5 where the increase in the money supply is shown by the shift from M 1 s to M 2 s .
If the demand for money curve remained unchanged, the interest rate would fall to Oi 2 .
The increased demand for goods and services, however, leads to an increase in the output or prices of these goods and services, so that the nominal demand for money increases at every interest rate.
The demand for money curve shifts from M D to M 1 D and the interest rate Oi 3 and a higher level of money national income result.
Notice that in Fig. 5, the demand for money curves are drawn fairly steeply.
This reflects the monetarist view that the demand for money is interest-inelastic.
A summary of the main tenets of monetarism and the monetarist policy recommendations are summarised at the end of the next chapter.
Fig. 5.
Effect of an increase in the money supply.
The relation between interest rates and real expenditure
Interest rates are determined by a number of complex factors.
For example, people's expectations about future inflation, interest rates, production costs, imports and exports, exchange rate movements and other external developments may all affect interest rates.
However, the question of how the effects of changes in interest rates get transmitted to real expenditure decisions is unclear.
Consider the Keynesian and monetarist views.
Keynesian view
We have seen that in the Keynesian world, an increase in the money supply affects the rate of interest and hence the cost of borrowing.
Most Keynesians, therefore, dispute the contention that changes in interest rates directly affect the price level.
Instead, they argue that the effects of a rising interest rate are transmitted indirectly to real expenditure decisions through the cost of borrowing, especially the cost of mortgage loans.
An increase in mortgage interest rates depresses the demand for home loans as individuals reduce their demand for new housing.
Consequently, the fall in demand for building materials and construction workers will generate downward multiplier effects on other types of investment.
It can be seen that the chain of causation is long so that, overall, the effect of interest rate changes on aggregate demand may be small.
Monetarist view
As reflected in recent United Kingdom monetary policy, monetarists contend that there is a direct relationship between the nominal money supply and money national income.
They argue that higher interest rates lead to a lower rate of growth of credit and the money supply and, consequently, a lower inflation rate.
So an interest rate increase directly stimulates saving and reduces real expenditure, particularly of those people with variable interest rate obligations (such as households with mortgage loans, overdrafts or other loan commitments).
Since a rise in interest rates means a fall in the values of financial assets, this further depresses total real expenditure via the wealth effect.
(The wealth effect may be defined as the change in spending on goods and services which results from a change in the real value of financial assets.)
To monetarists, all assets are close substitutes for one another.
So when interest rates rise, this induces wealth-holders to substitute financial assets (such as bonds and deposits) for real assets at the margin.
Conclusion
In this chapter, we have considered the main determinants of the demand for money in terms of, first, the classical quantity theory of money; secondly, the Keynesian liquidity-preference theory; and finally, Friedman's modern quantity theory.
In all three approaches, we have examined the effects on money national income of changes in the money supply.
This discussion is continued in the next chapter where, after deriving the IS-LM model and considering the contribution of Keynes to economic theory and policy, we turn our attention once more to the monetarist challenge to Keynesian economics.
Further reading
Exercises
1.
Review your understanding of the following terms:
Fisher's ‘equation of exchange'
speculative demand for money 
transactions velocity of circulation
income velocity of circulation
Cambridge cash-balance approach
transactions demand for money
precautionary demand for money
liquidity-preference
liquidity trap
interest-elasticity of demand for money
modern quantity theory
2.
A worker's average earnings are £100 per week, all of which he spends at an even rate throughout each period.
What are his average money holdings if he is paid:(a) weekly;(b) monthly?
Suppose his income increases by 25 per cent.
How are the answers to (a) and (b) affected?
3.
Consider the following information about a hypothetical economy: Stock of money = £50 million.
Each pound changes hands on average 3 times per year.
The number of transactions is 30 million per year.
(a)
Find the average price level.
(b)
Suppose the stock of money increases to £60 million, but that the velocity of circulation and number of transactions remain constant.
What is the new average price level?
(c)
Now suppose the velocity of circulation rises to 5 and the number of transactions increases to 40 million.
What is the new average price level?
(d)
Suggest possible reasons for the increase in the velocity of circulation.
4.
Assuming an initial equilibrium in the money market, describe the effects of an increase in the money supply:(a) in the context of a Keynesian model;(b) in the context of the ‘modern quantity theory’.
5.
Explain why there is an inverse relationship between the speculative demand for money and the rate of interest in the Keynesian liquidity-preference theory.
Under what circumstances might the demand for money be perfectly interest-elastic?
6.
Discuss the qualitative effect on the demand for money of the following changes:
(a)
an increase in the use of credit cards;
(b)
an increase in the rate of return from holding bonds;
(c)
a fall in the general price level;
(d)
a decrease in the proportion of human wealth to non-human wealth
Money and national income
Introduction
In Chapters 18–21, we examined the real and monetary sectors of the economy separately.
Our objective in the first part of this chapter is to combine these pieces of analysis and so derive a more general model (developed originally by J.R.
Hicks in 1937) in which the equilibrium of income and the equilibrium rate of interest are determined simultaneously.
This model is expressed graphically using IS and LM curves, so part of our task is to derive and explain these curves.
In the second part of the chapter, we discuss the value of Keynes' contribution to economic theory and policy.
This involves outlining the neoclassical attack on Keynesian economics and the ‘reinterpretation’ of Keynes as a disequilibrium economist by writers such as R.W. Clower and A. Leijonhufvud.
Here, a distinction is made between Keynesian economics and the economics of Keynes.
The final part of the chapter is concerned with setting out the monetarist challenge to Keynesian economics and with comparing Keynesian and monetarist policy recommendations.
A synthesis of the real and monetary sectors
The IS curve
In Chapter 18, we showed that the equilibrium level of income is determined at the point where total withdrawals from the flow of income (S + T + M) are just equal to total injections into that flow (I + G + X).
Suppose now that we introduce the rate of interest into the analysis and thus provide a link between the real and monetary sectors of the economy.
The variable most likely to be influenced by changes in interest rates is investment.
Assume that a rise in  interest rates causes a fall in investment and vice versa.
With a given level of government spending and exports, it follows that total injections will also be inversely related to the rate of interest.
Definition: The IS curve joins together all those combinations of the rate of interest and the level of income at which the real sector of the economy is in equilibrium — that is, at which total injections equal total withdrawals.
An IS curve is derived in Fig. 1 which shows four interconnected graphs for a hypothetical economy.
Graph (a) shows the inverse relationship between total injections (J) and the rate of interest (i).
Graph (b) represents the equilibrium condition that total injections should equal total withdrawals (W).
Since J is measured along the horizontal axis and W along the vertical axis, the only points on the graph at which J = W must lie along the 45° line from the origin (assuming, of course, that both axes are in the same scale).
Graph (c) illustrates the direct relationship between total withdrawals and national income (Y).
Fig. 1.
Derivation of the IS curve.
Notice from graph (a) that at an interest rate of 5 per cent, total injections amount to £20 million.
Graph (b) tells us that, for equilibrium, total withdrawals must also be equal to £20 million.
It is clear from graph (c), however, that there is only one level of national income at which W = £20 million.
This is an income level of £100 million.
It follows that an interest rate of 5 per cent and an income level of £100 million is one combination of interest and income at which the real sector is in equilibrium.
This combination must be one point on the IS curve and is plotted as point A in graph (d).
Now consider an interest rate of 10 per cent.
At this higher interest rate, total injections amount to only £10 million.
This means that, for equilibrium, total withdrawals must also be £10 million and therefore that income must be £40 million.
This gives us a second combination of interest and income (10% and £40m.) which must also be on the IS curve.
It is plotted as point B in graph (d).
Choosing other interest rates and finding the level of income required for equilibrium in each case will yield a series of combinations, all of which will lie along the downward-sloping IS curve shown in graph (d).
It should be clear that for total injections and total withdrawals to remain equal requires that a rising interest rate be accompanied by a falling level of income, and vice versa.
The reader should be able to confirm that if investment were completely interest-inelastic so that the injections line in graph (a) were vertical, the IS curve would also be vertical.
Given a stable withdrawals line, the steepness of the IS curve depends on the interest-elasticity of investment.
The LM curve
Now consider the monetary sector of the economy.
We saw in the previous chapter that equilibrium is achieved in the money market when the total demand for money (which depends on the interest rate and the level of income) is equal to the money supply (which is assumed to be autonomous).
Definition: The LM curve joins together all those combinations of the rate of interest and the level of income at which the monetary sector of the economy is in equilibrium — that is, at which the demand for money equals the supply of money.
Fig. 2.
Derivation of the LM curve.
An LM curve is derived in Fig. 2 using the same procedure as above.
Graph (a) shows the Keynesian speculative demand for money (L s ) on the assumption that it is inversely related to the rate of interest between the interest rates Oi and Oi,1 : above Oi 1 , the speculative demand is assumed to be  zero and below Oi, it is assumed to be perfectly elastic.
Graph (b) represents the equilibrium condition that the sum of the speculative and transactions demands for money should equal the given money supply.
The line MM shows how a money supply of £50 million can be divided between transactions and speculative holdings.
Graph (c) shows the direct relationship between the transactions demand for money (L t ) and national income.
Notice from graph (a) that at an interest rate of 5 per cent, the speculative demand for money is £20 million.
Inspection of graph (b) shows that with a given money supply of £50 million, equilibrium is achieved when the transactions demand is equal to £30 million.
From graph (c), however, we see that the transactions demand will only be equal to £30 million when national income is £45 million.
This gives us one combination which must be on the LM curve: it is plotted as point C in graph (d).
Now consider the higher interest rate of 10 per cent.
The speculative demand for money is very low at this interest rate and equal to only £5 million.
For equilibrium, transactions demand must be equal to £45 million and, from graph (c), we see that income has to be £67.5 million.
The combination of a 10 per cent rate of interest with a £67.5 million level of income represents a second point on the LM curve, plotted as point D in graph (d).
Choosing other interest rates (between Oi and Oi l ) and finding the level of income required for equilibrium in each case will yield a series of combinations, all of which lie along the upward-sloping LM curve shown in graph (d).
It should be clear that, in this range of interest rates, for the demand for and supply of money to remain equal, a rising interest rate must be accompanied by a rising level of income, and vice versa.
In Fig. 2, the reader should be able to confirm that for interest rates above Oi 1 , where the speculative demand for money is zero, the LM curve becomes vertical.
At interest rate Oi, where the speculative demand is perfectly elastic, the LM curve becomes horizontal.
General equilibrium
Fig. 3.
The point of general equilibrium
An IS curve and an LM curve are drawn together in Fig. 3.
The point of intersection determines the rate of interest and the level of income at which both the real and monetary sectors of the economy are in equilibrium.
The only combination of interest and income at which both markets are in  equilibrium is interest rate Oi 1 and income level OY 1 .
This is called the point of general equilibrium.
Stability of the general equilibrium
Recall from Chapter 6 that an equilibrium is said to be a stable one when economic forces tend to push the market towards it.
Figure 4 illustrates that the general equilibrium we have just derived is indeed a stable one.
To show this, consider all the points to the left of the IS curve, like point A: at this point, with the given interest rate Oi 1 , the level of income is too low for equilibrium to be achieved in the real sector.
This means that injections exceed withdrawals and the total value of output is less than the economy's aggregate demand.
In this situation, firms find their inventories being run down involuntarily and so act to increase output.
This is the economic force which pushes up national income.
For all points to the left of the IS curve, then, there is pressure on income to rise.
Similarly, for all points to the right of the IS curve, there is pressure on income to fall.
Fig. 4.
The stability of the general equilibrium.
Now consider points above the LM curve, like point B: at this point, with the given level of income OY 1 , the interest rate is too high for equilibrium to be achieved in the monetary sector.
This means that the supply of money exceeds the demand for money and so downward pressure is exerted on the rate of interest.
This is true for all points above the LM curve and it similarly follows that upward pressure will be exerted on interest rates at all points below the LM curve.
The directions of the pressures being exerted on incomes and interest rates in the four quadrants of the graph are indicated by the arrows in Fig. 4.
It follows that at any disequilibrium point, such as point C, economic forces will be pushing the market towards the general equilibrium position.
The actual path to equilibrium may be a spiral (as illustrated) rather than a direct route, but eventually, given sufficient time with other variables remaining unchanged, the equilibrium should be reached.
Shifting the IS and LM curves
Having demonstrated the stability of the IS-LM equilibrium, we can now consider what changes in the economy will cause the IS and LM curves to  shift.
Consider first the effects of an autonomous increase in investment spending.
For equilibrium to be maintained, a higher level of withdrawals and therefore national income is required at every interest rate; this means that the IS curve shifts to the right, as shown in Fig. 5.
This causes the equilibrium level of income to rise from OY 1 to OY 2 and the equilibrium rate of interest to rise from Oi 1 to Oi 2 .
Note that the reason for the rise in the equilibrium rate of interest is that the higher income level will have brought forth an increased transactions demand for money.
Fig. 5.
A shift in the IS curve.
Secondly, consider the effect of an autonomous increase in the real money supply (this could be caused by an increase in the nominal money stock or a fall in the general price level).
This will cause the LM curve to shift to the right, as shown in Fig. 6.
The reason for this is that every income level (which determines the transactions demand for money) must now be associated with a lower interest rate and therefore a higher speculative demand for money if equality between the total demand for and supply of money is to be maintained.
Notice that the new equilibrium is characterised by a lower rate of interest, Oi 2 , and a higher level of income, OY 2 .
In this case, the increased money supply has reduced the interest rate which, in turn, has caused a rise in investment spending; it is this rise in investment which causes the increase in the level of income.
Fig. 6.
A shift in the LM curve.
Table 1.
Summary of the causes and direction of shifts in the IS and LM curves.
Table 1 summarises the changes in the economy which cause either the IS curve or the LM curve to shift.
All the changes are autonomous in the sense that they are not themselves caused by changes in income or interest rates.
The reader should be able to confirm the direction of the shifts either graphically or by reasoned argument.
Uses and limitations of the IS — LM model
It must be emphasised that the IS-LM model is a theoretical construction based on many assumptions.
Since the assumptions we have made are the same as those in the simple Keynesian model and the Keynesian theory of money, the IS-LM model derived above is sometimes called the general Keynesian model.
It can, however, be modified to take account of different assumptions and this means that it is a useful framework for illustrating the differences between the various schools of thought.
For example, one major application of the IS-LM model is in comparing the effectiveness of fiscal and monetary policies in the Keynesian and neo-classical theories.
This application is considered in Chapter 25.
It is important at this stage to point out two serious limitations of the IS-LM model and these should be borne in mind in all its applications.
(a)
It is a comparative static equilibrium model and so ignores the time-lags which are so important in examining the effects of economic policy changes.
(b)
The model does not enable us to examine the effects of changes in aggregate demand on both output and prices.
On the one hand, the Keynesian version of the model assumes a constant price level and so cannot analyse the problem of inflation.
On the other hand, in the neo-classical version of the model, which applies when full employment is reached, the price level is determined by the nominal money supply and output is assumed to be determined exogenously.
Keynesian and neo-classical economics
In the last few chapters, we have referred to Keynes and Keynesian economics on many occasions.
Clearly, the publication of the General Theory in 1936 had an enormous impact on both economic theory and policy-making.
In the field of macroeconomic policy-making, Keynes' contribution has undoubtedly been influential.
The adoption in the 1950s and  1960s by western economies of demand-management policies to combat unemployment in the main kept unemployment rates down and we saw no return to the extremely high unemployment rates of the 1930s.
It is in the field of economic theory that Keynes' contribution has been questioned by neo-classical economists.
Basically, the debate has been centred on the question of whether or not a competitive market economy with flexible wages and prices would automatically tend towards a full employment equilibrium position.
The neo-classical economists argued that it would do so and, therefore, that all Keynes had done in effect was to add a single assumption to the neo-classical system: the assumption that wages and prices were inflexible downwards because of the existence of trade unions and other restrictive practices (which, of course, was well known anyway).
Keynesians, on the other hand, attempted to show that a competitive economy, even with completely flexible wages and prices, would not be likely to achieve full employment automatically.
Consider how this debate progressed.
The neo-classical view
Fig. 7.
The neo-classical attainment of full employment.
The neo-classical view is that a perfectly competitive economy always tends towards its full employment equilibrium position.
This is illustrated in the three-graph diagram in Fig. 7.
The upper graph shows the economy's initial general equilibrium position in the real and monetary sectors.
Notice that since we have now introduced a flexible price level, it has become necessary to relabel the horizontal axis as real income.
The lower left-hand graph is the short-run aggregate production function  and the lower right-hand graph illustrates the economy's labour market.
Notice that for convenience the real wage is measured along the horizontal axis and the quantity of labour is measured along the vertical axis.
As drawn, equilibrium in the real and monetary sectors exists at an output level of OY 1 which is produced using a quantity of labour OL 1 .
Unfortunately, this is not the full employment quantity of labour: there is an excess supply of labour (or unemployment) equal to BC.
According to the neo-classical economists, this unemployment cannot persist.
Assuming that wages and prices are flexible upwards and downwards, the excess supply of labour will cause money wages to fall.
As the real wage falls, employment and output rise, but this spoils the equilibrium in the real and monetary sectors of the economy.
In fact, there will be an excess supply of goods and services on the market which will exert downward pressure on prices.
The result is a deflation of both wages and prices which causes the real money supply to increase, so shifting the LM curve to the right to LM'.
This deflation, according to the neo-classical economists, will continue until the new equilibrium in the real and monetary sectors is just consistent with equilibrium in the labour market — that is, at point A in Fig. 7.
Only when this point is reached will the unemployment in the economy have been eradicated.
The Keynesian view
Keynesians were sceptical of the above mechanism, even assuming flexible wages and prices.
In particular, they pointed to two barriers which might exist to prevent the full employment equilibrium from being reached: lock of investment and the liquidity trap.
The possible lack of investment is illustrated in Fig. 8 where the IS curve is very steep and cuts the horizontal axis at a point below the full employment level of income Y,.
Recall that the IS curve will be steep when investment is very interest-inelastic.
In this case, as shown in the diagram, it is impossible for a full employment equilibrium to be reached by means of a shifting LM curve alone.
Fig. 8.
Lack of investment.
The liquidity trap was explained in Chapter 21.
Recall that it exists where the interest rate is so low that the demand for money becomes perfectly interest-elastic.
When the demand for money is perfectly interest-elastic, the LM curve is horizontal, as illustrated in Fig. 9.
In this case, the equilibrium  level of income is unaffected by the increase in the real value of the money supply.
The LM curve shifts to the right, as shown, but the intersection of the horizontal part of the LM curve with the IS curve is unchanged.
What is happening here is simply that the additional real money supply is being held in speculative or ‘idle’ balances.
Fig. 9.
Liquidity trap.
The Pigou effect
The neo-classical economists, largely through the work of Pigou, produced a counter-argument to the above Keynesian cases known as the Pigou effect or the real balance effect.
According to this, with a constant nominal money supply, a general deflation of wages and prices will tend to increase the real value of people's holdings of money above their desired levels.
Consequently, people will reduce their savings and increase their consumption in an attempt to reduce their ‘real balances’.
In the above cases, where full employment is not reached, as wages and prices fall and the LM curve shifts to the right, the IS curve will also shift to the right as consumption increases.
With both curves now shifting to the right, the equilibrium levels of income and employment must increase (even in the liquidity trap and with interest-inelastic investment) and there is now nothing to stop full employment from being reached.
This is illustrated in Fig. 10.
Fig. 10.
The real balance effect.
The important difference between Keynesian and neo-classical economics is that in the extreme Keynesian model, wages and prices are assumed to be inflexible (at least in the downward direction) whereas in the extreme neo-classical model, wages and prices are assumed to be completely flexible.
This means that the Keynesian model may be more relevant in the short run (in which wages and prices do not have time to adjust to demand and supply changes), but that the neo-classical model may be more relevant in the long run (in which wages and prices do have time to adjust).
To illustrate the difference between the two schools of thought more clearly, it is useful to derive the aggregate demand (AD) curve and the aggregate supply (AS) curve.
The AD curve
The AD curve shows the relationship between the price level and equilibrium real income (or aggregate demand).
To derive this relationship, we assume that the nominal money supply, the level of government expenditure and tax rates all remain unchanged and we examine the effect on real income of a change in the price level.
Fig. 11.
Derivation of the AD curve.
When the price level falls, we have seen that the LM curve shifts to the right (because a fall in the price level with a constant nominal money supply represents an increase in the real money supply).
Also, we have seen that the IS curve shifts to the right because of the real balance effect.
These shifts are shown in the upper graph of Fig. 11 where the price level falls from OP to OP 1 .
LM (P) and IS (P) are the LM and IS curves before the fall in the price level, and LM (P 1 ) and IS (P 1 ) are the curves after the price level fall.
Real income rises from OY to OY 1 .
The combinations (P, Y) and (P 1 , Y 1 ) are shown as two points on the aggregate demand curve in the lower graph.
Other points along the downward-sloping AD curve can easily be derived in a similar manner.
Since every combination of real income and the price level along the AD curve is associated with a point of intersection between the IS and LM curves, we can define the AD curve in the following way:
Definition: The aggregate demand curve joins together all those combinations of the price level and real income at which both the real sector and the monetary sector of the economy are in equilibrium.
It should be clear that an expansionary change in the economy (such as an increase in government spending, a cut in tax rates or an increase in the money supply) would shift the AD curve to the right.
Similarly, a contractionary change would shift the AD curve to the left.
The AS curve
The AS curve depicts the output (or real income) that firms are willing and able to supply at each price level.
We have seen in this chapter that, according to the neo-classical theory, flexible wages and prices ensure that the labour market is in equilibrium — in other words, full employment is assured in the long-run.
This means that in the long-run the level of real income will always be at the level associated with full employment, whatever the price level.
If the price level should rise, the real wage would fall, creating an excess demand for labour.
This would cause a rise in the money wage and so restore full employment.
Similarly, if the price level should fall, the real wage would rise, creating an excess supply of labour.
This would lead to a fall in the money wage and so restore full employment.
It follows that in the neo-classical model, firms will be willing to supply the full employment level of real income (Y f ) at each price level — thus, the AS curve is vertical at Y f .
This is illustrated in Fig. 12 which also shows an upward-sloping short-run AS curve.
In the short-run, firms will temporarily reduce output if the price level falls and will temporarily produce in excess of the full employment level of output if prices are high enough to make this profitable.
Comparing the Keynesian and neo-classical theories
The intersection of the AD and AS curves shown in Fig. 13 illustrates a long-run equilibrium position in the neo-classical model.
The equilibrium price level is OP and the equilibrium level of real income is OY f , the full employment level.
To compare the neo-classical and Keynesian theories, consider Fig. 14.
Suppose that the economy is initially at the full employment level of income OY f and that the equilibrium price level OP prevails.
Now consider the effect of a fall in aggregate demand (perhaps caused by a cut in government spending or a reduction in investment demand) which shifts the AD curve downwards from AD 1 to AD 2 .
Fig. 12.
The neo-classical AS curve.
Fig. 13.
Equilibrium in the neo-classical model.
Fig. 14.
Comparing the neo-classical and Keynesian models.
In the neo-classical model, where the price level is assumed to be flexible, the price level falls from OP to OP 1 and real income remains at the full employment level, OY f .
In the Keynesian model, the price level is assumed to be inflexible so that the fall in aggregate demand has the effect of reducing real income to OY 1 with the price level remaining unchanged at OP.
The inflexibility of prices up to full employment in effect makes the AS curve the inverted L-shape, P EAS.
Thus, in the Keynesian model, a fall in aggregate demand leads to a fall in real income and reduces employment.
This means, of course, that a disequilibrium is created in the labour market.
We turn now to a reinterpretation of Keynes' economics which emphasises the disequilibrium aspects of the analysis.
The reinterpretation of Keynes
Fig. 15.
Keynes as a disequilibrium theorist.
The economists Clower and Leijonhufvud have argued that a distinction needs to be drawn between Keynesian economics and the economics of Keynes.
Keynesian economics, they say, is the comparative static equilibrium approach to macroeconomics which has developed from other people's interpretations of the General Theory.
The true economics of Keynes, they  argue, is a dynamic analysis of the macroeconomy in disequilibrium and as such represents a major contribution to economic theory as well as to economic policy-making.
In other words, Clower and Leijonhufvud reinterpret Keynes as a disequilibrium theorist.
This reinterpretation sets Keynes' economics apart from the traditional equilibrium analysis of neo-classical theory which depended on some kind of tâtonnement process (as described in Chapter 6) to ensure that all transactions took place in equilibrium.
Given a tâtonnement process or at least a perfectly operating price mechanism which disseminated the information necessary to co-ordinate the plans of households and firms, the neo-classical comparative approach would be justified.
Now consider Fig. 15 which illustrates a full employment equilibrium position.
Suppose that some disturbance occurs — say, a fall in investment demand.
The IS curve will shift to the left (from IS to IS') creating an excess supply of goods and services and an excess supply of labour.
In the neo-classical system, this excess supply would cause a lower wage and price level to be established and this deflation in turn would shift the IS curve back to the right (because of the real balance effect) and the LM curve to the right (as the real money supply rises) until the full employment level of income were restored.
With the help of the auctioneer and the tâtonnement process, this new equilibrium position would be established instantaneously.
The neo-classical analysis can be justified only if the new equilibrium positions are reached quickly.
Suppose now, though, that there is no auctioneer.
Transactors will have to search for the new equilibrium values themselves.
If they had perfect information, the new equilibrium values would be established immediately; unfortunately, information is far from perfect — there is ignorance and uncertainty instead.
Searching for the new equilibrium values is time-consuming and in the meantime ‘false trading’ will take place at ‘false prices’.
Firms which have experienced a fall in sales will have no idea whether the reduced demand for their product is temporary or permanent; they will be reluctant to cut their prices until they know that it is permanent.
Whilst they are searching for the relevant information, their inventories of unsold goods will start to build up.
This is involuntary and undesirable and many firms will react to it by reducing output and laying off workers.
This is the essence of Keynes' analysis: that output or quantity adjustments come before price adjustments in response to changes in demand in the economy.
The same applies in the labour market where workers made unemployed do not immediately reduce their asking wage and take up a new job — instead, they spend some (possibly quite considerable) time searching for a new job at the old wage.
Only when they eventually become aware that no such jobs are available do they reduce their asking wage.
Note that this analysis draws on the theory of search discussed in Chapters 6 and 15.
Given sufficient time with other things remaining unchanged, prices and wages would eventually be adjusted and full employment may be restored.
Given the dynamic nature of variables like investment in the economy, however, ‘other things’ are unlikely to remain unchanged.
Once income has begun to fall and businessmen's expectations become pessimistic, persistent  unemployment may be created, far worse than the initial disturbance might have suggested.
Thus, according to Clower and Leijonhufvud, Keynes' conclusions that the economy may automatically move to a position of high unemployment which can only be corrected by demand-management policies are based on an ingenious analysis of the economy in its disequilibrium state.
We turn now to an outline of ‘monetarism’, a version of neo-classical economics.
Monetarism
The basic propositions of monetarism stem from the revival of the quantity theory of money, in particular by Milton Friedman, as described in Chapter 21.
The contributions of monetarists to the analysis of inflation and unemployment are discussed in Chapter 27.
Our intention in this section is simply to set out the main ideas of monetarism and to compare briefly monetarist policy recommendations with those of Keynesian economists.
Probably the most important assertion of monetarists is that the velocity of circulation of money, although not constant, is predictable, independent of the money supply and stably related to a limited number of variables.
This assertion leads directly to the proposition that money national income and the nominal money supply must be directly correlated with each other.
To show this, consider the following version of the quantity theory: where M is the nominal money supply, V is the income velocity of circulation and PY is the money value of national income.
Given V, all changes in M must be associated with changes in PY in the same direction.
Friedman has written that ‘there is a consistent though not precise relation between the rate of growth of the quantity of money and the rate of growth of nominal income’.
In 1963, Friedman and Anna Schwartz carried out extensive empirical tests of this correlation in their book A Monetary History of the United States, 1867–1960.
The results they obtained suggested a close relationship between changes in the United States' money supply and changes in money national income over a long period of time.
Correlation, of course, does not necessarily mean causation.
Friedman and Schwartz, however, claimed that it was changes in the nominal money supply which caused changes in money national income (recall the mechanism described in Chapter 21) and, once again, they appealed to empirical evidence to support their view.
For example, they looked in detail at each major recession and argued from their observations that the money supply declined for reasons other than the recession itself and that the fall in money national income generally followed the fall in the money supply.
Critics of monetarism, however, remain unconvinced.
Lord Kaldor, for example, has argued that the money supply is passively adjusted to the level required to accommodate the current level of economic activity.
A second assertion of monetarists is that in the absence of government intervention in the economy, there will be an automatic tendency towards the ‘natural rate of unemployment’— that is, ‘the level of unemployment which has the property that it is consistent with equilibrium in the structure of real  wage rates’.
Consequently, they argue, the effects of changes in the money supply will be largely on the general price level (P) rather than on real output (Y).
They also believe that this will be a lagged response, with prices following an expansion of the money supply with a time-lag of up to two years.
So, the short-term effect may be on output as firms strive to meet the increased demand, but the eventual effect will be almost entirely on prices.
(Notice the similarity between this analysis and the reinterpretation of Keynes outlined in the previous section.)
Finally, monetarists assert that the economy (again in the absence of government intervention) will not be subject to any inherent instability.
Indeed, they believe that instability in the past has been caused, rather than smoothed out, by governments' futile attempts at demand-management policies.
Policy recommendations
Unlike Keynesians, monetarists are almost entirely against the use of short-term demand-management policy.
Instead, they recommend a steady, annual expansion of the money supply at a constant rate, determined by the predictable steady growth in the velocity of circulation and the predicted growth in the country's potential output.
No attempt should be made to use monetary policy to offset any disturbances which may occur from time to time.
Any such attempts would most likely fail and possibly make matters worse because of the difficulties of predicting short-run changes and because of the variability of the time-lags with which changes in the money supply affect nominal national income.
Similarly, fiscal policy, according to monetarists, has no role to play in demand-management.
Since the economy will tend automatically to its ‘natural rate of unemployment’, any increase in government spending will increase the demand for money and so crowd out private spending through rising interest rates.
This is the case illustrated in Chapter 25, in Fig. 3, where the LM curve is vertical.
If the expansionary fiscal policy is accompanied by an increase in the money supply to counter the crowding-out effect, the result will be nothing more than a higher rate of inflation.
Generally, then, we can conclude that the monetarists' major policy recommendation is: maintain a steady constant growth in the money supply, otherwise leave things well alone.
Conclusion
This chapter has drawn together the real and monetary sectors of the economy and shown how a general equilibrium may be determined.
The IS-LM model is a method of illustrating the general Keynesian model and provides a useful means of analysing the effects of various policy changes.
We have seen that Keynes' contribution to economics has been challenged by neo-classical economists and reinterpreted by Clower and Leijonhufvud in terms of disequilibrium theory.
The most serious challenge to Keynesian macroeconomic policies, however, has come from Friedman and the monetarists.
Further reading
Exercises
1.
Review your understanding of the following terms:
real sector
monetary sector
IS curve
LM curve
general equilibrium
real money supply
nominal money supply
wage and price flexibility
real balance effect
Keynesian economics
economics of Keynes
tâtonnement
disequilibrium analysis
price adjustment
quantity adjustment
monetarism
income velocity of circulation
crowding out
2.
Consider a simple closed economy with no government.
The following equations represent the investment and savings functions respectively: where i is the rate of interest and Y is the level of national income.
Find the equation of the IS curve and plot it on a graph.
If the equation of the LM curve is Y = 4 + 2i,
(a)
find the equilibrium level of national income and the equilibrium rate of interest;
(b)
calculate the effect on the level of income and the rate of interest of an autonomous fall in investment of 10;
(c)
explain why the fall in income is less than that predicted by the multiplier.
3.
‘The IS-LM model is based on comparative static analysis and ignores the dynamic processes of a modern economy.’
Discuss.
4.
In the context of the IS-LM model, illustrate the effects on the equilibrium level of income and the rate of interest of a change in the real money supply.
5.
Discuss the view that completely flexible wages and prices would ensure the automatic attainment of full employment in an economy.
6.
What observations would be required to support the view that the true economics of Keynes is an analysis of the economy in disequilibrium?
The economics of cycles and growth
Cyclical fluctuations
Introduction
Cyclical fluctuations in the level of economic activity in an economy can be observed by examining annual changes in real national income (or real output) over a long period of years; these changes are inversely related to variations in the rate of unemployment.
Figure 1 shows the fluctuations in the rate of unemployment in the United Kingdom from 1878 to 1985.
Notice that the fluctuations up to 1920 were fairly regular with an average of about eight or nine years from peak to peak and trough to trough.
After the Great Depression of the 1920s and 1930s, however, the fluctuations were much reduced, possibly a result of the adoption of Keynesian demand-management policies by successive governments in the 1950s and 1960s.
None the less, even in this period, the economy has been subjected to fairly regular cycles of minor expansions and recessions.
In the 1970s, the trade cycle was masked by world recession, due in part to the energy crisis, which resulted in an upward trend in the rate of unemployment.
This upward trend continued into the 1980s.
Fig. 1.
The rate of unemployment in the United Kingdom, 1878–1985.
The phases of the trade cycle (sometimes called the business cycle)— slump, recovery, boom and deflation — are illustrated in Fig. 2.
An economy in a slump or depression is generally characterised by high demand-deficient unemployment of both labour and capital.
A low level of both consumption and investment demand leads firms to cut back on their  production, lay off workers and leave capital equipment lying idle.
Although money may be available for firms to borrow and interest rates may be low, investment will not be increased because of pessimistic expectations.
Fig. 2.
The phases of a trade cycle.
In the recovery phase, however, the level of aggregate demand is rising and consequently businessmen become more optimistic.
Generally, this is a period of rising consumer demand, rising investment demand, expanding output levels and a falling rate of unemployment.
Eventually, the economy reaches the peak of the cycle — the so-called boom period.
This is a time of low unemployment, a high level of demand, firms working at full capacity earning high profits, an increasing rate of inflation and probably rising interest rates as investors compete with each other for limited loanable funds.
Finally, in the deflation phase, the demands of both firms and households start to fall, firms' profits dwindle and output and employment levels are reduced.
Businessmen, once again, become pessimistic about the future level of demand for their product and so become extremely reluctant to invest in new capital, even for replacement purposes.
Eventually, this contracting economy reaches the slump again and the whole process restarts.
The objective of this chapter is to consider the possible causes of this cyclical movement in economic activity.
We concentrate on the famous multiplier-accelerator theory, so this is a good point at which to review your understanding of the multiplier process (Ch. 18) and the accelerator principle (Ch. 19).
Multiplier-accelerator interaction
Why do economies experience cyclical fluctuations?
An interesting theory of the trade cycle was propounded by Paul Samuelson in 1939 and is based on interaction between the multiplier process and the accelerator principle.
This simple model concentrates on the real sector of the economy and so excludes monetary variables.
Recall that, according to the ‘accelerator’, investment depends on changes in income, and that according to the multiplier, changes in investment cause changes in income.
Thus, it is not surprising that interaction between the two can result in cumulative movements in income for example, if income is rising at an increasing rate, both investment and consumption will be rising, causing further rises in income in the next period.
A turning point may be reached if income starts to rise at a decreasing rate; investment will start to fall and as soon as the fall in investment exceeds the rise in consumption, income will start to fall.
To generate cycles, the model requires certain important conditions to be satisfied.
The following assumptions are sufficient for a cyclical movement in national income to be generated after any exogenous change in investment or consumption spending:
(a)
The consumption function is lagged one period so that consumption in the current period depends on national income in the previous period.
That is, where c is both the average and marginal propensity to consume.
(b)
The accelerator is such that induced investment depends on the difference between national income in the last period and national income in the period before that.
Thus, we can write: where I is exogenous investment and θ is the accelerator.
(c)
The values of c and v must both lie below the curve shown in Fig. 3.
For example, if the values of c and v lie in the area ABC (say, c = 0.5 and v = 0.5 as at point E) then any exogenous change in consumption or investment will generate a damped cycle like that illustrated in Fig. 4; it is said to be damped because the fluctuations in real output become smaller and smaller over time.
But if the values of c and v lie in the area BCD (for example, c = 0.5 and v = 1.5 as at point F) then any exogenous change in spending will generate an explosive cycle like that in Fig. 5; in this case, the oscillations get larger and larger over time.
Fig. 3.
Different values of c and v to generate cycles.
If the values of c and v should lie above the curve in Fig. 3, no cycles will be generated at all.
If they lie in the area shaded horizontally, the new equilibrium Y e is approached gradually, as shown in Fig. 6.
If they lie in the area shaded vertically, national income will rise or fall explosively and indefinitely never reaching a new equilibrium as shown in Fig. 7.
Fig. 4.
A damped cycle.
Fig. 5.
An explosive cycle.
Fig. 6.
No cycle, but damped.
Fig. 7.
No cycle, but explosive.
The derivation of the curve in Fig. 3 is beyond the scope of this textbook.
A full derivation and explanation can be found in Chiang (see Further Reading).
However, we can partially demonstrate its validity by means of two simple numerical examples.
Example I: a damped cycle
To simplify matters, consider an economy which has no government activity and no foreign trade, so that national income is equal to consumption plus investment.
Suppose that for the last several periods of time, real national income has been constant at £l, 000.
Let c = 0.5, v = 0.5 (as at point E in Fig. 3) and suppose that initially autonomous investment (10) is equal to £500.
We have  This economy, then, is in equilibrium in the current period (called period t).
Suppose now, though, that in the next period of time, period t + I, autonomous investment (10) rises by £10 to £510.
Now we have  This rise in income from period t to period t + 1 will cause both consumption and investment in the next period, period t + 2, to rise: This further rise in income from period t + I to t + 2 will cause consumption and investment in period t + 3 to rise yet again:
Notice that this rise in income is smaller than the previous rises.
Consumption will rise in period t+4: But investment will start to fall because, according to the accelerator, the level of investment depends on the change in income (which has now begun to decrease): So, after rising from periods t to t + 3, income has now stayed the same from period t + 3 to t + 4.
Consumption in period t + 5 will therefore be unchanged: But investment will fall again: Since investment falls and consumption stays the same, income in period t + 5 will be lower than in period t + 4: So far in the analysis, the single increase in autonomous investment of £10 has caused income to rise from £1,000 to £1,025 in the first four time periods and then to start to fall in the fifth.
Taking the time-path to period t +12, we obtain a clearly damped, cyclical variation in real national income.
This is summarised in Table 1 and graphed in Fig. 8.
Table 1.
Cyclical variations in consumption, investment and national income following an increase in autonomous investment — damped case.
Notice that eventually the cycle will converge on the new equilibrium level of income of £1,020 (that is, an increase of £20 since the multiplier is 2 in this example).
Only when income settles at £1,020 can we say that the full multiplier effect has taken place.
However, no new equilibrium position is  reached in the case of an explosive cycle, as is shown in the next example.
Fig. 8.
Damped cyclical variation in national income.
Example II: an explosive cycle
In the same closed economy with no government, suppose now that c = 0.5 and v = 1.5 (as at point F in Fig. 3).
Assume as before that national income has been constant for several time periods at £1,000, and that autonomous investment is initially equal to £500.
This means that the economy is in equilibrium in period t.
Now suppose, as before, that autonomous investment rises to £510 in period t + 1.
This rise in spending will raise national income to £1,010 in period t + 1 and this will cause both consumption and investment to increase in the next period, period t + 2: Notice that both investment and national income have already risen above the levels reached in the previous example.
The time-path to period t + 18 is summarised in Table 2 and graphed in Fig. 9.
An explosive cyclical variation in national income results.
Although the arithmetic becomes quite laborious, it is a worthwhile exercise for the reader to work through the table carefully and confirm the results.
Some further exercises, which include non-cyclical time-paths, are set at the end of the chapter.
Table 2.
Cyclical variations in consumption, investment and national income following an increase in autonomous investment — explosive case.
Fig. 9.
Explosive cyclical variation in national income.
Ceilings and floors
We have seen that the multiplier-accelerator model outlined above is capable under certain circumstances of generating cycles automatically following any change in autonomous spending.
Depending on the values assigned to c and v, the cycle may be damped or explosive.
A re-examination of Fig. 1 shows that cycles in practice display no obvious tendency either to diminish or increase in amplitude over time — indeed, particularly in the nineteenth century, the amplitude of the cycles was remarkably constant.
A possible explanation for this is that the cycle is inherently explosive, as in our Example II, but is constrained within a band determined by an upper limit above which real output cannot rise, called a ceiling and a lower limit below which real output will not fall, called a floor.
The cycle thus generated will tend to have a constant amplitude determined by the distance between the ceiling and floor.
Such a cyclical movement in real output is illustrated in Fig. 10.
To explain how such a cyclical movement will develop, start at point A on the graph in Fig. 10.
This is in the recovery phase: consequently demand is increasing, output is expanding and unemployment is falling.
In terms of the multiplier-accelerator interaction, rising investment is causing national income to rise via the multiplier effect and the rising level of national income induces more investment to occur, after a lag, via the accelerator.
Soon, though, full employment will be reached (point B on the graph); this determines the so-called ceiling because now real output can only rise as new net investment comes into operation.
Firms may want to produce more at point B but are unable to do so because of insufficient resources.
This check to the growth of output and income will soon affect firms' investment plans via the accelerator.
In fact, since the increase in income has slowed down, induced investment will actually fall and it will not be long before this causes income itself to fall via the multiplier.
The existence of the ceiling, then, brings about a turning-point and after point C, real output starts to fall.
Fig. 10.
A cycle constrained by a ceiling and floor.
Real output will continue to fall with the multiplier and accelerator interacting with each other until the floor is reached.
What determines the position of the floor?
Well, clearly income cannot fall below zero, so in a sense that represents an ‘absolute’ floor; in practice, however, although investment demand can fall to zero when firms are so pessimistic that they have no demand for either new or replacement capital, consumption demand  must always be positive, if only to sustain life.
This consumption spending must represent the floor below which the level of income cannot realistically be expected to fall.
Furthermore, it is likely that some investment will be occurring somewhere in the economy so that aggregate investment is never likely actually to disappear completely.
Once point D has been reached, output will have stopped falling and eventually, as existing machines wear out or become obsolete, some replacement investment will become unavoidable.
This will set the multiplier-accelerator interaction into operation again.
The existence of the floor, then, brings about yet another turning-point so that after point E on the graph, real output is rising.
This brings us back to the recovery phase and the whole process starts over again.
Notice that each successive peak and trough is likely to be above all preceding ones because of underlying growth in the economy's productive capacity.
Random disturbances
The existence of ceilings and floors can help to explain the regularity of cycles when c and v are such that, without these constraints, cycles would be explosive.
But suppose that c and v took on values consistent with damped cycles, how then could we explain the observed regularity of cyclical fluctuations?
(In fact, this is an important question because empirical studies suggest that both c and v are less than 1, so damped rather than explosive cycles are likely.)
One possible answer has been suggested by the economist R. Frisch.
He argues that, even though fluctuations around a country's equilibrium growth path are likely to be damped, random disturbances will be continually occurring to stop the equilibrium path from being achieved and to maintain the cyclical variations in a fairly regular pattern.
No sooner has one cycle started to diminish in amplitude than another disturbance to the economy occurs, starting off a new cycle.
The types of disturbances which could do this are sudden changes in investment, balance of payments crises, changes in the money supply, rapid inflation and the policies designed to curb it, population movements, industrial disputes, or even wars.
Of course, it is possible for more than one disturbance to occur at the same time so that the cyclical variations generated, although inherently damped, may be quite large.
This means that the ‘ceiling’ and ‘floor’analysis may become relevant here as well as in the explosive cycles case.
Consider the hypothetical random disturbances shown in Fig. 11 which give rise to fairly realistic variations in real output.
In this kind of model, real output is volatile, occasionally reaching the ceiling or floor, with each successive random disturbance pushing real income upwards or downwards and with the underlying stabilising influences of the multiplier and accelerator.
Monetary influences
One of the random disturbances mentioned in the previous section was a change in the money supply.
Consider now to what extent changes in a  country's monetary variables may be responsible for cyclical variations in real output.
Fig. 11.
A cycle caused by random disturbances.
Recall from Chapter 22 that the monetarists put a great deal of faith in the observed correlation between changes in the money supply and changes in national income.
In particular, the study by Friedman and Schwartz emphasises the observation that all major recessions have been preceded by a fall in the money supply and all major inflations by an increase in the money supply.
By attempting to show that the monetary changes were not associated with the changes in national income, they concluded that it must be the change in the money supply that causes the change in national income.
Non-monetarists also recognise the role that monetary changes may have on real output, though of course they do not assign them such a major role as the monetarists.
For example, they recognise that in the recovery phase of the cycle, the demand for money will be increasing to finance the greater volume of transactions.
If the money supply is not expanded sufficiently to meet this demand, interest rates will rise, this in turn will discourage some investment and so contribute to the slowing down in the growth of output and eventually lead to the upper turning-point.
Similarly, in the deflation phase, the demand for money will be falling.
If the money supply is not also falling at the same rate, interest rates will fall and so encourage new investment.
This will contribute to the lower turning-point.
However, notice that the effectiveness of this mechanism clearly depends on the interest-elasticity of investment which, as pointed out in Chapter 19, is likely to be very low in the boom and slump periods of a trade cycle.
Conclusion
There are many possible causes of trade cycles and we have only had time to consider some of the major ones in this chapter.
In more advanced economics, it is possible to deal with more complex versions of the multiplier-accelerator model which require knowledge of difference and differential equations.
Other theories concentrate on technological changes or on firms' investment in inventories to explain the cycles.
There was even a  theory that trade cycles were associated with sun-spot cycles, but this is not held in much regard these days.
Further reading
Exercises
1.
Review your understanding of the following terms:
trade cycle
slump
recovery
boom
recession
deflation
damped cycle
explosive cycle
ceiling
floor
turning-point
random disturbance
2.
Using the multiplier-accelerator model developed in this chapter, trace out the time-path for national income over 10 years when
(a)
c = 0.8 and v = 0.1;
(b)
c = 0.5 and v = 4.
Comment on your results.
3.
Obtain data on gross domestic fixed capital formation, real national income and the number of unfilled job vacancies for the United Kingdom in the 1970s and 1980s.
Plot the data on a graph and comment on any cyclical variations.
4.
Discuss the extent to which the cyclical fluctuations observed in question (3) may be a result of:(a) monetary variables;(b) random disturbances.
5.
‘An essential characteristic of cyclical behaviour is not only that expansion and contraction follow each other, but that each phase of the cycle contains within it the seeds to generate the succeeding phase’(R. Levacic, Macroeconomics).
How can this aspect of the trade cycle be explained?