

Strong and weak syllables
9.1 Strong and weak
One of the most noticeable features of English is that many syllables are weak; this is true of many other languages, but it is necessary to study how these weak syllables are pronounced and where they occur in English.
The distribution of strong and weak syllables is a subject that will be met in several later chapters.
For example, we will look later at stress, which is a major factor in determining whether a syllable will be strong or weak.
Elision is a closely related subject, and in considering intonation the difference between strong and weak syllables is also important.
Finally, words with ‘strong’ and ‘weak’forms are clearly a related matter.
In this chapter we look at the general nature of weak syllables.
What do we mean by ‘strong’ and ‘weak’?
In the present context, we are using these terms to refer to phonetic characteristics of syllables.
We could describe them partly in terms of stress (by saying, for example, that strong syllables are stressed and weak syllables unstressed), but until we describe what ‘stress’ means such a description would not be very useful.
The most important thing to note at present is that any strong syllable will have as its peak one of the vowel phonemes (or possibly a triphthong) listed in Chapter 3, but not .
Weak syllables, on the other hand, as they are being defined here, can only have four types of peak:
i)
the vowel  (‘schwa’)
ii)
a close front unrounded vowel in the general area of  and 
iii)
a close back rounded vowel in the general area of  and 
iv)
a syllabic consonant.
When we compare weak syllables containing vowels with strong syllables, we find the vowel in a weak syllable tends to be shorter, of lower intensity and different in quality.
For example, in the word ‘father’ the second syllable, which is weak, is shorter than the first, is less loud and has a vowel that cannot occur in strong syllables.
In a word like ‘bottle’ the weak second syllable contains no vowel at all, but consists entirely of the consonant .
We call this a syllabic consonant.
In the rest of this chapter we will look at the different types of weak syllable in more detail.
9.2 The  vowel (‘schwa’)
The most frequently occurring vowel in English is , which is always associated with weak syllables.
In quality it is mid (that is, half-way between close and open) and central (that is , half-way between front and back).
It is generally described as lax, that is, not articulated with much energy.
Of course, the quality of this vowel is not always the same, but the variation is not important.
Not all weak syllables contain , though many do.
Learners of English need to learn where  is appropriate and where it is not.
To do this we often have to use information that traditional phonemic theory would not accept as relevant — we must consider spelling.
The question to ask is: if the speaker were to pronounce a particular weak syllable as strong instead, which vowel would it be most likely to have, according to the usual rules of English spelling?
Of course, knowing this will not tell us which syllables in a word or utterance should be weak — that is something we look at in later chapters — but it will give us a rough guide to the correct pronunciation of weak syllables.
Let us look at some examples:
i)
Spelt with ‘a’; strong pronunciation would have  ‘attend’‘character’‘barracks’
ii)
Spelt with ‘ar’; strong pronunciation would have  ‘particular’‘molar’‘monarchy’
iii)
Adjectival endings spelt ‘ate’; strong pronunciation would have  ‘intimate’‘accurate’‘desolate’(though there are exceptions to this: ‘private’ is usually )
iv)
Spelt with ‘o’; strong pronunciation would have  ‘tomorrow’‘potato’‘carrot’
v)
Spelt with ‘or’; strong pronunciation would have  ‘forget’‘ambassador’‘opportunity’
vi)
Spelt with ‘e’; strong pronunciation would have  ‘settlement’‘violet’‘postmen’
vii)
Spelt with ‘er’; strong pronunciation would have  ‘perhaps’‘stronger’‘superman’
viii)
Spelt with ‘u’; strong pronunciation would have  ‘Autumn’‘support’‘halibut’
ix)
Spelt with ‘ough’(there are, of course, many other pronunciations for the letter-sequence ‘ough’)‘thorough’‘borough’
x)
Spelt with ‘ous’‘gracious’‘callous’
9.3 Close front and close back vowels
Two other vowels are commonly found in weak syllables, one close front (in the general region of  and ) and the other close back rounded (in the general region of  and ).
In strong syllables it is comparatively easy to distinguish  from , from , but in weak syllables the difference is not so clear.
For example, although it is easy enough to decide which vowel one hears in ‘beat’ or ‘bit’, it is much less easy to decide which vowel one hears in the second syllable of words such as , for example , ‘easy’or ‘busy’.
There are accents of English (for example Welsh accents) in which the second syllable sounds most like the  in the first syllable of ‘easy’, and others (for example Yorkshire accents) in which it sounds more like the  in the first syllable of ‘busy’.
In present-day RP, however, the matter is not so clear.
There is uncertainty, too, about the corresponding close back rounded vowels.
If we look at the words ‘good to eat’ and ‘food to eat’, we must ask if the word ‘to’is pronounced with the  vowel phoneme of ‘good’or the  phoneme of ‘food’.
Again, which vowel comes in ‘to’ in ‘I want to’?
One common feature is that the vowels in question are more like  or  when they precede another vowel, less so when they precede a consonant or pause.
You should notice one further thing: with the exception of one or two very artificial examples, there is really no possibility in these contexts of contrast between  and , or between  and .
Effectively, then, the two distinctions, which undoubtedly exist within strong syllables, are neutralised in RP.
How should we transcribe the words ‘easy’ and ‘busy’as pronounced in RP?
We will use the close front unrounded case as an example, since it is more straightforward.
The possibilities, using our phoneme symbols, are the following: Few speakers of RP seem to feel satisfied with any of these transcriptions.
There is a possible solution to this problem, but it goes against standard phoneme theory.
We can symbolise this weak vowel as , that is, using the symbol for the vowel in ‘beat’ but without the length-mark.
Thus: The  vowel is neither the  of ‘beat’ nor the  of ‘bit’, and is not in contrast with them.
We can set up a corresponding vowel  that is neither the  of ‘shoe’ nor the  of ‘book’but a weak vowel that shares the characteristics of both.
If we use  and  in our transcription as well as,, and , it is no longer a true phonemic transcription in the traditional sense.
However, this need not be too serious an objection, and the fact that native speakers seem to think that this transcription fits better with their feelings about the language is a good argument in its favour.
Let us now look at where these vowels are found, beginning with close front unrounded ones.
We find  occurring:
i)
In word-final position in words spelt with final ‘y’ or ‘ey’(after one or more consonant letters), e.g. ‘happy’, ‘valley’, and in morpheme-final position when such words have suffixes beginning with vowels, e.g. ‘happier’, ‘easiest’, ‘hurrying’.
ii)
In a prefix such as those spelt ‘re’, ‘pre’, ‘de’ if it precedes a vowel and is unstressed, for example in ‘react’, ‘preoccupied’, ‘deactivate’.
iii)
In the suffixes spelt ‘iate’, ‘ious’ when they have two syllables, for example in ‘appreciate’, ‘hilarious’.
iv)
In the following words when unstressed: ‘he’, ‘she’, ‘we’, ‘me’, ‘be’ and the word ‘the’when it precedes a vowel.
In most other cases of weak syllables containing a close front unrounded vowel we can assign the vowel to the  phoneme, as in the first syllable of ‘resist’, ‘inane’, ‘enough’, the middle syllable of ‘incident’, ‘orchestra’, ‘artichoke’, and the final syllable of ‘swimming’, ‘liquid’, ‘optic’.
It can be seen that this vowel is most often represented in spelling by the letters ‘i’ and ‘e’.
Weak syllables with close back rounded vowels are not so commonly found.
We find  most frequently in the words ‘you’, ‘to’, ‘into’, ‘do’, when they are unstressed and are not immediately preceding a consonant, and ‘through’ and ‘who’in all positions when they are unstressed.
This vowel is also found before another vowel within a word, as in ‘evacuation’, ‘influenza’.
9.4 Syllabic consonants
In the above sections we have looked at vowels in weak syllables.
We must also consider syllables in which no vowel is found.
In this case, a consonant, either , or a nasal, stands as the centre of the syllable  instead of the vowel.
It is usual to indicate that a consonant is syllabic by means of a small vertical mark , for example‘cattle’.
Syllabic  is perhaps the most noticeable example of the English syllabic consonant, though it would be wrong to expect to find it in all accents.
It occurs after another consonant, and the way it is produced depends to some extent on the nature of that consonant.
If the preceding consonant is alveolar, as in ‘bottle’, ‘muddle’, ‘tunnel’, the articulatory movement from the preceding consonant to the syllabic  is quite simple.
The sides of the tongue, which are raised for the preceding consonant, are lowered to allow air to escape over them (this is called lateral release).
The tip and blade of the tongue do not move until the articulatory contact for the  is released.
The  is a ‘dark ’(as explained in Chapter 7).
In some accents — particularly London ones — we often find a close back rounded vowel instead.
Where do we find syllabic  in RP?
It is useful to look at the spelling as a guide.
The most obvious case is where we have a word ending with one or more consonant letters followed by ‘le’(or, in the case of noun plurals or third person singular verb forms, ‘les’).
Examples are:
i)
with alveolar consonant preceding ‘cattle’‘bottle  ‘wrestle’‘muddle’
ii)
with non-alveolar consonant preceding ‘couple’‘trouble’‘struggle’‘knuckle 
Such words usually lose their final letter ‘e’ when a suffix beginning with a vowel is attached, but the  usually remains syllabic.
Thus:
‘bottle’—‘bottling’—
‘muddle’—‘muddling’—
‘struggle’—‘struggling’—
Similar words not derived in this way do not have the syllabic  — it has been pointed out that the two words ‘coddling’(derived from the verb ‘coddle’) and ‘codling’(meaning ‘small cod’, derived by adding the diminutive suffix ‘-ling’ to ‘cod’) show a contrast between syllabic and non-syllabic : ‘coddling’and ‘codling’.
In the case of words such as‘bottle’, ‘muddle’, ‘struggle’, which are quite common, it would be a mispronunciation to insert a vowel between the  and the preceding consonant.
There are a few accents of English which may do this, so that, for example , ‘cattle’ is pronounced , but this is not the case in RP.
We also find syllabic  in words spelt with, at the end, one or more consonant letters followed by ‘al’ or ‘el’, for example: In some less common or more technical words, it is not obligatory to pronounce syllabic  and the sequence al may be used instead, though it is less likely: ‘missal’or  ‘acquittal’or .


Of the syllabic nasals, the most frequently found and the most important is .
When should it be pronounced?
A general rule could be made that weak syllables which are phonologically composed of a plosive or fricative consonant plus  are uncommon except in initial position in the words.
So we can find words like ‘tonight’, ‘canary’ with an  before , but medially and finally, as in words like ‘threaten’, ‘threatening’, we find much more commonly a syllabic :,.
To pronounce a vowel before the nasal consonant would sound strange (or at best overcareful) in RP.
Syllabic  is most common after alveolar plosives and fricatives; in the case of  and  followed by  the plosive is nasally released by lowering the soft palate, so that in the word ‘eaten’, for example, the tongue does not move in the  sequence but the soft palate is lowered at the end of  so that compressed air escapes through the nose.
We do not find  after  or ,, so that for example‘sullen’ must be pronounced , ‘Christian’as  (though this word may be pronounced with  plus  or  instead of ) and ‘pigeon’as .
Syllabic  after non-alveolar consonants is not so widespread.
In words where the syllable following a velar consonant is spelt ‘an’ or ‘on’(for example, ‘toboggan’, ‘wagon’) it is rarely heard, the more usual pronunciation being ,.
After bilabial consonants, in words like ‘happen’, ‘happening’, ‘ribbon’ we can consider it equally acceptable to pronounce them with syllabic  (,,) or with  (,,).
As we will see, syllabic  is also possible in this context.
In a similar way, after velar consonants in words like ‘thicken’, ‘waken’, syllabic  is possible but  is also acceptable.
Syllabic velar nasal  is also possible in this context.
After  or , syllabic  is more common than  (except, as with the other cases described, in word-initial syllables).
Thus ‘seven’, ‘heaven’, ‘often’ are more usually ,, than ,,.
In all the examples given so far the syllabic  has been following  another consonant; sometimes it is possible for another consonant to precede that consonant, but in this case a syllabic consonant is less likely to occur.
If  is followed by a plosive, as in ‘Wilton’, the pronunciation  is possible, but  is also found regularly.
If  precedes, as in ‘Boston’, a final syllabic nasal is less frequent, while clusters formed by nasal + plosive + syllabic nasal are very unusual: thus ‘Minton’, ‘lantern’, ‘London’, ‘abandon’ will normally have  in the last syllable and be pronounced ,,,.
Other nasals also discourage a following plosive plus syllabic nasal, so that for example‘Camden’ is normally pronounced .
,
We will not spend much time on the syllabic pronunciation of these consonants.
Both can occur as syllabic, but only as a result of processes such as assimilation and elision that I have not yet described.
We find them sometimes in words like ‘happen’, which can be pronounced , though  and  are equally acceptable, and ‘uppermost’, which could be pronounced as  though  would be more usual.
Examples of possible syllabic velar nasals would be ‘thicken’(where  and  are also possible), and ‘broken key’, where the nasal consonant occurs between velar consonants (again, or  could be substituted for ).
A note about symbols: the usual convention for the syllabic mark is that it should be placed below symbols that do not come below the line, for example, but above a symbol that does come below the line, for example .
In this course, however, it is felt preferable to put the mark underneath the symbol in all cases of syllabic consonants.


In many accents of the type called ‘rhotic’(as explained in Chapter 7), such as most American accents, syllabic  is very common.
The word ‘particular’, for example, would probably be pronounced  by most Americans, while RP speakers would pronounce this word .
Syllabic  is less common in RP and in most cases where it occurs there are perfectly acceptable alternative pronunciations without the syllabic consonant.
Here are some examples:
a)
where non-syllabic  is also acceptable ‘history’ or  (not usually )‘wanderer’or  (not usually )
b)
where  is also acceptable ‘buttering’ or  (not usually )‘flattery’or  (not usually )
It seems that type (a) concerns cases where more than one consonant precedes the weak syllable in question, and type (b) where there is only one consonant preceding.
There are a few pairs of words (minimal pairs) in which a difference in meaning appears to depend on whether a particular  is syllabic or not, for example: But we find no case of syllabic  where it would not be possible to substitute either non-syllabic  (type a) or  (type b); in the examples above, ‘Hungary’ could equally well be pronounced  and ‘adulterous’as .
Combinations of syllabic consonants
It is not unusual to find two syllabic consonants together.
Examples are: ‘national’‘literal’‘visionary’‘veteran’.
It is important to remember that it is often not possible to say with certainty whether a speaker has pronounced a syllabic consonant, a non-syllabic consonant or a non-syllabic consonant plus .
For example, the word ‘veteran’ given above could be pronounced in other ways than .
An RP speaker might instead say , or .
The transcription makes it look as if the difference between these words was clear; it is not.
In examining colloquial English it is often more or less a matter of arbitrary choice how one transcribes such a word.
Transcription has the unfortunate tendency to make things seem simpler and more clear-cut than they really are.
Notes on problems and further reading
9.1
I have at this point tried to bring in some preliminary notions of stress and prominence without giving a full explanation; by this stage in the course it is important to be getting familiar with the difference between stressed and unstressed syllables, and the nature of ‘schwa’, but the subject of stress is such a large one that I have felt it best to leave its main treatment until later.
9.2
On the subject of schwa, see Jones (1975), sections 355–72; Gimson (1989), 7.9.12.
9.3
The introduction of  and  is an idea that not everyone agrees with, but its acceptance as a convention in two influential dictionaries (the Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English and the Longman Pronunciation Dictionary) gives substantial support.
Since I mention native speakers' feelings in this connection, and since I am elsewhere rather sceptical about appeals to native speakers' feelings, I had better explain that in this case my evidence comes from the native speakers of English I have taught in practical classes on transcription over many years.
A substantial number of these students have either been speakers of RP or had accents only slightly different from it, and their usual reaction to being told to use  for the vowel at the end of ‘easy’, ‘busy’ has been one of puzzlement and frustration; like them, I cannot equate this vowel with the vowel of ‘bit’.
I am, however, reluctant to use , which suggests a stronger vowel than should be pronounced (like the final vowel in ‘evacuee’, ‘Tennessee’).
For some time, I told students that since  and  were equally unsuitable for this vowel in the context in question, I would accept either in a transcription.
This, not unnaturally, led to further confusion on the students' part, and the treatment suggested here was adopted as the solution that fitted best with what the students felt they wanted to write.
I must emphasise that the vowels  and  are not included in the set of English phonemes but are simply additional symbols to make the writing and reading of transcription easier.
9.4
I feel that the subject of syllabic consonants is an area that we need to know more about, and that there has not yet been enough discussion of the problems found in their analysis.
See Wells (1965).
Notes for teachers
Introduction of the ‘schwa’ vowel has been deliberately delayed until this chapter, since I wanted it to be presented in the context of weak syllables in general.
Since students should by now be comparatively well-informed about basic segmental phonetics, it is very important that their production and recognition of this vowel should be good before moving on to the following chapters.
This chapter is in a sense a crucial point in the course: although the segmental material of the preceding chapters is important as a foundation, the relationship between strong and weak syllables and the overall prosodic characteristics of words and sentences are essential to intelligibility, and most of the remaining chapters of the course are concerned with such matters.
Written exercises
The following sentences have been partially transcribed, but the vowels have been left blank.
Fill in the vowels, taking care to identify which vowels are weak; put no vowel at all if you think a syllabic consonant is appropriate, but put a syllabic mark beneath the syllabic consonant.
Stress in simple words
10.1 The nature of stress
Stress has been mentioned several times already in this course without any attempt to define what the word means.
The nature of stress is simple enough — practically everyone would agree that the first syllable of words like ‘father’, ‘open’, ‘camera’ is stressed, that the middle syllable is stressed in ‘potato’, ‘apartment’, ‘relation’and that the final syllable is stressed in ‘about’, ‘receive’, ‘perhaps’, and most people feel they have some sort of idea of what the difference is between stressed and unstressed syllables, though they might explain it in many different ways.
We will mark a stressed syllable in transcription by placing a small vertical line  high up, just before the syllable it relates to; the words quoted above will thus be transcribed as follows:
What are the characteristics of stressed syllables that enable us to identify them?
It is important to understand that there are two different ways of approaching this question, one being to consider what the speaker does in producing stressed syllables and the other being to consider what characteristics of sound make a syllable seem to a listener to be stressed.
In other words we can study stress from the point of view of production and of perception; the two are obviously closely related, but are not identical.
The production of stress is generally believed to depend on the speaker using more muscular energy than is used for unstressed syllables.
Measuring muscular effort is difficult, but it seems possible, according to experimental studies, that when we produce stressed syllables, the muscles that we use to expel air from the lungs are more active, producing higher subglottal pressure.
It seems probable that similar things happen with muscles in other parts of our speech apparatus.
Many experiments have been carried out on the perception of stress, and it is clear that many different sound characteristics are important in making a syllable recognisably stressed.
From the perceptual point of view, all stressed syllables have one characteristic in common, and that is  prominence; stressed syllables are recognised as stressed because they are more prominent than unstressed syllables.
What makes a syllable prominent?
At least four different factors are important.
i)
Most people seem to feel that stressed syllables are louder than unstressed; in other words, loudness is a component of prominence.
In a sequence of identical syllables (e.g.    ), if one syllable is made louder than the others, it will be heard as stressed.
However, it is important to realise that it is very difficult for a speaker to make a syllable louder without changing other characteristics of the syllable such as those explained below (ii-iv); if one literally changes only the loudness, the perceptual effect is not very strong.
ii)
The length of syllables has an important part to play in prominence.
If one of the syllables in our ‘nonsense word’ is made longer than the others, there is quite a strong tendency for that syllable to be heard as stressed.
iii)
Every syllable is said on some pitch; pitch in speech is closely related to the frequency of vibration of the vocal folds and to the musical notion of low- and high-pitched notes.
It is essentially a perceptual characteristic of speech.
If one syllable of our ‘nonsense word’ is said with a pitch that is noticeably different from that of the others, this will have a strong tendency to produce the effect of prominence.
For example, if all syllables are said with low pitch except for one said with high pitch, then the high-pitched syllable will be heard as stressed and the others as unstressed.
To place some movement of pitch (e.g. rising or falling) on a syllable is even more effective.
iv)
A syllable will tend to be prominent if it contains a vowel that is different in quality from neighbouring vowels.
If we change one of the vowels in our ‘nonsense word’(e.g.    ) the ‘odd’ syllable  will tend to be heard as stressed.
This effect is not very powerful nor very important, but there is one particular way in which it is relevant in English: the previous chapter explained how the most frequently encountered vowels in weak syllables are , and  (syllabic consonants are also quite common).
We can look on stressed syllables as occurring against a ‘background’ of these weak syllables, so that their prominence is increased by contrast with these background qualities.
Prominence, then, is produced by four main factors:(i) loudness,(ii) length,(iii) pitch and (iv) quality.
Generally these four factors work together in combination, though syllables may sometimes be made prominent by means of only one or two of them.
Experimental work has shown that these factors are not equally important; the strongest effect is produced by pitch, and length is also a powerful factor.
Loudness and quality have much less effect.
10.2 Levels of stress
Up to this point we have talked about stress as though there was a simple distinction between ‘stressed’ and ‘unstressed’syllables with no intermediate levels; such a treatment would be a two-level analysis of stress.
Usually, however, we have to recognise one or more intermediate levels.
It should be remembered that in this chapter we are dealing only with stress within the word; this means that we are looking at words as they are said in isolation, which is a rather artificial situation — we do not often say words in isolation, except for a few such as‘yes’, ‘no’, ‘possibly’, ‘please’ and interrogative words such as ‘what’, ‘who’, etc., but looking at words in isolation does help us to see stress placement and stress levels more clearly than studying them in the context of continuous speech.
Let us begin by looking at the word ‘around’, where the stress always falls clearly on the last syllable and the first syllable is weak.
From the point of view of stress, the most important fact about the way we pronounce this word is that on the second syllable the pitch of the voice does not remain level, but usually falls from a higher to a lower pitch.
We might diagram the pitch movement as shown below, where the two parallel lines represent the speaker's high and low pitch level: The prominence that results from this pitch movement, or tone, gives the strongest type of stress; this is called primary stress.
In some words, we can observe a type of stress that is weaker than primary stress but stronger than that of the first syllable of ‘around’, for example in the first syllables of the words ‘photographic’, ‘anthropology’.
The stress in these words is called secondary stress.
It is sometimes represented in transcription with a low mark  so that the examples could be transcribed as ,.
This convention will only be used where necessary in this course.
We have now identified two levels of stress: primary and secondary, as well as a third level which can be called unstressed and regarded as being the absence of any recognisable amount of prominence.
These are the three levels that we will use in describing English stress.
However, it is worth noting that unstressed syllables containing ,, or a syllabic  consonant will sound less prominent than an unstressed syllable containing some other vowel.
For example, the first syllable of ‘poetic’ is more prominent than the first syllable of ‘pathetic’.
This could be used as a basis for a further division of stress levels, giving us a third and fourth level, but it seems unnecessarily complex to do so.
10.3 Placement of stress within the word
We now come to a question that causes a great deal of difficulty, particularly to foreign learners (who cannot simply dismiss it as an academic question): how can one select the correct syllable or syllables to stress in an English word?
As is well known, English is not one of those languages where word stress can be decided simply in relation to the syllables of the word, as can be done in French (where the last syllable is usually stressed), Polish (where the syllable before the last — the penultimate syllable — is stressed) or Czech (where the first syllable is stressed).
Many writers have said that English word stress is so difficult to predict that it is best to treat stress placement as a property of the individual word, to be learned when the word itself is learned.
Certainly anyone who tries to analyse English stress placement has to recognise that it is a highly complex matter.
However, it must also be recognised that in most cases when English speakers come across an unfamiliar word, they can pronounce it with the correct stress (there are exceptions to this, of course); in principle, it should be possible to discover what it is that the English speaker knows and to write in the form of rules.
The following summary of ideas on stress placement in nouns, verbs and adjectives is an attempt to present a few rules in the simplest possible form.
Nevertheless, practically all the rules have exceptions and readers may feel that the rules are so complex that it would be easier to go back to the idea of learning the stress for each word individually.
In order to decide on stress placement, it is necessary to make use of some or all of the following information:
i)
Whether the word is morphologically simple, or whether it is complex as a result either of containing one or more affixes (that is, prefixes or suffixes) or of being a compound word.
ii)
The grammatical category to which the word belongs (noun, verb, adjective, etc.).
iii)
The number of syllables in the word.
iv)
The phonological structure of those syllables.
It is sometimes difficult to make the decision referred to in (i).
The rules  for complex words are different from those for simple words and these will be dealt with in Chapter 11.
Obviously, single-syllable words present no problems — if they are pronounced in isolation they are said with primary stress.
Two-syllable words
Here the choice is still simple: either the first or the second syllable will be stressed — not both.
We will look first at verbs.
The basic rule is that if the second syllable of the verb contains a long vowel or diphthong, or if it ends with more than one consonant, that second syllable is stressed.
Thus:
If the final syllable contains a short vowel and one (or no) final consonant, the first syllable is stressed.
Thus:
A final syllable is also unstressed if it contains  (e.g. follow' , ‘borrow’).
Most two-syllable verbs that seem to be exceptions to the above might be interpreted as being morphologically complex (e.g. ‘permit’ = ‘per’+ ‘mit’), or we could simply list all such verbs as exceptions.
Two-syllable simple adjectives are stressed according to the same rule, giving:
As with most stress rules, there are exceptions, for example‘honest’, ‘perfect’ or , both of which end with two consonants but are stressed on the first syllable.
Nouns require a different rule: if the second syllable contains a short vowel the stress will usually come on the first syllable.
Otherwise it will be on the second syllable.
Other two-syllable words such as adverbs and prepositions seem to behave like verbs and adjectives.
Three-syllable words
Here we find a more complicated picture.
In verbs, if the last syllable contains a short vowel and ends with not more than one consonant, that syllable will be unstressed, and stress will be placed on the preceding (penultimate) syllable.
Thus:
If the final syllable contains a long vowel or diphthong, or ends with more than one consonant, that final syllable will be stressed.
Thus:
Nouns require a different rule.
Here, if the final syllable contains a short vowel or , it is unstressed; if the syllable preceding this final syllable contains a long vowel or diphthong, or if it ends with more than one consonant, that middle syllable will be stressed.
Thus:
If the final syllable contains a short vowel and the middle syllable contains a short vowel and ends with not more than one consonant, both final and middle syllables are unstressed and the first syllable is stressed:
Most of the above rules show stress tending to go on syllables containing a long vowel or diphthong and/or ending with more than one consonant.
However, three-syllable simple nouns are different.
If the final syllable is of this type, the stress will usually be placed on the first syllable.
The last syllable is usually quite prominent so that in some cases it could be said to have secondary stress.
Adjectives seem to need the same rule, to produce stress patterns such 
The above rules do not, of course, cover all English words.
They apply only to major categories of lexical words (nouns, verbs and adjectives in this chapter), not to function words such as articles and prepositions.
There is not enough space in this course to deal with simple words of more than three syllables, nor with special cases of loan words (words  brought into the language from other languages comparatively recently).
Complex and compound words are dealt with in the next chapter.
One problem that we must also leave until the next chapter is the fact that there are many cases of English words with alternative possible stress patterns (e.g. ‘controversy’, either  or ).
Other words, which we will look at in studying connected speech, change their stress pattern according to the context they occur in.
Above all, there is not space to discuss the many exceptions to the above rules.
Despite the exceptions, it seems better in many ways to attempt to produce some stress rules (even if they are rather crude and inaccurate) than to claim that there is no rule or regularity in English word stress.
Notes on problems and further reading
The subject of English stress has received a large amount of attention, and the references given here are only a small selection from an enormous number.
As I implied in the notes on the previous chapter, incorrect stress placement is the major cause of intelligibility problems for foreign learners, and is therefore a subject that needs to be treated very seriously.
10.1
I have deliberately avoided using the term accent, which is found widely in the literature on stress.
This is for three main reasons:
(i)
it increases the complexity of the description without, in my view, contributing much to its value.
(ii)
different writers do not agree with each other about the way the term should be used.
(iii)
the word ‘accent’ is used elsewhere to refer to different varieties of pronunciation (e.g. ‘a foreign accent’); it is confusing to use it for a quite different purpose — to a lesser extent we also have this problem with ‘stress’, which can be used to refer to psychological tension.
There is a good discussion of the confusing nature of the terms ‘stress’ and ‘accent’in Clark and Yallop (1990), pp.288–9; see also Kreidler (1989), pp.75–6 and Gimson (1989), sections, 9.1–9.7, 10.1–10.4.
An important study of muscular effort and air-pressure in stressed syllables is that reported in Ladefoged (1967), pp. 1–49.
Although many experimental studies have been carried out since then, this remains the clearest and best-known work.
On the perception of stress, the pioneering work is by Fry (e.g. 1958).
10.2
Many studies of stress have tried to deal with the question of the numbers of different levels.
Arnold (1957) presents a well-reasoned approach; most writers conclude that three levels (primary, secondary and unstressed) are required, as outlined in this chapter.
10.3
It is said above that one must take one of two positions: one is that stress is not predictable by rule and must be learned word by word (see for example Jones (1975), sections 920–1).
The second (which I prefer) is to say that, difficult though the task is, one must try to find a way of writing rules that express what native speakers naturally tend to do in placing stress (while acknowledging that there will always be a substantial residue of cases which appear to follow no regular rules).
Kingdon (1958b) produced a detailed survey of stress tendencies in a corpus of many thousands of words; the analysis is based not only on phonological structure but also on etymology and morphology.
The result is that it is very complex; in addition, I must note that quite a few words are given stress patterns that I do not feel are acceptable in present-day English.
A more modern, and very thorough treatment is Fudge (1984), which is an extremely valuable work on the subject and in many ways takes over the place of Kingdon's earlier work.
The other well-known approach to English stress rules is radically different, being based on generative phonology.
This is the analysis which was presented in Chomsky and Halle (1968) and has been followed by an enormous number of works exploring the same field.
To anyone not familiar with this type of treatment, the presentation will seem difficult or even unintelligible; within the generative approach, many different theories, all with different names, tend to come and go with changes in fashion, which is very confusing.
The following paragraph is an attempt to summarise the main characteristics of basic generative phonology, and recommends some further reading for those interested in learning about it properly.
The level of phonology is very abstract in this theory.
An old-fashioned view of speech communication would be that what the speaker intends to say is coded, or represented, as a string of phonemes just like a phonemic transcription, and what a hearer hears is also converted by the brain from sound waves into a similar string of phonemes.
But a generative phonologist would say that this phonemic representation is irrelevant; the representation in the brain of the speaker or hearer is much more complex and is often quite different from the ‘real’ sounds recognisable in the sound wave.
You may hear the word ‘football’ pronounced as , but your brain recognises the word as made up of ‘foot’and ‘ball’and interprets it phonologically as .
You may hear  in the first syllable of ‘photography’, in the second syllable of ‘photograph’ and in the third syllable of ‘photographer’, but the brain recognises links between these a vowels and , and  respectively, and supplies underlying vowels which change  into the appropriate sound as the stress pattern changes.
These vowel changes are brought about by rules — not the sort of rules that one might teach to language learners, but more like the instructions that one might build into a machine or write into a computer program.
According to Chomsky and Halle, at the abstract phonological level there is no stress; stress (of many different levels) is the result of the application of phonological rules, which are simple enough in theory but highly complex in practice.
The principles of these rules are explained first in pp. 15–43 of their book, and in greater detail in pp. 69–162.
There is a clear and thorough introductory account of generative phonology in Clark and Yallop (1990), chapter 6, and they present a brief account of the generative treatment of stress on pp. 300–3.
A brief review that covers more modern forms of generative treatment is in Katamba (1989), chapter 11, section 1.
Notes for teachers
It should be clear from what is said above that from the purely practical classroom point of view, generative phonology has little to offer and could well create confusion.
Producing practice and testing material for word stress is very simple: any modern English dictionary will show word stress patterns as part of word entries, and lists of these can be made either with stress marks for student to read from (as in Exercise 2 of Tape Unit 10), or without stress marks for students to put their own marks on (as in Exercise 1 of the same Tape Unit).
Written exercises (mainly for foreign learners)
(Native speakers of English should transcribe the words phonemically as well as marking stress.)
Complex word stress
11.1 Complex words
In the last chapter the nature of stress was explained and some broad general rules were given for deciding which syllable in a word should receive primary stress.
The words that were described were called ‘simple’ words; ‘simple’in this context means ‘not composed of more than one grammatical unit’, so that, for example , the word ‘care’is simple while ‘careful’and ‘careless’(being composed of two grammatical units each) are complex; ‘carefully’and ‘carelessness’are also complex, and are composed of three grammatical units each.
Unfortunately, as was suggested in the last chapter, it is often difficult to decide on whether a word should be treated as complex or simple.
The majority of English words of more than one syllable (polysyllabic words) have come from other languages whose way of constructing words is easily recognisable; for example, we can see how combining ‘mit’ with the prefixes ‘per-’, ‘sub-’, ‘com-’produced ‘permit’, ‘submit’, ‘commit’, words which have come into English from Latin.
Similarly, Greek has given us ‘catalogue’, ‘analogue’, ‘dialogue’, ‘monologue’, in which the prefixes ‘cata-’, ‘ana-’, ‘dia-’, ‘mono-’ are recognisable.
But we cannot automatically treat the separate grammatical units of other languages as separate grammatical units of English; if we did, we would not be able to study English morphology without first studying the morphology of five or six other languages, and we would be forced into ridiculous analyses such as that the English word ‘parallelepiped’ was composed of four or five grammatical units (which is the case in Ancient Greek).
We must accept, then, that the distinction between ‘simple’ and ‘complex’words is difficult to draw, and is therefore not always useful.
Complex words are of two major types: words made from a basic stem word with the addition of an affix, and compound words, which are made of two (or occasionally more) independent English words (e.g. ‘ice-cream’, ‘armchair’).
We will look first at the words made with affixes; these will be called affix words.
Affixes are of two sorts in English: prefixes, which come before the stem (e.g. prefix ‘un-’ + stem ‘pleasant’→ ‘unpleasant’) and suffixes, which come after the stem (e.g. stem ‘good’+ suffix -ness' → ‘goodness’).
Affixes will have one of three possible effects on word stress:
i)
The affix itself receives the primary stress (e.g. ‘semi-’ +'circle'  → ‘semicircle’; ‘-ality’+ ‘person’→ ‘personality’).
ii)
The word is stressed just as if the affix was not there (e.g. ‘pleasant’, ‘unpleasant’; ‘market’, ‘marketing’)
iii)
The stress remains on the stem, not the affix, but is shifted to a different syllable (e.g. ‘magnet’, ‘magnetic’).
11.2 Suffixes
There are so many suffixes that it will only be possible here to examine a small proportion of them; we will concentrate on those which are common and productive (that is, are applied to a considerable number of stems and could be applied to more to make new English words).
In the case of the others, foreign learners would probably be better advised to learn the stem+affix combination as an individual item.
One of the problems that will be encountered is that we may find words which are obviously complex but which, when we divide them into stem + affix, turn out to have a stem that it is difficult to imagine is an English word.
For example, the word ‘audacity’ seems to be a complex word — but what is its stem?
Another problem is that it is difficult in some cases to know whether a word has one, or more than one, suffix (e.g. should we analyse ‘personality’, from the point of view of stress assignment, as  +  or as  +  + ?).
We will not spend more time here on looking at the problems, but go on to look at some generalisations about suffixes and stress.
The suffixes are referred to in their spelling form.
Suffixes carrying primary stress themselves
In the examples given, which seem to be the most common, the primary stress is on the first syllable of the suffix.
If the stem consists of more than one syllable there will be a secondary stress on one of the syllables of the stem.
This cannot fall on the last syllable of the stem, and is, if necessary, moved to an earlier syllable.
For example, in ‘Japan’ the primary stress is on the last syllable, but when we add the stress-carrying suffix ‘-ese’the primary stress is on the suffix and the secondary stress is placed not on the second syllable but on the first: ‘Japanese’.
Suffixes that do not affect stress placement
(This is the rule for adjectives; verbs with stems of more than one syllable always have the stress on the syllable immediately preceding ‘ish’, e.g. ‘replenish’, ‘demolish’.)
Suffixes that influence stress in the stem
PRIMARY STRESS ON THE LAST SYLLABLE OF THE STEM
THE SUFFIXES ‘-ANCE’, ‘-ANT’ AND ‘-ARY'
When these suffixes are attached to single-syllable stems, the stress is almost always placed on the stem.
When the stem has two syllables the stress is sometimes on the first, sometimes on the second syllable of the stem.
To explain this we need to use a rule based on syllable-structure, as was done for simple words in the previous chapter.
If the final syllable of the stem contains a long vowel or diphthong, or if it ends with more than one consonant, that syllable receives the stress.
For example: ‘importance’; ‘centenary’.
Otherwise the syllable before the last one receives the stress: ‘consonant’; ‘military’.
We will not consider words with stems of more than two syllables.
Such words are, from the point of view of this course, too complex and uncommon for it to be worth attempting to write rules.
11.3 Prefixes
We will only deal briefly with prefixes.
Their effect on stress does not have the comparative regularity, independence and predictability of suffixes, and there is no prefix of one or two syllables that always carries primary stress.
Consequently, the best treatment seems to be to say that stress in words with prefixes is governed by the same rules as those for words without prefixes.
11.4 Compound words
The words discussed so far in this chapter have all consisted of a stem plus an affix.
We now pass on to another type of word.
This will be called compound, and its main characteristic is that it can be analysed into two words, both of which can exist independently as English words.
(Some compounds are made of more than two words, but we will not consider these.)
As with many of the distinctions being made in connection with stress, there are areas of uncertainty.
For example, it  could be argued that ‘photograph’ may be divided into two independent words, ‘photo’and ‘graph’; yet we usually do not regard it as a compound, but as an affix word.
(If someone drew a graph displaying numerical information about photos, this would perhaps be called a ‘photo-graph’ and the word would be regarded as a compound).
Compounds are written in different ways; sometimes they are written as one word, e.g. ‘armchair’, ‘sunflower’, sometimes with the words separated by a hyphen, e.g. ‘gear-change’, ‘fruit-cake’, and sometimes with two words separated by a space, e.g. ‘desk lamp’, ‘battery charger’.
In this last case there would, of course be no indication to the foreign learner that the pair of words was to be treated as a compound.
There is no clear dividing line between two-word compounds and pairs of words that simply happen to occur together quite frequently.
As far as stress is concerned, the question is quite simple.
When is primary stress placed on the first word of the compound and when on the second?
Both patterns are found.
A few rules can be given, though these are not completely reliable.
Words which do not receive primary stress normally have secondary stress, though for the sake of simplicity this is not marked here.
Perhaps the most familiar type of compound is the one which combines two nouns, and normally has the stress on the first element, as in:
It is probably safest for foreign learners to assume that stress will normally fall in this way on other compounds; however, a variety of compounds receive stress instead on the second element.
For example, compounds with an adjectival first element and the -ed morpheme at the end have this pattern (given in spelling only):
Compounds in which the first element is a number in some form also tend to have final stress:
Compounds functioning as adverbs are usually final-stressed:
Finally, compounds which function as verbs and have an adverbial first element take final stress:
11.5 Variable stress
It would be wrong to imagine that the stress pattern is always fixed and unchanging in English words.
Stress position may vary for one of two reasons: either as a result of the stress on other words occurring next to the word in question, or because not all speakers of RP agree on the placement of stress in some words.
The former case is an aspect of connected speech that will be encountered again in Chapter 14: the main effect is that the stress on a final-stressed compound tends to move to the preceding syllable if the following word begins with a strongly stressed syllable.
Thus (using some examples from the previous section):
The second is not a serious problem, but one that foreign learners should be aware of.
A well-known example is ‘controversy’, which is pronounced by some speakers as  and by others as ; it would be quite wrong to say that one version was correct and one incorrect.
Other examples of different possibilities are ‘ice-cream’, ‘kilometer’(either  or ) and ‘formidable’(or ).
11.6 Word-class pairs
One aspect of word stress is best treated as a separate issue.
There are several dozen pairs of two-syllable words with identical spelling which differ from each other in stress placement, apparently according to word class (noun, verb or adjective).
All appear to consist of prefix + stem.
We shall treat them as a special type of word and give them the following rule: when a pair of prefix-plus-stem words exists, both members of which are spelt identically, one of which is a verb and  the other is either a noun or an adjective, the stress will be placed on the second syllable of the verb but on the first syllable of the noun or adjective.
Some common examples are given below (V = verb, A = adjective, N = noun):
Notes on problems and further reading
Most of the reading recommended in the notes for the previous chapter is relevant for this one too.
Looking specifically at compounds, it is worth reading Fudge (1984), chapter 5.
If you wish to go more deeply into compound word stress, you should first study English word formation.
Recommended reading for this is Bauer (1983).
Written exercises
1
Put stress marks on the following words (try to put secondary stress marks on as well).
a)
shop-fitter
b)
open-ended
c)
Javanese
d)
birth-mark
e)
anti-clockwise
f)
confirmation
g)
eight-sided
h)
fruit-cake
i)
defective
j)
roof-timber
2
Write the words in phonemic transcription, including the stress marks.
Weak forms
Chapter 9 discussed the difference between strong and weak syllables in English.
We have now moved on from looking at syllables to looking at words, and we will consider certain well-known English words that can be pronounced in two different ways, which are called strong forms and weak forms.
As an example, the word ‘that’ can be pronounced  (strong form) or  (weak form).
The sentence ‘I like that’ is pronounced    (strong form); the sentence ‘I hope that she will’is pronounced      (weak form).
There are roughly forty such words in English.
It is possible to use only strong forms in speaking, and some foreigners do this.
Usually they can still be understood by other speakers of English, so why is it important to learn how weak forms are used?
There are two main reasons; firstly, most native speakers of English find an ‘all-strong-form’ pronunciation unnatural and foreign-sounding, something that most learners would wish to avoid.
Secondly, and more importantly, speakers who are not familiar with the use of weak forms are likely to have difficulty understanding speakers who do use weak forms; since practically all native speakers of British English use them, learners of the language need to learn about these weak forms to help them to understand what they hear.
We must distinguish between weak forms and contracted forms.
Certain English words are shortened so severely (usually to a single phoneme) and so consistently that they are represented differently in informal writing, e.g. ‘it is’—‘it's’; ‘we have’—‘we've’; ‘do not’—‘don't’.
These contracted forms are discussed in a later chapter, and are not included here.
Almost all the words which have both a strong and weak form belong to a category that may be called function words — words that do not have a dictionary meaning in the way that we normally expect nouns, verbs, adjectives and adverbs to have.
These function words are words such as auxiliary verbs, prepositions, conjunctions, etc., all of which are in certain circumstances pronounced in their strong forms but which are more frequently pronounced in their weak forms.
It is important to remember that there are certain contexts where only the strong form is acceptable, and others where the weak form is the  normal pronunciation.
There are some fairly simple rules; we can say that the strong form is used in the following cases:
i)
For many weak-form words, when they occur at the end of a sentence.
For example, the word ‘of’ has the weak form  in the following sentence: ‘I'm fond of chips’but when it comes at the end of the sentence, as in the following example, it has the strong form : ‘Chips are what I'm fond of’Many of the words given below (particularly the first nine) never occur at the end of a sentence, e.g. ‘the’, ‘your’.
Some words (particularly the pronouns numbered 10–14 below) do occur in their weak forms in final position.
ii)
When a weak-form word is being contrasted with another word, e.g.: ‘The letter's from him, not to him’ A similar case is what we might call a co-ordinated use of prepositions: ‘I travel to and from London a lot’‘A work of and about literature’
iii)
When a weak-form word is given stress for the purpose of emphasis, e.g.: ‘You must give me more money’
iv)
When a weak-form word is being ‘cited’ or ‘quoted’, e.g.: ‘You shouldn't put ‘and’at the end of a sentence'          
Another point to remember is that when weak-form words whose spelling begins with ‘h’(e.g. ‘her’, ‘have’) occur at the beginning of a sentence, the pronunciation is with initial h, even though this is usually omitted in other contexts.
In the rest of this chapter, the most common weak-form words will be introduced.
1.
Weak forms:(before consonants)‘Shut the door’(before vowels)‘Wait for the end’
2.
Weak forms:(before consonants)‘Read a book’(before vowels)‘Eat an apple’
‘THE'
‘A’, ‘AN'
3.
Weak form:(sometimes  after ,,,,)‘Come and see’‘Fish and chips’
4.
Weak form: ‘It's good but expensive’
5.
(This word only has a weak form when used in a relative clause; when used with a demonstrative sense it is always pronounced in its strong form.)
Weak form: ‘The price is the thing that annoys me’
6.
Weak form: ‘Better than ever’
7.
(when it occurs before a noun) Weak form:(at the beginning of a sentence)‘Take his name’(Another sense of ‘his’, as in ‘it was his’, or ‘his was late’, always has the strong form.)
8.
(When used with possessive sense, preceding a noun; as an object pronoun, this can also occur at the end of a sentence.)
Weak forms:(before consonants)‘Take her home’ ar (before vowels)‘Take her out’
9.
Weak forms:(before consonants)‘Take your time’(before vowels)‘On your own’
10.
This group of pronouns has weak forms pronounced with weaker vowels than the  and  of their strong forms.
I will use the symbols  and  (in preference to  and ) to represent them.
There is little difference in the pronunciation in different places in the sentence, except in the case of ‘he’.
Weak forms: ‘Why did she read it?’
‘Who is she?’(the weak form is usually pronounced without  except at the beginning of a sentence)‘Which did he choose?’
‘He was late, wasn't he?’
‘How can we get there?’
‘We need that, don't we?’
‘What do you think?’
‘You like it, do you?’
11.
Weak form: ‘Leave him alone’‘I've seen him’
12.
Weak form:(when sentence-initial)‘Ask her to come’‘I've met her’
13.
Weak form: ‘Leave them here’‘Eat them’
14.
‘Write us a letter’‘They invited all of us’
The next group of words (some prepositions and other function words) occur in their strong forms when they are final in a sentence; examples of this are given.
(19 is a partial exception.)
‘AND'
‘BUT'
‘THAT'
‘THAN'
‘HIS'
‘HER'
‘YOUR'
‘SHE’, ‘HE’, ‘WE’, ‘YOU'
‘SHE'
‘HE'
‘WE'
‘YOU'
‘HIM'
‘HER'
‘THEM'
‘US'
15.
Weak form: ‘I'll see you at lunch’ In final position: ‘What's he shooting at?’
16.
Weak form:(before consonants)‘Tea for two’(before vowels)‘Thanks for asking’ In final position: ‘What's that for?’
17.
Weak form: ‘I'm home from work’ In final position: ‘Here's where it came from’
18.
Weak form: ‘Most of all’ In final position: ‘Someone I've heard of’
19.
Weak forms:(before consonants)‘Try to stop’(before vowels)‘Time to eat’ In final position:(It is not usual to use the strong form , and the pre-consonantal weak form  is never used.)
‘I don't want to’
20.
Weak form: ‘As much as possible’ In final position: ‘That's what it was sold as’
21.
This word is used in two different ways.
In one sense (typically, when it occurs before a countable noun, meaning ‘an unknown individual’) it has the strong form: ‘I think some animal broke it’ It is also used before uncountable nouns (meaning ‘an unspecified amount of’) and before other nouns in the plural (meaning ‘an unspecified number of’), in such uses it has the weak form .
‘Have some more tea’ In final position: ‘I've got some’
22.
When this word has a demonstrative function, it always occurs in its strong form  (before vowels), e.g. ‘There it is’‘Put it there’ Weak forms:(before consonants)‘There should be a rule’(before vowels)‘There is’In final position the pronunciation may be  or .
‘There isn't any, is there?’ or     
The remaining weak-form words are all auxiliary verbs, which are always used in conjunction with(or at least implying) another (‘full’) verb.
It is important to remember that in their negative form (i.e. combined with ‘not’) they never have the weak pronunciation, and some (e.g. ‘don't’, ‘can't’) have different vowels from their non-negative strong forms.
‘AT'
‘FOR'
‘FROM'
‘OF'
‘TO'
‘AS'
‘SOME'
‘THERE'
23.
Weak forms:, ‘They can wait’‘He could do it’ In final position:, ‘I think we can’‘Most of them could’
24.
Weak forms:,,(with initial  in initial position)‘Which have you seen?’
‘Which has been best?’
‘Most had gone home’ In final position:,, ‘Yes, we have’‘I think she has’‘I thought we had’
25.
Weak forms: or ; ‘We shall need to hurry’‘I should forget it’ In final position:, ‘I think we shall’‘So you should’
26.
This word is sometimes used with the sense of forming a conclusion or deduction, e.g. ‘she left at 8 o'clock, so she must have arrived by now’; when ‘must’ is used in this way, it is rather less  likely to occur in its weak form than when it is being used in its more familiar sense of ‘obligation’.
Weak forms:(before consonants)‘You must try harder’(before vowels)‘He must eat more’ In final position: ‘She certainly must’
‘CAN’, ‘COULD'
‘HAVE’, ‘HAS’, ‘HAD'
‘SHALL’, ‘SHOULD'
‘MUST'
27.
Weak forms: ‘DO’(before consonants)‘Why do they like it?’(before vowels)‘Why do all the cars stop?’
‘DOES’‘When does it arrive?’
In final position:, ‘We don't smoke, but some people do’‘I think John does’
28.
‘AM’, ‘ARE’, ‘WAS’, ‘WERE’ Weak forms: ‘Why am I here?’(before consonants)‘Here are the plates’(before vowels)‘The coats are in there’‘He was here a minute ago’(before consonants)‘The papers were late’(before vowels)‘The questions were easy’In final position:,,, ‘She's not as old as I am’‘I know the Smiths are’‘The last record was’‘They weren't as cold as we were’
‘DO’, ‘DOES'
Notes on problems and further reading
This chapter is almost entirely practical.
All books about English pronunciation devote a lot of attention to these words.
Some of them give a great deal of importance to using weak forms, but do not stress the importance of also knowing when to use the strong forms, something which I feel is very important.
See Mortimer (1984).
Written exercises
In the following sentences, the transcription for the weak-form words is left blank.
Fill in the blanks, taking care to use the appropriate form.
1.
I want her to park that car over there.
2.
Of all the proposals, the one that you made is the silliest.
3.
Jane and Bill could have driven them to and from the party.
4.
To come to the point, what shall we do for the rest of the week?
5.
Has anyone got an idea where it came from?
6.
Pedestrians must always use the crossings provided for them.
7.
Each one was a perfect example of the art that had been developed there.
Problems in phonemic analysis
The concept of the phoneme was introduced in Chapter 5, and a few theoretical problems connected with phonemic analysis have been mentioned in other chapters.
The general assumption (as in most phonetics books) has been that speech is composed of phonemes and that usually whenever a speech sound is produced by a speaker it is possible to identify which phoneme that sound belongs to.
While this is often true, we must recognise that there are several quite serious theoretical problems that should be considered.
From the comparatively simple point of view of learning pronunciation, these problems are not particularly important; however, from the point of view of learning about the phonology of English they are too important to ignore.
There are two main areas of difficulty.
The first will be called the problem of analysis: we may accept the principle of the phoneme as a fundamental unit in language, but we find difficulty in deciding what are the phonemes of a language (in our case, of English).
The result of this is that different writers produce different analyses of the phonemic system of English; it is clear that phonemic analysis is not as clear and simple as studying the letters of the alphabet.
The second area of difficulty will be called the problem of assignment.
As an example of what is meant by ‘assignment’, we might say that a botanist who discovers an unusual plant will try to assign it to a known species; if this is found impossible, it will be decided that a new species has been discovered, and that future examples of this plant will be assigned to this new species.
We find many cases where it is difficult to assign a particular speech sound to a particular phoneme.
13.1 Problems of analysis
The affricates  and  are, phonetically, composed of a plosive followed by a fricative, as explained in Chapter 6.
It is possible to treat each of the pair , as a single consonant phoneme (we will call this the one-phoneme analysis of ,), and it is also possible to say that  they are composed of two phonemes each — either  plus  or  plus  all of which are already established as independent phonemes of English; this will be called the two-phoneme analysis of  and .
If we adopted the two-phoneme analysis, the words ‘church’ and ‘judge’would be composed of five phonemes each, like this: instead of the three phonemes, resulting from the one-phoneme analysis: and there would be no separate  and  phonemes.
But how can we decide which analysis is preferable?
The two-phoneme analysis has one main advantage: if there are no separate  and  phonemes, then our total set of English consonants is smaller.
Many phonologists have claimed that one should prefer the analysis which is the most ‘economical’ in the number of phonemes it results in.
The argument for this might be based on the claim that when we speak to someone we are using a ‘code’, and the most efficient codes do not use unnecessary symbols.
Further, it could be claimed that a phonological analysis is a type of scientific theory, and a scientific theory should be stated as economically as possible.
Both of these points of view have serious weaknesses, but in fact the one-phoneme analysis is generally chosen by phonologists.
Why is this?
There are several arguments; no single one of them is conclusive, but added together they are felt to make the one-phoneme analysis seem preferable.
We will look briefly at some of these arguments.
i)
One argument could be called ‘phonetic’ or ‘allophonic’: if it could be shown that the phonetic quality of the  and  (or  and ) in , was clearly different from realisations of ,,, found elsewhere in similar contexts, this would support the analysis of , as separate phonemes.
As an example, it might be claimed that  in ‘hutch’ was different (perhaps in having shorter duration) from  in ‘hush’or ‘Welsh’,; or it might be claimed that the place of articulation of  in ‘watch apes’is different from that of  in ‘what shapes’.
This argument is a weak one: there is no clear evidence that such phonetic differences exist, and even if there were such evidence, it would be easy to produce explanations for the differences that did not depend on phonemic analyses (e.g. the position of the word boundary in ‘watch apes’, ‘what shapes’).
In fact there is some allophonic evidence that supports the two-phoneme analysis: we find this in the occurrence of glottalisation (which was described at the end of Chapter 6).
If we look at glottalisation of ,, and then  in RP we find the  following pattern of occurrence:(phonetic transcription showing glottalisation is given in square brackets).
— One-consonant phoneme occurring medially; no glottalisation is found: ‘upper’‘better’‘backer’
— Two-consonant phonemes occurring medially; glottalisation is normal: ‘optic’[]‘Betsy’[]‘boxer’[]
— occurring medially; glottalisation is normal after a stressed syllable: ‘butcher’[]‘matches’[]‘watching’[]This makes the medial occurrence of  look more similar to a medial two-consonant-phoneme cluster.
The phonetic argument is therefore inconclusive.
ii)
It could be argued that the proposed phonemes  and  (if one were arguing for the one-phoneme analysis) have distributions similar to other consonants, while other combinations of plosive plus fricative do not.
It can easily be shown that  and  are found initially, medially and finally, and that no other combination (e.g. ,,) has such a wide distribution.
However, several consonants are generally accepted as phonemes of RP despite not being free to occur in all positions (e.g. ,,,,,), so this argument, though supporting the one-phoneme analysis, does not actually prove that , must be classed with other single-consonant phonemes.
iii)
If  and  were able to combine quite freely with other consonants to form consonant clusters, this would support the one-phoneme analysis.
Initially, however, and  never occur in clusters with other consonants.
In final position in the syllable, we find that  can be followed by  (e.g. ‘watched’) and  by  (e.g. ‘wedged’).
and  can be preceded by  (e.g. ‘squelch’, ‘bulge’); is never preceded by , and  is preceded by  only in a few words and names, e.g. ‘Welsh’, ‘Walsh’,.
A fairly similar situation is found if we ask if  can precede  and ; some RP speakers have   in ‘lunch’, ‘French’, etc., and never pronounce the sequence  within a syllable, while other speakers always have  in these contexts and never .
It seems, then, that no contrast between syllable-final  and  exists in RP, and the same appears to be true in relation to and  and to  and .
There are no other possibilities for final consonant clusters containing  and , except that the pre-initial  or  may occur in combination with post-final , as in ‘squelched’, ‘hinged’.
It could  not, then, be said that  and  combine freely with other consonants in forming consonant clusters; this is particularly noticeable in initial position.
How would the two-phoneme analysis affect the syllable-structure framework that was introduced in Chapter 8?
Initial , would have to be interpreted as initial , plus post-initial ,, with the result that the post-initial set of consonants would have to contain ,,, and also ,— consonants which are rather different from the other four and which could only combine with ,.
(The only alternative would be to put , with  in the pre-initial category, again with very limited possibilities of combining with another consonant.)
iv)
Finally, it has been suggested that if native speakers of English who have not been taught phonetics feel that  and  are each ‘one sound’, we should be guided by their ‘intuitions’ and prefer the one-phoneme analysis.
The problem with this is that discovering what untrained (or ‘naive’) speakers feel about their own language is not as easy as it might sound.
Presumably it would be necessary to ask questions like this: ‘Would you say that the word ‘chip’ begins with one sound, like ‘tip’and ‘sip’, or with two sounds, like ‘trip’and ‘skip’?’
But the results would be distorted by the fact that two consonant letters are used in the spelling; to do the test properly one should use illiterate subjects, which raises many further problems.
This rather long discussion of the phonemic status of  and  shows how difficult it can be to reach a conclusion in phonemic analysis.
For the rest of this chapter a number of different problems will be discussed comparatively briefly.
I have already mentioned (in Chapter 6) problems of analysis in connection with the sounds usually transcribed  and .
The velar nasal , described in Chapter 7, also raises a lot of analysis problems; some writers have suggested that the correct analysis is one in which there is no  phoneme, and this sound is treated as an allophone of the phoneme  that occurs when it precedes the phoneme .
It was explained in Chapter 7 that in certain contexts no  is pronounced, but the theory mentioned in the last sentence would claim that at an abstract level there is a  phoneme, though in certain contexts the  is not actually pronounced.
is therefore, according to this theory, an allophone of .
The analysis of the English vowel system presented in Chapters 2 and 3 contains a large number of phonemes, and it is not surprising that some phonologists (who believed in the importance of keeping the total number of phonemes small) proposed different analyses which contain less than ten vowel phonemes and treat all long vowels and diphthongs as composed of two phonemes each.
There are different ways of doing  this: one way is to treat long vowels and diphthongs as composed of two vowel phonemes.
If we start with a set of basic or ‘simple’ vowel phonemes ,,,,,, it would then be possible to make up long vowels by using vowels twice.
Our usual transcription is given in brackets: This can be made to look less unusual by choosing different symbols for the basic vowels.
Diphthongs are made from a simple vowel phoneme followed by one of ,,.
Triphthongs are made from a basic vowel plus one of , followed by , and are therefore composed of three phonemes.
Another way of doing this kind of analysis is to treat long vowels and diphthongs as composed of a vowel plus a consonant; this may seem a less obvious way of proceeding, but it was for many years the choice of most American phonologists.
The idea is that long vowels and diphthongs are composed of a basic vowel phoneme followed by one of ,,(in the case of RP).
Thus the diphthongs could be made up like this (our usual transcription is given in brackets): Long vowels: Diphthongs and long vowels are now of exactly the same phonological composition.
An important point about this analysis is that ,, do not otherwise occur finally in the syllable.
In this analysis, the inequality of distribution is corrected.
There are many other ways of analysing the very complex vowel system of English, some of which are extremely ingenious.
Each has its own advantages and disadvantages.
A final analysis problem that we will consider is that mentioned at the end of Chapter 8 — how to deal with syllabic consonants.
It has to be recognised that syllabic consonants are a problem — they are phonologically different from their non-syllabic counterparts.
How do we account for the minimal pairs given in Chapter 9?
One possibility is to add new consonant phonemes to our list.
We could invent the phonemes ,, etc.
The distribution of these consonants would be rather limited, but the main problem would be fitting them into the pattern of syllable structure.
For a word like ‘button’, or  ‘bottle’, it would be necessary to add  and  to the first post-final set; the argument would be extended to include the  in ‘Hungary’.
But if these consonants now form part of a syllable-final consonant cluster, how do we account for the fact that English speakers hear the consonants as extra syllables?
The question might be answered by saying that the new phonemes are to be classed as vowels.
Another possibility is to set up a phoneme that we might name syllabicity, symbolised with the mark .
Then the word ‘codling’ would consist of the following six phonemes:, while the word ‘coddling’would consist of the following seven phonemes:(and simultaneously ).
This is a superficially attractive theory, but the proposed phoneme is nothing like the other phonemes we have identified up to this point — putting it simply, it doesn't have any sound.
Some phonologists maintain that a syllabic consonant is really a case of a vowel and a consonant that have become combined.
Let us suppose that the vowel is .
We could then say that, for example, ‘Hungary’ is phonemically  while ‘hungry’is ; it would then be necessary to say that the vowel phoneme in the phonemic representation is not pronounced as a vowel, but instead causes the following consonant to become syllabic.
This is an example of the abstract view of phonology where the way a word is represented phonemically may be significantly different from the actual sequence of sounds heard, so that the phonetic and the phonemic levels are quite widely separated.
13.2 Problems of assignment
One problem of assignment has already been encountered: in Chapter 9 we saw how, although  and  are clearly distinct in most contexts, there are other contexts where we find a sound which cannot clearly be said to belong to one or other of these two phonemes.
The suggested solution to this problem was to use the symbol , which does not represent any single phoneme; a similar proposal was made for .
We use the term neutralisation for cases where contrasts between phonemes which exist in other places in the language disappear in particular contexts.
A clearer case of neutralisation can be found in the case of plosives following s in syllable-initial position.
Words like ‘spill’, ‘still’, ‘skill’ are usually represented with the phonemes ,, following the s.
But, as many writers have pointed out, it would be quite reasonable to transcribe them with ,, instead.
For example,,, are unaspirated while ,, in syllable-initial position are usually aspirated; but in ,, we find an unaspirated plosive — there could be a strong argument for transcribing them as ,,.
We do not do this, perhaps because of the spelling, but it is important to remember that the contrasts between  and , between  and  and between  and  are neutralised in this context.
There are some other cases which are not so clear.
It has been suggested that there is not really a contrast between  and , since  only occurs in weak syllables and no minimal pairs can be found to show a clear contrast between  and  in unstressed syllables (though there have been some ingenious attempts).
This has resulted in a proposal that one phoneme symbol (e.g. ) be used for representing any occurrence of  or , so that‘cup’ would be transcribed  and ‘upper’as .
This new a phoneme would have two allophones, one being []and the other []; the stress mark would indicate the []allophone and in syllables not marked for stress it would be unimportant whether []or []was used.
Other phonologists have suggested that  is an allophone of several other vowels; for example, compare the middle two syllables in the words ‘economy’ and ‘economic’— it appears that when the stress moves away from the syllable containing  the vowel becomes .
Similarly, compare ‘Germanic’ with ‘German’— when the stress is taken away from the syllable , the vowel weakens to .
Many similar examples could be constructed with other vowels; some possibilities may be suggested by the list of words given in 9.2 to show the different spellings that can be pronounced with .
The conclusion that could be drawn from this argument is that  is not a phoneme of English, but is an allophone of several different vowel phonemes when those phonemes occur in an unstressed syllable.
The argument is in some ways quite an attractive one, but since it leads to a rather complex and abstract phonemic analysis it is not adopted for this course.
This chapter was intended to show that there are many ways of analysing the English phonemic system, each with its own advantages and disadvantages.
We need to consider the practical goal of teaching or learning about English pronunciation, and for this purpose a very abstract analysis would be unsuitable.
This is one criterion for judging the value of an analysis; unless one believes in carrying out phonological analysis for purely aesthetic reasons, the only other important criterion is whether the analysis corresponds to the representation of sounds in the human brain.
We do not yet know much about this but the brain is so powerful and complex that it is very unlikely that any of the analyses proposed so far bear much resemblance to this reality; they are too heavily influenced by the theoretician's preoccupation with economy, elegance and simplicity.
Notes on problems and further reading
13.1
The analysis of  and  is one of the most intractable problems.
The general principles in traditional phoneme theory have been set out by Trubetzkoy (1939); the German original has been translated into English (1969), and the relevant section of this translation was reprinted in Fudge (1973), pp. 65–70.
The problem is also discussed in Gimson (1980), pp. 172–4.
The phonemic analysis of the velar nasal has already been discussed above (notes on Chapter 7).
The ‘double vowel’ interpretation of English long vowels was put forward by MacCarthy (1952) and is used by Kreidler (1989).
The ‘vowel-plus-semivowel’ interpretation of long vowels and diphthongs was almost universally accepted by American (and some British) writers from the 1940s to the 1960s, and still pervades contemporary descriptions.
It has the advantage of being economical on phonemes and very ‘neat and tidy’.
The analysis in this form is presented in Trager and Smith (1951).
This work was claimed to provide an analysis that could produce a phonologically distinct representation for all English short vowels, long vowels and diphthongs.
An early attack on this view was made by Sledd (1955), pp. 316–24.
Kreidler (1989) reviews this approach and others (pp. 293–304), but his treatment of Gimson's vowel analysis is inaccurate.
In generative phonology, the claim is that, at the abstract level, vowels are simply tense or lax.
If they are lax they are realised as short vowels, if tense as diphthongs (this category including what I have been calling long vowels).
The quality of the first element of the diphthongs/long vowels is modified by some phonological rules, while other rules supply the second element automatically.
This is set out in Chomsky and Halle (1968), pp. 178–87.
13.2
The ‘problems of assignment’ have all been mentioned briefly in earlier chapters.
On the interpretation of ,,, see Davidsen-Nielsen (1969).
There is an interesting discussion of the  — contrast in Wells (1970), pp.233–5.
The idea that  is an allophone of many English vowels is not a new one — for example, it was discussed in Bloomfield (1933), though unfortunately this is left out of the edition sold in Britain.
In generative phonology, a results from vowel reduction in vowels which have never received stress in the process of the application of stress rules.
This is explained — in rather difficult terms in Chomsky and Halle (1968), pp. 110–26.
Note for teachers
Since this is a theoretical chapter it is difficult to come up with practical work.
I do not fee! that it is helpful for students to do exercises on using different ways of transcribing phonemes — just learning one set of conventions is difficult enough.
Some books on phonology give exercises on the phonemic analysis of other languages (e.g. Katamba, 1989; Hawkins, 1984), but though these are useful, I do not feel that it would be appropriate in this book to divert attention from English.
The exercises given below therefore concentrate on bits of phonetically transcribed English which involve problems when a phonemic representation is required.
Written exercises
The following are all exercises in which you must look at phonetically transcribed material from different English accents, and decide on the best way to transcribe them phonemically.
Information is given where necessary about the meaning of the phonetic symbols.
1.
a)
‘thing’[]
b)
‘think’[]
c)
‘thinking’[]
d)
‘finger’[]
e)
‘singer’[]
f)
‘singing’[]
2.
It often happens in rapid speech that a nasal consonant disappears when it comes between a vowel and another consonant (for example, this may happen to the  in ‘front’: when this happens the preceding vowel becomes nasalised (some of the air escapes through the nose).
We symbolise a nasalised vowel in phonetic transcription by putting the  diacritic above it; for example, the word ‘front’ may be pronounced [].
Nasalised vowels are found in the words given in phonetic transcription below.
Transcribe them phonemically.
3.
When the  phoneme occurs between vowels it is sometimes pronounced as a ‘tap’(the tongue blade strikes the alveolar ridge sharply, producing a very brief voiced plosive: the phonetic symbol is ; this is very common in American English, and is also found in a number of accents in England: think of a typical American pronunciation of ‘getting better’[].
Look at the transcriptions of a number of words given below and see if you can work out (for the accent in question) the environment in which []is found.
a)
‘betting’[]
b)
‘bedding’[]
c)
‘attend’[]
d)
‘attitude’[]
e)
‘time’[]
f)
‘tight’[]
Aspects of connected speech
Many years ago scientists tried to develop machines that produced speech from a vocabulary of pre-recorded words; the machines were designed to join these words together to form sentences.
For very limited messages, such as those of a ‘talking clock’, this technique was usable, but for other purposes the quality of the speech was so unnatural that it was practically unintelligible.
The failure of this ‘mechanical speech’ approach (which eventually led to the development of speech synthesis by rule) has many lessons to teach us about pronunciation teaching and learning, and it will be useful, in looking at connected speech, to bear in mind the difference between the way humans speak and what would be found in ‘mechanical speech’.
14.1 Rhythm
The notion of rhythm involves some noticeable event happening at regular intervals of time; one can detect the rhythm of a heart-beat, of a flashing light or of a piece of music.
It has often been claimed that English speech is rhythmical, and that the rhythm is detectable in the regular occurrence of stressed syllables; of course, it is not suggested that the timing is as regular as a clock — the regularity of occurrence is only relative.
The theory that English has stress-timed rhythm implies that stressed syllables will tend to occur at relatively regular intervals whether they are separated by unstressed syllables or not; this would not be the case in ‘mechanical speech’.
An example is given below.
In this sentence, the stressed syllables are given numbers: syllables 1 and 2 are not separated by any unstressed syllables, 2 and 3 are separated by one unstressed syllable, 3 and 4 by two and 4 and 5 by three.
The stress-timed rhythm theory states that the times from each stressed syllable to the next will tend to be the same, irrespective of the number of intervening unstressed syllables.
The theory also claims that while  some languages (e.g. Russian and Arabic) have stress-timed rhythm similar to that of English, others (such as French, Telugu and Yoruba) have a different rhythmical structure called syllable-timed rhythm; in these languages, all syllables, whether stressed or unstressed, tend to occur at regular time-intervals and the time between stressed syllables will be shorter or longer in proportion to the number of unstressed syllables.
Some writers have developed theories of English rhythm in which a unit of rhythm, the foot, is used (with an obvious parallel in the metrical analysis of verse); the foot begins with a stressed syllable and includes all following unstressed syllables up to(but not including) the following stressed syllable.
The example sentence given above would be divided into feet as follows:
Some theories of rhythm go further than this, and point to the fact that some feet are stronger than others, producing strong-weak patterns in larger pieces of speech above the level of the foot.
To understand how this could be done, let's start with a simple example: the word ‘twenty’ has one strong and one weak syllable, forming one foot.
A diagram of its rhythmical structure can be made, where s stands for ‘strong’ and w stands for ‘weak’.
The word ‘places’ has the same form: Now consider the phrase ‘twenty places’, where ‘places’will normally carry stronger stress than ‘twenty’, i.e. will be rhythmically stronger.
We can make our ‘tree diagram’ grow to look like this: If we then look at this phrase in the context of a longer phrase ‘twenty places further back’, and build up the ‘further back’part in a similar way, we would end up with an even more elaborate structure:
By analysing speech in this way we are able to show the relationships between strong and weak elements, and the different levels of stress that we find.
The strength of any particular syllable can be measured by counting up the number of times an s symbol occurs above it; the levels in the sentence shown above can be diagrammed like this (leaving out syllables that have never received stress at any level):
The above pattern may be correct for very slow speech, but we must now look at what happens to the rhythm in normal speech: many English speakers would feel that, although in ‘twenty places’ the right-hand foot is the stronger, the word ‘twenty’is stronger than ‘places’in ‘twenty places further back’when spoken in conversational style.
It is widely claimed that English speech tends towards a regular alternation between stronger and weaker, and tends to adjust stress levels to bring this about.
The effect is particularly noticeable in cases such as the following:
compact (adjective) but compact disc   thirteen  but thirteenth place   Westminster  but Westminster Abbey  
In brief, it seems that stresses are altered according to context: we need to be able to explain how and why this happens, but this is a difficult question and one for which we have only partial answers.
An additional factor is that in speaking English we vary in how rhythmically we speak: sometimes we speak very rhythmically (this is typical of some styles of public speaking) while at other times we speak  arhythmically (that is, without rhythm)— for example , when we are hesitant or nervous.
Stress-timed rhythm is thus perhaps characteristic of one style of speaking, not of English speech as a whole; one always speaks with some degree of rhythmicality, but the degree will vary between a minimum value (arhythmical) and a maximum (completely stress-timed rhythm).
It follows from what was said earlier that in a stress-timed language all the feet are supposed to be of roughly the same duration.
Many foreign learners of English are made to practise speaking English with a regular rhythm, often with the teacher beating time or clapping hands on the stressed syllables.
It must be pointed out, however, that the evidence for the existence of stress-timed rhythm is not strong.
There are many laboratory techniques for measuring time in speech, and measurement of the time intervals between stressed syllables in connected English speech has not shown the expected regularity; moreover, using the same measuring techniques on different languages, it has not been possible to show a real difference between ‘stress-timed’ and ‘syllable-timed’languages.
Experiments have shown that we tend to hear speech as more rhythmical than it actually is, and one suspects that this is what the proponents of the stress-timed rhythm theory have been led to do in their auditory analysis of English rhythm.
However, one ought to keep an open mind on the subject, remembering that the large-scale, objective study of suprasegmental aspects of real speech is only just beginning, and there is much research that needs to be done.
What, then, is the practical value of the traditional ‘rhythm exercise’ for foreign learners?
The argument about rhythm should not make us forget the very important difference in English between strong and weak syllables; some languages do not have such a noticeable difference (which may, perhaps, explain the subjective impression of ‘syllable-timing’), and for native speakers of such languages learning English it can be helpful to practise repeating strongly rhythmical utterances since this forces the speaker to concentrate on making unstressed syllables weak.
Speakers of languages like Japanese, Hungarian and Spanish, which do not have weak syllables to anything like the same extent as English does, may well find such exercises of some value (as long as they are not overdone to the point where learners feel they have to speak English as though they were reciting verse).
14.2 Assimilation
The device mentioned earlier that produces ‘mechanical speech’ would contain all the words of English, each having been recorded in  isolation.
A significant difference in natural connected speech is the way that sounds belonging to one word can cause changes in sounds belonging to neighbouring words.
Assuming that we know how the phonemes of a particular word would be realised when the word was pronounced in isolation, when we find a phoneme realised differently as a result of being near some other phoneme belonging to a neighbouring word we call this an instance of assimilation.
Assimilation is something which varies in extent according to speaking rate and style; it is more likely to be found in rapid, casual speech and less likely in slow, careful speech.
Sometimes the difference caused by assimilation is very noticeable, and sometimes it is very slight.
Generally speaking, the cases that have most often been described are assimilations affecting consonants.
As an example, consider a case where two words are combined, the first of which ends with a single final consonant (which we will call C f ) and the second of which starts with a single initial consonant (which we will call C i ); we can construct a diagram like this:
If C f changes to become like C i in some way, the assimilation is called regressive (the phoneme that comes first is affected by the one that comes after it); if C i changes to become like C f in some way, the assimilation is called progressive.
In what ways can a consonant change?
We have seen that the main differences between consonants are of three types:
i)
differences in place of articulation
ii)
differences in manner of articulation
iii)
differences in voicing.
In parallel with this, we can identify assimilation of place, of manner and of voicing in consonants.
Assimilation of place is most clearly observable in some cases where a final consonant (C f ) with alveolar place of articulation is followed by an initial consonant (C i ) with a place of articulation that is not alveolar.
For example, the final consonant in ‘that’ is alveolar .
In rapid, casual speech the  will become  before a bilabial consonant, as in: ‘that person’; ‘light blue’; ‘meat pie’.
Before a dental consonant, will change to a dental plosive, for which the symbol is , as in: ‘that thing’; ‘get those’; ‘cut through’.
Before a velar consonant, the  will become , as in: ‘that case’; ‘bright colour’; ‘quite good’.
In similar contexts  would  become , and , respectively, and  would become , and .
However, the same is not true of the other alveolar consonants: and  behave differently, the only noticeable change being that  becomes , and  becomes  when followed by  or , as in: ‘this shoe’; ‘those years’.
It is important to note that the consonants that have undergone assimilation have not disappeared; in the above examples, the duration of the consonants remains more or less what one would expect for a two-consonant cluster.
Assimilation of place is only noticeable in this regressive assimilation of alveolar consonants; it is not something that foreign learners need to learn to do.
Assimilation of manner is much less noticeable, and is only found in the most rapid and casual speech; generally speaking, the tendency is again for regressive assimilation and the change in manner is most likely to be towards an ‘easier’ consonant — one which makes less obstruction to the airflow.
It is thus possible to find cases where a final plosive becomes a fricative or nasal (e.g. ‘that side’, ‘good night’), but most unlikely that a final fricative or nasal would become a plosive.
In one particular case we find progressive assimilation of manner, when a word-initial  follows a plosive or nasal at the end of a preceding word: it is very common to find that the C i becomes identical in manner to the C f but with dental place of articulation.
For example(the arrow symbol means ‘becomes’): It seems that the  phoneme frequently occurs with no discernible friction noise.
Assimilation of voice is also found, but again only in a limited way.
Only regressive assimilation of voice is found across word boundaries, and then only of one type; since this matter is important for foreign learners we will look at it in some detail.
If C f is a lenis (i.e. ‘voiced’) consonant and C i is fortis (‘voiceless’) we often find that the lenis consonant has no voicing; this is not a very noticeable case of assimilation, since, as was explained in Chapter 4, initial and final lenis consonants usually have little or no voicing anyway.
When C f is fortis (‘voiceless’) and C i lenis (‘voiced’), a context in which in many languages C f would become voiced, assimilation of voice never takes place; consider the following example: ‘I like that black dog’.
It is typical of many foreign learners of English to allow regressive assimilation of voicing to change the final  of ‘like’ to , the final  of ‘that’to  and the final  of ‘black’to .
This creates a very strong impression of a foreign accent, and is something that should obviously be avoided.
Up to this point we have been looking at some fairly clear cases of assimilation across word boundaries.
However, similar effects are also observable across morpheme boundaries and to some extent also within the morpheme.
Sometimes in the latter case it seems that the assimilation is rather different from the word-boundary examples; for example, if in a syllable-final consonant cluster a nasal consonant precedes a plosive or a fricative in the same morpheme, the place of articulation of the nasal is always determined by the place of articulation of the other consonant; thus: ‘bump’; ‘tenth’; ‘hunt’; ‘bank’.
It could be said that this assimilation had become ‘fixed’ as part of the phonological structure of English syllables, since exceptions are almost non-existent.
A similar example of a type of assimilation that has become fixed is the progressive assimilation of voice with the suffixes  and ; when a verb carries a third person singular ‘-s’ suffix, or a noun carries an ‘-s’plural suffix or an' —‘s’possessive suffix, that suffix will be pronounced as  if the preceding consonant is fortis (‘voiceless’) and as  if the preceding consonant is lenis (‘voiced’), thus:
Much more could be said about assimilation, but from the point of view of learning or teaching English pronunciation, to do so would not be very useful.
It is essentially a natural phenomenon that can be seen in any sort of complex physical activity, and the only important matter is to remember the restriction, specific to English, on voicing assimilation mentioned above.
Assimilation creates something of a problem for phoneme theory; when, for example, in ‘good’ becomes  in the context ‘…girl’() or  in the context ‘…boy’(), should we say that one phoneme has been substituted for another?
If we do this, how do we describe the assimilation in ‘good thing’, where  becomes dental  before the  of ‘thing’, or in ‘good food’, where  becomes a labiodental plosive before the  in ‘food’?
English has no dental or labiodental plosive phonemes, so in these cases, although there is clearly assimilation, there could not be said to be a substitution of one phoneme for another.
The alternative is to say that assimilation causes a phoneme to be realised by a different allophone; this would mean that, in the case of   and  , the phoneme  of ‘good’ has velar and bilabial allophones.
Traditionally, phonemes were supposed not to overlap in their allophones, so that the only plosives that could have allophones with bilabial place of articulation were  and ; this restriction is no longer looked on as so important.
14.3 Elision
The nature of elision may be stated quite simply: under certain circumstances sounds disappear; one might express this in more technical language by saying that in certain circumstances a phoneme may be realised as zero, or have zero realisation or be deleted.
As with assimilation, elision is typical of rapid, casual speech; the process of change in phoneme realisations produced by changing the speed and casualness of speech is sometimes called gradation.
Producing elisions is something which foreign learners do not need to learn to do, but it is important for them to be aware that when native speakers of English talk to each other, quite a number of phonemes that the foreigner might expect to hear are not actually pronounced.
We will look at some examples, though only a small number of the many possibilities can be given here.
i)
In words like ‘potato’, ‘tomato’, ‘canary’, ‘perhaps’, ‘today’, the vowel in the first syllable may disappear; the aspiration of the initial plosive takes up the whole of the middle portion of the syllable, resulting in these pronunciations (where  indicates aspiration):;;;;
Loss of weak vowel after ,,.
ii)
(Syllabic consonants were introduced in Chapter 9.)
Examples: ‘tonight’; ‘police’; ‘correct’.
iii)
It has been said that no normal English speaker would ever pronounce all the consonants between the last two words of the following: ‘George the Sixth's throne’ Though this is not impossible to pronounce, something like…is more likely.
In clusters of three plosives or two plosives plus a fricative, the middle plosive may disappear, so that the following pronunciations result: ‘acts’; ‘looked back’; ‘scripts’.
Weak vowel + , or  becomes syllabic consonant.
Avoidance of complex consonant clusters.
iv)
Examples: ‘lots of them’; ‘waste of money’.
v)
It is difficult to know whether contractions of grammatical words should be regarded as examples of elision or not.
The fact that they are regularly represented with special spelling forms makes them seem rather different from the above examples.
The best-known cases are:
‘Had’, ‘would’: spelt ‘d, pronounced  (after vowels),(after consonants).
Loss of final  in ‘of’ before consonants.
‘Is’, ‘has’: spelt ‘s, pronounced  (after fortis consonants),(after lenis consonants), except that after ,,,,, ‘is’ is pronounced  and ‘has’is pronounced  in contracted form.
‘Will’: spelt ‘ll, pronounced  (after vowels’,(after consonants).
‘Have’: spelt ‘ve, pronounced  (after vowels),(after consonants).
‘Not’: spelt n't, pronounced  (after vowels),(after consonants).
(There are also vowel changes associated with n't, e.g. ‘can’‘can't’, ‘do’—‘don't’.)
‘Are’: spelt ‘re, pronounced  after vowels, usually with some change in the preceding vowel, e.g. ‘you’—‘you're’, ‘we’—‘we're’, ‘they’— they're ; linking r is used when a vowel follows, as explained in the next section.
Contracted ‘are’ is also pronounced as  or  when following a consonant.
14.4 Linking
In our hypothetical ‘mechanical speech’ all words would be separate units placed next to each other in sequence; in real connected speech, however, we sometimes link words together.
The most familiar case is the use of linking ; the phoneme  cannot occur in syllable-final position in RP, but when a word's spelling suggests a final , and a word beginning with a vowel follows, the usual pronunciation for RP speakers is to pronounce with .
For example:
‘here’ but ‘here are’
‘four’ but ‘four eggs’
Many RP speakers use  in a similar way to link words ending with a vowel even when there is no ‘justification’ from the spelling, as in: ‘Formula A’‘Australia all out’‘media event’This has been called intrusive ; some English speakers and teachers still regard this as incorrect or sub-standard pronunciation, but it is undoubtedly widespread.
‘Linking’ and ‘intrusive ’are special cases of juncture; this name refers to the relationship between one sound and the sounds that  immediately precede and follow it, and has been given some importance in phonological theory.
If we take the two words ‘my turn’, the relationship between  and , between  and  and between  and  is said to be one of close juncture.
is preceded by silence and  is followed by silence, and so  and  are said to be in a position of external open juncture.
The problem lies in deciding what the relationship is between  and ; since we do not usually pause between words, there is no silence (or external open juncture) to indicate word division and to justify the space left in the transcription.
But if English speakers hear   they can usually recognise this as ‘my turn’ and not ‘might earn’.
This is where the problem of internal open juncture (usually just called ‘juncture’ for short) becomes apparent.
What is it that makes perceptible the difference between   and  ?
The answer is that in the one case the  is aspirated (initial in ‘turn’), and in the other case it is not (being final in ‘might’).
In addition to this, the  diphthong is shorter in ‘might’, but we will ignore this for the sake of a simpler argument.
If a difference in meaning is caused by the difference between aspirated and unaspirated , how can we avoid the conclusion that English has a phonemic contrast between aspirated and unaspirated ?
The answer is, of course, that the position of a word boundary has some effect on the realisation of the  phoneme; this is one of the many cases in which the occurrence of different allophones can only be properly explained by making reference to units of grammar (something which was for a long time disapproved of by many phonologists).
Many ingenious minimal pairs have been invented to show the significance of juncture, a few of which are given below:
a)
‘might rain'   (voiced when initial in ‘rain’, short)
b)
‘my train'   (voiceless following  in ‘train’)
a)
‘all that I'm after today’(unaspirated when final in ‘that’)
b)
‘all the time after today’(aspirated when initial in ‘time’)
a)
‘he lies’(‘clear ’ initial in ‘lies’)
b)
‘heal eyes   (‘dark ’ final in ‘heal’)
a)
‘keep sticking’(unaspirated after ; short)
b)
‘keeps ticking’(aspirated in ‘ticking’)
Of course, the context in which the words occur almost always makes it clear where the boundary comes, and the juncture information is then redundant.
It should by now be clear that there is a great deal of difference between the way words are pronounced in isolation and in the context  of connected speech.
It would not be practical or useful to teach all learners of English to produce assimilations; practice in making elisions is more useful, and it is clearly valuable to do exercises related to rhythm and linking.
Perhaps the most important consequence of what has been described in this chapter is that learners of English must be made very clearly aware of the problems that they will meet in listening to colloquial, connected speech.
Notes on problems and further reading
14.1
English rhythm is a controversial subject on which widely differing views have been expressed.
On one side there are writers such as Abercrombie (1964) and Halliday (1967) who have set out an elaborate theory of the rhythmical structure of English speech (including foot theory).
On the other side there are sceptics like Crystal (1969) who reject the idea of an inherent rhythmical pattern.
The distinction between physically measurable time-intervals and subjective impressions of rhythmicality is discussed in Roach (1982)(in which figures are presented from a laboratory study of six different languages) and Lehiste (1977); see also Dauer (1983).
Adams (1979) presents a review and experimental study of the subject, and concludes that despite the theoretical problems, there is practical value in teaching rhythm to learners of English.
The treatment of rhythmicality as a matter of degree, or a characteristic which may or may not be present, is presented in Crystal (1969), pp.161–5.
For some writers concerned with English language teaching, the notion of rhythm is a more practical matter of making a sufficiently clear difference between strong and weak syllables, rather than concentrating on a rigid timing pattern, as I suggest at the end of 14.1.
See, for example, Taylor (1981); Mortimer (1984) contains practice material on rhythm.
The treatment of rhythmical hierarchy is based on the comparatively recent theory of metrical phonology.
Hogg and McCully (1987) give a full explanation of this, but it is difficult material.
Goldsmith (1990), chapter 4, and Katamba (1989), chapter 11.1, are briefer and somewhat simpler.
James (1988) explores the relevance of metrical phonology to language learning.
14.2
Assimilation of place with specific reference to alveolar consonants is described in Gimson (1960) .1 think it is important to realise that the traditional view of assimilation as a change from one phoneme to another is naive; modern instrumental studies in the broader field of coarticulation show that when assimilation happens one can often show how there is some sort of combination of articulatory gestures.
In  ‘good girl’, for example, it is not a simple matter of the first word ending either in  or in , but rather a matter of the extent to which alveolar and/or velar closures are achieved.
There may be an alveolar closure immediately preceding and overlapping with a velar closure; there may be simultaneous alveolar and velar closure, or a velar closure followed by slight contact but not closure in the alveolar region.
There are many other possibilities.
An experimental study of coarticulation in consonant clusters which shows some of the above articulatory events is described in Hardcastle and Roach (1979).
14.4
An essential part of acquiring fluency in English is learning to produce connected speech without gaps between words, and this is the practical importance of linking.
For practical work, see Mortimer (1984).
From the theoretical point of view, however, I personally do not find the question of ‘intrusive’ and ‘linking’in RP very interesting (one might perhaps class it as a matter similar to the grammatical and stylistic question of whether or not to use ‘whom’) but anyone who wishes to go into the subject could read Windsor Lewis (1975a), Pring (1976), Windsor Lewis (1977a) and Fox (1978).
An obvious question to be asked in relation to juncture is whether ‘internal open juncture’ can actually be heard.
Jones (1931) implies that it can, but experimental work (e.g. O'Connor and Tooley (1964)) suggests that in many cases it is not perceptible unless a speaker is deliberately trying to avoid ambiguity.
It is interesting to note that some phonologists of the 1950s and 1960s felt it necessary to invent a ‘phoneme’ of juncture in order to be able to transcribe minimal pairs like ‘grey tape’/‘great ape’unambiguously without having to refer to grammatical boundaries; see for example Trager and Smith (1951).
Notes for teachers
There is a lot of disagreement about the importance of the various topics in this chapter from the language teacher's point of view.
My feeling is that two separate matters sometimes get mixed up: the practice and study of connected speech is agreed by everyone to be of great importance, but this can sometimes result in some relatively unimportant aspects of speech (e.g. assimilation, juncture) being given more emphasis than they should.
In looking at the importance of studying aspects of speech above the segmental level some writers have claimed that learners can come to identify an overall ‘feel’ of the pronunciation of the language being learned.
Differences between languages have been described in terms of their articulatory settings, that is, overall articulatory posture, by  Honikman (1964).
She describes such factors as lip mobility and tongue-setting for English, French and other languages.
The notion seems a useful one, though it is difficult to confirm these settings scientifically.
Tape Unit 14 is liable to come as something of a surprise to students who have not had the experience of examining colloquial English speech before.
The main message to get across is that concentration on selective, analytic listening will help them to recognise what is being said, and that practice usually brings confidence.
Written exercises
1.
Divide the following sentences up into feet, using the  mark as a boundary symbol.
If a sentence starts with an unstressed syllable, leave it out of consideration — it doesn't belong in a foot.
a)
A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush.
b)
Over a quarter of a century has elapsed since his death.
c)
Computers consume a considerable amount of money and time.
d)
Most of them have arrived on the bus.
e)
Newspaper editors are invariably underworked.
2.
Try to draw tree diagrams of the rhythmical structure of the following phrases.
a)
Christmas present
b)
Rolls Royce
c)
Pet food dealer
d)
Rolls-Royce rally event
3.
The following sentences are given in spelling and in a ‘slow, careful’ phonemic transcription.
Rewrite the phonemic transcription as a ‘broad phonetic’ one so as to show likely assimilations, elisions and linking.
a)
One cause of asthma is supposed to be allergies 
b)
What the urban population could use is better trains 
c)
She acts particularly well in the first scene 
Intonation 1
Many of the previous chapters have been concerned with the description of phonemes, and in 5.2 it was pointed out that the subject of phonology includes not just this aspect (which is usually called segmental phonology) but also several others.
In Chapters 10 and 11, for example, we studied stress.
Clearly, stress has linguistic importance and is therefore an aspect of the phonology of English that must be described, but it is not usually regarded as something that is related to individual segmental phonemes; normally, stress is said to be something that is applied to (or is a property of) syllables, and is therefore part of the suprasegmental phonology of English.
Another part of suprasegmental phonology is intonation, and the next five chapters are devoted to this subject.
What is intonation?
No definition is completely satisfactory, but any attempt at a definition must recognise that the pitch of the voice plays the most important part.
Only in very unusual situations do we speak with fixed, unvarying pitch, and when we speak normally the pitch of our voice is constantly changing.
One of the most important tasks in analysing intonation is to listen to the speaker's pitch and recognise what it is doing; this is not an easy thing to do, and it seems to be a quite different skill from that acquired in studying segmental phonetics.
We describe pitch in terms of high and low, and some people find it difficult to relate what they hear in someone's voice to a scale ranging from low to high.
We should remember that ‘high’ and ‘low’are arbitrary choices for end-points of the pitch scale.
It would be perfectly reasonable to think of pitch as ranging instead from ‘light’ to ‘heavy’, for example, or from ‘left’to ‘right’, and people who have difficulty in ‘hearing’intonation patterns are generally only having difficulty in relating what they hear (which is the same as what everyone else hears) to this ‘pseudo-spatial’representation.
It is very important to make the point that we are not interested in all aspects of a speaker's pitch; the only things that should interest us are those which carry some linguistic information.
If a speaker tries to talk while riding fast on a horse, the speaker's pitch will make a lot of sudden rises and falls as a result of the irregular movement; this is something which is outside the speaker's control and therefore cannot be linguistically significant.
Similarly, if we take two speakers at random we will almost certainly find that one speaker typically speaks  with lower pitch than the other; the difference between the two speakers is not linguistically significant because their habitual pitch level is determined by their physical structure.
But individual speakers do have control over their own pitch, and may choose to speak with a higher than normal pitch; this is something which is potentially of linguistic significance.
We have established that for pitch differences to be linguistically significant, it is a necessary condition that they should be under the speaker's control.
There is another necessary condition and that is that a pitch difference must be perceptible; it is possible to detect differences in the frequency of the vibration of a speaker's voice by means of laboratory instruments, but these differences may not be great enough to be heard by a listener as differences in pitch.
Finally, it should be remembered that in looking for linguistically significant aspects of speech we must always be looking for contrasts; one of the most important things about any unit of phonology or grammar is the set of items it contrasts with.
We know how to establish what phonemes are in contrast with  in the context —; we can substitute other phonemes (e.g. ,) to change the identity of the word from ‘bin’ to ‘pin’to ‘sin’.
Can we establish such units and contrasts in intonation?
15.1 Form and function in intonation
To summarise what was said above, we want to know the answers to two questions about English speech:
i)
What can we observe when we study pitch variations?
ii)
What is the linguistic importance of the phenomena we observe?
These questions might be rephrased more briefly as:
i)
What is the form of intonation?
ii)
What is the function of intonation?
We will begin by looking at intonation in the shortest piece of speech we can find — the single syllable.
At this point a new term will be introduced: we need a name for a continuous piece of speech beginning and ending with a clear pause, and we will call this an utterance.
In this chapter, then, we are going to look at the intonation of one-syllable utterances.
These are quite common, and give us a comparatively easy introduction to the subject.
Two common one-syllable utterances are ‘yes’ and ‘no’.
The first thing to notice is that we have a choice of saying these with the pitch remaining at a constant level, or with the pitch changing from one level to another.
The word we use for the overall behaviour of the pitch in  these examples is tone; a one-syllable word can be said with either a level tone or a moving tone.
If you try saying ‘yes’ or ‘no’with a level tone (rather as though you were trying to sing them on a steady note) you may find the result does not sound natural, and indeed English speakers do not use level tones on one-syllable utterances very frequently.
Moving tones are more common; if English speakers want to say ‘yes’ or ‘no’in a definite, final manner they will probably use a falling tone — one which descends from a higher to a lower pitch.
If they want to say ‘yes?’ or ‘no?’in a questioning manner they may say it with a rising tone — a movement from a lower pitch to a higher one.
Notice that already, in talking about different tones, some idea of function has been introduced; speakers are said to select from a choice of tones according to how they want the utterance to be heard, and it is implied that the listener will hear one-syllable utterances said with different tones as sounding different in some way.
During the development of modern phonetics in the present century it was for a long time hoped that scientific study of intonation would make it possible to state what the function of each different aspect of intonation was, and that foreign learners could then be taught rules to enable them to use intonation in the way that native speakers use it.
Few people now believe this to be possible.
It is certainly possible to produce a few general rules, and some will be given in this course, just as a few general rules for word stress were given in Chapters 10 and 11.
However, these rules are certainly not adequate as a practical guide to how to use English intonation.
My treatment of intonation is based on the belief that foreign learners of English at advanced levels who may use this course should be given training to make them better able to recognise and copy English intonation; the only really efficient way to learn to use the intonation of a language is the way a child acquires the intonation of its first language, and the training referred to above should help the adult learner of English to acquire English intonation in a similar (though much slower) way — through listening to and talking to English speakers.
It is perhaps a discouraging thing to say, but learners of English who are not able to talk regularly with native speakers of English, or who are not able at least to listen regularly to colloquial English, are not likely to learn English intonation, though they may learn very good pronunciation of the segments and use stress correctly.
15.2 Tone and tone languages
In the preceding section we mentioned three simple possibilities for the intonation used in pronouncing the one-word utterances ‘yes’ and ‘no’.
These were: level, fall and rise.
It will often be necessary to use symbols  to represent tones, and for this we will use marks placed before the syllable in the following way (phonemic transcription will not be used in these examples — words are given in spelling):
Obviously, this simple system for tone transcription could be extended, if we wished, to cover a greater number of possibilities.
For example, if it was important to distinguish between a high level and low level tone for English we could do it in this way:
Although in English we do on occasions say  yes or  no and on other occasions  yes or  no, no speaker of English would say that the meaning of the words ‘yes’ and ‘no’was different with the different tones.
(As will be seen below, we will not use the symbols for high and low level tones in the description of English intonation.)
But there are many languages in which the tone can determine the meaning of a word, and changing from one tone to another can completely change the meaning.
For example, in Kono, a language of West Africa, we find the following (meanings given in brackets):
Similarly, while we can hear a difference between English  yes, yes and  yes, and between  no, no and  no, there is not a difference in meaning in such a clear-cut way as in Chinese (Peking dialect), where, for example, ma means ‘mother’, ma means ‘hemp’ and  ma means ‘scold’.
Languages such as the above are called tone languages; although to most speakers of European languages they may seem strange and exotic, such languages are in fact spoken by a very large proportion of the world's population.
In addition to the many dialects of Chinese, many other languages of South-East Asia (e.g. Thai, Vietnamese) are tone languages; so are very many African languages, particularly those to the South and West, and a considerable number of Amerindian languages.
English is, of course, not a tone language, and the function of tone is much more difficult to define than in a tone language.
15.3 Complex tones and pitch height
We have introduced three simple tones that can be used on one-syllable English utterances: level, fall and rise.
However, other more complex tones are also used.
One that is quite frequently found is the fall-rise tone, where the pitch descends and then rises again; another complex tone, much less frequently used, is the rise-fall in which the pitch follows the opposite movement.
We will not consider any more complex tones, since these are not often encountered and are of little importance.
One further complication should be mentioned here.
Each speaker has his or her own normal pitch range: a top level which is the highest pitch normally used by the speaker, and a bottom level that the speaker's pitch normally does not go below.
In ordinary speech,.
the intonation tends to take place within the lower part of the speaker's pitch range, but in situations where strong feelings are to be expressed it is usual to make use of extra pitch height.
For example, if we represent the pitch range by drawing two parallel lines representing the highest and lowest limits of the range, then a normal unemphatic ‘yes’ could be diagrammed like this: but a strong, emphatic ‘yes’like this:
We will use a new symbol  (a vertical arrow) to indicate extra pitch height, so that we can distinguish between: yes and   yes Any of the tones presented in this chapter may be given extra pitch height, but since this course is based on normal, unemotional speech, it will not be necessary to use the symbol very frequently.
15.4 Some functions of English tones
In this chapter only a very small part of English intonation has been introduced.
We will now see if it is possible to state in what circumstances the different tones are used within the very limited context of the words ‘yes’ and ‘no’said in isolation.
We will look at some typical occurrences; no examples of extra pitch height will be considered here.
Fall  yes  no
This is the tone about which least needs to be said, and which is usually regarded as more or less ‘neutral’.
If someone is asked a question and replies  yes or  no it will be understood that the question is now answered and that there is nothing more to be said.
The fall could be said to give an impression of ‘finality’.
Rise  yes  no
In a variety of ways, this tone conveys an impression that something more is to follow; a typical occurrence in a dialogue between two speakers whom we shall call A and B might be the following: A (wishing to attract B's attention): Excuse me.
B: yes
(B's reply is, perhaps, equivalent to ‘what do you want?’)
Another quite common occurrence would be: A: Do you know John Smith?
One possible reply from B would be  yes, inviting A to continue with what she intends to say about John Smith after establishing that B knows him.
To reply instead  yes would give a feeling of ‘finality’, of ‘end of the conversation’; if A did have something to say about John Smith, the response with a fall would make it difficult for A to continue.
We can see similar ‘invitations to continue’ in someone's response to a series of instructions or directions.
For example: A: You start off on the ring road…
B: yes A: turn left at the first roundabout…
B: yes A: and ours is the third house on the left.
Whatever B replies to this last utterance of A, it would be most unlikely to be  yes again, since A has clearly finished her instructions and it would be pointless to ‘prompt’ her to continue.
With ‘no’, a similar function can be seen.
For example: A: Have you seen Ann?
If B replies  no, he implies quite clearly that he has no interest in continuing with that topic of conversation.
But a reply of  no would be an invitation to A to explain why she is looking for Ann, or why she does not know where she is.
Similarly, someone may ask a question that implies readiness to present some new information.
For example: A: Do you know what the longest balloon flight was?
If B replies  no he is inviting A to tell him, while a response of  no could be taken to mean that he does not know and is not expecting to be told.
This is, in fact, a common cause of misunderstanding in English conversation, when a question such as A's above might be a request for information or an offer to provide some.
Fall-rise  yes  no
The fall-rise is used a lot in English and has some rather special functions.
In the present context we will only consider one fairly simple one, which could perhaps be described as ‘limited agreement’ or ‘response with reservations’.
Examples may make this clearer: A: I've heard that it's a good school.
B: yes
B's reply would be taken to mean that he would not completely agree with what A said, and A would probably expect B to go on to explain why he was reluctant to agree.
Similarly: A: It's not really an expensive record, is it?
B: no
The fall-rise in B's reply again indicates that he would not completely agree with A. Fall-rise in such contexts almost always indicates both something ‘given’ or ‘conceded’and at the same time some ‘reservation’or ‘hesitation’.
This use of intonation will be returned to in Chapter 19.
Rise-fall  yes  no
This is used to convey rather strong feelings of approval, disapproval or surprise.
It is not usually considered to be an important tone for foreign  learners to acquire, though it is still useful practice to learn to distinguish it from other tones.
Here are some examples: A: You  wouldn't do an awful thing like that, would you?
B: no A: Isn't the view lovely!
B: yes A: I think you said it was the best so far.
B: yes
Level  yes  no
This tone is certainly used in English, but in a rather restricted context: it almost always conveys (on single-syllable utterances) a feeling of saying something routine, uninteresting or boring.
A teacher calling the names of pupils from a register will often do so using a level tone on each name, and the pupils would be likely to respond with  yes when their name was called.
Similarly, if one is being asked a series of routine questions for some purpose such as applying for an insurance policy, one might reply to each question of a series like ‘Have you ever been in prison?’,
‘Do you suffer from any serious illness?’,
‘Is your eyesight defective?’, etc., with  no.
A few ‘meanings’ have been suggested for the five tones that have been introduced, but each tone may have many more such meanings.
Moreover, it would be quite wrong to conclude that in the above examples only the tones given would be appropriate; it is, in fact, almost impossible to find a context where one could not substitute a different tone.
This is not the same thing as saying that any tone can be used in any context; the point is that no particular tone has a unique ‘privilege of occurrence’ in a particular context.
When we come to look at more complex intonation patterns, we will see that defining intonational ‘meanings’ does not become any easier.
Notes on problems and further reading
To devote five chapters to intonation may seem excessive, but I feel that this is necessary since the subject is difficult and complex, and needs to be explained at considerable length if the explanation is to be intelligible.
The study of intonation has gone through many changes during this century.
The most intensive theoretical development began during the 1940s.
In the United States the theory that evolved was based  on ‘pitch phonemes’(Wells, 1945; Pike, 1945): four contrastive pitch levels were established and intonation was described basically in terms of a series of movements from one of these levels to another.
This approach was further developed in Trager and Smith (1951).
Although this ‘pitch phoneme’ theory became an orthodoxy, it was consistently attacked by one American linguist, D. Bolinger (e.g. Bolinger, 1951).
In Britain the ‘tone-unit’ or ‘tonetic’approach begun by H. E. Palmer in the 1920s (Palmer, 1924) was developed by (among others) Kingdon (1958a), O'Connor and Arnold (1962) and Halliday (1967).
These two different theoretical approaches became gradually more elaborate; in the American case perhaps the most elaborate exposition was in Trager (1964), while O'Connor and Arnold produced an extended version of their treatment in their second edition (1973).
However, since the 1970s it has become clear that such frameworks are inadequate for dealing with natural spontaneous speech; in Britain the most influential work leading to this recognition was Crystal (1969); another good example of the same attitude is Brown et al.(1980).
I have tried in this course to reflect some of the more recently developed ideas for dealing with intonation, though the treatment remains essentially within the conventions of the British tradition.
The best explanation of theoretical issues in intonation is Cruttenden (1986).
A word of caution is needed in connection with the word pitch.
Strictly speaking, this should be used to refer to an auditory sensation experienced by the hearer.
The rate of vibration of the vocal cords — something which is physically measurable, and which is related to activity on the part of the speaker — is the fundamental frequency of voiced sounds, and should not be called ‘pitch’.
However, as long as this distinction is understood, it is generally agreed that the term ‘pitch’ is a convenient one to use informally to refer both to the subjective sensation and to the objectively measurable fundamental frequency.
15.1
The notion of tone is best understood by dealing with single syllables at first.
Eventually the number of tones used in this course is five: fall, rise, fall-rise, rise-fall and level.
15.2
The amount of time to be spent on learning about tone languages should depend to some extent on your background.
Those whose native language is a tone language should be aware of the considerable linguistic importance of tone in such languages; often it is extremely difficult for people who have spoken a tone language all their life to learn to observe their own use of tone objectively.
The study of tone languages is less important for native speakers of non-tone languages, but most students seem to find it an interesting subject.
A good introduction is Ladefoged (1982), pp. 226–32.
The classic work on the  subject is Pike (1948), while more modern treatments are Hyman (1975), pp. 212–29 and Katamba (1989), Chapter 10.
15.3
Many analyses within the British approach to intonation include among tones both ‘high’ and ‘low’varieties.
For example, O'Connor and Arnold (1973) distinguished between ‘high fall’ and ‘low fall’(the former starting from a high pitch, the latter from mid), and also between ‘low rise’and ‘high rise’(the latter rising to a higher point than the former).
Some writers have high and low versions of all tones.
Compared with the proposed establishing of a separate feature of ‘extra pitch height’(which is explained more fully in 18.1), this is unnecessary duplication.
Of course, if one adds extra pitch height to a tone, one has not given all possible detail about it.
If we take as an example a fall-rise without extra pitch height: then something symbolised as   could be any of the following 
It would be possible to extend our framework to distinguish between these possibilities, but I do not believe it would be profitable to do so.
Crystal (1969) includes in his set of tones fall-rise-fall and rise-fall-rise; I have seldom felt the need to recognise these as distinct from rise-fall and fall-rise respectively.
Halliday (1967) has a rather odd-looking set of tones: There is, of course, no particular reason to expect linguistic systems to be tidy and symmetrical, but I find it hard to see why Halliday chose these particular tones.
15.4
I will leave discussion of the functions (or supposed functions) of tones until later, except for the fall-rise.
It seems to be generally agreed that this is in some way ‘special’, and peculiar to English.
This may not be  true, but certainly in listening to conversational English one does encounter a very large number of these and they do seem to the native speaker to have some perhaps indefinable ‘feel’ of something negative present in the background, as suggested above, on p. 139).
The clearest attempt to explain this is, in my opinion, O'Connor (1957).
Note for teachers
As explained above, some students may be perfectly well able to discriminate between tones, but have difficulty in labelling them as ‘fall’, ‘rise’, etc.
I find that about 5 per cent of the students I teach are never able to overcome this difficulty (even though they may have perfect hearing and in some cases a high level of linguistic and musical ability); of the remainder, a few are especially gifted and cannot understand how anyone could find the task difficult, and most others eventually learn after five or ten hours of practical classes.
Many students find it very helpful to sit in the phonetics laboratory looking at a computer display showing a picture of their pitch movements.
Written exercise
In the following sentences and bits of dialogue, each underlined syllable must be given an appropriate tone mark.
Write a tone mark just in front of each of the syllables.
1.
This train is for Leeds, York, Darlington and Durham
2.
Can you give me a lift?
Possibly Where to?
3.
No!
Certainly not!
Go away!
4.
Did you know he'd been convicted of drunken driving?
No!
5.
If I give him money he goes and spends it If I lend him the bike he loses it He's completely unreliable
Intonation 2
16.1 The tone-unit
In the last chapter it was explained that some of the world's languages are ‘tone languages’, in which substituting one distinctive tone for another on a particular word or morpheme can cause a change in the dictionary (‘lexical’) meaning of that word or morpheme, or in some aspect of its grammatical categorisation.
English is one of the languages that do not use tone in this way though tones or pitch differences are used for other purposes; such languages are sometimes called intonation languages.
In tone languages the main suprasegmental contrastive unit is the tone, which is usually linked to the phonological unit that we call the syllable.
It could be said that someone analysing the function and distribution of tones in a tone language would be mainly occupied in examining utterances syllable by syllable, looking at each syllable as an independently variable item.
In the last chapter, five tones found on English one-syllable utterances were introduced, and if English was spoken in isolated monosyllables, the job of tonal analysis would be a rather similar one to that described for tone languages.
However, when we look at continuous speech in English utterances we find that these tones can only be identified on a small number of particularly prominent syllables.
For the purposes of analysing intonation, a unit generally greater in size than the syllable is needed, and this unit is called the tone-unit; in its smallest form the tone-unit may consist of only one syllable, so it would in fact be wrong to say that it is always composed of more than one syllable.
The tone-unit is difficult to define, and one or two examples may help to make it easier to understand the concept.
(As explained in the last chapter, examples used to illustrate intonation transcription are usually given in spelling form, and you will notice that no punctuation is used; the reason for this is that intonation and stress are the vocal equivalents of written punctuation, so that when these are transcribed it would be unnecessary or even confusing to include punctuation as well.)
Let us begin with a one-syllable utterance: you We will underline syllables that carry a tone.
Now consider this three-syllable utterance: is it  you
The third syllable is more prominent than the other two and carries a rising tone.
The other two syllables will normally be much less prominent, and be said on a level pitch.
Why do we not say that each of the syllables ‘is’ and ‘it’carries a level tone?
This is a difficult question that will be examined more fully later; for the present I will answer it (rather unsatisfactorily) by saying that it is unusual for a syllable said on a level pitch to be so prominent that it would be described as carrying a level tone.
To summarise the analysis of ‘is it  you’ so far, it is an utterance of three syllables, composed of one tone-unit; the only syllable that carries a tone is the third one.
From now on, a syllable which carries a tone will be called a tonic syllable.
It has been mentioned several times that tonic syllables have a high degree of prominence; prominence is, of course, a property of stressed syllables, and a tonic syllable not only carries a tone (which is something related to intonation) but also a type of stress that will be called tonic stress.
(Some writers use the terms nucleus and nuclear stress for tonic syllable and tonic stress.)
The example can now be extended: John is it  you (a fall-rise is used quite commonly in calling someone's name out).
If there is a clear pause (silence) between ‘John’ and ‘is it  you’, then according to the definition of an utterance given in the last chapter, there are two utterances; however, it is quite likely that a speaker would say ‘John is it  you’with no pause, so that the four syllables would make up a single utterance.
In spite of the absence of any pause, the utterance would normally be regarded as divided into two tone-units: ‘John’ and ‘is it  you’.
Since it is very difficult to lay down the conditions for deciding where the boundaries between tone-units exist, the discussion of this matter must wait until later.
It should be possible to see now that the tone-unit has a place in a range of phonological units that are in a hierarchical relationship: speech consists of a number of utterances (the largest unit that we shall consider); each utterance consists of one or more tone-units; each tone-unit consists of one or more feet; each foot consists of one or more syllables; each syllable consists of one or more phonemes.
16.2 The structure of the tone-unit
In Chapter 8 the structure of the English syllable was examined in some detail.
Like the syllable, the tone-unit has a fairly clearly-defined  internal structure, but the only component that has been mentioned so far is the tonic syllable.
The first thing to be done is to make more precise the role of the tonic syllable in the tone-unit.
Most tone-units are of a type that we call simple, and the sort that we call compound are not discussed in this chapter.
Each simple tone-unit has one and only one tonic syllable; this means that the tonic syllable is an obligatory component of the tone-unit.
(Compare the role of the vowel in the syllable.)
We will now see what the other components may be.
The head
Consider the following one-syllable utterance: those We can find the same tonic syllable in a long utterance (still of one tone-unit): give me  those
The rest of the tone-unit in this example is called the head.
Notice that the first syllable has a stress mark; this is important.
A head is all that part of a tone-unit that extends from the first stressed syllable up to(but not including) the tonic syllable.
It follows that if there is no stressed syllable before the tonic syllable, there cannot be a head.
In the above example, the first two syllables (words) are the head of the tone-unit.
In the following example, the head is the first five syllables: Bill  called to  give me  those
As was said a little earlier, if there is no stressed syllable preceding the tonic syllable, there is no head.
This is the case in the following example: in an  hour
Neither of the two syllables preceding the tonic syllable is stressed.
The syllables ‘in an’ form a pre-head, which is the next component of the tone-unit to be introduced.
The pre-head
The pre-head is composed of all the unstressed syllables in a tone-unit preceding the first stressed syllable.
Thus pre-heads are found in two main environments:
i)
When there is no head (i.e. no stressed syllable preceding the tonic syllable), as in the example ‘in an  hour’.
ii)
When there is a head, as in the following example: in a  little  less than an  hour
In this example, the pre-head consists of ‘in a’, the head consists of ‘little  less than an’, and the tonic syllable is ‘hour’.
The tail
It often happens that some syllables follow the tonic syllable.
Any syllables between the tonic syllable and the end of the tone-unit are called the tail.
In the following examples, each tone-unit consists of an initial tonic syllable and a tail: look at it  what did you say  both of them were here
When it is necessary to mark stress in a tail, we will use a special symbol, a raised dot  for reasons that will be explained later.
The above examples should, then, be transcribed as follows: look at it  what did you  say  both of them were  here
This completes the list of tone-unit components.
If we use brackets to indicate optional components (that is, components which may be present or may be absent), we can summarise tone-unit structure as follows:(pre-head)(head) tonic syllable (tail) or, more briefly, as:(PH)(H) TS (T)
To illustrate this more fully, let us consider the following passage, which is transcribed from a tape-recording of spontaneous speech (the speaker is describing a picture).
When we analyse longer stretches of speech, it is necessary to mark the places where tone-unit boundaries occur (that is, where one tone-unit ends and another begins, or where a tone-unit ends and is followed by a pause, or where a tone-unit begins following a pause).
It was mentioned above that tone-units are sometimes separated by silent pauses and sometimes not; pause-type boundaries can be marked by double vertical lines like this  and non-pause boundaries with a single line .
In practice it is not usually important to mark pauses at the beginning and end of a passage; in the rest of the book I put no lines on short examples and only single lines around longer ones; the boundaries within a passage are much more important.
We can mark their structure as follows:
The above passage contains five tone-units.
Notice that in the third tone-unit, since it is the tonic syllable rather than the word that carries the tone, it is necessary to divide the word ‘forest’ into two parts, ‘fo’and ‘rest’(it could be argued that the syllables should be divided ‘for’and ‘est’, but this is not important here).
This example shows clearly how the units of phonological analysis can sometimes be seen to differ from those of grammatical analysis.
16.3 Pitch possibilities in the simple tone-unit
It has been said several times in this chapter that tone is carried by the tonic syllable, and it is now necessary to examine this statement more carefully.
Before doing this, another general statement will be made (and will also need further explanation): intonation is carried by the tone-unit.
In a one-syllable utterance, the single syllable must have one of the five tones described in the last chapter.
In a tone-unit of more than one syllable, the tonic syllable must have one of those tones.
If the tonic syllable is the final syllable, the tone will not sound much different from that of a corresponding one-syllable tone-unit.
For example, the word ‘here’ will be said in much the same way in the following:
However, if there are other syllables following the tonic syllable (i.e. there is a tail), we find that the pitch movement of the tone is not completed on the tonic syllable.
If, for example, a tail follows a tonic syllable that has a rising tone, it will almost always be found that the syllable or syllables of the tail will continue to move upwards from the pitch of the tonic syllable.
For example, if the word ‘what’ is said on a rising tone, ‘what’, it might have a pitch movement that could be diagrammed like this: The four syllables in ‘, what did you say’might be said like this: with the pitch of the syllables in the tail getting progressively higher.
In such cases, the tonic syllable is the syllable on which the pitch movement of the tone begins, but that pitch movement is completed over the rest of the tone unit (i.e. the tail).
If, in rising progressively higher, the pitch reaches the highest part of the speaker's normal pitch range, subsequent syllables will continue at that level.
We find a similar situation with the falling tone.
On a single syllable ‘why’, the pitch movement might be of this sort: but if there are syllables following, the fall may not be completed on the tonic syllable: why did you go 
Again, if the speaker's lowest pitch is reached before the end of the tail, the pitch continues at the bottom level.
In the case of a level tone, syllables following in the tail will, of course, continue at the same level; since level tone is to be treated as a rather unusual type of tone, we will not examine it in more detail at this stage.
The situation is more complicated when we have a tail following a fall-rise or a rise-fall, and this will be described in the next chapter.
Notes on problems and further reading
Almost all British analyses use a unit similar or identical to what I call a tone-unit, and many writers see this unit as having a crucial role in  linking intonation to higher-level grammatical units.
It is possible to represent intonation as a simple sequence of tonic and non-tonic stressed syllables, and pauses, with no higher-level organisation; an example of this is Windsor Lewis (1977b).
An early attempt at defining intonation units was that of Jones (1975, Chapter 30), where stretches of speech between pauses were called ‘breath-groups’ and marked with double vertical lines, and smaller stretches within these, called ‘sense-groups’, bounded by places where ‘pauses may be made’and consisting of ‘a few words in close grammatical connexion’.
Trim (1959) criticises this proposal, saying that Jones' 'sense-group' is defined in semantic terms and the ‘breath-group’ in physiological terms, whereas we should be concerned with phonetic and phonological units and definitions.
Instead, he proposes that the unit used should be the ‘tone-group’, defined in terms of rhythm and pitch movements, and that we should distinguish between ‘major’ and ‘minor’tone-groups.
The minor tone-group corresponds to the tone-unit used in this course, and the idea of a larger unit (the major tone-unit) is a valuable one that will be discussed further in the notes on Chapter 19.
Different writers use different names: Halliday and his followers use ‘tone-group’, O'Connor and Arnold use ‘sense-group’ and Crystal, Brazil et al.and I use ‘tone-unit’.
On tone-unit structure and pitch possibilities in the tone-unit, see chapter 5 in Crystal (1969), chapter 1 in Crystal (1975), Halliday (1967), and chapter 1 in O'Connor and Arnold (1973).
Note for teachers
The move from tones to tone-units is a difficult one, and I feel it is advisable at this stage to use only slow, careful speech for exercises (Tape Units 15 and 16).
More difficult exercises follow later (Tape Units 18 and 19).
Written exercises
1.
Here is a list of single tonic syllables.
Add a number of extra syllables (as specified by the number in brackets) to make a tail.
(The answers section gives some possible versions.)
2.
Now expand the following tonic syllables by putting heads in front of them, containing the number of stressed syllables indicated in brackets.
3.
The following sentences are given with intonation transcribed.
Draw underneath them a diagram of the pitch movements, leaving a gap between each syllable.
Intonation 3
In the last chapter the structure of the tone-unit was introduced and it was explained that when a tonic syllable is followed by a tail, that tail continues and completes the tone begun on the tonic syllable.
Examples were given to show how this happens in the case of rising and falling tones.
We now go on to consider the rather more difficult cases of fall-rise and rise-fall tones.
17.1 Fall-rise and rise-fall tones followed by a tail
A rising or a falling tone is quite easy to identify, whether it falls on a single syllable or extends over more syllables in the case of a tonic syllable followed by a tail.
Fall-rise and rise-fall tones, however, can be quite difficult to recognise when they are extended over tails, since their characteristic pitch movements are often broken up or distorted by the structure of the syllables they occur on.
For example, the pitch movement on  some will be something like this:
If we add a syllable, the ‘fall’ part of the fall-rise is usually carried by the first syllable and the ‘rise’part by the second.
The result may be a continuous pitch movement very similar to the one-syllable case, if there are no voiceless medial consonants to cause a break in the voicing.
For example:
If the continuity of the voicing is broken, however, the pitch pattern might be more like this:
In this case it would be possible to say that there is a falling tone on ‘some’ and a rise on ‘chairs’.
However, most English speakers seem to feel that the pitch movement in this case is the same as that in the previous two examples; it can be said that there is a parallel with rhyming.
Just as ‘balloon’ rhymes with ‘moon’, so we might say that ‘some chairs’has what could be called a tonal rhyme with ‘some’.
If there is a tail of two or more syllables, the normal pitch movement is for the pitch to fall on the tonic syllable and to remain low until the last stressed syllable in the tail.
The pitch then rises from that point up to the end of the tone-unit.
If there is no stressed syllable in the tail, the rise happens on the final syllable.
Here are some examples:
With the rise-fall tone we find a similar situation: if the tonic syllable is followed by a single syllable in the tail, the ‘rise’ part of the tone takes place on the first (tonic) syllable and the ‘fall’part is on the second.
Thus:
When there are two or more syllables in the tail, the syllable immediately following the tonic syllable is always higher and any following syllables are low.
For example:
It should be clear by now that the speaker does not have a choice in the matter of the pitch of the syllables in the tail.
This is completely determined by the choice of tone for the tonic syllable.
17.2 High and low heads
The head was defined in the last chapter as ‘all that part of a tone-unit that extends from the first stressed syllable up to, but not including, the tonic syllable’.
In our description of intonation up to this point, the only pitch contrasts found in the tone-unit are the different possible choices of tone for the tonic syllable.
However, we can identify different pitch possibilities in the head, though these are limited to two which we will call high head and low head.
In the case of the high head, the stressed syllable which begins the head is high in pitch; usually it is higher than the beginning pitch of the tone on the tonic syllable.
For example:
In the low head the stressed syllable which begins the head is low in pitch; usually it is lower than the beginning pitch of the tone on the tonic syllable.
To mark this stressed syllable in the low head we will use a different symbol, as in  low.
As an example, the heads of the above sentences will be changed from high to low:
The two different versions (high and low head) will usually sound slightly different to English listeners, though it it not easy to say just what the difference is, as will be made clear in the next chapter.
It is usual for unstressed syllables to continue the pitch of the stressed syllable that precedes them.
In the following example, the three unstressed syllables ‘if it had’ continue at the same pitch as the stressed syllable ‘asked’:
When there is more than one stressed syllable in the head there is usually a slight change in pitch from the level of one stressed syllable to that of the next, the change being in the direction of the beginning pitch of the tone on the tonic syllable.
We will use some long examples to illustrate this, though heads of this length are not very frequently found in natural speech.
In the first example the stressed syllables in the high head step downwards progressively to approach the beginning of the tone:
In the next example the head is low; since the tone also starts low, being a rise, there is no upward movement in the head:
When there is a low head followed by a falling tone, successive stressed syllables in the head will tend to move upwards towards the beginning pitch of the tone:
When a high head is followed by a rise the stressed syllables tend to move downwards, as one would expect, towards the beginning pitch of the tone:
Of course, when we examine the intonation of polysyllabic heads we find much greater variety than these simple examples suggest.
However, the division into high and low heads as general types is probably the most basic that can be made, and it would be pointless to set up a more elaborate system to represent differences if these differences were not recognised by most English speakers.
Some writers on intonation claim that the intonation pattern starting at a fairly high pitch, with a gradual dropping down of pitch during the utterance, is the most basic, normal, ‘unmarked’ intonation pattern; this movement is often called declination.
The claim that declination is universally unmarked in English, or even in all languages, is a strong one.
As far as English is concerned, it would be good to see more evidence from the full range of regional and national varieties in support of the claim.
It should be noted that the two marks  and  are being used for two different purposes in this course, as they are in many phonetics books.
When stress is being discussed, the  mark indicates primary stress and  indicates secondary stress.
For the purposes of marking intonation, however, the mark  indicates a stressed syllable in a high head and the mark  indicates a stressed syllable in a low head.
In practice this is not usually found confusing as long as one is aware of whether one is marking stress levels or intonation.
Of course, when the high and low marks  and  are being used to indicate intonation it is no longer possible to mark two different levels of stress within the word.
However, when looking at speech at the level of the tone-unit we are not usually interested in this; a much more important difference here is that between tonic stress (marked by underlining the tonic syllable and placing before it one of the five tone-marks) and non-tonic stressed syllables (marked  or  in the head or in the tail).
It needs to be emphasised that in marking intonation, only stressed syllables are marked; this implies that intonation is carried entirely by the stressed syllables of a tone-unit and that the pitch of unstressed syllables is either predictable from that of stressed syllables or is of so little importance that it is not worth marking.
Remember that the additional information given in the examples above by drawing pitch levels and movements between lines is only included here to make the examples clearer and is not normally given with our system of transcription, so all the important information about intonation must be given by the marks placed in the text.
17.3 Problems in analysing the form of intonation
The analysis of intonational form presented in this chapter and the two previous ones is similar in most respects to the approaches used in many British studies of English intonation.
There are certain difficulties that all of these studies have had to confront, and it is useful to have a brief summary of what the major difficulties are.
Identifying the tonic syllable
It is often said that the tonic syllable can be identified because it is the only syllable in the tone-unit that carries a movement in pitch; this is in fact not always true.
We have seen how when the tonic syllable is followed by a tail the tone is carried by the tonic plus tail together in such a way that in some cases practically no pitch movement is detectable on the tonic syllable itself.
In addition it has been claimed that one of the tones is the level tone, which by definition may not have any pitch movement.
It is therefore necessary to say in this particular case that the tonic syllable is identified simply as the most prominent syllable.
In addition, it sometimes seems as if some tone-units (though only a small number) contain not one but two tonic syllables, almost always with the first syllable having a fall on it and the other a rise.
An example is:
In this example there seems to be equal prominence on ‘seen’ and ‘him’.
Of course, it could be claimed that this was the same thing as: but it has been pointed out that the two versions are different in several ways.
Since ‘him’ has greater prominence in (i), it cannot occur in its weak form , but must be pronounced , whereas in (ii) the pronunciation is likely to be   .
The two versions are said to convey different meanings, too.
Version (i) might be said in conversation on hearing someone's name, as in this example: A: John Cleese is a very funny actor.
B: Oh  yes  Ive  seen  him
In version (ii), on the other hand, the word ‘seen’ is given the greatest prominence, and it is likely to sound as though the speaker has some reservation, or has something further to say: A: Have you seen my father yet?
B: Ive  seen him  but I  havent had  time to  talk to him
The same is found with ‘her’, as in  compared with  This is a difficult problem, since it weakens the general claim made earlier that each tone-unit contains only one tonic syllable.
Identifying tone-unit boundaries
It is a generally accepted principle in the study of grammar that utterances may contain one or more sentences, and that one can identify on grammatical grounds the places where one sentence ends  and another begins.
In a similar way in suprasegmental phonology it is claimed that utterances may be divided up into tone-units, and that one can identify on phonetic or phonological grounds the places where one tone-unit ends and another tone-unit begins.
However, giving rules for determining where the boundaries are placed is not easy, except in cases where a clear pause separates tone-units.
Two principles are usually mentioned: one is that it is possible in most cases to detect some sudden change from the pitch level at the end of one tone-unit to the pitch level that starts the following tone-unit, and recognition of the start of the following tone-unit is made easier by the fact that speakers tend to ‘return home’ to a particular pitch level at the beginning of a tone-unit.
The second principle used in tone-unit boundary identification is a rhythmical one: it is claimed that within the tone-unit, speech has a regular rhythm, but that rhythm is broken or interrupted at the tone-unit boundary.
Both the above principles are useful guides, but one regularly finds, in analysing natural speech, cases where it remains difficult or impossible to make a clear decision; the principles may well also be factually correct, but it should be emphasised that at present there is no conclusive evidence from instrumental study in the laboratory that they are.
Anomalous tone-units
However comprehensive one's descriptive framework may be (and the one given in this course is very limited), there will inevitably be cases which do not fit within it.
For example other tones such as fall-rise-fall or rise-fall-rise are occasionally found.
In the head, we sometimes find cases where the stressed syllables are not all high or all low, as in the following example: After  one of the  worst  days of my  life
It can also happen that a speaker is interrupted and leaves a tone-unit incomplete — for example, lacking a tonic syllable.
To return to the analogy with grammar, one often finds in natural speech, sentences which are grammatically anomalous or incomplete, but this does not deter the grammarian from describing ‘normal’ sentence structure.
Similarly, though there are inevitably problems and exceptions, we continue to treat the tone-unit as something that can be described, defined and recognised.
Notes on problems and further reading
The main concern of this chapter is to complete the description of intonational form, including analysis of perhaps the most difficult aspect, that of recognising fall-rise and rise-fall tones when they are extended over a number of syllables.
This is necessary since no complete analysis of intonation can be done without having studied these ‘extended tones’.
The most detailed discussion of the difference between fall-rise and the ‘compound’ fall-plus-rise is Sharp (1958), though this is not easy reading and many will find it hard to follow some of the examples.
It is interesting that Brazil et al.(1980) exclude compound tone completely from their analysis.
On tone-unit boundaries, there is a clear explanation of the problems in Cruttenden (1986), pp.35–42, and in more detail in Crystal (1969), pp.204–7.
Brazil et al.make it clear (pp. 45–6) that they attach little importance to the identification of such boundaries.
The study of Scottish English by Brown et al.(1980) gives ample evidence that tone-units in real life are not by any means always like tone-units in textbooks.
Declination was given importance by Pierrehumbert (1979, 1987); see Cruttenden (1986), pp.67–72 for a summary.
Notes for teachers
I would like to emphasise how valuable an exercise it is for students and teachers to attempt to analyse some recorded speech for themselves.
For beginners it is best to start on slow, careful speech, such as that of newsreaders, before attempting conversational speech.
One can learn more about intonation in an hour of this work than in days of reading text-books on the subject, and one's interest in and understanding of theoretical problems becomes much more profound.
Written exercises
1.
The following sentences are given with intonation marks.
Sketch the pitch within the lines below, leaving a gap between each syllable.
a)
Which was the  cheap one did you say
b)
I  only  want to  taste it
c)
She would have  thought it was  obvious
d)
There  wasnt  even a  piece of  bread in the house
e)
Now will you be  lieve me
2.
This exercise is similar, but here you are given polysyllabic words and a tone; you must draw an appropriate pitch movement between the lines.
Functions of intonation 1
The form of intonation has now been described in some detail, and we will move on to look more closely at its functions.
Perhaps the best way to start on this is to ask ourselves what would be lost if we were to speak without intonation: you should try to imagine speech in which every syllable was said on the same level pitch, with no pauses and no changes in speed or loudness.
This is the sort of speech that would be produced by a ‘mechanical speech’ device (as described at the beginning of Chapter 14) that made sentences by putting together recordings of isolated words.
To put it in the broadest possible terms, we can see that intonation makes it easier for a listener to understand what a speaker is trying to convey.
The ways in which intonation does this are very complex, and many suggestions have been made for ways of isolating different functions.
Among the most often proposed are the following:
i)
Intonation enables us to express emotions and attitudes as we speak, and this adds a special kind of ‘meaning’ to spoken language.
This is often called the attitudinal function of intonation.
ii)
Intonation helps to produce the effect of prominence on syllables that need to be perceived as stressed, and in particular the placing of tonic stress on a particular syllable marks out the word to which it belongs as the most important in the tone-unit.
This has been called the accentual function of intonation.
iii)
The listener is better able to recognise the grammar and syntactic structure of what is being said by using the information contained in the intonation: for example, such things as the placement of boundaries between phrases, clauses or sentences, the difference between questions and statements and the use of grammatical subordination may be indicated.
This has been called the grammatical function of intonation.
iv)
Looking at the act of speaking in a broader way, we can see that intonation can signal to the listener what is to be taken as ‘new’ information and what is already ‘given’, can suggest when the speaker is indicating some sort of contrast or link with material in another tone-unit and, in conversation, can convey to the listener what kind of response is expected.
Such functions are examples of intonation's discourse function.
The attitudinal function has been given so much importance in past  work on intonation that it will be discussed separately in this chapter, though it should eventually become clear that it overlaps considerably with the discourse function.
In the case of the other three functions, it will be argued that it is difficult to see how they could be treated as separate: for example, the placement of tonic stress is closely linked to the presentation of ‘new’ information, while the question/statement distinction and the indication of contrast seem to be equally important in grammar and discourse.
What seems to be common to accentual, grammatical and discourse functions is the indication, by means of intonation, of the relationship between some linguistic element and the context in which it occurs.
The word used in linguistics for this type of relationship is syntagmatic, and I will refer to the accentual, grammatical and discourse functions as syntagmatic functions of intonation.
The fact that they overlap with each other to a large degree is not so important if one does not insist on discovering several distinct functions.
The rest of this chapter is concerned with a critical examination of the attitudinal function.
18.1 The attitudinal function of intonation
Many writers have expressed the view that intonation is used to convey our feelings and attitudes; for example, the same sentence can be said in different ways, which might be labelled ‘angry’, ‘happy’, ‘grateful’, ‘bored’, and so on .
It has also been widely observed that the form of intonation is different in different languages; for example, the intonation of languages such as Swedish, Italian or Hindi is instantly recognisable as being different from that of English.
Not surprisingly, it has often been said that foreign learners of English need to learn English intonation; some have gone further than this and claimed that, unless the foreign learner learns the appropriate way to use intonation in a given situation, there is a risk that he or she may unintentionally give offence; for example, the learner might use an intonation suitable for expressing boredom or discontent when what was needed was an expression of gratitude or affection.
This misleading view of intonation must have caused unnecessary anxiety to many learners of the language.
Let us begin by considering how one might analyse the attitudinal function of intonation.
One possibility would be for the analyst to invent a large number of sentences and try saying them with different intonation patterns (i.e. different combinations of head and tone), noting what attitude was supposed to correspond to the intonation in each case; of course, the results are then very subjective, and based on  an artificial performance that has little resemblance to conversational speech.
Alternatively, the analyst could say these different sentences to a group of listeners and ask them all to write down what attitudes they thought were being expressed; however, we have a vast range of adjectives available for labelling attitudes and the members of the group would probably produce a very large number of such adjectives, leaving the analyst with the problem of deciding whether pairs such as‘pompous’ and ‘stuck-up’, or ‘obsequious’and ‘sycophantic’were synonyms or represented different attitudes.
To overcome this difficulty, one could ask the members of the group to choose among a small number of adjectives (or ‘labels’) given by the analyst; the results would then inevitably be easier to quantify (that is, the job of counting the different responses would be simpler) but the results would no longer represent the listeners' free choice of label.
An alternative procedure would be to ask a lot of speakers to say a list of sentences in different ways according to labels provided by the analyst, and see what intonational features are found in common(for example , one might count how many speakers used a low head in saying something in a ‘hostile’ way).
The results of such experiments are usually very variable and difficult to interpret, not least because the range of acting talent in a randomly selected group is considerable.
A much more useful and realistic approach is to study recordings of different speakers' natural, spontaneous speech and try to make generalisations about attitudes and intonation on this basis.
Many problems remain, however.
In the method described previously, the analyst tries to select sentences (or passages of some other size) whose meaning is fairly ‘neutral’ from the emotional point of view, and will tend to avoid material such as‘Why don't you leave me alone?’or ‘How can I ever thank you enough?’because the lexical meaning of the words used already makes the speaker's attitude pretty clear, whereas sentences such as ‘She's going to buy it tomorrow’or ‘The paper has fallen under the table’are less likely to prejudice the listener.
The choice of material is much less free for someone studying natural speech.
Nevertheless, if we are ever to make new discoveries about intonation, it will be as a result of studying what people actually say rather than inventing examples of what they might say.
The notion of ‘expressing an emotion or attitude’ is itself a more complex one than is generally realised.
Firstly, an emotion may be expressed involuntarily or voluntarily; if I say something in a ‘happy’ way, this may be because I feel happy, or because I want to convey to you the impression that I am happy.
Secondly, an attitude that is expressed could be an attitude towards the listener (e.g. if I say something in a ‘friendly’ way), towards what is being said (e.g. if I say something in a ‘sceptical’or ‘dubious’way? or towards some external event or situation (e.g. ‘regretful’or ‘disapproving’).
However, one point is much more important and fundamental than all the problems discussed above.
To understand this point you should imagine (or even actually perform) your pronunciation of a sentence in a number of different ways: for example, if the sentence was ‘I want to buy a new car’ and you were to say it in the following ways: ‘pleading’, ‘angry’, ‘sad’, ‘happy’, ‘proud’, it is certain that at least some of your performances will be different from some others, but it is also certain that the technique for analysing and transcribing intonation introduced earlier in the course will be found inadequate to represent the different things you do.
You will have used variations in loudness and speed, for example; almost certainly you will have used different voice qualities for different attitudes.
You may have used your pitch range (which was introduced in 15.3) in different ways: your pitch movements may have taken place within quite a narrow range (narrow pitch range) or using the full range between high and low (wide pitch range); if you did not use wide pitch range, you may have used different keys: high key (using the upper part of your pitch range), mid key (using the middle part of the range) or low key (the lower part).
It is very likely that you will have used different facial expressions and even gestures and body movements.
These factors are all of great importance in conveying attitudes and emotions, yet the traditional handbooks on English pronunciation have almost completely ignored them.
If we accept the importance of these factors it becomes necessary to consider how they are related to intonation, and what intonation itself consists of.
We can isolate three distinct types of suprasegmental variable:
SEQUENTIAL
These components of intonation are found as elements in sequences of other such elements occurring one after another (never simultaneously).
These are:
i)
pre-heads, heads, tonic syllables and tails (with their pitch possibilities)
ii)
pauses
iii)
tone-unit boundaries.
These have all been introduced in previous chapters.
PROSODIC
These components are characteristics of speech which are constantly present and observable while speech is going on.
The most important are:
i)
width of pitch range
ii)
key
iii)
loudness
iv)
speed
v)
voice quality.
It is not possible to speak without one's speech having some degree or type of pitch range, loudness, speed and voice quality (with the possible exception that pitch factors are largely lost in whispered speech).
Different speakers do, of course, have their own typical pitch range, loudness, voice quality, etc., and contrasts among prosodic components should be seen as relative to these ‘background’ speaker characteristics.
Each of these prosodic components needs a proper framework for categorisation, and this is an interesting area of current research.
One example of the prosodic component ‘width of pitch range’ has already been mentioned in 15.3, when ‘extra pitch height’was introduced, and the ‘rhythmicality’discussed in 14.1 could be regarded as another prosodic component.
Prosodic components should be regarded as part of intonation along with sequential components.
PARALINGUISTIC
Mention was made above of facial expressions, gestures and body movements.
People who study human behaviour use the term body language for such activity.
One could also mention certain vocal effects such as laughs and sobs.
These are obviously relevant to the act of speaking but could not themselves properly be regarded as components of speech.
Again, they need a proper descriptive and classificatory system, but this is not something that comes within the scope of this course, nor in my opinion should they be regarded as components of intonation.
What advice, then, can be given to the foreign learner of English who wants to learn ‘correct intonation’?
It is certainly true that a few generalisations can be made about the attitudinal functions of some components of intonation.
Within tone, for example, most books agree on some basic meanings; here are some examples:
1.
Fall Finality, definiteness: That is the end of the  news I'm absolutely  certain Stop  talking
2.
Rise
Most of the functions attributed to rises are nearer to grammatical  than attitudinal, as in the first three examples given below; they are included here mainly to give a fuller picture of intonational function.
General questions: Can you  help me Is it  over
Listing: Red, brown, yellow or  blue (fall is normal on the last item)
‘More to follow’: I phoned them right a  way (and they agreed to come) You must write it a  gain (and this time, get it right)
Encouraging: It wont  hurt
3.
Fall-rise
Uncertainty, doubt: You  may he right Its  possible
Requesting: Can I  buy it Will you  lend it to me
4.
Rise-fall
Surprise, being impressed: You were  first  All of them
Generalisations such as these are, however, too broad, and foreign learners do not find it easy to learn to use intonation through studying them.
Similarly, within the area of prosodic components most generalisations tend to be very broad and obvious: wider pitch range tends to be used in excited or enthusiastic speaking, slower speed is typical of the speech of someone who is tired or bored, and so on.
Most of the generalisations one could make are probably true for a lot of other languages as well.
In short, of the rules and generalisations that could be made about conveying attitudes through intonation, those which are not actually wrong are likely to be too trivial to be worth learning.
I have witnessed many occasions when foreigners have unintentionally caused misunderstanding or even offence in speaking to an English person, but can remember very few occasions when this could be attributed to ‘using the wrong intonation’ except when a mistake caused a difference in apparent grammatical meaning (something that is dealt with in the next chapter).
It should not be concluded that intonation is not important for conveying attitudes.
What is being claimed here is that, though it is of great importance, the complexity of the total set of sequential and prosodic components of intonation and of paralinguistic features makes it a very difficult thing to teach.
One might compare the difficulty with that of trying to write rules for how one might indicate to someone of the opposite sex that one finds them attractive; while psychologists and biologists might make detailed observations and generalisations about how human beings of a particular culture behave in such a  situation, most people would rightly feel that studying these generalisations would be no substitute for practical experience, and that relying on a text-book could lead to hilarious consequences.
The attitudinal use of intonation is something that is best acquired through talking with and listening to English speakers, and this course aims simply to train learners to be more aware of and sensitive to the way English speakers use intonation.
Notes on problems and further reading
Perhaps the most controversial question concerning English intonation is what its function is; pedagogically speaking, this is a very important question, since one would not wish to devote time to teaching something without knowing what its value was likely to be.
At the beginning of the chapter I list four commonly cited functions; it is possible to construct a longer list: Lee (1958), for example, proposes ten.
For general introductory reading on the attitudinal function of intonation, see O'Connor and Arnold (1973), Chapter 2; Gimson (1989).
Critical views are expressed in Brazil et al.(1980), pp.98–103 and Crystal (1969), pp.282–308 and there is a good survey in Cruttenden (1986), pp.95–126.
Few people have actually done experiments on listeners' perception of attitudes through intonation.
The experiments reported in Crystal (1969), chapter 7, are only small-scale pilot experiments.
Uldall (1960, 1964) used a speech synthesiser to vary pitch and elicit listeners' judgments.
Lieberman and Michaels (1962) found that they could get reasonably accurate recognition of attitudes using short recording of sentences spoken in different ways, but that when the recordings were distorted in such a way that most acoustic information was removed (e.g. the speech sounds, voice quality, loudness variations etc.) leaving only the pitch information — that part traditionally equated with intonation — listeners' ability to recognise the attitudes was seriously reduced.
Once one has recognised the importance of features other than pitch, it is necessary to devise a framework for categorising these features.
In writing this course I have found it necessary to do this in a way which is somewhat different from other writers' proposals.
The framework set out in Crystal and Quirk (1964) is unsatisfactory in two ways: firstly, no explicit distinction is made between sequential and prosodic variables and the choice between, say, rising as opposed to falling tone is presented as a choice of the same type as the choice between fast and slow speed (tempo), which I feel is confusing.
Secondly, paralinguistic  features of the ‘vocal effect’ type are treated as part of intonation, and it is not made sufficiently clear how these are to be distinguished from prosodic features.
Crystal (1969) defines paralinguistic features as: ‘…vocal effects which are primarily the result of physiological mechanisms other than the vocal cords, such as the direct results of the workings of the pharyngeal, oral or nasal cavities’ but this does not seem to me to fit the facts.
In my view, ‘paralinguistic’ implies ‘outside the system of contrasts used in spoken language’— which does not, of course, necessarily mean ‘non-vocal’.
I would therefore treat prosodic variables as linguistic, and consequently part of intonation, while vocal effects like laughs or sobs are non-linguistic vocal effects to be classed with gestures and facial expressions.
Brown (1990), on the other hand, uses ‘paralinguistic’ to include what I call ‘prosodic’, and appears to have no separate term for non-linguistic vocal effects.
The term ‘voice quality’ needs comment, as it tends to be used to refer to three different things:
i)
The personal, ‘background’ characteristics that make one person's voice recognisably different from another.
Crystal (1969), pp. 100–4, uses it in this sense; see also Nolan (1973).
ii)
The result of different types of vocal fold vibration.
iii)
The auditory quality resulting from the complex interaction of laryngeal and supralaryngeal features.
The last use is the basis of the major work in this field, the treatment by Laver (1968, 1980); if one adopts this as the meaning of ‘voice quality’ it is preferable to use the term ‘phonation type’(see Catford, 1964) for (ii), and in any case I would prefer to use ‘personal speaker characteristics’for (i).
Note for teachers
Tape Unit 18 consists of extracts from a recording of spontaneous dialogue.
Students usually feel that listening to these unfamiliar voices chopped up into small pieces is hard work, but generally the transcription exercise is not found nearly as difficult as expected.
Written exercises
In the following bits of conversation, you are supplied with an ‘opening line’ and a response that you must imagine saying.
You are  given an indication in brackets of the feeling or attitude expressed, and you must mark on the text the intonation you think is appropriate (mark only the response).
As usual in intonation work in this book, punctuation is left out, since it can cause confusion.
Functions of intonation 2
In the previous chapter a distinction was made between the attitudinal function of intonation and several other functions that were given the collective names of syntagmatic functions.
They include accentual, grammatical and discourse functions, and these are discussed below.
19.1 The accentual function of intonation
The term accentual is derived from ‘accent’, a word used by some writers to refer to what in this course is called ‘stress’.
When writers say that intonation has accentual function they imply that the placement of stress is something that is determined by intonation.
It is possible to argue against this view: in Chapters 10 and 11, word stress was presented as something quite independent of intonation, and subsequently (p. 157) it was said that ‘intonation is carried entirely by the stressed syllables of a tone-unit’.
This means that in the presentation so far it has been implied that the placing of stress is independent of and prior to the choice of intonation.
However, one particular aspect of stress could be regarded as part of intonation: this is the placement of the tonic stress within the tone-unit.
It would be reasonable to suggest that while word stress was independent of intonation, the placement of tonic stress was a function (the accentual function) of intonation.
Some older pronunciation handbooks refer to this area as ‘sentence stress’, which is not an appropriate name: the sentence is a unit of grammar, while the location of tonic stress is a matter which concerns the tone-unit, a unit of phonology.
The location of the tonic syllable is of considerable linguistic importance.
The most common position for this is on the last lexical word (e.g. noun, adjective, verb, adverb as distinct from the function words introduced in Chapter 12, p. 102) of the tone-unit.
For contrastive purposes, however, any word may become the tonic syllable.
In the following pairs of examples,(a) represents normal placement and (b) contrastive: a) I  want to  know  where hes  travelling to  (The word ‘to’, being a preposition and not a lexical word, is not stressed.) b)(I  dont want to  know where hes  travelling  from) I  want to  know  where hes  travelling  to 
a) She was  wearing a  red  dress  b)(She  wasnt  wearing a  green dress) She was  wearing a  red dress 
Similarly, for the purpose of emphasis we may place the tonic stress in other positions; in these examples,(a) is non-emphatic and (b) is emphatic:
a) It was  very  boring  b) It was  very  boring 
a) You  mustnt  talk so  loudly  b) You  mustnt  talk so  loudly 
However, it would be wrong to say that the only cases of departure from putting tonic stress on the last lexical word were cases of contrast or emphasis.
There are quite a few situations where it is normal for the tonic syllable to come earlier in the tone-unit.
A well-known example is the sentence ‘I have plans to leave’; this is ambiguous: a) I have  plans to  leave  (i.e. I am planning to leave.) b) I have  plans to  leave  (i.e. I have some plans/diagrams/drawings that I have to leave.)
Version (b) could not be described as contrastive or emphatic.
There are many examples similar to (b); perhaps the best rule to give is that the tonic syllable will tend to occur on the last lexical word in the tone-unit, but may be placed earlier in the tone-unit if there is a word there with greater importance to what is being said.
This can quite often happen as a result of the last part of the tone-unit being already ‘given’(i.e. something which has already been mentioned or is completely predictable), for example:
a) Heres that  book you  asked me to bring (The fact that you asked me to bring it is not new.) b) Ive  got to  take the  dog for a  walk  (‘For a walk’ is by far the most probable thing to follow ‘I've got to take the dog’; if the sentence ended with ‘to the vet’the tonic syllable would probably be ‘vet’.)
Placement of tonic stress is, therefore, important and is closely linked to intonation.
A question that remains, however, is whether one can and should treat this matter as separate from the other functions described below.
19.2 The grammatical function of intonation
The word ‘grammatical’ tends to be used in a very loose sense in this context.
It is usual to illustrate the grammatical function by inventing sentences which when written are ambiguous, and whose ambiguity can only be removed by using differences of intonation.
A typical example is the sentence ‘Those who sold quickly made a profit’.
This can be said in at least two different ways: a) Those who  sold  quickly   made a  profit  b) Those who  sold   quickly  made a  profit 
The difference caused by the placement of the tone-unit boundary is seen to be equivalent to giving two different paraphrases of the sentences, as in: a) A profit was made by those who sold quickly.
b) A profit was quickly made by those who sold.
Let us look further at the role of tone-unit boundaries, and the link between the tone-unit and units of grammar.
There is a strong tendency for tone-unit boundaries to occur at boundaries between grammatical units of higher order than words; it is extremely common to find a tone-unit boundary at a sentence boundary, as in: I  wont have any  tea  I  dont  like it 
In sentences with a more complex structure, tone-unit boundaries are often found at phrase and clause boundaries as well, as in: In France  where  farms  tend to be  smaller  the  subsidies are  more im  portant 
It is very unusual to find a tone-unit boundary at a place where the only grammatical boundary is between words.
lt would, for example, sound distinctly odd to have a tone-unit boundary between an article and a following noun, or between auxiliary and main verbs if they are adjacent (though we may on occasions hesitate or pause in such places within a tone-unit; some people who do a lot of arguing, notably politicians and philosophers, develop the skill of pausing for breath in such intonationally unlikely places because they are less likely to be interrupted than if they pause at the end of a sentence).
Tone-unit boundary placement can, then, indicate grammatical structure to the listener and we can find minimal pairs such as the following: a) The Con  servatives who  like the pro  posal  are  pleased  b) The Con  servatives  who  like the pro  posal  are  pleased   The intonation makes clear the difference between (a)‘restrictive’ and (b)‘non-restrictive’relative clauses;(a) implies that only some Conservatives like the proposal, while (b) implies that all the Conservatives like it.
Another component of intonation that can be said to have grammatical significance is the choice of tone on the tonic syllable.
One example that is very familiar is the use of a rising tone with questions.
Many languages have the possibility of changing a statement into a question simply by changing the tone from falling to rising.
This is, in fact, not used very much by itself in the variety of English being described here, where questions are usually grammatically marked.
Thus the sentence ‘The price is going up’ can be said as a statement like this: The  price is going up  (the tonic stress could equally well be on ‘up’).
It would be quite acceptable in some dialects of English (e.g. many varieties of American English) to ask a question like this:(Why do you want to buy it now?)
The  price is going up 
But speakers in England would be more likely to ask the question like (Why do you want to buy it now?)
Is the  price going up 
It is by no means true that a rising tone is always used for questions in English; it is quite usual, for example, to use a falling tone with questions beginning with one of the ‘wh-question-words’ like ‘what’, ‘which’, ‘when’, etc.
Here are two examples with typical intonations, where (a) does not start with a ‘wh-word’ and has a rising tone and (b) begins with ‘where’and has a falling tone.
a) Did you  park the  car  b) Where did you  park the  car  However, the fall in (b) is certainly not obligatory, and a rise is quite often heard in such a question.
A fall is also possible in (a).
The intonation of question-tags (e.g. ‘isn't it’, ‘can't he’, ‘should she’, ‘won't they’, etc.) is often quoted as a case of a difference in meaning being due to the difference between falling and rising tone.
In the following example, the question-tag is ‘aren't they’; when it has a falling tone, as in (a), the implication is said to be that the speaker is comparatively certain that the information is correct, and simply expects the listener to provide confirmation, while the rising tone in (b) is said to indicate a lesser degree of certainty, so that the question-tag functions more like a request for information.
a) They  are  coming on  Tuesday   arent they   b) They  are  coming on  Tuesday   arent they 
The difference illustrated here could reasonably be said to be as much attitudinal as grammatical.
Certainly there is overlap between these two function.
19.3 The discourse function of intonation
A comparatively new area of study is becoming increasingly important in the description of natural speech.
If we think of linguistic analysis as usually being linked to the sentence as the maximum unit of grammar, then the study of discourse attempts to look at the larger contexts in which sentences occur.
For example, consider the four sentences in the following:
A: Have you got any free time this morning?
B: I might have later on if that meeting's off.
A: They were talking about putting it later.
B: You can't be sure.
Each sentence could be studied in isolation and be analysed in terms of grammatical construction, lexical content and so on.
But it is obvious that the sentences form part of some larger act of conversational interaction between two speakers; the sentences contain several references that presuppose shared knowledge (e.g. ‘that meeting’ implies that both speakers know which meeting is being spoken about), and in some cases the meaning of a sentence can only be correctly interpreted in the light of knowledge of what has preceded it in the conversation (e.g. ‘You can't be sure’).
If we consider how intonation may be studied in relation to discourse, we can identify two main areas: one of them is the use of intonation to focus the listener's attention on aspects of the message that are most important, and the other is concerned with the regulation of conversational behaviour.
We will look at these in turn.
In the case of ‘attention focussing’, the most obvious use has already been described: this is the placing of tonic stress on the appropriate syllable of one particular word in the tone-unit.
In many cases it is easy to demonstrate that the tonic stress is placed on the word that is in some sense the ‘most important’, as in: She  went to  Scotland 
Sometimes it seems more appropriate to describe tonic stress placement in terms of‘information content’: the more predictable a word's occurrence is in a given context, the lower its information content is, and tonic stress will tend to be placed on words with high information content.
This is the explanation that would be used in the case of the sentences suggested in 19.1:
a) Ive  got to  take the  dog for a  walk  b) Ive  got to  take the  dog to the  vet 
The word ‘vet’ is less predictable (has a higher information content) than ‘walk’.
However, we still find many cases where it is difficult to explain tonic placement in terms of‘importance’ or ‘information’.
For example, in messages like: Your coat's on fire The wing's breaking up The radio's gone wrong Your uncle's died probably the majority of English speakers would place the tonic stress on the subject noun, though it is difficult to see how this is more important than the last lexical word in each of the sentences.
The placement of tonic stress is still to some extent an unsolved mystery; it is clear, though, that it is at least partly determined by the larger context (linguistic and non-linguistic) in which the tone-unit occurs.
We can see at least two other ways in which intonation can assist in focussing attention.
The tone chosen can indicate whether the tone-unit in which it occurs is being used to present new information or to refer to information which is felt to be already possessed by speaker and hearer.
For example, in the following sentence: Since the  last time we met  when we had that  huge  dinner  Ive  been on a  diet  the first two tone-units present information which is relevant to what the speaker is saying, but which is not something new and unknown to the listener.
The final tone-unit, however, does present new information.
Writers on discourse intonation have proposed that the falling tone indicates new information while rising (including falling-rising) tones indicate ‘shared’ or ‘given’information.
Another use of intonation connected with the focussing of attention is intonational subordination; we can signal that a particular tone-unit is of comparatively low importance and as a result give correspondingly greater importance to adjacent tone-units.
For example: a) As I ex  pect youve  heard  theyre  only ad  mitting e  mergency  cases  b) The  Japa  nese  for  some  reason or  other   drive on the  left  like  us 
In a typical conversational pronunciation of these sentences, the first tone-unit of (a) and the second and fourth tone-units of (b) might be treated as intonationally subordinate; the prosodic characteristics  marking this are usually (i) a drop to a lower part of the pitch range (‘low key’),(ii) increased speed,(iii) narrower range of pitch and (iv) lower loudness, relative to the non-subordinate tone-unit(s).
The use of these components has the result that the subordinate tone-units are less easy to hear.
Native speakers can usually still understand what is said, if necessary by guessing at inaudible or unrecognisable words on the basis of their knowledge of what the speaker is talking about; foreign learners of English, on the other hand, having in general less ‘common ground’ or shared knowledge with the speaker, often find that these subordinate tone-units, with their ‘throw-away’, parenthetic style, cause serious difficulties in understanding.
We now turn to the second main area of intonational discourse function, the regulation of conversational behaviour.
We have already seen how the study of sequences of tone-units in the speech of one speaker can reveal information carried by intonation which would not have been recognised if intonation was analysed only at the level of individual tone-units.
Intonation is also important in the conversational interaction of two or more speakers.
Most of the research on this has been on conversational interaction of a rather restricted kind, such as between doctor and patient, teacher and pupil or between the various speakers in court cases.
In such material it is comparatively easy to identify what each speaker is actually doing in speaking — for example, questioning, challenging, advising, encouraging, disapproving, etc.
It is likely that other forms of conversation can be analysed in the same way, though this is considerably more difficult.
In a more general way, it can be seen that speakers use various prosodic components to indicate to others that they have finished speaking, that another person is expected to speak, that a particular type of response is required, and so on.
A very familiar example is that quoted above (p. 175), where the difference between falling and rising intonation on question-tags is supposed to indicate to the listener what sort of response is expected.
It seems that key (the part of the pitch range used) is important in signalling information about conversational interaction.
We can observe many examples in non-linguistic behaviour of the use of signals to regulate turn-taking: in many sports, for example, it is necessary to do this — footballers can indicate that they are looking for someone to pass the ball to, or that they are ready to receive the ball, and doubles partners in tennis can indicate to each other who is to play a shot.
Intonation, in conjunction with‘body language’ such as eye-contact, facial expression, gestures and head-turning, is used for similar purposes in speech, as well as for establishing or confirming the status of the participants in a conversation.
19.4 Conclusions
It seems clear that studying intonation in relation to discourse makes it possible to explain much more comprehensively the uses that speakers make of intonation.
Practically all the separate functions traditionally attributed to intonation (attitudinal, accentual and grammatical) could be seen as different aspects of discourse function.
The risk, with such a broad approach, is that one might end up making generalisations that were too broad and had little power to predict with any accuracy the intonation that a speaker would use in a particular context.
It is too early yet to say how useful the discourse approach will be, but even if it achieves nothing else, it can at least be claimed to have shown the inadequacy of attempting to analyse the function of intonation on the basis of isolated sentences or tone-units, removed from their linguistic and situational context.
Notes on problems and further reading
19.1
In Britain, the most important work on the placement of tonic stress is Halliday (1967); his term for this is ‘tonicity’, and he adopts the widely-used linguistic term ‘marked’ for tonicity that deviates from what I have called (for the sake of simplicity)‘normal’.
Within generative phonology there has been much debate about whether one can put tonic (‘primary’) stress in the right place without referring to the non-linguistic context in which the speaker says something.
This debate is well summarised and criticised in Schmerling (1976), but see Bolinger (1972).
19.2
Opinions differ about whether intonation has a grammatical function.
Cruttenden (1970) argues that intonation is affected by and reflects the grammar of what is said, but does not alter it or contribute to it.
Consequently, it is wrong to say that it has a grammatical function.
I think Cruttenden's arguments are in many ways convincing, but one must recognise that if intonation is influenced by and reflects the grammar, it follows that it must be a help to listeners in interpreting the grammar of what they hear, and perhaps more importantly, if a speaker's intonation is inappropriate in relation to the grammar, listeners will find it more difficult to interpret the grammar, and may be confused.
19.3
One of the most interesting developments of recent years has been the emergence of a theory of discourse intonation.
Readers unfamiliar with the study of discourse may find some initial difficulty in understanding  some of the principles involved; the best way to begin is to read Coulthard (1977), paying particular attention to the chapter on intonation, then go on to study Brazil et al.(1980).
I have not been able to do more than suggest the rough outline of this approach.
The treatment of intonational subordination is based not on the work of Brazil but on Crystal and Quirk (1964), pp. 52–6 and Crystal (1969), pp. 235–52.
The basic philosophy is the same, however, in that both views illustrate the fact that there is in intonation some organisation at a level higher than the isolated tone-unit; this was pointed out in the discussion of Trim (1959)(notes on Chapter 16 above); see also Fox (1973).
A parallel might be drawn with the relationship between the sentence and the paragraph in writing.
It seems likely that a considerable amount of valuable new research on pronunciation will grow out of the study of discourse.
Note for teachers
The comment about Tape Unit 18 made above applies also to Tape Unit 19: at first hearing it seems very difficult, but when worked on step by step it is far from impossible.
In fact, although this passage sounds rapid and colloquial it is still easier to analyse than a full-speed conversational interchange.
Written exercises
1.
In the following exercise, read the ‘opening line’ and then decide the most suitable place for tonic stress placement (underline the syllable) in the response.
2.
The following sentences are given without punctuation.
Underline the appropriate tonic syllable places and mark tone-unit boundaries where you think they are appropriate.
a)
(he wrote the letter in a sad way) he wrote the letter sadly
b)
(it's regrettable that he wrote the letter) he wrote the letter sadly
c)
four plus six divided by two equals five
d)
four plus six divided by two equals seven
e)
we broke one thing after another fell down
f)
we broke one thing after another that night
Further areas of study in phonetics and phonology
This chapter completes the course by looking at three further areas of study; each is important in its own way, and each is an area on which students working at an advanced level in phonetics and phonology spend a considerable amount of time.
20.1 Distinctive features
Many references have been made to phonology in this course, with the purpose of making use of the concepts and analytical techniques of that subject to help explain various facts about English pronunciation as efficiently as possible.
One might call this ‘applied phonology’; however, the phonological analysis of different languages raises a great number of difficult and interesting theoretical problems, and for a long time the study of phonology ‘for its own sake’ has been regarded as an important area of theoretical linguistics.
Within this area of what could be called ‘pure phonology’, problems are examined with little or no reference to their relevance to the language learner.
Many different theoretical approaches have been developed, and no area of phonology has been free from critical examination.
The very fundamental notion of the phoneme, for example, has been treated in many different ways.
One approach that has been given a lot of importance is distinctive feature analysis, which is based on the principle that phonemes should be regarded not as independent and indivisible units, but instead as combinations of different features.
For example, if we consider the English  phoneme, it is easy to show that it differs from the plosives  and  in its place of articulation (alveolar), from  in being lenis, from  and  in not being fricative, from  in not being nasal, and so on .
If we look at each of the consonants just mentioned and see which of the features each one has, we get a table like this, where + means that a phoneme does possess that feature and — means that it does not:
If you look carefully at this table, you will see that the combination of + and — values for each phoneme is different; if two sounds were represented by exactly the same +'s and — 's, then by definition they could not be different phonemes.
In the case of the limited set of phonemes used for this example, not all the features are needed: if one wished, it would be possible to get rid of, for example, the feature ‘velar’ and the feature ‘nasal’.
The  phoneme would still be distinguished from  and  by being neither alveolar nor bilabial, and  would be distinct from plosives and fricatives simply by being neither plosive nor fricative.
Of course, to produce a complete analysis of all the phonemes of English, other features would be needed for representing other types of consonant and for vowels and diphthongs.
In distinctive feature analysis the features themselves thus become important components of the phonology.
Let us look at how the full set of English vowels might be analysed in terms of a small number of distinctive features.
We could begin with a feature called short to make the fundamental distinction between ,,,,,,(+short), and ,,,,,,,,,,,,(-short).
Then to distinguish pure vowels from diphthongs we could have the feature pure;,,,,,,,,,,, would be (+pure) and all the diphthongs would be (-pure).
The feature close would have the value + for ,,,, and we could also use this for  and  if we adopt the convention that most of the features will be used to classify the first part of the diphthongs.
All the other vowels and diphthongs would then be (-close).
We could also have the feature open;,,,,, would be (+open), all the others being (-open).
All vowels and diphthongs that are neither close nor open, i.e. ,,,,,,,, must be distinguished from each other by other features.
Some of the vowels that are (-close, -open) are central and some are not; the feature central would identify ,,,, all others being (-central).
With the features introduced so far, we still do not have complete distinctiveness for all vowels: and , for example, are identical in feature specification so far, as are  and , and , and .
We can use the feature round to separate these pairs, so that in each case the former is (-round) and the latter (+round).
The only remaining problem is that we have three different sorts of diphthong: those which glide to  (,,), those which glide to  (,) and those which glide to  (,,).
The obvious approach would be to have two additional features: gliding to  and gliding to ;, and  would be (-gliding to , -gliding to ).
In fact, however, it turns out that if we have only the former of these two features, that is, gliding to , all the diphthongs which are (-gliding to ) can be distinguished from each other in terms of their beginnings, using the features we have already introduced.
This can all be seen in Table 5, which you should look at carefully.
This is only one possible analysis, and many others, using quite different features, are equally efficient.
It has been claimed by some writers that distinctive feature analysis is not irrelevant to the study of language learning, and that pronunciation difficulties experienced by learners are better seen as due to the need to learn a particular feature or combination of features than as the absence of particular phonemes.
For example, English speakers learning French or German have to learn to produce front rounded vowels.
In English it is not necessary to be able to class a vowel as (+front, +round), whereas this is necessary for French and German; it could be said that the major task for the learner in this case is to learn the combination of these features, not to learn the individual vowels , and (in French).
English, on the other hand, has to be able to distinguish dental from labiodental and alveolar places of articulation for  to be distinct from  and  and for  to be distinct from  and ; this requires an additional feature that most languages do not need, and this could be seen as specific task for the learner of English.
Distinctive feature phonologists have also claimed that when children are learning their first language, they acquire features rather than individual phonemes.
20.2 Experimental phonetics
Experimental phonetics has been an important part of phonetics for almost a century, and experimental work in phonetics laboratories has produced many important discoveries about how speech is produced and perceived.
Too often, however, this area of the subject is regarded as a mysterious world where incomprehensible things are done with expensive equipment.
There is reason to hope that in coming years the  fields of pronunciation teaching and of experimental phonetics will become much more closely linked.
In explaining the subject-matter of experimental phonetics it is usual to start by mentioning the speech chain, which may be diagrammed in simplified form like this:
With currently available equipment we are not able to discover what goes on in detail in the brain when someone is speaking, though we can make guesses based on evidence such as speech errors (‘slips of the tongue’) and the effects on speech production of different sorts of brain damage.
Much more is known about stage 2, the articulatory aspect of speech production.
Many special instruments have been developed to help us to find out about such things as the pressure of air in the lungs and the vocal tract, the flow of air out of the mouth and nose, the opening and closing of the vocal folds and of the soft palate, and the movement of articulators like the lips and the lower jaw.
Recently-developed, safer X-ray techniques can help us to observe articulatory movements taking place within the vocal tract, and contact between the tongue and the palate can be measured electrically.
Additionally, it is possible to detect the electrical activity that is produced when muscles contract, and we can thus observe the complex co-ordination of activity in the muscles controlling speech production.
Although most of these techniques are expensive and difficult to use, it is possible that at least some of them may become more easily available; they can be very useful both for discovering in detail how English speakers produce their speech sounds, and for demonstrating to learners of English their pronunciation errors in a way that helps them to correct them.
To give a brief example, recording the airflow from speakers' mouths can show how successfully they are producing the aspiration appropriate for , and .
The third stage, the transmission of sound waves through the air, is studied by acoustic analysis; much has been discovered about the sounds of speech in this way.
We can discover the physical events that produce the perceptual effect of vowel quality, we can measure the intensity of different sounds (which is closely related to the loudness that we perceive), and the fundamental frequency of voiced sounds (which is closely related to pitch) can be extracted from the speech signal.
Until recently, the acoustic analysis of speech has been such a    slow and laborious business that only small samples of speech could be analysed, but recent developments in the use of computers are making it possible to carry out analysis on a much larger scale.
Not only is it possible to get an accurate computer analysis of the fundamental frequency of speech (which can be displayed on a screen for someone doing practice on intonation, or can be used in the study of the intonation of large samples of natural speech), but it is now possible to get a computer to produce a simple phonetic transcription of what is said to it.
If such techniques are further developed, it should be possible to use computers to provide additional pronunciation training at times when a human teacher is not available.
Table 5.
A distinctive feature analysis of the English vowel system
Finally, it is of great importance to discover more about how the listener's brain identifies what it receives from the ear (stages 4 and 5); many experiments have shown how sensitive we are to very slight acoustic differences and how flexible we are in being able to adjust to very different speakers.
We are also very strongly influenced by our expectations; if we have heard and understood half a sentence, it seems that our brain is already guessing at what the rest of it will be before it is heard, and is certainly not acting in a passive way like a simple machine.
To help in discovering the organisation and the capabilities of our faculty for perceiving speech, we need to be able to produce very small and finely-controlled differences in speech sounds, and experimental phonetics has made much use of speech produced by machines called speech synthesisers.
Here again, developments in computers are bringing about rapid changes.
The best speech synthesisers are capable of producing speech of such high quality that only an expert can distinguish it from a recording of a human being's speech; less sophisticated synthesisers are becoming so cheap that they can now be bought for attaching to ordinary micro-computers.
It is possible that synthetic speech may have a useful role to play in testing language learners' ability to perceive important segmental and suprasegmental distinctions in the language they are learning.
20.3 The study of variety
Differences among accents of English have been mentioned several times in the course, and this is a subject that many students of English find interesting and wish to know more about.
For a long time, the study of accents was part of the subject of dialectology, which aimed to identify all the ways in which a language differed from place to place.
Dialectology in its traditional form is therefore principally interested in geographical differences; its best-known data-gathering technique has  been to send researchers (usually called ‘field-workers’) mainly into rural areas (where the speakers were believed to be less likely to have been influenced by other accents), to find elderly speakers (whose speech was believed to have been less influenced by other accents and to preserve older forms of the dialect) and to use lists of questions to find information about vocabulary and pronunciation, the questions being chosen to concentrate on items known to vary a lot from region to region.
Surveys of this kind can provide the basis for many generalisations about geographical variation, but they have serious weaknesses, which will be discussed later.
Differences between accents are of two main sorts, phonetic and phonological.
When two accents differ from each other only phonetically, we find the same number of phonemes in both accents, but some or all of the phonemes are realised differently.
There may also be differences in stress or intonation, but not such as would cause a change in meaning.
As an example of phonetic differences at the segmental level, it is said that Australian English has the same set of phonemes and phonemic contrasts as RP, yet Australian pronunciation is so different from RP that it is easily recognised as such.
A word of caution should be given here: it is all too easy to talk about such things as ‘Australian English’, and ignore the great variety that inevitably exists within such a large community of speakers.
Every individual's speech is different from any other's; it follows from this that no one speaker can be taken to represent a particular accent or dialect, and it also follows that the idea of a ‘standard Received Pronunciation’ is a convenient fiction, not a scientific fact.
Many accents of English also differ noticeably in intonation without the difference being such as would cause a difference in meaning; some Welsh accents, for example, have a tendency for unstressed syllables to be higher in pitch than stressed syllables.
Such a difference is, again, a phonetic one.
An example of a phonetic (non-phonological) difference in stress would be the stressing of verbs ending in ‘-ise’ in some Scots and Northern Irish accents (e.g. ‘realise’).
Phonological differences are of various types: again, we can divide these into segmental and suprasegmental.
Within the area of segmental phonology the most obvious type of difference is where one accent has a different number of phonemes (and hence of phonemic contrasts) from another.
Many speakers with Northern English accents, for example, do not have a contrast between  and , so that ‘luck’ and ‘look’are pronounced identically (both as ); in the case of consonants, many accents do not have the phoneme .
The phonemic system of such accents is different from that of RP.
On the other hand, some accents differ from others in having more phonemes and phonemic contrasts.
For example, many Northern English accents have a long  sound as the realisation of the phoneme symbolised  in RP (which is a simple  phonetic difference); but in some Northern accents there is an  diphthong phoneme and a contrasting long vowel phoneme that could be symbolised .
Words like ‘eight’ and ‘reign’are pronounced ,, while ‘late’, ‘rain’(with no ‘g’in the spelling) are pronounced ,.
A more complicated kind of difference is where, without affecting the overall set of phonemes and contrasts, a phoneme has a distribution in one accent that is different from the ‘same’ phoneme's distribution in another accent.
The obvious example is , which is restricted to occurring in pre-vocalic position in RP but in many other accents is not restricted in this way.
Another example is the occurrence of  between a consonant and , or ; in RP we can find the following: ‘pew’, ‘tune’, ‘queue’.
However, in many American accents and in some English accents of the South and East we find that, while ‘pew’ is pronounced  and ‘queue’as , ‘tune’is pronounced ; this absence of  is found after the other alveolar consonants, hence: ‘due’; ‘new’.
We also find another kind of variation: in the example just given above, the occurrence of the phonemes being discussed was determined by their phonological context, but sometimes the determining factor is lexical rather than phonological.
For example, in many accents of the Midlands and North-Western England a particular set of words contains a vowel (represented by ‘o’ in the spelling) which is pronounced as  in RP but as  in these other accents; the list of words includes ‘one’, ‘none’, ‘nothing’, ‘tongue’, ‘mongrel’and ‘constable’.
One of the results of this difference is that such accents have different pronunciations for the two members of pairs of words that are pronounced identically (i.e. are homophones) in RP, e.g. ‘won’ and ‘one’, ‘nun’and ‘none’.
It would be satisfying to be able to list examples of phonological differences between accents in the area of stress and intonation, but unfortunately, straightforward examples are not available; we do not yet know enough about the phonological functions of stress and intonation, and too little work has been done on comparing accents in terms of these factors.
It would be necessary to show how one accent was able to make some difference in meaning with stress or intonation that another accent was unable to make.
It is very probable that such differences do exist, and will be identified by suitable research work.
It was mentioned earlier that there were weaknesses in the description of accents in terms of geographical variation alone; the study of sociolinguistics has shown the importance of considering other sources of variation.
We can find differences in pronunciation (as well as in other fields of linguistic analysis) resulting from various factors that we could call static influences including (in addition to geographical origin) one's age and sex, social class, educational background, occupation and personality.
In addition, various situational factors influence pronunciation, such as the social relationship between speaker and hearer, whether one is speaking publicly or privately and the purposes for which one is using language.
Some people (who usually turn out to do well in phonetic training) find that in speaking to someone with a different accent their pronunciation gets progressively more like that of the person they are speaking to, like a chameleon adapting its colour to its environment.
Among the situational factors influencing variation, it is possible to pick out some which could be described as stylistic, and many linguists have attempted to produce frameworks for the analysis of style in language.
We will not consider this in detail, but should note that for foreign learners a typical situation — regrettably, an almost inevitable one — is that they learn a style of pronunciation which could be described as careful and formal.
Probably their teachers will speak to them in this style, though what the learners are likely to encounter when they join in conversations with native speakers is what we have referred to previously as a ‘rapid, casual’ style.
Young children have an enviable ability to acquire the rapid, casual pronunciation of a language apparently without effort if they are provided with the necessary social contact with native speakers and meaningful communication situations.
It has been claimed that adults can also ‘pick up’ spoken language in this way (second language acquisition) better than by the traditional classroom approach (second language learning) if the conditions are similar to those experienced by young children.
This is an attractive idea, but for most adults the goal of learning through communicating naturally in the language throughout the day will, sadly, never be a practical one; we have to continue to make use of something like formal classroom teaching because of the limited time and resources available.
It should now be clear that the pronunciation described in this course is only one of a vast number of possible varieties.
The choice of a slow, careful style is made for the sake of convenience and simplicity; learners of English need to be aware of the fact that this style is far from being the only one they will meet, and teachers of English to foreigners should do their best to expose their pupils to other varieties.
Notes on problems and further reading
20.1
Students learning about distinctive features face two main difficulties: one is understanding the basic principles and the other is learning the meanings of the rather confusing feature labels used by most writers.
I  have chosen to reduce the latter problem by using labels already familiar from earlier chapters, but some information about the other labels is given here.
The idea of distinctive features was put forward in the early 1930s by Bloomfield (1933) and Trubetzkoy (various publications leading up to 1939); however, in early work and in present-day functional phonology, the features are worked out individually for the language being studied.
Later, under Jakobson, the idea emerged of a set of features that could be used for every language, and a set of about twelve such features was proposed in Jakobson et al.(1952), later reworked in more readable form in Jakobson and Halle (1956).
A universal set of features is an attractive idea, but the price one pays is that each feature has to do many jobs, and the meaning associated with it gets spread thinner and thinner, like a small amount of butter on a large amount of bread.
The definition of the Jakobsonian features is thus very difficult to understand.
The principle of whether features should or should not be binary (i.e. ‘+’ or ‘— ’, ‘yes’or ‘no’) has been much argued about, but this is too big a question to go into here (Hyman (1975), pp. 32–3, 55–8).
In the 1960s it became apparent that a revision of the features was needed, and the new set was introduced in Chomsky and Halle (1968), pp.293–329, rather pretentiously called ‘The Universal Set of Phonetic Features’.
Unfortunately the definitions of many of these features are also very difficult to understand and there are twice as many of them.
If one does not like these features, one can use features that are designed to have a more clearly-defined phonetic meaning (Ladefoged (1982), chapter 11), or alternatively, abandon phonetically meaningful feature labels altogether (Fudge, 1967).
There is a good review of approaches to distinctive features in Clark and Yallop (1990), chapter 9 and pp.364–8.
20.2
As far as I know there is no introductory book that explains the principles of experimental phonetics, in the sense of how to design and carry out experiments and to interpret the results in terms that are meaningful to other phoneticians.
There are, however, good books that explain the speech chain and the aspects of the speech that are measurable.
Denes and Pinson (1973) is entitled The Speech Chain, and is clear and interesting.
Outlines of acoustic phonetics are given in O'Connor (1973), chapter 3, and Ladefoged (1982), chapter 8.
There is fuller treatment of speech production, speech acoustics and speech perception in Borden and Harris (1984) and Lieberman and Blumstein (1988).
20.3
On the study of variety, the list of references could become enormous.
Those given in the section ‘Suggestion for further reading’ should be enough for most readers; the same is true for sociolinguistics, but I feel that any reading beyond basic introductory material ought to include some work by Labov, whose influence on the subject has been profound.
See, for example, Labov (1972).
The distinction between second language learning and second language acquisition is one that has been proposed by Krashen; see for example Krashen (1981).
Note for teachers
Tape Unit 20 is short and intensive.
It is meant primarily to give a final reminder that English spoken at something like full conversational speed is very different from the slow, careful pronunciation of the early Tape Units.
If there is time, students should now be encouraged to go back to some of the more difficult Tape Units dealing with connected speech (say from Tape Unit 12 onwards, missing out Tape Unit 15); they will probably discover a lot of things they did not notice before.
Written exercises
1.
Distinctive feature analysis looks at different properties of segments and classes of segments.
In the following exercise you must find what feature or features certain groups of segments have in common; you will probably find it useful to look at the IPA chart on pp. 40–1.
You are not restricted to using feature labels given in Chapter 20.
2.
Phonological differences between accents are of various types.
For each of the following sets of data, based on non-RP accents, say what you can conclude about the phonology of that accent.