

4
The parchment was greasy and finger-stained, a six-inch square with a three-masted ship crudely drawn in the centre and a large black cross in each corner.
‘Is that all?’
Athelstan asked, passing the parchment back.
The girl tensed.
Her lower lip trembled, tears pricked her eyes.
‘There was something else,’ Athelstan continued.
‘Wasn't there?’
Philippa nodded.
Geoffrey took her hand and held it, stroking it gently as if she was a child.
‘There was a sesame seed cake.’
‘What?’
Cranston barked.
‘A seed cake like a biscuit, a dirty yellow colour.’
‘What happened to it?’
Cranston asked.
‘I saw my father walk along the parapet.
He seemed very agitated.
He brought his arm back and threw the cake into the moat.
After that he was a changed man, keeping everyone away from him and insisting on moving to the North Bastion Tower.’
‘Is that correct?’
Cranston asked the rest of the group.
‘Of course it is!’ the chaplain snapped.
‘Mistress Philippa is not a liar.’
‘Then, Father,’ Cranston asked silkily, ‘did Sir Ralph share his secrets with you?’
He held up a podgy hand.
‘I  know about the seal of confession.
All I'm asking is, did he confide in you?’
‘I think not,’ Colebrooke sniggered.
‘Sir Ralph had certain questions to ask the chaplain about stores and provisions which appear to have gone missing.’
The priest turned on him, his lip curling like that of an angry dog.
‘Watch your tongue, Lieutenant!’ he rasped.
‘True, things have gone missing, but that does not mean that I am the thief.
There are others,’ he added meaningfully, ‘with access to the Wardrobe Tower.’
‘Meaning?’
Colebrooke shouted.
‘Oh, shut up!’
Cranston ordered.
‘We are not here about stores but about a man's life.
I ask all of you, on your allegiance to the King — for this could be a matter of treason — did Sir Ralph confide in one of you?
Does this parchment mean anything to any of you?’
A chorus of ‘ Noes ’ greeted the coroner's demands though Athelstan noticed that the hospitallers looked away as they mumbled their responses.
‘I hope you are telling the truth,’ Cranston tartly observed.
‘Sir Ralph may have been slain by peasant leaders plotting rebellion.
Your father, Mistress Philippa, was a close friend and trusted ally of the court.’
Athelstan intervened, trying to calm the situation.
‘Mistress Philippa, tell me about your father.’
The girl laced her fingers together nervously and looked at the floor.
‘He was always a soldier,’ she began.
‘He served in Prussia against the Latvians, on the Caspian, and then travelled to Outremer, Egypt, Palestine and Cyprus.’
She blinked and nodded at the hospitallers.
‘They can tell you more about that than I.’ She took a deep breath.
‘Fifteen years  ago,’ she continued, ‘he was in Egypt in the army of the Caliph and then he came home covered in glory, a rich man.
I was three years old.
My mother died a year later and we entered the household of John of Gaunt.
My father became one of his principal retainers; four years ago he was appointed Constable of the Tower.’
Athelstan smiled understandingly.
He knew Sir Ralph's type: a professional soldier, a mercenary who would crusade for the faith but was not averse to serving in the armies of the infidel.
Athelstan stared round the group.
How quiet and calm they appeared, though he sensed something was wrong.
They were hiding mutual dislikes and rivalries in their over-eagerness to answer his questions.
‘I suppose,’ he remarked drily, ‘you have already been through Sir Ralph's papers?’
Athelstan looked at Sir Fulke who nodded.
‘Of course I have been through my brother's documents, household accounts, memoranda and letters.
I found nothing untoward.
I am, after all,’ he added, glaring round the room as if expecting a challenge, ‘the executor of Sir Ralph's.’
‘Of course, of course ,’ Cranston assured him.
Athelstan groaned to himself.
Yes, he thought, and if there was anything damaging it will have been removed.
He stared at the young man next to Philippa.
‘How long, sir, have you known your betrothed?’
Geoffrey's wine-flushed face was wreathed in smiles as he gripped her hand more firmly.
‘Two years.’
Athelstan noticed the conspiratorial smiles the two lovers exchanged.
Cranston leered at the girl whilst he considered the incongruous couple.
Geoffrey was outstandingly handsome and probably quite wealthy, yet Philippa was almost plain.
Moreover, Sir Ralph had been a soldier and  Geoffrey was not, at first glance, the sort of man likely to be welcomed into such a family.
Cranston then remembered Maude and his own passionate courting of her.
Love was strange, as Athelstan kept reminding him, and opposites were often attracted to each other.
‘Tell me, Geoffrey, why did you stay in the Tower?’
The young man belched and blinked his eyes as if he was on the point of falling asleep.
‘Well,’ he mumbled, ‘the great frost has killed all trade in the city.
Sir Ralph wished me to stay during the Yuletide season — even more so after he became distraught and upset.’
‘Did you know the reason for his anxiety?’
‘No,’ Geoffrey slurred.
‘Why should I?’
‘Did you like Sir Ralph?’
‘I loved him as a son does a father.’
Cranston switched his attention to Sir Fulke who was beginning openly to fidget.
‘Sir Fulke, you say you are the executor of Sir Ralph's will?’
‘Yes, I am.
And, before you ask, I am also a beneficiary, after the will is approved in the Court of Probate.’
‘What does the will provide?’
‘Well, Sir Ralph had property next to the Charterhouse in St Giles.
This and all of the monies banked with the Lombards in Cornhill will go to Philippa.’
‘And to you?’
‘Meadows and pastures in the Manor of Holywell outside Oxford.’
‘A rich holding?’
‘Yes, Sir John, a rich holding, but not rich enough to murder for.’
‘I didn't say that.’
‘You implied it.’
‘Sir Ralph,’ Athelstan hurriedly interrupted, ‘was a wealthy man?’
‘He amassed wealth in his travels,’ Sir Fulke snapped back.
‘And he was careful with his monies.’
Athelstan noticed the sour smile on the chaplain's face.
Sir Ralph, he thought, was probably a miser.
The friar looked sideways at Cranston and quietly groaned.
The good coroner was taking one of his short naps, his great belly sagging, mouth half-open.
Oh, Lord, Athelstan quietly prayed, please make sure he doesn't snore!
‘Why do you live in the Tower, a bleak dwelling place for any man?’
Athelstan abruptly asked.
Sir Fulke shrugged.
‘My brother paid me to help him in an unofficial capacity.’
Both he and Athelstan chose to ignore the snorting laughter of Colebrooke.
Cranston was now quietly nodding, belching softly and smacking his lips.
Mistress Philippa tightened her mouth and Athelstan cursed; he did not wish his interrogation to end in mocking laughter.
‘Sir Gerard, Sir Brian,’ he almost shouted in an attempt to rouse Cranston, ‘how long have you been in the Tower?’
‘Two weeks,’ Fitzormonde replied.
‘We come every year.’
‘It's a ritual,’ Mowbray added, ‘ever since we served with Sir Ralph in Egypt.
We met to discuss old times.’
‘So you were close friends of Sir Ralph?’
‘In a sense.
Colleagues, veterans from old wars.’
Mowbray stroked his evenly clipped beard.
‘But, I'll be honest with you, Sir Ralph was a man more feared and respected than loved.’
Athelstan picked up the yellowing piece of parchment and thrust it at them.
‘Do you know what this drawing means or the significance of the seed cake?’
Both knights shook their heads but Athelstan was sure they were lying.
He leaned forward.
‘Why?’ he whispered.
‘Why should Sir Ralph be so terrified of this?’
He stared slowly round the rest of the group.
‘A cup of sack!’
Cranston muttered thickly.
‘Who found this?’
Athelstan quickly asked.
Sir Fulke pointed to Rastani who sat with his dark face fearful and anxious.
Athelstan leaned forward.
‘What does this mean, Rastani?’
The eyes stared blankly back.
‘Where did you find it?’
The fellow suddenly made strange gestures with his fingers.
‘He can hear but not speak,’ Philippa reminded the friar.
Fascinated Athelstan watched the strange hand signs which Philippa translated for him.
‘He found it on a table in my father's chamber,’ she announced.
‘Four days ago.
Early on the morning of the ninth of December — that and the hard-baked seed cake.’
Athelstan caught and held Rastani's glance.
‘You were a faithful servant to Sir Ralph?’
The man nodded in response.
‘Why didn't you move with your master to the North Bastion?’
Athelstan continued.
The fellow's mouth opened and shut like a landed carp's.
‘I can answer that,’ Philippa said.
‘When the message was received, my father distanced himself from Rastani, though God knows why.’
She gently stroked the man's hand.
‘As I have said, Father became strange.
Even I did not recognise him from his actions.’
Cranston smacked his lips and suddenly stirred.
‘Yes, yes, very good!’ he bawled.
‘But did any of you  approach the North Bastion Tower the night Sir Ralph was killed?’
A series of firm denials greeted his question.
‘So you can all account for your movements?’
‘I can,’ the kinsman spoke up.
‘Rastani and I were out of the Tower.
We were sent to buy stores from a merchant in Cripplegate.
Or, at least, that's where the warehouse is.
You can ask Master Christopher Manley in Heyward Lane near All Hallows.’
‘That's near the Tower?’
‘Yes, it is, Sir John.’
‘And when did you leave?’
‘Before dinner, and did not return until after Prime this morning when we heard of Sir Ralph's death.
Rastani and I can vouch for each other.
If you doubt that, speak to Master Manley.
He saw us take lodgings at a tavern in Muswell Street.’
Sir John rose and stretched.
‘Well, well!
Now my clerk and I,’ he trumpeted, ‘would like to question each of you alone.
Though,’ he smiled at the girl, ‘Mistress Philippa and Geoffrey had best stay together.
Master Colebrooke, there's a chamber below.
Perhaps our guests could wait there?’
There were mumbled protests and groans but Cranston, refreshed after his nap, glared round beneath thick furrowed brows.
Led by Colebrooke, all left except for Philippa and Geoffrey.
‘Your chamber, Master Geoffrey?’
Athelstan asked ‘Where is it?’
‘Above the gatehouse.’
‘And you stayed there all night?’
The young man smiled weakly.
‘You're a perceptive man, Sir John.
That's why you asked me to stay, I  suppose?
I spent the night with Philippa.’
The girl looked away, blushing.
Cranston smiled and tapped the man gently on the shoulder.
‘Why did you not rouse Sir Ralph yourself?’
The young man rubbed his eyes.
‘As I have said before, I didn't have a key and, God be my witness, I knew there was something wrong.
The corridor was cold, with no sound from Sir Ralph's chamber.’
He smiled bleakly at Athelstan.
‘I am not the bravest of men, I'll be honest I did not like Sir Ralph using me as a page boy but he distrusted the others.’
‘You mean Colebrooke and the rest?’
‘Yes, I think so.’
Cranston stared at Philippa.
‘Had your father been in such dark spirits before?’
‘Yes, about three years ago, just before Christmas.
But it passed when he met his companions, as was their custom, and supped at the Golden Mitre.’
‘Who were your father's companions?’
Athelstan asked.
‘Well, the two hospitallers, Sir Gerard Mowbray and Sir Brian Fitzormonde, and Sir Adam Horne — he's a merchant in the city.’
‘Did these include all your father's comrades-in-arms?’
‘Oh, there was someone called Bartholomew.
Bartholomew…’ the girl repeated, biting her lip ‘…
Burghgesh, I believe.
But he never came.’
‘Why?’
‘I don't know.’
She half laughed.
‘I think he's dead.’
‘Why did your father insist on meeting his friends every year just before Christmas?’
‘I don't know.
Some pact they made a long time ago.’
Athelstan scrutinised the girl carefully.
He was sure she was hiding something.
‘Tell me,’ he said, changing tack, ‘is there more than one postern gate on to the moat?’
‘Oh, yes,’ Philippa replied.
‘Quite a number.’
Athelstan glanced at Cranston, ‘My Lord Coroner, do you have any questions?’
‘No,’ Sir John replied.
‘Enough is enough!
Ask Master William Hammond to come in.’
The priest entered in a surly, disgruntled way, biting his thumb nail to the quick as he gave curt answers to Athelstan's questions.
Yes, he had been in the fortress that evening, but in his chamber in the Beauchamp Tower near the Church of St Peter ad Vincula.
The two hospitaller knights were more courteous but equally adamant.
They had chambers in Martin Tower and spent most of the evening drinking or trying their hand at chess.
‘I assure you, Sir John,’ Mowbray rasped, ‘we can hardly find our way around the Tower in the full light of day, never mind on a freezing winter's night.’
‘But you know what this means, don't you?’
Athelstan accused, picking up the piece of yellow parchment.
‘By heaven, we do not!’
Fitzormonde replied.
‘Sir,’ Athelstan retorted, ‘I think you do, as you also know about the seed cake.’
The two hospitallers shook their heads.
‘Oh, come,’ Athelstan continued.
‘Let's not be coy.
You are monks and knights.
Your Order fights for the cross in Outremer.
My Order, too, has brothers who serve there.
They bring back tales which they relate over the dinner table at Blackfriars.’
‘What tales?’
Mowbray challenged.
‘How in the mountains of Palestine live a secret sect of infidels called the Assassins, ruled by a chieftain called the Old Man of the Mountain.
This coven deals in secret  assassination.
They are fed on drugs and despatched by their master with golden daggers to kill whomever he has marked down for destruction.’
Cranston watched the two knights tense and, for the first time, show a flicker of nervousness, Fitzormonde particularly.
‘Now these assassins,’ Athelstan continued, ‘always give their victim fair warning.
They do not leave a picture but a flat seed cake as a sign that violent death will soon be upon them.’
Athelstan stood up and stretched to ease the cramp in his thighs and legs.
‘I ask myself, why is this secret sect which flourishes in the Middle Sea, carrying out murder in the cold and sombre chambers of the Tower of London?’
‘Are you accusing us?’
Mowbray shouted.
‘If so, do it!’
‘I am not accusing anyone, just remarking on a strange coincidence.’
‘Rastani is from Palestine!’
Mowbray cried.
‘Sir Ralph did distance himself from his so-called faithful servant.’
‘Why do you say ‘so-called’?’
Cranston quickly asked.
‘Because I do not believe Rastani's conversion to our faith was genuine.
Such men bear grudges, they wait years to settle accounts.’
‘But Rastani was absent from the Tower?’
‘He could have slipped back.’
‘No, no, no!’
Athelstan sat down and shook his head.
‘Sir Ralph's death is more complex than that.
You served with him?’
‘Yes, we did.
The Caliph of Cairo hired us to crush revolts in the city of Alexandria.’
‘And after that?’
‘Sir Ralph came home.
We stayed a while longer before returning to our house in Clerkenwell.’
‘Have you ever returned across the seas?’
Cranston asked.
Mowbray shook his head.
‘No, Fitzormonde is slightly wrong.
When we served with Sir Ralph we were not hospitallers.
We joined after we left him.
The Order sent us back to England.
I am at Clerkenwell, Fitzormonde in our house at Rievaulx near York.’
Athelstan stared at the closed, set faces of both knights.
‘Forgive me,’ Athelstan said quietly, ‘I do not wish to call you liars but there is a great mystery here and you are party to it.’
He leaned over and suddenly pulled back Mowbray's cloak.
‘You wear chained mail?
And you, too, Sir Brian.
Why?
Do you also fear the assassin's dagger?
How well do you sleep at night?
What secrets did you share with Sir Ralph?’
‘By the Rood!’
Sir Brian suddenly stood up.
‘I have heard enough.
We have told you what we can.
Leave it at that!’
Both hospitallers swept out of the room.
Cranston slumped on the stool and stretched out his legs.
‘A pretty mess, eh, Friar?
What have we here?
Treason by persons unknown or foul midnight murder?’
‘I don't know.’
Athelstan replaced the stopper in the ink horn as he rearranged his writing materials.
‘But we do have the buckle we found on the icy moat, and I know who it belongs to.’
‘By the sod!
’ Cranston cried.
‘For a monk you are sharp-eyed, Athelstan.’
‘For a friar I am very quick, My Lord Coroner, and so would you be if you drank less claret!’
‘I drink to drown my sorrows.’
Cranston looked away.
What would Maude be doing now? he fretted.
What was she hiding?
Why wouldn't she just tell him instead of giving those long, mournful glances?
Cranston glared at the small statue in a niche, the Virgin and Child; secretly, the  coroner hated Christmas.
Yuletide always brought back the memories of little Matthew, taken by the plague, but not before the mite had shown Sir John the wonder with which every child greeted Christmas.
Did Maude also have her memories?
‘Sir John!’
Cranston blinked to hide his tears and grinned over at Athelstan.
‘I have a need of refreshment, monk!’
Athelstan saw the pain in his friend's face and looked away.
‘In a while, Sir John.
First, let us see Sir Fulke.
I wish to search Sir Ralph's bed chamber here in the White Tower.’
Cranston nodded and lumbered off whilst Athelstan packed his writing tray away.
The friar sat for a while admiring the beauty of St John's Chapel, comparing it to the grimness of St Erconwald's.
He thought of Benedicta.
How lovely she had looked at the early morning Mass.
He wondered if Huddle would use her in the painting of the Visitation he was planning for one of the aisles.
What, Athelstan wondered, would she do at Christmas?
She had mentioned a brother in Colchester.
Perhaps she might stay in Southwark and agree to go for a walk, or at least sit and share a goblet of wine with him and gossip about the past.
Christmas could be so lonely…
Athelstan's eye caught a crucifix and he suddenly remembered the horrors being perpetrated in the cemetery at St Erconwald's.
He must get to the bottom of that matter.
Who could it be, and why?
‘Brother Athelstan!
Brother Athelstan!’
Cranston stood, leering down at him.
‘You drink too much claret, priest,’ the coroner mockingly announced.
‘Come, we must visit the late constable's chamber.
Colebrooke and Sir Fulke are on their way.’
Sir Ralph's quarters were up a polished wooden staircase in one of the turrets of the White Tower a pleasant, sweet-smelling chamber in sharp contrast to the grim cell over in the North Bastion.
Two small bay windows with cushioned seats below and an oriel window, glazed with stained glass depicting the Agnus Dei, provided light.
The walls were of plaster, painted soft green and decorated with silver and gold lozenges.
A thick tapestry hung just above the small canopied fireplace, the floor had been polished smooth, and the great bed was covered by a gold-tasselled counterpane.
At the foot of the four-poster, with its lid thrown back, stood Sir Ralph's huge personal coffer.
‘It's luxurious,’ Cranston whispered.
‘What terrified Sir Ralph so much he had to move from here to that bleak prison cell?’
Cranston and Athelstan squatted down before the coffer and began to go through Sir Ralph's personal papers, but they found nothing about his years in Outremer.
Every document concerned his office as constable or his service in the retinue of John of Gaunt.
They must have spent an hour sifting through letters, indentures and memoranda.
Only a Book of Hours caught Athelstan's attention.
Each page was decorated with delicate filigree-like scrollwork in a range of dazzling colours: on one page lightly drawn angel figures, on another a priest sprinkling a shrouded corpse with holy water as he committed it to the grave.
The Nativity, with Mary and Joseph bowing over a sleeping child; Christ's walk through Limbo, driving away black-faced demons with the power of his golden eye.
Athelstan became engrossed, fascinated by its beauty.
He looked inside the cover and noticed how Sir Ralph had scrawled prayer after prayer to St Julian.
‘St Julian, pray for me!
St Julian, avert God's anger!
St Julian, intercede for me with  Christ's mother!’
Each of the blank pages at the back of the book was filled with similar phrases.
Athelstan read them all, ignoring Cranston's mutterings and the angry boot-tapping of Sir Fulke.
Finally Athelstan closed the coffer and stood up.
‘You are finished, friar?’ the kinsman snapped.
Athelstan looked sharply at him: Sir Fulke was apparently a man who hid behind a veil of bonhomie and good humour but now he looked angry, suspicious, and resentful of their intrusion.
‘Am I finished?’
Athelstan echoed.
‘Yes and no, Sir Fulke.’
The knight blew out his cheeks.
‘The day is passing, friar,’ he observed tartly, glaring out of the window.
‘I am a busy man with matters to attend to.
What more do you want?’
‘You wear boots, Sir Fulke?’
‘Yes, I wear boots!’ came the mimicking reply.
‘And there are buckles on your boots?’
The colour drained from Sir Fulke's face.
‘Yes,’ he mumbled.
‘Well,’ Athelstan pulled from his wallet the buckle he had found on the frozen moat, ‘I believe this is yours.
We found it on the ice outside the North Bastion tower, yet you said you were in the city all night.’
Sir Ralph's kinsman paled, the arrogance draining from his face.
‘I lost the buckle yesterday.’
‘Were you on the ice?’
Sir Fulke suddenly smiled.
‘Yes, I was.
I went there early this morning.
You are not the only one, Brother, to think the assassins scaled the tower at dead of night to murder Sir Ralph.’
Athelstan tossed the buckle at him and Sir Fulke caught it clumsily.
‘Then, Sir John, we are finished here.
Perhaps some refreshment?’
They met Colebrooke in the passageway outside, thanked him for his attentions and went down the outside steps into the Tower bailey.
Athelstan gauged it to be about two o'clock in the afternoon and this was confirmed by a servant who bumped into them as they passed the great hall.
They were on the point of going under the Archway of Wakefield when Athelstan caught sight of the great brown bear chained to the wall in the corner near Bell Tower.
‘I have never seen a bear so huge, Sir John!’ he exclaimed.
Cranston clapped him on the shoulder.
‘Then, my lad, it's time you did!’
The friar was fascinated by Ursus.
The bear scarcely repaid the compliment but sat on his hindquarters, hungrily stuffing his great muzzle from a pile of scraps thrown around him.
Cranston clapped his hands and the beast raised his huge, dark head.
One paw came up and Athelstan stood, riveted by the great, slavering jaws, the teeth — long, white and pointed like a row of daggers — and the insane ferocity blazing in those red-brown eyes.
The bear lurched slightly towards them, growling softly in his throat.
Cranston grabbed Athelstan's arm and pulled him back.
The animal, alarmed by such rapid movement, now sprang to his full height, his great unsheathed paws beating the air as he strained at the massive steel collar around his neck.
Both the coroner and his companion saw the chain fastened to the wall strain at its clasps.
‘That chain,’ Athelstan murmured, ‘is not as secure as it should be.’
‘Goodbye, Ursus,’ Cranston whispered.
‘Let's go, Athelstan.
Very softly!’
They collected their horses and made their way out of the Tower into Petty Wales.
A few stalls stood uncovered and some brave souls made their way through the ankle-deep, mucky slush.
Two beggar children, arms and legs as thin as sticks, stood beside a brazier singing a carol.
Cranston tossed them a penny, and turned to watch as a woman condemned as a scold was led by a beadle up to the stocks in Tower Street, a steel brank fastened tightly around her head.
Down the dirt-filled alleyways business was thriving for the red-wigged whores and their constant stream of clients from the Tower garrison.
Cranston asked directions from a one-eyed beggarman and came back beaming from ear to ear.
‘I have found it!’ he announced.
‘The Golden Mitre tavern!
You know, the one Sir Ralph and the hospitallers went to every year for their banquet.’
The tavern was just near the Custom House on the corner of Thames Street, a grand, spacious affair with a green-leaved ale-stake pushed under the eaves from which hung a huge, gaudily painted sign.
A red-nosed ostler took their horses.
Inside, the tap room was airy and warmed by a fire.
The rushes on the floor were clean and sprinkled with rosemary and thyme.
The walls were lime-washed to keep off insects, and the hams which hung from the blackened beams gave off a sweet crisp smell which made Cranston smack his lips.
They hired a table between the fire and the great polished wine butts.
The landlord, a small, red-faced, balding fellow with a surprisingly clean apron draped across his expansive front, took one look at Sir John and brought across a deep bowl brimming with blood red claret.
‘Sir John!’ he exclaimed.
‘You remember me?’
Cranston seized the bowl by its two silver handles and half drained it at a gulp.
‘Yes, I do,’ he replied, smacking his lips and glaring over the rim.
‘You are Miles Talbot who once worked as an ale-conner in the taverns round St Paul's.’
Cranston put down the bowl and shook the landlord's hand.
‘Let me introduce an honest man, Brother Athelstan.
Talbot always knew when a blackjack of ale had been watered down.
Well, well, well!’
Cranston unclasped his cloak and basked in the sweet odours and warmth of the tavern.
‘What can you serve us, Master Talbot?
And don't give me fish.
We know the river is frozen and the roads blocked, so anything from the water must be weeks old!’
The landlord grinned, listed the contents of his larder, and within the half-hour served a couple of pullets stuffed with herbs and covered with a piquant sauce of sweet butter and wild berries, a skillet pasty, an apple tansy, and a prodigious marrow pudding.
Athelstan sat in complete stupefaction, drinking his beer, as Cranston cleared every platter, washing it all down with another bowl of claret.
At last Cranston belched, stretched, and beamed round the tavern, snapping his fingers to call Talbot over.
‘Master Miles, a favour!’
‘Anything you wish, Sir John.’
‘Your house is frequented, or rather was frequented, by the late Constable of the Tower, Sir Ralph Whitton?’
Talbot's face became guarded.
‘Now and again,’ he mumbled.
‘He used to meet here every Yuletide — he, two hospitallers, and others.’
‘Oh, come, Miles.
I'm not your enemy, you can trust me.
What did they talk about?’
Talbot tapped the table with his stubby fingers.
‘They sat here like you do, Sir John, well away from the rest.
When I or any of the servants came near, they always fell silent.’
‘And their demeanour?
Were they sad or happy?’
‘Sometimes they would laugh but they were generally very secretive.
Often the two hospitallers would be locked in argument with Sir Ralph, and he would become quite hostile and snap back at them.’
‘Anything else?’
Talbot shook his head and turned away.
Cranston made a face at Athelstan and shrugged.
Suddenly the taverner came back to the table.
‘One thing,’ he announced.
‘Only one strange thing: about three years ago, around Christmas, a stranger came here.’
‘What did he look like?’
‘Oh, I can't remember his appearance but there was something about him.
He was cowled and hooded, but he spoke like a soldier.
He wanted to know if Sir Ralph drank here.
I told him I knew nothing.
He went on his way and I never saw him again.’
Talbot smiled apologetically.
‘Sir John, on my oath, that's all I know.’
The coroner sat with lips pursed, staring down at the empty platters and dishes as if wishing the food he had devoured would magically reappear.
Athelstan studied him carefully, rather concerned, for by now Sir John would usually have been shouting for more claret or sack.
‘My Lord Coroner?’
‘Yes, Brother Athelstan.’
‘We must formulate some conclusions about Sir Ralph's death.’
Cranston blew noisily through his lips.
‘What can we say?’
‘First, you will agree that Sir Ralph was not murdered because he was Constable of the Tower.
I mean, by peasant  knaves plotting treason and rebellion?’
‘I agree, Brother, but the assassin might have come from outside.
He could have been a professional.
There are plenty of ex-soldiers for hire in the city who would cut their mothers’ throats if the price was right.’
Athelstan skimmed the rim of the wine goblet with his finger.
‘I would like to believe that, Sir John, but it strikes me as false.’
He shrugged.
‘Yet, for the sake of argument, we will accept that the assassin crossed the frozen moat, climbed the North Bastion, undid the wooden shutters and quietly slashed Sir Ralph's throat.’
‘It can and has been done, my good priest.’
‘Of course,’ Athelstan continued, ‘the assassin may have been someone in the Tower who knew where Sir Ralph lay, and seized the opportunity of the moat freezing over to gain access to the footholds on the North Bastion.
Accordingly either the murderer did this himself or paid someone else to do it.’
Cranston took a deep gulp from the wine bowl.
‘Let us put the two together,’ he said, cracking his knuckles softly.
‘Let us say, for the sake of argument, that the plotter and the assassin are one and the same person.
Virtually everyone we questioned, including Mistress Philippa, who may be plump but is very light on her feet, young and agile, could have climbed that tower.’
‘Yet, in the main, they all have stories to explain their whereabouts.’
Cranston nodded.
‘So they have.
And it would be the devil's own job to prove any of them a liar.
Moreover, have you noticed how each, apart from the chaplain, has someone to confirm their tale?
Which means,’ Cranston concluded, ‘we could be hunting two murderers not one; the two hospitallers, Sir Fulke and Rastani, Philippa and her young swain, Colebrooke and one of the guards.’
Athelstan stared idly up at one of the hams turning on its skewer from one of the rafters.
‘In reality, we know nothing,’ the friar concluded.
‘We have no idea who the murderer is or how he or she gained access to Sir Ralph, though we did find Sir Fulke's buckle.’
‘And yet he claims he walked on the frozen moat this morning before our arrival.’
‘I believe him,’ Athelstan answered.
‘But remember how he said he lost the buckle the previous day.’
‘What are you saying, friar?’
‘Either he lost it as he crept across the moat to kill Sir Ralph or else someone put it there.
I believe the latter.
Sir Fulke's honesty in admitting he walked on the frozen moat saved him from suspicion.
If he had denied it, and we later proved he had been on the moat, then it would have been a different matter.’
‘How do we know he's honest?’
Cranston barked.
‘Did you notice the postern gate we used to gain access to the moat?
Its hinges were rusty.
Before we did, no one had used that door for years.
Sir Fulke could be lying.’
‘Or he could have used another postern gate.’
‘An interesting thought, Brother, but let's look at motives.’
Athelstan spread his hands.
‘There are as many motives as there are people in the Tower, Sir John.
Was Sir Fulke greedy?
Was the chaplain angry at being called a thief?
Did Colebrooke want Sir Ralph's post?
Did Philippa and her lover see Sir Ralph as an obstacle to their marriage or to Mistress Philippa's inheritance?’
‘Which brings us,’ Cranston concluded, ‘to the two hospitallers.
Now we know they are not telling the truth.
Somehow  or other that piece of parchment and the seed cake lie at the very heart of the murder and they must know something about both.
Sir Ralph's death note bore the impression of a three-masted ship, the type often used in the Middle Sea, whilst the seed cake is the mark of the Assassins.
Ergo, Sir Ralph's death must be linked to some mystery in his past, something connected with his days as a warrior in Outremer.’
Athelstan put his blackjack down on the table.
He opened and shut his mouth.
‘What's the matter, friar?’
‘There's only one conclusion we can reach, Master Coroner — Sir Ralph might not be the  first person to die in the Tower before Yuletide comes.’
5
They stayed in the tavern a little longer.
Athelstan expected Cranston to mount his horse and ride back to Cheapside but the coroner shook his head.
‘I want to go back to your damned graveyard,’ he snorted.
‘You need a keen brain to plumb the mysteries there.’
‘But Lady Maude will be waiting.’
‘Let her!’
‘Sir John, tell me, is there anything wrong?’
Cranston scowled and looked away.
‘Is it Matthew?’
Athelstan asked gently.
‘Is it the anniversary of his death?’
Cranston stood up and linked his arm through Athelstan's as they went out to stand at the door whilst the ostler saddled their horses.
‘Tell me, Brother, when you ran away from your order as a novice and took your younger brother to the wars in France, were you happy?’
Athelstan felt his own heart lurch.
‘Of course.’
He smiled thinly.
‘I was young then.
The blood boiled in my veins for some great adventure.’
‘And when you found your brother dead, cold as ice in that battlefield, and trailed back to England to confess your deeds to your parents, what then?’
Athelstan looked across the darkening yard.
‘In the gospels, Sir John, Christ says that at the end of the world the very heavens will rock and the planets fall to earth in a  fiery blaze.’
Athelstan closed his eyes.
He sensed Francis's ghost very close to him now.
‘When I found my brother dead,’ he continued, ‘my heaven fell to earth.’
He shrugged.
‘I suppose it was the end of my world.’
‘And what did you think of life then?’
Athelstan rubbed his mouth with his thumb and gazed directly at Cranston's sorrowful face.
‘I felt betrayed by it,’ he whispered.
Cranston tapped him gently on the shoulder.
‘Aye, Brother, always remember the carmined kiss of the traitor is ever the sweetest.
You remember that, as I shall.’
Athelstan gazed speechlessly back.
He had never seen Cranston like this before.
By now the coroner should have been singing some lewd song at the top of his voice, bellowing abuse at the landlord, or urging Athelstan to come back to his house in Cheapside.
They mounted their horses and made their way quietly up snow-packed Billingsgate, turning left into the approaches to London Bridge.
A large crowd milled there despite the cold wind which lashed face and hand.
Under a sky shrouded by deep snow clouds, some boys threw snowballs at each other, shrieking with laughter as they hit their target.
A legless beggar pulled himself along through the slush on wooden slats.
A group of tattered watermen muttered abuse at the frozen river and cursed the great frost which had taken their livelihood from them.
Others, hooded and cowled, pushed forward into the city or joined Athelstan and Cranston in crossing the narrow frozen bridge to Southwark.
The coroner suddenly reined in his horse, staring back at a group of dark figures who had just slipped by.
Were they a group, he wondered, or just individuals travelling together for comfort and security?
He was sure he had glimpsed Lady Maude amongst them, her pale face peering out from  beneath her hood.
But what would she have been doing in Southwark?
Apart from Athelstan she knew no one there, and Southwark was a dangerous place to visit on a dark winter's day.
‘Sir John, is all well?’
Cranston stared once more at the group receding into the darkness.
Should he go back?
But then a great metal-rimmed cart came crashing by, the people behind Cranston began to mutter and moan, so the coroner nodded at his companion that they should continue on their way.
They crossed the bridge, passing the Priory of St Mary Overy at the far end, and took the main highway into Southwark.
The two men rode down the narrow alleyways where the great four-storey houses were interspaced with the ramshackle cottages and lean-tos of the workmen and artisans.
The coroner caught the acrid tang of dog urine.
‘The snow doesn't hide the stench!’ he muttered, twitching his nose.
Athelstan agreed, pulling the cowl of his hood closer against the sight of rotting refuse, discarded food and human excrement tossed out in night pots, mixed with the sweepings from the houses as the citizens prepared for a festive season.
Southwark, of course, never rested.
The artisans and cottagers continually plied their trades: chandlers making tallow from pig fat; skinners, cheesemongers, capmakers, blacksmiths, and at night, when the stalls came down, the raw-boned villains of the underworld who scrounged for easy pickings amongst the brothels and stewsides of the Thames.
No one, however, approached Cranston or Athelstan.
The friar was well respected whilst Cranston was more feared than the Chief Justice himself.
They found St Erconwald's in darkness.
Athelstan was pleased that Watkin had doused the lights.
He was about to  lead Sir John through the wicket gate to the priest's house when a dark shape jumped from the shadows and grabbed Philomel by the bridle.
Athelstan stared down at the long, white face under its tarry black hood.
‘Ranulf, for God's sake, what's the matter?’
‘Father, I have been waiting for you all afternoon.’
‘Tell him to bugger off, Athelstan!
I'm cold!’
‘Never mind Sir John.’
Athelstan replied soothingly.
‘What do you want, Ranulf?’
The rat-catcher licked bloodless lips.
‘I have an idea, Father.
You know how the great guilds across the river have their own churches?
St Mary Le Bow for the mercers, St Paul's for the parchment-makers?’
‘Yes.
So?’
The rat-catcher looked up pleadingly.
‘Go on, Ranulf, what do you want?’
‘Well, Father, I and the other rat-catchers wondered whether St Erconwald's could be the church for our guild fraternity?’
Athelstan hid a smile, glanced at Cranston's glowering face and bunched the reins in his hands.
‘A guild of rat-catchers, Ranulf?
With St Erconwald's as your chancery church and I your chaplain?’
‘Yes, Father.’
Athelstan dismounted.
‘Of course.’
‘We would pay our tithes.’
‘In what?’
Cranston bellowed.
‘A tenth of the rats you catch!’
Ranulf flashed the coroner a dagger glance but Cranston was already rocking to and fro in the saddle, laughing uproariously at his own joke.
‘I think it an excellent idea,’ Athelstan murmured.
‘And we shall talk about it again.
You have my agreement in  principle, Ranulf, but for the moment Sir John and I are both busily engaged on other matters.
If you could stable our horses, give them some hay?’
The rat-catcher nodded vigorously and, gathering the reins of Sir John's horse, trotted into the darkness.
Philomel followed, moving a little faster as he sensed feeding-time was very close.
Athelstan led Cranston round the church, stopped, and told the coroner to wait until he fetched a sconce torch.
He hurried back to the priest's house, plucked one from the wall, lit it with a tinder and ran back before Cranston's litany of curses became too audible.
They crossed into the cemetery.
Even in summer time it was a sombre place.
Now, under a carpet of white snow, the branches of the yew trees spread like huge white claws over the forlorn mounds of earth, crude crosses and decaying headstones.
Athelstan felt a deep sense of isolation.
An eerie stillness hung like a cloud and even the breeze seemed softer.
The trees were motionless.
No night bird sounded.
In places, the shadows seemed oppressively dark, sinister hiding-places where some demon or evil sprite might lurk.
Athelstan held up his torch and Cranston looked around this most benighted of God's acres.
‘By the sod, Athelstan!’ he whispered.
‘Who would come here in the dead of night, never mind pluck corpses from their final resting place?
Where are the graves?’
Athelstan showed him the forlorn, shallow holes in the ground, the mud piled high on either side as if some demented creature had clawed the corpses out.
Cranston knelt down next to them and whistled softly through his teeth.
He looked up, fat face distorted by the torchlight.
‘Brother, you said that only the corpses of beggars and strangers have been stolen?’
‘Yes, Sir John.’
‘And how were they buried?’
‘The corpse, wrapped in canvas, is placed on a piece of wickerwork in the parish coffin.
During the funeral ceremony this is covered by a purple canopy and removed when the body is lowered into the soil.’
‘And you found no trace of the grave robbers?’
‘None whatsoever.’
Cranston stood up, wiping the slushy mud from his hands.
‘We have three possibilities, Brother.
First, it could be a macabre joke.
Some of our idle rich young fops think it funny to place such a corpse in the bed of a friend, but there's no rumour of such an evil prank recently.
Secondly, it could be animals, either four-footed or human.
Oh, yes,’ he murmured at Athelstan's shocked expression.
‘When I served in France I witnessed such abominations outside Poitou.
However,’ he stamped his feet and looked up at the darkened mass of the church, ‘no one, not even in Southwark, can be that degenerate.
Finally, there are Satanists, the Astrasoi, those born under an evil star.’
He shrugged.
‘You know more about such people than I do, Brother.
The corpse may be used as an altar or the blood drained to raise a demon or they may need one of the limbs.
You have heard of the hand of glory?’
Athelstan shook his head.
‘The hand of the corpse is hacked off; the name of the person whom the witch or warlock wishes to hurt is placed between its fingers and then it's buried at the foot of a gibbet on the first stroke of midnight.’
Athelstan rubbed his face.
‘But how can I stop such desecration, Sir John?
The ward bailiffs and beadles are not interested.
No citizen will guard our cemetery.’
‘I will see what I can do,’ Cranston murmured.
He turned quickly.
‘There's someone here.’
He pointed to two dark  shapes over near the charnel house at the far side of the cemetery.
‘Look there!’
He strode across the snow-covered grass like a charging bullock, Athelstan hurrying behind him.
‘Stop!’
Sir John bellowed.
‘In the King's name, stop!’
Two cloaked figures turned and slowly walked towards them.
At the sound of the clatter of wooden sticks and the soft tinkle of a bell, Cranston hurriedly stepped back.
‘Lepers!’ he whispered, and grabbing Athelstan's torch, held it up before him.
‘By the sod!’
Cranston breathed, and stared pityingly at the white-hooded faces.
He looked round at Athelstan.
‘You let them stay here?’
He nodded.
‘During the day.
At night it is easier for them to wander unmolested.’
‘Have they seen anything?’
Athelstan shook his head.
‘They are mutes but I doubt if they would become involved.
It would be a brave man, Sir John, never mind a healthy one, who would confront grave robbers.’
‘You are sure they are lepers?’
Cranston whispered.
Athelstan grinned in the darkness.
‘They have letters from the bishops.
Look at their wrists and hands.
However, if you wish to examine them…?’
Cranston cursed and tossed a coin at one of the creatures then strode back to the house, bellowing that he had seen enough.
Ranulf the rat-catcher had apparently disappeared, as indeed did any of Athelstan's parishioners when the coroner appeared.
‘You will stay for a bowl of soup, Sir John?
I have some fine claret.’
Cranston, huffing and puffing, checked the saddle girths of his horse.
‘I would like to, Brother,’ he replied over his shoulder, ‘but I must return.’
Cranston did not wish Athelstan to probe his anxieties about the Lady Maude.
‘I need to reflect upon what we saw at the Tower.’
He pointed to the graveyard.
‘I'll see what I can do to help you there.’
He swung himself on to his horse, and with an airy wave clattered into the darkness.
Athelstan sighed and went round to unlock the church.
It was cold inside but the friar was pleased that it had lost its musty smell.
He revelled in the fragrance of the green boughs so lovingly placed along the nave and sanctuary steps.
He remembered the chapel of St John and wondered what lies he had been told there.
Athelstan was sure the murderer was in the Tower and equally certain that some evil deed from the past had finally caught up with Sir Ralph.
He took a tinder from his pouch, lit two sconce torches in the nave and collected his battered prayer book from the sacristy.
He knelt on the sanctuary steps and began the Divine Office.
He reached the line in the psalm ‘My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?’ and stopped.
He stared into the flickering light of the candle, leaning back on his heels.
Had God forsaken him?
Why did things such as the desecration of the cemetery happen, Sir Ralph's murder or Cranston's sadness?
Oh, Athelstan knew about the problem of evil but sometimes he wondered, especially when he stared into the darkness, was there really anyone listening to him?
What if there was not?
What if Christ had not risen from the dead, and religion was mere hocus-pocus?
Painfully, Athelstan drew back from the precipice of doubt and depression.
He finished his prayers, made the sign of the cross, and crouched with his back against the chancel screen.
He took deep breaths, trying to calm his  mind and soul so he could concentrate on the recent events in the Tower.
‘What happens,’ he asked the darkness, ‘if Sir Ralph has been killed by secret peasant leaders?
And if the revolt comes…?’
He dozed for an hour until a warm, furry body slid under his hand, ‘Good evening, Bonaventure!’ he whispered.
‘A cold day for a gentleman of leisure.’
He sat up and stroked the cat gently, scratching between the backs of its ears, making Bonaventure purr with pleasure.
‘So, you have been visiting all your ladies in the neighbourhood?’
Athelstan knew about Bonaventure's sexual prowess.
Sometimes the cat even brought his ‘ladies’ back to the church steps to sing their own eerie vespers to a cold silver moon.
‘What will happen, Bonaventure, when the rebellion comes?
Will we side with Pike the ditcher and the other dispossessed?’
Bonaventure grinned in a fine display of pink gums and sharp ivory teeth.
Pike the ditcher!
Strange, Athelstan thought, but there it was.
He had no proof but he was certain the ditcher was a member of the Great Community and carried secret messages to its leaders.
Athelstan tensed as the church door opened.
‘Brother Athelstan?
Brother Athelstan?’
The friar smiled.
Benedicta.
Perhaps she would share his supper?
They could exchange gossip about the parish; anything to distract his mind.
He put Bonaventure down, stood, and broadened his smile, to hide his disappointment.
Beside Benedicta stood a tall man, his features quite clear in the torchlight.
His face was burnt dark by the sun, his raven-black hair tied in a knot at the back of his head.
He was dressed in a long blue robe which reached down to snow-flecked boots.
Athelstan went along the nave to meet  him.
The man was strikingly good-looking, he thought, with the sharp features of a hunting peregrine, vivid cherry-brown eyes, a hooked nose and neatly clipped moustache and beard.
Athelstan saw the pearl pendant which hung on a gold chain from one ear lobe.
‘This is Doctor Vincentius,’ Benedicta exclaimed.
Athelstan clasped a strong, brown hand.
‘Good evening, sir.
I have heard of you.’
And who hadn't?
Athelstan wondered.
The physician lived in Duckets Lane off Windmill Street, on the other side of the Tabard Inn.
He had recently bought a huge house there with a garden which bordered on the river, directly opposite Botolph's Wharf.
Vincentius had won himself a name as a reputable physician.
His fees were petty and he didn't bleed his patients with leeches or use strange zodiac charts and stupid incantations.
Instead he preferred to emphasise cleanliness, the importance of a sensible diet, the efficacy of boiled water, and the need to keep wounds clean.
Cecily the courtesan had even intimated that he used an ointment which was most effective in curing certain sores on the most delicate parts of the body.
Athelstan studied the extraordinarily handsome face and the beaming smile on Benedicta's.
The friar felt a twinge of jealousy.
‘I have heard of you, Father,’ the doctor smiled.
Athelstan shrugged.
‘I am a priest, a friar, one among thousands.’
The doctor spread his hands and the rings on his fingers sparkled.
‘But there again, it is written on many tombstones…
‘I was a healthy man until I met a physician’.’
Athelstan laughed, immediately liking the man.
‘I don't see you in church,’ he teased.
‘Perhaps one day, Father.’
‘Doctor Vincentius so wanted to meet you.’
Benedicta spoke as coyly as a young girl.
‘I wonder, Father, if you could join us for supper?’
Athelstan felt like refusing, but that would have been churlish.
He clapped his hands briskly.
‘I would love to.’
He doused the lights in the church and locked the door, leaving Bonaventure to hunt in the darkness.
He went across to the house whilst Benedicta and her strange visitor waited on the church steps.
Philomel was still munching noisily on his oats.
Athelstan patted him gently, took his cloak from the house and rejoined Benedicta and Vincentius.
They walked through the silent, icy streets into Flete Lane, near Holyrood Walk, where the widow lived.
This was the first time Athelstan had been to Benedicta's house, a two-storied building which stood alone, an alleyway on either side and a garden beyond.
On the ground floor was a huge kitchen, parlour and store room.
The kitchen had no rushes on the floor but the flagstones were scrubbed and wiped clean.
Two box-chairs were pushed near the roaring log fire.
Above the hearth ran a broad oaken shelf containing silver and pewter cups which shimmered by the light of two multi-branched candelabra; woollen rugs of dark murrey hung against the white-washed walls.
A warm, homely place, Athelstan thought.
Indeed, very much as he had imagined it.
They both helped Benedicta prepare and serve the meal.
First jussell, composed of eggs and spiced bread.
Then succulent hare cooked in wine, a jelly moulded in the form of a castle, and a jug of chilled white wine and claret which Cranston would have downed in a trice.
Vincentius quietly dominated the conversation.
Athelstan found his courtly manners and soft, well-modulated voice fascinating.
Perhaps Vincentius realised he talked too much and, changing the conversation, asked about the friar's  day.
Athelstan described his journey to the Tower and Sir Ralph Whitton's death.
‘He will not be missed,’ Vincentius observed.
‘A dour, war-like man.’
‘You met him?’
The physician smiled.
‘I know of him, though it's the Tower I find more interesting.
I went there yesterday.
A wonderful testimony to the subtlety of the human mind, especially when it comes to engines and places of war.’
Vincentius sipped from his goblet.
‘You say Sir Ralph's throat was slashed?’
‘Yes,’ Athelstan replied.
‘Why?’
‘How was the body when it was found?’
‘What do you mean?’
‘Was it cold?
Was the blood congealed?’
‘Yes, it was,’ Athelstan replied, though he remembered he had not asked that question himself at the time.
‘Where are you from, Doctor?’ he deftly turned the conversation.
The physician carefully put his wine cup back on the table.
‘I was born in Greece, of Frankish parents.
They later returned to England.
I studied at Cambridge, then Santiago and Salerno.’
He grinned.
‘At Salerno,’ he continued, ‘I spent most of my time trying to forget what I had learnt at Cambridge.
The Arabs have a more thorough grasp of medicine than we.
They know more about the human body and have proper Greek translations of Galen's Art of Medicine and Hippocrates’ Book of Symptoms.’
‘What brought you back to Southwark?’
Benedicta asked.
The physician smiled as if relishing some private jest.
‘Why not?’ he joked.
‘Wealth?
I have enough.
And as you know, Brother, the poor need any help they can get.’
He leaned across the table and studied Athelstan's face carefully.
‘What are you going to recommend, Physician?’
Athelstan teased.
‘The eagle's remedy for bad eyesight?’
‘What's that?’
Benedicta asked.
‘Brother Athelstan jokes,’ Vincentius replied.
‘The charlatans say the eagle gets its keen eyesight by eating raw lettuce.
So they claim rubbing the eyes with the juice of the lettuce will clear up any eye infection.’
‘And will it?’
‘A bag of nonsense!’
Vincentius snapped.
‘Warm water and a clean cloth will do more!
No, Brother,’ he tapped Athelstan lightly on the fingers, ‘what you need is more sleep.
And if you have any lettuce, eat it.
It will do you good.’
Athelstan laughed.
‘If I can find it!
The frost has killed everything in my garden, and Ursula's pig scoffs the rest.’
Whilst Benedicta described Ursula and her malevolent sow, Athelstan felt tempted to talk to Vincentius about the desecration of the cemetery but concluded it was not a topic suitable for the table.
He looked across at the hour candle and saw it was growing late.
He rose and made his farewells, politely refusing Benedicta's invitation to stay longer.
He had enjoyed the meal but was glad to be gone, reminding himself that he was a priest and Benedicta was the mistress of her own life.
He left her house and trudged wearily through the snow.
The night was cold and black but when he stopped and looked up between the black overhanging gables of the houses, he was pleased to see the clouds beginning to break up.
He would have gone straight home but made a short diversion when he found Pike the ditcher drunk as a bishop on the corner of the trackway leading down to the church.
Athelstan helped his errant parishioner to his feet.
‘Good evening, Father.’
Athelstan flinched at the ale fumes which billowed towards him.
‘Pike!
Pike!’ he hissed.
‘You great fool.
You should be home in your bed with your wife.’
Pike staggered away from him, tapping his nose drunkenly.
‘I have been seeing people, Father.’
‘I know you have, Pike.’
Athelstan grasped him by the arm.
‘For God's sake, man, be careful!
Do you want to end your life swinging on the end of some gibbet as the crows come to peck your eyes out?’
‘We'll rule like kings,’ Pike slurred.
He struggled free of the friar's grip and danced a quick jig.
‘When Adam delved and Eve span,’ he chanted, ‘who was then the gentleman?’
Pike smiled drunkenly at Athelstan.
‘But you'll be safe, Father.
You, your cat, and your bloody stars!’
He laughed.
‘You're a jewel.
You charge no tithes.
I just wish you'd bloody well laugh sometimes!’
‘I'll bloody well laugh,’ Athelstan hissed, seizing the drunken man by the arm, ‘when you're sober!’
And he hustled the ditcher back to his angry wife waiting in their tenement in Crooked Lane.
Athelstan thankfully reached St Erconwald's, made sure everything was locked up and walked over to his house.
It was only when he was lying on his pallet bed trying to pray and not be distracted by Benedicta's fair face, that Athelstan suddenly remembered what Vincentius had said.
What had the good physician been doing at the Tower?
Moreover, Vincentius admitted he had been educated in the area around the Middle Sea where Sir Ralph and the others had also served.
Was there any connection?
Athelstan wondered.
He was still pondering on the problem when he drifted into a deep and dreamless sleep.
Cranston, too, was thinking about events in the Tower but was too anxious to concentrate on the problems they posed.
The coroner sat forlornly at the desk in his chamber, his little chancery or writing office as he called it, a place he loved, at the back of the house away from noisy Cheapside.
He stared around.
The floor had been specially tiled with small red and white lozenge-shaped stones and covered with woollen rugs.
The windows were glazed and tightly shuttered against piercing draughts.
Pine logs crackled and snapped in the small fireplace and warming dishes stood on stands at either end of the great writing desk.
Sir John loved to spend time here, concentrating on his great treatise on the governance of the city.
Yet tonight he could not relax; he was too distracted, ill-at-ease with the atmosphere in his own household.
Oh, he had found Maude a little happier, they had exchanged the usual pleasantries, but Cranston still sensed that she was hiding something.
He stirred as below stairs the maid tinkled a bell, the sign for dinner.
Sir John groaned as he eased his bulk up and sorrowfully waddled down to the aroma-filled kitchen.
Leif, the beggar, was crouched in the inglenook, stuffing his mouth full of richly sauced venison.
He grinned at Sir John, then stared in surprise as Cranston mournfully passed by.
Leif was astonished.
Usually Sir John would greet him with a stream of good-natured abuse.
The beggar shrugged and went back to his meal.
He was enjoying himself.
Lady Maude had given him a few pennies and tomorrow he planned to see his friend in Crabbe Street.
They'd dine in an eating-house and go to Moorfields where foaming bears, huge-tusked hogs and fat bulls were baited by bloody-mouthed mastiffs.
In the linen-panelled dining chamber, the table had been specially laid, covered by a white cloth of lawn with gold  embossed candlesticks placed at either end.
Cranston looked suspiciously at his wife.
She seemed too happy.
He noticed the colour high in her cheeks whilst her eyes danced with pleasure.
Sir John grew more mournful.
Had Lady Maude found someone else? he wondered.
A young swain more virile and lusty than he?
Oh, he knew such practices were common.
The bored wives of old men and burgesses often found happiness in the arms of some court dandy or noble fop.
Sir John eased himself into his great chair at the top of the table and gloomily reflected on the past.
Yes, his marriage had been an arranged one.
Maude Philpott, daughter of a cutler, solemnly betrothed to the young Cranston.
Young?
He had been fifteen years her senior when they met at the church door but he had been slimmer then, fleet as a greyhound, a veritable Hector on the battlefield and a Paris in the bedchamber.
Sir John looked soulfully at his wife who smiled back.
Should he raise the matter?
Sir John gulped.
He dare not.
Cranston was frightened of no one; he had the body of a bullock and the heart of a lion.
Yet, secretly, he was wary of his miniature, doll-like wife.
Oh, she never shouted or threw things at him.
Just the opposite.
She would sit and answer back, stripping away his pomposity as she would the layers of an onion, before going into a sulk which could last for days.
‘Sir John, all is well?’
‘Yes, My Lady,’ Cranston mumbled.
The maid served dinner: beef stew pie, the pastry crisp and golden.
The meat within was garnished with herbs and cooked in a rich onion sauce.
Cranston's mood receded, aided and abetted by two generous cups of claret.
‘You were at the Tower today, Sir John?’
‘Yes, and all the fault of Sir Ralph Whitton, the constable.
Last night he had a throat, tonight both throat and life have gone.’
Lady Maude nodded, remarking how she had heard that Sir Ralph was a hard, cruel man.
‘And you, My Lady?’
‘Oh, this morning I did the accounts, and later went to take the air.’
‘Where?’
‘In Cheapside.
Why?’
‘You didn't go to Southwark?’
‘By the Mass, Sir John, no!
Why do you ask?’
Cranston shook his head and looked away.
He had caught the tremor in her voice.
His heart lurched and he splashed his goblet full to the brim with dark red claret.
In the darkness of the Tower, the hospitaller, Gerard Mowbray, walked along the high parapet which stretched between Broad Arrow Tower and Salt Tower on the inner curtain wall.
The night wind whipped his grey cropped hair, bit at his ears and cheeks and clawed at the grey robe wrapped round his body.
Sir Gerard ignored the cold.
He always came here.
This was his favourite walk.
He would stand and stare into the darkness trying to see the old ruins of Caesar's time, but not tonight, the mist was too thick.
To the north he could glimpse the beacon light in the Tower of St Mary Grace's, and to the south the fires and torch flames from the Hospital of St Katherine.
Sir Gerard looked up at the sky.
The clouds were beginning to break, revealing a storm of stars across the heavens.
Strange, he thought.
In Outremer the stars seemed closer, the velvet darkness of the heavens so near you felt you could stand on tip-toe and pluck the lights from the sky.
Mowbray leaned against the crenellated wall.
Oh, they  had been happier times!
He remembered the hot burning sands outside Alexandria where he, Sir Brian, Sir Ralph, and the others had been a band of carefree knights only too happy to take the gold of the enemy.
Mowbray recalled the climax of their campaign.
There had been a revolt in Alexandria and the Caliph's army, Mowbray's group amongst them, had massed outside the city: the air thick with the beat of their kettledrums, the wind snapping at the huge green banners, and the silver crescents on the standards dazzling in the scorching sunlight.
The city had been besieged for months but at last a breach had been forced in one of the walls.
He and Sir Brian had gone in first to stand shoulder to shoulder, their comrades around them, a fighting circle of steel slowly edging into the city.
Behind them the massed troops of the Caliph, their battle cries rising and falling like a demoniac chorus.
The knights had forced their way through the gap and along the wall to the steps leading to the parapet above the main gate.
Sir Gerard's mind slipped eagerly back into the past.
He remembered the intense heat, the sunlight dancing off sword and dagger points, the roar of battle, the blood which pumped like a thousand fountains as men fell screaming from horrible wounds in head, body or thigh.
Slowly he and his companions had edged up the steps, hacking their way through flesh until they reached a point above the main gate.
Now who had it been?
Of course!
As always, Bartholomew.
He'd jumped down, engaging in combat with a huge Mameluke.
Bartholomew had moved with the grace of a dancer, his sword a silver hissing snake.
One false feint to the groin, then up and round in a semi-arc to slice the enemy between helmet and hauberk.
Ralph had followed.
He had been an honourable knight then.
The great bar to the gate was lifted and the Caliph's men  had poured into the city.
What a bloodletting!
No quarter was asked and none was given.
The narrow, hot streets dinned with the silver bray of trumpets and the shrieks of dying men and women.
At least the knights had not been party to the massacre; they had achieved their task and now looked for suitable reward.
They eventually found themselves in a huge square where a white marble fountain played in the centre.
Nearby stood the banker's empty house.
Oh, the treasure they had found there!
Adam had run knee-deep in silver ducats and jewelled goblets full of pearls!
Mowbray suddenly shook himself free from his memories.
He thought he'd heard a sound, there towards the end of the parapet at the top of the steps.
No, he concluded, it was only the wind.
He went back to his memories.
Strange, Mowbray pondered, that Adam had not come to see them this Christmas.
Perhaps he was too frightened.
Had the dead Sir Ralph and the now wealthy burgess Adam known something he did not?
What had happened three years ago to frighten the Constable so much?
‘We are all frightened,’ Mowbray whispered to himself.
This fear had changed them all.
That's what evil did to you, he thought, it corroded the will, rotted the soul, and fouled the chambers and passageways of the mind.
What had been done in Outremer so many years ago had been evil!
Bartholomew had been their leader.
Half the treasure was rightfully his, and he had trusted them — a terrible mistake.
Betrayal!
Treachery!
The words shrieked like tormented ghosts in the dark recesses of Mowbray's soul.
Ralph had planned it but they had all been party to his evil.
Mowbray stirred against the cold.
Oh, he had confessed his sins, walked barefoot to the shrine of St James at Compostela and both he and Fitzormonde had become hospitallers to make reparation.
He stared out into the darkness.
‘Oh, sweet Christ!’ he murmured.
‘Wasn't that enough?’
The hospitaller felt the black demons of Hell closing in around him.
What terrors did the pit hold for traitors?
To be basted with pitch in a dark pen full of brimstone where adders would suck at his eyes and snakes curl round his lying tongue!
What could he do to break free of such phantasms?
Tell Cranston?
No!
Perhaps Brother Athelstan?
Mowbray remembered the dark eyes and closed face of the Dominican monk.
Mowbray had met such men before; some of his commanders in the knights hospitaller had the same gift as Athelstan of sensing every thought.
The friar knew there was something wrong, something evil and rotten, behind Sir Ralph's death.
Mowbray jumped as a night bird shrieked beyond the Tower walls.
A dog howled in protest.
Was it a dog? he wondered.
Or one of Satan's scouts calling up the legions of the damned from the abyss of Hell?
A bell clanged.
Mowbray moaned in fear, caught now in his own fancies.
The bell boomed as though it came from the bowels of the earth.
He cursed and calmed himself.
The bell was the tocsin in the Tower!
Mowbray's hand fell to his sword hilt as he realised that great brass tongue only tolled when the Tower was under attack.
He gripped the hilt of his sword tightly.
Perhaps he had been wrong?
Perhaps Sir Ralph's death had been the work of rebels and now they were back?
He ran along the gravel-strewn parapet.
He wanted to fight.
He wanted to kill, give vent to the fury boiling within him.
Suddenly he stumbled.
His arms flailed out like the wings of a bird, black against the sky, then he tipped and fell, his mind still gripped by delirium.
He was a boy again, leaping from a rock into one of the sweet rivers of Yorkshire.
He was the brave young knight storming the parapet of Alexandria, crying out for  the rest to join him.
Then, darkness.
Mowbray's body crashed against the earth, his brains spattering as the sharp, icy cobbles crushed his skull.
His body twitched then lay still, even as the dying hand edged towards the wallet containing a yellow piece of parchment depicting a crudely etched ship with dark crosses drawn in each corner.
6
Athelstan stood outside his church and stared in pleasant disbelief at the blue-washed sky and the early morning sun as its rays danced and shimmered over the snow-covered roofs of his parish.
The friar took a deep breath and sighed.
He had slept well, woken early, said Office, celebrated Mass, broken fast and then swept both his house and Philomel's stable.
He had been to the cemetery.
The lepers had gone and none of the graves had been disturbed.
Athelstan felt pleased, even more so as the great frost had been broken by this sudden bright snap as if Christ himself wanted the weather to improve for his great feast day.
He looked over his shoulder and smiled at Cecily the courtesan as she swept the porch of the church.
She simpered back before looking, sloe-eyed, towards a dreamy-faced Huddle, now sketching in charcoal the outlines of one of his vigorous paintings on the wall of the nave.
‘Keep your mind on the task in hand, Cecily,’ Athelstan murmured.
He stretched, turning his face up to the sun.
‘Praise to thee, Lord,’ he muttered, ‘for Brother Day.
Praise to thee, Lord,’ he continued St Francis of Assisi's Canticle of the Sun, ‘for our sister, Mother Earth.’
Athelstan sniffed and wrinkled his nose.
‘Even though,’ he whispered, ‘in Southwark she smells of sour vegetables and putrid refuse!’
He suddenly remembered other beautiful mornings at his father's farm in Sussex and the sun seemed  to lose some of its brightness.
‘You are happy, Father?’
Athelstan grinned at Benedicta.
‘Yes, I am.
You left Mass early?’ he queried.
‘I had to, Father, have you forgotten?’
Athelstan remembered the date and winced.
No, he hadn't forgotten Simon the carpenter, one of his more errant parishioners, a florid-faced, thickset man with an evil temper and a long Welsh dagger.
Two weeks ago Simon had raped a girl whilst carousing in Old Fish Street then compounded his crime by brutally beating her.
He had been tried for his life at the Guildhall and tomorrow would hang.
Simon had neither family nor friends and three days ago the parish council had begged Athelstan and Benedicta to visit the unfortunate.
The friar had even made a vain plea to Cranston to have the sentence commuted but the coroner had sorrowfully shaken his head.
‘Brother,’ he had replied, ‘I can do very little, even if I wanted to.
The girl was only twelve and she'll never walk again.
The fellow has to die.’
Athelstan stared up at the sky.
‘God have mercy on Simon,’ he whispered.
‘And God help his poor victim!’
‘What was that, Father?’
‘Nothing, Benedicta, nothing.’
Athelstan turned to go back into his church just as a young pursuivant turned the corner of the alley, slipping and sliding on the ice as he bellowed the friar's name.
Athelstan groaned.
‘What is it, man?’
as if he didn't know already.
‘Sir John Cranston awaits you, Father, at the Golden Lamb tavern near the Guildhall.
Father, he says it is urgent.
You must go there now!’
Athelstan fished in his purse and flicked a penny at the young man.
‘Go tell Sir John to stay where he is and not to  drink too much.
I'll be there shortly!’
Athelstan took the keys of the church, tied by a piece of string to the cord round his waist, and pressed them into Benedicta's soft, warm hand.
‘Look after the church,’ he pleaded.
Her eyes rounded with mock wonderment.
‘A woman in charge of the church, Father?
Next you'll be saying that God favours women more than men because he created Eve in Paradise, rather than before, as He did Adam.’
‘They also say the serpent had a woman's face.’
‘Aye, and a man's lying heart!’
‘You'll lock the church?’
‘Such trust, Father.’
Athelstan smiled.
‘I believe you would do a better job than any of the men.
Seriously, Benedicta, make sure Ranulf the rat-catcher doesn't take Bonaventure.
The children are not to play snowballs in the porch.
Try to keep Ursula's pig away from what is left of my garden, and above all watch Cecily!
I think she is about to fall in love again.’
He ran down the steps and turned.
‘Oh, Benedicta?’
‘Yes, Father.’
‘Last night — the delicious meal, thank you.
A strange man, Doctor Vincentius.’
Benedicta grinned.
‘Not as strange as some priests I have met!’
Athelstan glowered back in mock anger whilst she turned and skipped like a young girl into the church.
He roused and saddled a snoring Philomel and took the road to London Bridge.
He found the stews around the riverside as busy as an overturned ant heap in summer as boatmen, sailors and fishermen flocked down to the river bank to watch the ice thaw.
Athelstan gently nudged Philomel through the press around the bridge.
He refused  to look to either side; crossing the bridge on the pleasantest of days could be a frightening experience and more so now as the ice below split and cracked.
Instead Athelstan looked across the river at the ships plying along the quays of Billingsgate and Queenshithe in a scene of frenetic activity.
Galleys from Gascony laden with casks of wine, woad ships for Picardy, the whelk boats of Essex, and the great vessels of Alamein and Norway making ready for sea.
Fishing boats, barges and lighters were busy around the ships, full of men smashing the ice with picks, hammers and mallets.
From the high-stemmed poop of a Genoese cog, a boy sang a hymn to the Virgin in thanksgiving for the change in the weather whilst sailors in a Greek galley chanted their prayer for mercy: ‘Kyrie Eleison, Christe Eleison, Kyrie Eleison.’
Lord, have mercy, Christ have mercy, Lord have mercy.
The chant was so beautiful Athelstan stopped, closing his eyes to listen, until a rough-mouthed carter flicked his whip, bellowing how some men had to work and couldn't laze around like stupid priests.
Athelstan sketched a blessing in the air at his tormentor, dismounted and led Philomel past the church of St Magnus on the corner of Bridge Street.
They turned into Candlewick, now thronged with carts, pack horses and wagons as virtually every tradesman in the city seized the opportunity afforded by the break in the weather.
Athelstan continued into Walbrook.
On one side of the street ran a sluggish stream in a deep channel cut through the earth.
The water was black, ice-filled, and two youths were fighting with quarter-staffs on one of the shit-strewn footbridges.
Athelstan and Philomel pressed forward though, for a while, both were forced into the shadows of the overhanging houses as a group of aldermen rode pompously down the street.
A herald went before them, a silver trumpet to his lips, whilst two serjeants-at-arms  cleared the way with sharp knocks from their staffs.
Above the aldermen the city banner snapped in a glorious splash of bright vermilion, whilst the figure of St Paul, embroidered in gold, seemed to glow with its own special light.
At the corner of Walbrook the rakers were out, their great wooden rods moving piles of slush and refuse into high, stinking heaps.
A bailiff had found a pig wandering where it shouldn't and, according to city regulations, had promptly cut the animal's throat.
The blood gushed out in hot, scarlet streams whilst its owner, a little balding man, threatened the official with a stream of horrible oaths.
Athelstan remembered Ursula and her great, fat sow and wondered if the bailiff would cross to Southwark.
The city parasites were also massing as thick as flies over a turd: smooth-skinned lads, cloak-twitchers, quacks, night wanderers, mimes and petty sorcerers.
At last Athelstan found the Golden Lamb, a little tavern on the corner of an alleyway.
The dark taproom was dominated by a morose Cranston, who sat slumped on a bench with his back against the wall.
The empty alejacks scattered on the table before him made the coroner look like an angry Bacchus surrounded by votive offerings.
Athelstan walked across and Cranston's eyes swivelled to meet him.
‘Where have you been?’ the coroner snapped.
‘I came as fast as I could.’
‘It wasn't fast enough!’
Athelstan silently prayed for patience and sat down on the stool opposite Sir John.
He didn't like the appearance of the coroner one bit.
Cranston was a drinker but was usually a jovial soul, conscious of his own sins, faults and failings, and so tolerant of those of others.
Now he looked positively sinister, his eyes continually flashing around as if seeking a challenge.
His lips moved wordlessly and even  the white whiskers bristled with some inner fury.
‘Do you want some wine, Priest?’
‘No, Sir John, I don't, and I think you've drunk enough.’
‘Sod off!’
Athelstan leaned forward.
‘Sir John, please, what is wrong?
Perhaps I could help?’
‘Mind your own business!’
Athelstan coughed and backed away.
‘This,’ he murmured, ‘is going to be a very trying day.
You said the mayor and the sheriffs wished to see us?’
‘They have seen me.
They got tired of waiting for you!’
‘And what did they say, Sir John?’
Athelstan asked sweetly.
The coroner shook himself, sat up and smiled shamefacedly at Athelstan.
‘Forgive me, Brother,’ he mumbled.
‘A bad night, and I've got an aching head.’
‘And a filthy temper to boot,’ Athelstan thought, but decided to keep his own counsel.
Sir John would talk soon enough.
Cranston chewed his lip and glared into a corner where a huge rat gnawed at a bloody globule of fat glistening amongst the dirty rushes.
‘Is it the black or brown rat which carries infection?’ he suddenly asked.
Athelstan followed Cranston's gaze and shuddered in disgust.
‘Both, I think, so I'm not eating here, Sir John, and I suggest that neither should you.
Anyway, tell me what's happened.’
‘There's been more bloodshed in the Tower.
Sir Gerard Mowbray, who also received a death warning, slipped from a parapet and fell.’
‘Anything else?’
‘About the same time that Mowbray died, the great tocsin  of the Tower sounded, convincing the garrison it was under attack.’
‘But there was no attack?’
Athelstan replied.
‘And, I am sure, no sign of a bell ringer?’
‘Apparently.’
‘And the business of the Mayor?’
Athelstan jumped as a fierce tom cat slunk out of the shadows, grasped the rat by its leg and pulled it squealing into the centre of the room.
‘For God's sake!’
Cranston bellowed at the taverner.
The fellow wandered over waving a broomstick and the cat, its quarry still swinging from his mouth, fled up the spiral, wooden staircase.
Cranston lifted the alejack, remembered the rat, and slammed it back on the table.
‘The business of the Mayor, my dear Athelstan, is that Sir Adam Horne, burgess, alderman and close friend of the late Sir Ralph, has received a drawing of a three-masted cog, together with a flat sesame seed cake.’
‘And where is Horne now?’
‘At his warehouse along the Thames.
Horne did not tell the mayor about this, his wife did.
Both message and cake were delivered anonymously to her.
She handed them over to her husband and was terrified by his reaction.
He became pale and ill as if taken by a sudden seizure.’
‘When was this?’
‘Earlier today.
The wife immediately went to see one of the sheriffs.
The rest you know.’
‘Lady Horne acted very quickly?’
‘Yes, the mayor himself is suspicious.
He still believes Lady Horne knows more than she claims.’
Athelstan stared towards the door as a group of pedlars, battered trays slung round their necks, bustled in, raucously shouting for ale.
A one-eyed beggar followed and, for a  penny, agreed to do a dance.
His skeletal body clothed in dirty rags looked grotesque as he hopped from foot to foot, to the mocking laughter of the tinkers.
‘Isn't it strange, Sir John,’ Athelstan murmured, ‘how we men take such a delight in the humiliation of others?’
Cranston remembered Lady Maude, blinked and looked away.
Athelstan stirred.
‘So, Sir John, do we question Horne or go to the Tower?’
Cranston rose.
‘My office is to enquire as to the cause of death,’ he announced pompously.
‘Not to run errands for the powerful ones of this city.
So we go to the Tower.
After all, as the good book says, ‘Where the body lies, the vultures will gather’.’
‘Sir John?’
Athelstan scratched his head.
‘This warning — the seedcake and the ship, still troubles me.’
‘What do you mean?’
Cranston slurred, swaying dangerously against the table.
‘Well, apparently Horne, for example, recognised the seed cake as a death threat, but why does the crude drawing of a ship hold such terrors for him and others?’
‘All men are fearful because they're liars!’
Cranston snapped.
‘No one tells the truth!’
He glared at Athelstan under bristling brows.
‘What's wrong, Sir John?’
Athelstan insisted.
‘I can feel the fury and the hurt seething within you.
You must tell me.’
‘In a while,’ the coroner muttered.
‘Let's go!’
They collected their horses from the stables and led them through the cold, bustling streets.
Every Londoner seemed to be out of doors: the stall-holders were busy making up for lost trade and the air was thick with savoury smells from taverns and cookshops.
They went to Cornhill, past  Leadenhall and into Aldgate, pausing where a crowd had gathered round a speaker on the corner of Poor Jewry.
He was a striking figure with a long, dour face, the head completely shaven, his thin body clothed from head to toe in a black gown and cloak.
The speaker paused as he glimpsed Cranston, and his mouth and jaw tensed with fury.
The anger in his face made his eyes glow, reminding Athelstan of the figure of St John the Baptist in a mummer's play.
The man's eyes never left Cranston's as he drew a deep breath, one bony finger pointing upwards to the clear blue sky.
‘Woe to this city!’ the preacher rasped.
‘Woe to its corrupt officials!
Woe to those they serve who are clad in silk, loll on couches, and fill their bellies with the best of food and the richness of wine.
They will not escape the fury which is coming!
How can we eat and drink when our poor brothers starve?
What will their answer be then?’
Cranston angrily stepped forward but Athelstan caught him by the sleeve.
‘Not now, Sir John!’
‘Who is it?’
Cranston rasped.
‘The hedge priest, John Ball.
A great preacher,’ Athelstan muttered.
‘Sir John,’ he advised, ‘the man is well liked.
This is neither the time nor the place!’
Cranston took a deep breath, spun on his heel and walked on.
The preacher's fiery words pursued them as they passed the house of Crutched Friars and turned left down an alleyway towards the Tower.
‘One day,’ Cranston grated, ‘I'll see that bastard hang!’
‘Sir John, he speaks the truth.’
The coroner turned.
His face and body sagged as the fury drained from him.
‘What can I do, Athelstan?
How can I feed the poor of  Kent?
I may eat too much, I know I drink too much, but I pursue justice and do the best I can.’
Cranston's great fat hands flapped like the wings of a wounded bird and Athelstan saw the hurt in his eyes.
‘By the sod, Brother, I can't even govern my own house.’
‘Lady Maude?’
Athelstan queried.
Cranston nodded.
‘I fear she has met someone else,’ he blurted out.
‘Perhaps a fop from the court.’
Athelstan stared back in disbelief.
‘Lady Maude?
Never!
Sir John, you are a fool!’
‘If any other man said that, I'd kill him!’
‘Well, I say it, Sir John.
Lady Maude is an honourable woman, she loves you deeply.
Though,’ Athelstan snarled in genuine anger, ‘sometimes I wonder how she can!’
He grasped the fat coroner by his cloak.
‘What proof do you have?’
‘Last night I saw her coming across London Bridge from Southwark, yet when I asked her where she had been, she replied no further than Cheapside.’
Athelstan was about to snarl a further retort when the coroner's words suddenly quickened his own memories.
Sir John might be right.
A week ago, just before the feast of the Virgin, Athelstan had seen the Lady Maude near the Tabard in Southwark.
At the time he'd thought it strange but then forgot about it.
Cranston narrowed his eyes.
‘You know something, don't you, you bloody monk?’
Athelstan looked away.
‘I'm a friar,’ he replied softly.
' Sir John, I know nothing except that I honour you and the Lady Maude.
I also know she would never betray you.’
Cranston brushed by him.
‘Come on!’ he barked.
‘We have business to do.’
They reached the bottom of the alleyway, went up the hill and into the Tower through a rear postern gate.
One of  the sentries took their horses and led them across Tower Green, now ankle-deep in icy slush, to where a depressed-looking Colebrooke was waiting.
‘More deaths,’ the lieutenant announced mournfully.
‘Sir John, I wish I could say you were welcome.’
He took them out, stopped and stared up at the ravens cawing raucously against the blue sky.
He pointed up at them.
‘You have heard the legends, Sir John?
While the ravens are here the Tower will never fall.
And that when they caw so stridently, it's always a sign of impending death.’
Colebrooke blew on the tips of his fingers.
‘Unfortunately, the ravens’ song is turning into a constant hymn.’
‘Did anyone know that Mowbray had received the same warning as Sir Ralph?’
Cranston abruptly asked.
Colebrooke shook his head.
‘No.
Mowbray was uneasy but, following Sir Ralph's death, so were we all.
He and Sir Brian kept to themselves.
Last night Mowbray went for his usual walk on the parapet between the Salt and Broad Arrow Towers.
He was still there when the tocsin sounded.
Mowbray apparently heard the alarm, ran, slipped and fell to his death.’
‘There was no one else on the parapet with him?’
‘No.
Indeed, if it wasn't for the warning we found in his pouch, we would have assumed it was a simple accident.’
‘Was the parapet slippery?’
‘No, of course not, Sir John.
You are a soldier.
Sir Ralph was most strict on such matters.
As soon as the weather worsens, sand and gravel are strewn on every step.’
‘Then who rang the bell?’
Athelstan asked
‘Ah, that's the mystery.
Come, I'll show you.’
They walked into the centre of Tower Green.
The snow was relatively unmarked here, packed high around a great wooden post with a beam jutting out like a scaffold.
The  tocsin bell was balanced on an iron ring and from its great brass tongue hung a long piece of cord.
‘You see,’ Colebrooke said, pointing up to the bell, ‘this is only sounded when the Tower is under direct attack.
If you touch the rope even, the bell is angled so as to sound continuously.’
Sir John looked up and nodded wisely.
‘Of course,’ he said.
‘I have seen such a mechanism before.
If the guard is wounded, once he starts the bell, it will swing and toll until someone stops it.’
‘Exactly!’
Colebrooke exclaimed.
‘And that's the real mystery.
I stopped the bell myself.
No one else was about.’
‘But someone could have rung it and run off?’
Cranston queried.
Colebrooke shook his head.
‘Impossible.
I came out here with a sconce torch.
I stopped the bell but, when I examined the snow, found no other footprints around.’
‘What?’
Cranston barked.
‘None at all?’
‘None, Sir John.’
Colebrooke pointed to the surrounding carpet of snow.
‘Because this bell is so important,’ he explained, ‘no one is allowed anywhere near it.
Even the soldiers, when they are drunk, keep clear of the area in case they stumble and start the bell tolling.’
‘And nothing else was found?’
‘Nothing except the claw marks of the ravens.’
‘But that's impossible,’ Athelstan said.
Colebrooke sighed.
‘I agree, Father, and what makes it even more mysterious is that we also had guards patrolling the green.
They saw no one approach the bell.
They found no foot prints.’
Colebrooke turned away and spat.
‘A time of death,’ he mourned.
‘The ravens’ song is the only one we hear.’
‘And where was everyone?’
Cranston snapped.
‘Oh, Mistress Philippa had invited us all for supper in Beauchamp Tower.’
‘All of you?’
Athelstan asked.
‘Well, the two hospitallers demurred.
Rastani did not come, and I left occasionally to make my rounds.
I'd just returned to Mistress Philippa's when the bell began to sound.’
‘And you found no one?’
Cranston repeated.
‘No one at all,’ Colebrooke muttered.
‘Now the soldiers are uneasy.
They talk darkly of demons and ghosts and the Tower is not a popular garrison.
You know soldiers, Sir John, they're worse than sailors.
They repeat stories of how the Tower was built on a place used for ancient sacrifice.
How blood is mixed with the mortar, and men were nailed to the earth in its foundation.’
‘Nonsense!’
Cranston barked.
‘What do you think, Brother?’
Athelstan shrugged.
‘The lieutenant may be right, Sir John.
There are more forces under heaven than we know.’
‘So you believe the nonsense about ghosts?’
‘Of course not!
But the Tower is a bloody place.
Men and women have died horrible deaths here.’
Athelstan stared round the green and shivered despite the bright sunshine.
‘Fear is the real ghost,’ he continued.
‘It saps harmony of the mind and disturbs the soul.
It creates an air of danger, of threatening menace.
Our murderer is highly skilled and intelligent.
He is achieving exactly what he wants.’
‘Who found the corpse?’
Cranston queried.
‘Fitzormonde did.
When the bell was sounded, people were running around all over the place, checking gates and doors.
Fitzormonde went looking for Mowbray and found his corpse.’
‘We'll check the parapet walk,’ Athelstan muttered.
‘Master Lieutenant, I would be grateful if you could gather everyone in Mistress Philippa's chamber.
Please give my apologies and excuses to the lady, but it's important to meet where you all were last night when the tocsin was sounded.’
Cranston and Athelstan watched Colebrooke stride away.
‘Do you think there's any connection?’
Cranston asked.
‘Between what?’
‘Between the bell chiming and Mowbray's fall.’
‘Of course, Sir John.
’ Athelstan tugged him by the sleeve and they made their way across the deserted bailey to the steps leading up to the parapet walk.
They stopped at the foot and stared up at the curtain wall rising above them.
‘A terrible fall,’ Athelstan whispered.
‘You said there was a connection?’
Cranston replied testily, ‘between the bell sounding and Mowbray falling.’
‘A mere hypothesis, Sir John.
Mowbray went on to the parapet walk.
Like many old soldiers he liked to be by himself, to reflect well away from others.
He stands there staring into the darkness.
He has already received warnings of his own impending doom so is lost in his own thoughts, fears and anxieties.
Suddenly the tocsin sounds, proclaiming the greatest fortress in the realm to be under attack.’
Athelstan stared into Sir John's soulful eyes.
‘If you had been Mowbray, what would you have done?
Remember, Sir John,’ Athelstan added slyly, ‘you too are a warrior, a soldier.’
Cranston pushed back the beaverskin hat on his head, scratched his balding pate and pursed his lips as if he was a veritable Alexander.
‘I'd run to find the cause,’ he replied ponderously.
‘Yes, that's what I'd do.’
He stared at Athelstan.
‘Of course, Mowbray would have done the same, but then what happened?
Did he slip?
Or was he pushed?’
‘I don't think he slipped, Mowbray would have been too careful, and I doubt he would have let someone push him off the parapet walk without a struggle.’
‘So how?’
‘I don't know, Sir John.
Let's study the evidence first.’
They were about to climb the steps when a voice suddenly sang out: ‘Good morrow, friends!’
Red Hand, his gaudy rags fluttering around him, jumped through the slush towards them.
‘Good morrow, Master Coroner.
Good morrow, Sir Priest,’ he repeated.
‘Do you like old Red Hand?’
Athelstan saw the chicken struggling in Red Hand's grip.
The poor bird squawked and scrabbled, its claws beating the madman's stomach, ripping his rags still further, but Red Hand held it firmly by the neck.
‘Death has come again!’ he chanted, his colourless eyes dancing with mischievous glee.
‘The old Red Slayer has returned and more will die.
You wait and see.
Death will come, snap, like this.’
And before Athelstan or Cranston could do anything, the madman bit into the hen's neck and tore its throat out.
The bird squawked, struggled and lay limp.
Red Hand stared up, his mouth ringed with blood, gore and feathers.
‘Slay!
Slay!
Slay!’ he chanted.
‘Go away!’
Cranston barked.
‘Sod off, you little bugger!’
Red Hand turned and ran, the blood from the freshly killed chicken spraying the greying slush on every side.
Cranston watched him disappear behind a wall.
‘In my treatise, Brother,’ he said softly, ‘I will suggest houses for such men.
Though I do wonder…’
‘What, Sir John?’
‘Well, if Red Hand is as mad as he claims to be.’
Athelstan shrugged.
‘Who decides who is mad, Sir John?
Red Hand may think he is the only sane man around here.’
They climbed the steep steps, Athelstan going first.
Behind him followed Sir John, breathing heavily and muttering a litany of dark curses.
The wind whipped their faces; halfway up Athelstan stopped and, stooping, picked up the thick sand mixed with gravel which carpeted every step.
‘This would stop anyone from slipping, Sir John.’
‘Unless he was drunk or careless,’ Cranston replied.
‘Aye, Sir John.
A sober soldier is a rarity indeed.’
‘Aye, monk, very rare, but not as rare as a holy priest.’
Athelstan grinned and continued climbing.
They reached the parapet walk.
It was about four feet wide and as carefully coated with sand and pebbles as the step.
They leaned against the curtain wall.
Cranston, breathing heavily, looked down, curiously watching the figures below as they scurried around like black ants on the various tasks of the garrison.
He then stared up at the blue sky.
The clouds were now only faint wisps lit by the strong mid-day sun.
The coroner suddenly felt rather giddy and quietly cursed himself for drinking so much.
‘Old age,’ he murmured
‘Sir John?’
‘In media vitae, sumus in morte,’ Cranston replied.
‘In the midst of life we are in death, Brother.
I do not feel too safe here, yet in France when I was younger but not so wise, I held one of these parapet walks against the best the French could send.’
Cranston felt self-pity seep through him.
Did Maude also think him old? he wondered.
Was that it?
Sir John breathed deeply, trying to control the spasm of rage and fear which shot through him.
‘Go on, Athelstan,’ he muttered.
‘Make your careful, bloody study.’
‘Stay there, Sir John,’ Athelstan replied softly.
The friar  glanced despondently down at the sand and gravel.
‘I suppose so many have been up here since Mowbray's fall, I doubt we will find anything.’
Athelstan walked gingerly along the parapet, using the crenellated wall as his guide.
He walked slowly, not daring to look at the drop on his right and becoming ever more aware of the cold, biting wind and eerie sense of loneliness, as if he hung half way between heaven and earth.
On either side of the parapet walk were two towers.
Near the Salt Tower he found the gravel-strewn slush had been disturbed, indicating someone had stood there for some time.
Athelstan studied this spot for a while.
‘What have you found, Brother?’
Cranston bellowed.
Athelstan walked carefully back.
‘Mowbray stood where I stopped.
Now, Sir John, if you go first?’
Cranston went back to the top of the steps.
Athelstan followed behind.
‘Go on, Sir John.
Stand on the top step.’
Cranston obliged, closing his eyes for he had begun to feel rather dizzy.
‘What is it, Brother?’ he rasped.
Athelstan crouched and stared closely where the sand and gravel had been scattered.
‘I suspect Mowbray fell from here,’ he replied.
‘But why, and how?’
The friar examined the crenellations from which an archer would shoot if the wall was under attack.
‘Strange,’ he murmured.
‘There's a fresh mark in the wall as if an axe has been swung against it.
And look, Sir John.’
Athelstan carefully picked up some splinters of wood.
‘These are fresh.’
Cranston opened his eyes.
‘Yes, Brother, but what do they mean?’
‘I don't know, but it would appear that someone took an axe and drove it hard against the wall, with such force the stone was marked and the wooden handle of the axe shattered.’
Cranston shook his head in disbelief.
‘What it all means,’ Athelstan murmured, ‘I don't know.
I cannot make the connection between Mowbray's fall and these fragments of evidence.’
The Dominican looked suspiciously at the white, haggard face of Cranston, the bleary red eyes, and the way he was swaying rather dangerously on the top step.
‘Come on, Sir John,’ he said gently.
‘We are finished here and others await.’
They made their way gingerly down the steps.
At the bottom Cranston immediately felt better, turned and beamed at Athelstan.
‘Thank God!’ he bellowed.
‘You don't do that every day, eh, Brother?’
Thank God, Athelstan thought, you are not in such a mood every day.
The friar looked around.
The Tower garrison was now busy: soldiers in half-armour lounged on benches.
Despite the cold they wished to revel in the sunshine.
A few played dice, others shared a wineskin.
A scullion ran across with a basket of fresh-cooked meat, taking it to one of the kitchens where it would hang to be cured, diced, salted and stored for the duration of the winter.
The clanging from the blacksmith's rang like a bell through the air; somewhere a child cried, the son or daughter of one of the garrison.
In the outer bailey an officer was shouting orders about a gate being oiled.
A dog barked and they heard laughter from the kitchens.
Athelstan smiled and relaxed.
He must not forget the small things of life, he concluded, they kept you sane.
He linked his arm through Sir  John's and they ambled across Tower Green, making their way carefully through the soft, dirty slush, alert for the icy patches which hadn't thawed.
A guard ushered them into the Beauchamp Tower and up into Mistress Philippa's chamber on the second floor.
It was a spacious room with a deep bay window overlooking Tower Green.
The seats were cushioned and quilted, the windows glazed with fragments of stained glass.
As soon as he entered, Athelstan sensed it was a woman's chamber: hand-woven tapestries hung on the walls, one depicting a golden dragon locked in combat with a silver wyvern.
Another portrayed the Infant Jesus smiling, arms outstretched, in the manger at Bethlehem where Christ's mother stood in a dress of gold and a mantle of deep sky blue.
The bricks in the wall had been painted alternately white and red; large cupboards stood with doors half-open displaying gowns, dresses, hoods and mantles, of various colours and different fabrics .
A small pine log fire blazed in the canopied hearth.
In one corner stood a spinning wheel, the threads still pulled tight.
In the other, curtained off from the rest of the room, was the bed chamber.
A long, polished table stood in the centre of the room.
On it were placed chafing dishes full of glowing charcoal, spices and herbs.
Their perfume reminded Athelstan of a fresh spring morning on his father's farm in Sussex.
He also noticed the other door in the far side wall, peeping out from behind the thick red arras.
Athelstan grinned and winked at Sir John.
‘A lady's bower, my Lord Coroner,’ he whispered.
Cranston smiled, then remembered Lady Maude and his face grew long.
Mistress Philippa rose as they entered.
In temperament, though not in looks, she reminded Athelstan of Benedicta; she had the same quiet composure and he had glimpsed the  steely look in her eyes.
Was Philippa strong and ruthless enough, he wondered, to commit murder?
Athelstan stared round at the rest, mumbling quietly like people who wanted to maintain appearances though he sensed their tension.
The conversation died abruptly as Cranston lurched across the room.
Perhaps Philippa or the femininity of her chamber had reminded Cranston of Maude for the coroner suddenly became bellicose with the girl.
‘Another bloody murder!’ he roared.
‘What now, eh?’
Geoffrey Parchmeiner, Philippa's betrothed, stood up and walked out of the darkness near the wall.
He looked anxious, more white-faced and sober than the last time Athelstan had seen him.
‘Murder, My Lord Coroner?’ he stammered.
‘What proof do you have?
You swagger in here, into my lady's chamber, and shout allegations yet show no evidence.
What can we make of that?’
Athelstan looked around.
Sir Fulke seemed subdued and remained slouched in his chair.
The chaplain, crouched on a stool near the fireplace, stared into the flames wringing his hands whilst Rastani, the silent, dark servant, sat with his back to the wall as if he wished the very stones would open and swallow him.
The other hospitaller, Fitzormonde, stood near the window, his hands folded, staring at the floor as if totally unaware of Cranston's presence.
Colebrooke looked embarrassed, tapping his foot and whistling softly under his breath.
‘My betrothed asked a question,’ Philippa demanded.
‘How do you know the knight was murdered?
And what difference does it make, Sir Coroner?
So was my father, and are you any nearer to finding his killer?’
‘Your father's murder will be avenged,’ Cranston snapped.
‘As for Mowbray, he had that bloody parchment on him  and the fragments of a seed cake.
What further proof do you need?’
Philippa stared coolly back.
‘Well!’
Cranston shouted.
‘I have answered one of your bloody questions!’
‘Sir John,’ she replied icily, ‘moderate your language.
My father,’ her voice nearly broke, ‘now lies sheeted in a coffin in the Chapel of St Peter Ad Vincula.
I, his daughter, grieve and demand justice, but all I get is the offensive language of the alleys and runnels of Southwark.
Sir, I am a lady.’
Cranston's eyes narrowed evilly.
‘So bloody what?’ he answered before Athelstan could intervene.
‘Show me a lady and I'll show you a whore!’
The girl gasped.
Her betrothed leapt back to his feet, his hand going to the knife at his belt, but Cranston just dismissed him with a contemptuous flicker of his eyes.
Athelstan watched the hospitaller suddenly stir and noticed with alarm how the knight now grasped one of his gloves in his hand.
Good Lord, the friar thought, not here, not now!
The last thing Sir John needs is a challenge to the death.
‘Sir John!’ he snapped.
‘Mistress Philippa is correct.
You are the King's Coroner.
She is a lady of high birth who has lost her father and now sees one of his friends meet a similar terrible death.’
He grasped the coroner's arm and swung him round, keeping an eye on the hospitaller now standing behind them.
‘Sir John!
Control yourself, please,’ he murmured.
‘For my sake.’
Cranston stared at Athelstan with red-rimmed eyes.
He reminded the friar of the great, shaggy bear squatting in the courtyard below.
The friar touched Cranston's hand gently.
‘Sir John,’ he whispered, ‘please.
You are a gentleman and a knight.’
The coroner closed his eyes, took a deep breath, opened them and grinned.
‘When you are around, monk,’ he muttered, ‘I don't need a bloody conscience.’
He turned to Philippa.
‘My lady,’ he said, ‘before Sir Brian or Sir Fulke,’he glanced contemptuously at the girl's uncle who still sat slumped in his chair, ‘challenge me to a duel, I apologise profusely.’
He gave her a dazzling smile.
‘There are old men, Mistress,’ he continued, ‘and there are fools.
But there's nothing worse than an old fool.’
He stretched out his hand, took the girl's unresisting fingers and kissed them in a way the most professional courtier would have envied.
‘I was most discourteous,’ he bellowed.
‘You must forgive me, especially at this time when your father's body is not yet buried.’
7
The atmosphere in the room relaxed.
Athelstan closed his eyes.
Good God, he prayed, oh thank you!
The hospitaller had been on the verge of striking Sir John and, once that happened, well, Athelstan knew Cranston.
It would be a duel à outrance, to the death!
Mistress Philippa smiled and stepped forward into the light and Athelstan realised just how boorish Cranston had been.
The girl's face was white as snow, her eyes red-rimmed and circled with deep shadows, but she sensed Cranston's insult had not been intended.
She leaned over and kissed Sir John gently on the cheek.
This only discomfited the coroner further, he stared down at the floor and shuffled his feet like some clumsy schoolboy.
Philippa went across to a tray of goblets, filled two and brought them back.
She gave one to Athelstan and pressed the other into Sir John's great paw.
The coroner smiled at the wine, lifted the cup and downed it in one gulp.
He smacked his lips, winked at the girl and held out the goblet to be refilled.
Philippa smilingly obliged and Athelstan groaned.
He didn't know what was worse, Cranston sulking or Cranston in his cups.
Sir John took the goblet and went over to the window, staring out at the sun dazzling the snow on Tower Green.
Athelstan busied himself arranging his writing tray on the table.
The rest of the group hardly moved as if absorbed in everything the coroner said or did.
They watched him  intently, like a group of schoolboys would a fearsome master.
Cranston watched the sunlight shimmer on the great tocsin bell then turned round abruptly.
‘Mowbray,’ he announced, ‘was murdered.
Well, at least I believe he was.
He received the same message as Sir Ralph.
I think he went on to the parapet and the tocsin was sounded to make him run.
Now, I have examined the parapet most carefully…’
Athelstan remembered how Cranston had slouched against the wall and hid his smile.
‘I have examined the parapet most carefully,’ Cranston continued, glaring at Athelstan.
‘Mowbray did not slip accidentally.
The sand and gravel there are at least an inch thick.
Someone planned his fall.’
‘Did Mowbray drink?’
Athelstan asked.
Cranston turned and glanced at the other hospitaller.
Sir Brian shook his head.
‘He was a seasoned warrior,’ the knight replied.
‘He could run along such a parapet in a blinding snow storm.’
‘Tell me,’ Cranston said, ‘what happened yesterday evening?
I mean, before Mowbray fell?’
‘We were all here,’ Sir Fulke spoke up.
He smiled.
‘Mistress Philippa had invited us for supper.’
‘I wasn't!’ snapped Fitzormonde.
‘I was in my own chamber, awaiting poor Mowbray's return.’
‘And, of course, Rastani,’ the chaplain stuttered, squirming on his stool.
‘Yes,’ Fitzormonde murmured.
‘The Morisco wasn't here.’
Athelstan left his desk and squatted in front of Rastani.
He stared into the silent, fear-filled face.
‘My Lady Philippa,’ Athelstan murmured over his shoulder, ‘I wish to talk to Rastani though I think he knows what I am going to ask.’
‘So do I!’
Sir Fulke shouted.
‘I will answer for him.’
‘No, sir, you won't!’
Cranston barked.
Athelstan touched Rastani's hand which was as cold as ice.
The friar gazed into his liquid dark eyes.
The man was terrified, but of what?
Detection?
Discovery?
‘Where were you, Rastani?’
Athelstan asked.
Beside him, Philippa made strange gestures with her fingers and Rastani replied in the same sign language.
‘He says he was freezing cold,’ Philippa explained ‘And stayed in my father's old chamber in the White Tower.’
‘He's silent-footed as a cat,’ Cranston observed.
‘He could creep round this fortress and no one would notice.’
‘What are you implying, Sir John?’
Philippa snapped.
‘Rastani could have rung the bell.’
‘How on earth could he have done that when there were no footprints?’
Geoffrey mocked, moving to stand beside Philippa.
Cranston smiled.
‘A snowball?’
Colebrooke snorted with laughter.
‘I have told you, Sir John, the area around the bell could be seen by sentries.
They saw no one approach.’
Cranston sniffed loudly and looked longingly at his now empty wine goblet.
‘Before you continue, Sir John,’ Fitzormonde spoke up, ‘and you start speculating on where I was, all I can say is that I was in my own chamber but no one saw me there.’
He glared fiercely at Cranston.
‘However, I am a priest, a knight and a gentleman.
I am not a liar!’
‘Why did you stay there, Sir Brian?’
Athelstan tactfully interrupted.
Sir Brian shrugged.
‘I was frightened.
I, too, have received a letter of death.’
He drew out a piece of parchment  from beneath his cloak and Cranston almost snatched it from his hand.
The hospitaller was right.
The same sketch Sir Ralph Whitton and Mowbray had received: a crudely drawn ship in full sail and, in each corner, a small black cross.
‘I also had the seed cake,’ Fitzormonde murmured.
‘But I threw it away.’
‘When Mowbray fell,’ Cranston suddenly asked, ‘did anyone else inspect the parapet?’
‘I, Fitzormonde and Colebrooke did,’ Fulke replied.
‘When the tocsin sounded we all left this room.
The hospitaller was with us when Mowbray's body was found.
Our young gallant here,’ he waved his hand contemptuously at Geoffrey, ‘was asked to accompany us to the parapet but it's well known he's terrified of heights.’
Geoffrey flushed with embarrassment and looked away.
‘Uncle!’
Philippa murmured.
‘That's not fair.’
‘What's not fair,’ Cranston interrupted, ‘is that we know so little about last night.
Mistress Philippa, what time did your guests assemble?’
‘Oh, just after Vespers, about eight o'clock.’
‘And all except Rastani and the hospitaller came?’
‘Yes, yes, that's correct.’
Cranston turned to the hospitaller.
‘And where did you say you were?’
‘In my chamber.’
‘And Mowbray?’
‘On the parapet walk.’
‘So,’ Cranston heaved a sigh, ‘as Mowbray brooded, the rest of you except Fitzormonde gathered here?’
‘Yes.’
‘And how long till the tocsin sounded?’
‘About two to three hours.’
‘And no one left?’
‘Only Colebrooke on his round and others to the privy, but that's along the passageway.’
The girl smiled wanly.
‘We all drank deep.’
Athelstan raised a hand.
‘Never mind that.’
The friar, snatching the parchment from Cranston's hand, went and stood over the hospitaller.
Athelstan pushed the drawing under the knight's face.
‘Sir Brian, what does this mean?’
The knight looked away.
‘Sir Brian Fitzormonde,’ Athelstan repeated, ‘soon you will appear before God's tribunal.
I ask you, on your oath as a knight, what does this parchment signify?’
The hospitaller glanced up with his red-rimmed eyes in a drawn, pale face.
Athelstan felt he was looking at a man already under the shadow of Death's soft, black wing.
The friar leaned closer until he could see the small red veins in the knight's eyes and the grey, dusty pallor of his cheeks.
Fitzormonde was probably a brave man but Athelstan could almost taste the stench of fear which emanated from him.
‘On your oath to Christ,’ Athelstan whispered, ‘tell me the truth.’
Sir Brian suddenly lifted his face and whispered in Athelstan's ear.
The Dominican stood back in surprise but then nodded.
‘What did he say?’
Cranston barked.
‘Later, Sir John.’
Athelstan turned to the rest of the group.
‘What did happen here last night?’ he asked, trying to divert the conversation.
Sir Fulke, his face now suffused with his usual false bonhomie, leaned forward.
‘My niece,’ he said, ‘wished to thank us for our kindness following the death of Sir Ralph.
We sat and dined like a group of friends.
We talked of old times and what might happen in the future.’
‘And no one left?’
‘Not until the tocsin sounded.’
‘No, Sir Fulke,’ Geoffrey interrupted.
‘Remember, you drank deeply.’
He smiled falsely.
‘Perhaps too deeply to remember.
The priest left.’
Geoffrey pointed to where the chaplain, William Hammond, dressed like a crow, sat perched on his stool near the fire.
‘Don't you remember, Father, you left?’
‘I went back to my room,’ the chaplain announced.
‘I had a gift of some wine.’
He glared maliciously at Geoffrey and then at Colebrooke.
‘A parishioner gave it to me.
It's not from the Tower stores if that's what you're thinking.’
He shrugged.
‘Yes, I too drank deeply and I was unsteady and slow in returning.
I was about to re-enter Beauchamp Tower when the bell began to toll.’
‘What happened then?’
Athelstan asked.
He glanced at Colebrooke and realised the lieutenant had told them little of his own movements.
‘Well, Lieutenant?’
Athelstan repeated.
‘What did happen?’
‘Well, the bell tolled.
I and the others left Mistress Philippa.
The garrison was roused and all gates were checked.
We then scattered, trying to find what was wrong.
Fitzormonde discovered Mowbray's body, we joined him then Master Parchmeiner came.
We examined the corpse and I went up on to the parapet.’
‘And?’
Cranston barked.
‘I found nothing.
We were more concerned that the tocsin had been sounded.’
‘But you found no trace of the bell-ringer?’
Athelstan asked.
‘No, I have told you that.’
Athelstan gazed round in desperation.
How, he wondered, could a bell ring and no one be seen pulling it?
Or, indeed, any trace of someone being near the bell?
What did happen?
And how could the bell ringer run undetected across the Tower to arrange Mowbray's fall?
Athelstan drew a deep breath.
‘Where is Mowbray's body now?’
‘It's already sheeted,’ Philippa replied.
‘It lies in its coffin before the chancel screen in the Chapel of St Peter ad Vincula.’
‘And I will join him there,’ Fitzormonde murmured.
He looked up and smiled wanly.
‘Oh, yes, I have the mark of death upon me.’
His statement hung like an arrow in the air, just before it turns and begins its fatal descent.
Athelstan whirled round as a loud snore from Cranston broke the silence.
He heard Geoffrey giggle, even white-faced Philippa smiled, the chaplain grinned sourly whilst Fulke snorted with laughter.
‘Sir John has many problems to exhaust him,’ Athelstan announced.
‘Mistress Philippa, may we be your guests for a while?’
He looked at Colebrooke.
‘Master Lieutenant, I need words with Sir Brian.
Is there a chamber here?’
Philippa pointed to the door in the far wall.
‘There's a small one at the end of the corridor.’
She blushed slightly.
‘Just past the privy.
The chamber will be warm.
I had a brazier put there this morning.’
Athelstan bowed, smiled thinly at the rest of the group, glanced despairingly at the snoring Cranston and led Sir Brian down the corridor.
On the left was the privy, covered by a curtain which hung from a metal rod.
Athelstan pulled the curtain back and wrinkled his nose at the smell.
The privy was crude, a small recess in the wall with a latrine seat, just under a tiny, open, oval-shaped window which looked down over the green.
‘It drains down to the moat,’ Sir Brian mumbled.
Athelstan nodded, let the curtain fall and walked on.
The chamber at the end of the passage was more fragrant and clean.
The walls were lime-washed, the windows closely shuttered.
Athelstan sat down on a stool and gestured to a bench which ran along the wall.
‘Sit down, Sir Brian.
Now, tell me, what do you want?’
Sir Brian suddenly knelt at Athelstan's feet and sketched the sign of the cross in the air.
Athelstan glanced around despairingly.
He suspected what was coming.
‘Bless me, Father,’ Fitzormonde murmured, ‘for I have sinned.
And this is my confession.’
Athelstan drew back, the legs of the stool scraping the hard stone floor.
‘I cannot,’ he whispered.
‘Sir Brian, you have tricked me!
Whatever you tell me now will be covered by the seal of Confession.’
‘I know!’
Fitzormonde hissed.
‘But my soul is steeped in the blackest sin.’
Athelstan shook his head and made to rise.
‘I cannot,’ the friar repeated.
‘Whatever you tell me, I can only reveal on the orders of the Holy Father, the Pope in Avignon.
Sir Brian, you are most unfair.
Why this trickery?’
Fitzormonde glanced up, his eyes gleaming.
‘No mummery,’ he said.
‘Father, I wish to confess.
You must shrive me.
I am a sinner in  periculo mortis!’
Athelstan sighed.
Sir Brian was right.
Canon Law was most strict on this: a priest was bound to hear the confession of any man who believed he was in danger of death.
To refuse would be a terrible sin.
‘I agree,’ Athelstan whispered.
Sir Brian made the sign of the cross again.
‘Bless me, Father, for I have sinned.
It is many years since my last confession and I confess in the face of God  and in the hope of his divine mercy at the imminent approach of death.’
Athelstan closed his eyes and leaned back.
He listened to the litany of sins: impure thoughts and actions, the lusts of the flesh, avarice, bad temper, foul language, as well as the petty bickerings which take place in any community.
Sir Brian confessed about his fight against sin, his will to do good and his constant failures to carry this through.
Athelstan, a skilled confessor, perceived Sir Brian was a good but deeply troubled man.
At last the hospitaller finished and leaned back on his heels though he kept his head bowed.
‘I am a sinner, Father,’ he whispered.
‘God knows,’ Athelstan replied, ‘we are all sinners, Sir Brian.
There are those who know they are sinners, confess and try to pursue the good.
You are one of these.
There are others like the Pharisees who cannot be forgiven, for they believe they never do wrong!
’ Athelstan leaned closer.
‘Now you wish absolution?’
The friar raised his hand.
‘Absolvo te,’ he intoned.
‘I absolve you.’
‘Stop!’
Sir Brian lifted his head and Athelstan saw the tears on the white, haggard cheeks.
‘Sir Brian, there is more?’ he asked gently.
‘Of course there is!’
Fitzormonde hissed.
‘I am a murderer, Father.
An assassin.
I took my friend's life.
No!
No!’
He shook his head as if talking to himself.
‘I was party to a murder.
I turned my face the other way.’
Athelstan tensed, trying to hide that inner tingle of excitement, the deep curiosity aroused in a priest who, in confession, has the unique opportunity to see a soul bare itself.
‘Whose murder?’ he asked softly.
Sir Brian shook his head, sobbing like a child.
‘Sir Brian.’
Athelstan tapped him gently on the shoulder.
‘Sit down, man!
Come, sit down!’
Sir Brian slumped on the bench.
Athelstan looked round the chamber and saw the wine jug and goblets on the chest.
He got up, filled one of these and thrust it into Fitzormonde's hand.
‘There's nothing in Canon Law,’ Athelstan smiled, ‘which says a man cannot have a drink during confession.’
He wiped his sweat-stained hands on his robe.
‘Or,’ he continued, ‘as St Paul says, ‘Take a little wine for the stomach's sake.’’
Sir Brian sipped from the goblet and smiled.
‘Aye, Father,’ he replied.
‘And, as the Romans put it, ‘In vino veritas g’.
In wine there is truth.’
Athelstan nodded, pushed the stool nearer and sat down.
‘Tell me, Sir Brian, in your own words and at your own time, the truth about this murder.’
‘Many years ago,’ Fitzormonde began, ‘I was a wild, young man, a knight with visions of becoming a crusader.
My friends were of a similar disposition.
We all served in London or hereabouts: Ralph Whitton, Gerard Mowbray, Adam Horne, and…’
The man's voice trailed off.
‘And who?’
‘Our leader, Bartholomew Burghgesh, of Woodforde in Essex.’
Fitzormonde took a deep breath ‘The war in France was finished.
Du Guesclin was reorganising the French armies, our old king was doddering and there was no need for English swords in France, so we sailed for Outremer.
We offered our swords to the King of Cyprus.
We spent two years there, becoming steeped in blood.
Eventually, the Cypriot king dispensed with our services and we had nothing to show for it but our clothes, horses, armour, and the wounds of battle.
So we became mercenaries in the  armies of the Caliph of Egypt.’
‘All of you?’
Athelstan asked.
‘Yes, yes.
We were still a band of brothers.
David and Jonathan to each other.’
Fitzormonde smiled to himself.
‘We feared nothing.
We had each other and we always shared.
Now there was a revolt in Alexandria.
Our leader, Bartholomew, was hired by the Caliph to join his satraps in suppressing the uprising.’
Fitzormonde stopped and gulped from the cup.
‘It was a bloody business but eventually a breach was forced in the defences and Bartholomew led us through.’
The hospitaller's eyes caught Athelstan's.
‘We hacked our way through a wall of living flesh.
Do you know, the cobblestones couldn't be seen for the blood which swilled like water?
The Caliph's armies followed us in and the real killing began.
Men, women and children were put to the sword.’
Fitzormonde paused and wiped his mouth on the back of his hand.
‘That, too, Father, I confess, though we were not party to it.
Bartholomew led us away.
We found a merchant's house full of treasure.’
Fitzormonde licked his lips and closed his eyes tightly, trying to remember events in that sun-drenched city so many years ago.
‘Now the Caliph's rules were strict,’ he continued.
‘As mercenaries we were allowed no plunder, so most of the treasure was useless to us, but Bartholomew found a heavy purse of gold.’
The knight stopped speaking and pointed to the cord tied round Athelstan's waist.
‘Think of that ten times thicker, Father.
Two heavy pieces of leather sewn together and stuffed with money.
Every coin was of pure gold.
A king's ransom in a leather belt.
There must have been thousands.’
Fitzormonde paused again.
He was back in time, standing battered and blood-stained, gazing open-mouthed at the belt Bartholomew had found hidden beneath the tiled floor.
‘What happened?’
Athelstan asked.
Fitzormonde smiled.
‘Bartholomew did a brave thing.
He said he would wait to see if the Caliph would reward us for forcing the breach.
He didn't so Bartholomew kept the purse.’
‘Why was that brave?’
‘Well, if he had been caught, Bartholomew would have been sliced from neck to crotch, his genitals ripped off and stuffed into his mouth, and his decapitated head placed on a spike above the city gates.
Now Bartholomew agreed to conceal the purse on condition that he had half the treasure whilst we shared the rest.
We agreed, and by night fled the Caliph's armies and crossed the sea to Cyprus.’
‘Is that the connection with the ship?’
Athelstan asked.
‘Oh, no.
We reached Cyprus safely but the Caliph sent assassins after us.
These were the Hashishoni, the followers of the Old Man of the Mountain, skilled killers who came by night.
They were so confident they even sent us fair warning of their arrival.’
‘A flat sesame seed cake?’
Athelstan interrupted.
‘Yes, but Bartholomew was waiting for them.
One night they crept into our house but he had arranged for us to sleep on the roof whilst through a crack he could watch our sleeping chamber.
Do you know,’ Fitzormonde said in a dream-like voice, ‘Bartholomew showed no fear?
He trapped all three in that room and killed them.’
Sir Brian's voice broke.
‘He was the best — Bartholomew, I mean — honourable and fair.
I have never met a more redoubtable fighter, yet we murdered him!’
Athelstan rose, took the wine jug and refilled the man's cup.
‘Continue, Sir Brian.’
‘Bartholomew wanted to go home, return to his manor at  Woodforde.
His wife was sickly and he also feared for his young son's life.
At the same time he had difficulties with Sir Ralph Whitton.’
Fitzormonde glared into his wine cup.
‘Ralph was the canker in the rose.
I think he was secretly jealous of Bartholomew.
He began to object to the way the treasure was being shared out, but Bartholomew failed to take him seriously.
He said a bargain was a bargain; he had found the treasure, he had risked the Caliph's wrath, and he had killed the three assassins.
However, he said he trusted his blood brothers and left the treasure with us when he took ship from Cyprus.’
Fitzormonde stared at Athelstan and the friar began to suspect the true reason behind the drawing on the pieces of parchment.
‘What happened to that ship, Sir Brian?’
The knight emptied the wine goblet in one gulp.
‘A few days later we learnt Whitton had sent a secret message to the Caliph.’
He shrugged.
‘The rest is obvious.
The ship Bartholomew was travelling on was intercepted and sunk.’
Athelstan whirled round as the door crashed open.
Cranston stood there, foul-faced and bleary-eyed.
‘What's the bloody matter, monk?’ he boomed.
‘Where the…?’
Cranston used an obscene word and glared at the knight.
‘You still wish to challenge me, Sir Brian?’
Athelstan rose, grabbed Cranston by the arm and hustled him out of the room, closing the door behind him.
‘Sir John,’ he rasped, ‘I am hearing this man's confession!’
Cranston tried to push Athelstan aside.
‘By the sod!’ he roared.
‘I don't give a shit!’
‘Sir John, this is nothing to do with you.’
Athelstan, using all his weight, pushed Sir John back and sent him tottering down the corridor.
Cranston steadied himself, pulled his long, wicked-looking dagger from its  sheath and walked slowly back, his red-rimmed eyes fixed on Athelstan.
The friar leaned against the door.
‘What are you going to do, John?’
Athelstan asked softly.
‘Are you, the Lord Coroner, going to slay a priest, a colleague and a friend?’
Sir John stopped and slouched against the wall, staring upwards at the great beams resting on their corbels of stone.
‘God forgive me, Athelstan,’ he whispered.
‘My apologies to Sir Brian.
I shall wait for you downstairs.’
The friar re-entered the room.
Fitzormonde still sat, cradling his head in his hands.
Athelstan touched him gently on the shoulder.
‘Forget Cranston.’
He smiled.
‘A man whose bark is much worse than his bite.
Sir Brian, you wanted me to hear your confession?
So Burghgesh was murdered.
Surely the blame rests squarely with Sir Ralph?’
Fitzormonde shook his head and looked up.
‘Don't patronise me, Father.
Ralph told us what he had done.
We could have stopped it.
We could have brought Sir Ralph to justice.
We could have searched the seas to see if Bartholomew had survived.’
‘Was that possible?’
‘Perhaps.
Sometimes the Moors sell prisoners in the slave markets.
But we didn't look there for him.
We could have looked after Bartholomew's widow and his little son but we failed to do that.’
Fitzormonde drove one of his fists into the palm of his hand.
‘We should have executed Sir Ralph.
Instead, we became his accomplices and shared out his ill-gotten wealth.’
‘What happened to Bartholomew's widow?’
‘I don't know.
We went our separate ways.
Eventually guilt caught up with Mowbray and myself so we joined the hospitallers, handing over what wealth we had left to the  Order.
Horne came back to the city and grew powerful on his riches.
Whitton entered the service of John of Gaunt.’
Fitzormonde placed the goblet on the ground before him.
‘Do you know, Father, it wasn't until Whitton was dead that I realised how he had held us in his evil thrall.’
Fitzormonde paused.
‘You have seen the great bear in the Tower bailey?’
‘Yes.’
‘Every afternoon I am here,’ Fitzormonde continued, ‘I go to stare at it.
The beast is a killer, but I'm fascinated by it.
Whitton was like that.
Sir Ralph made his guilt a bond between us all.
As the years passed, we became more confident that our crime had been forgotten and began the custom of every year meeting to celebrate Christmas.
We never discussed Bartholomew.’
Athelstan nodded.
‘That's the terrible thing about sin, Sir Brian.
We let it become part of us, like a rotting tooth which we tolerate and forget.’
Fitzormonde rubbed his face with his hands.
‘But what happened,’ Athelstan asked, ‘three years ago?’
‘I don't know.
We came to the Tower as Ralph's guests for Yuletide, supping as usual at the Golden Mitre in Petty Wales, but when we met Sir Ralph that particular time, he looked as if he had seen a ghost.
In fact he said he had, and that's all he would say.’
Athelstan seized the man's wrist and forced him to look up.
‘Have you confessed all, Sir Brian?’
‘Everything I know.’
‘And the piece of parchment?’
‘A reminder of the ship Bartholomew was sailing on.’
‘And the four crosses?’
‘They represent Bartholomew's four companions.’
‘And the seed cake?’
Fitzormonde sighed and blew his cheeks out.
‘A reminder of how Bartholomew saved us from the assassins, and a warning of our own deaths.’
‘Do you know who murdered Sir Ralph and Sir Gerard?’
‘Before God, I do not!’
‘Could Bartholomew have survived?’
‘He may have.’
Athelstan stared at the lime-washed walls.
‘What about Bartholomew's son?
He would be a young man now.’
Fitzormonde shrugged.
‘I thought of that but I have made some enquiries.
Young Burghgesh was killed in France.
Now, Father, my penance?’
Athelstan raised his hand and pronounced absolution, making the broad sweep of the sign of the cross above Fitzormonde's bowed head.
Sir Brian looked up.
‘My penance, Father?’ he repeated.
‘Your penance is the guilt you have borne.
You are to pray for Burghgesh's soul and for those of Sir Gerard and Sir Ralph.
And one more thing!’
‘Yes, Father?’
‘You are to go downstairs and repeat your confession to Sir John.’
‘He'll arrest me for murder.’
Athelstan grinned.
‘Sir John is an old soldier and, when sober, a keen student of the human heart.
He has more compassion in his little finger than many a priest.
He'll hear you out and probably roar for a cup of sack.’
8
Fitzormonde left, closing the door quietly behind him.
Athelstan went to gaze out of the window, staring absentmindedly at the great tocsin bell which hung so silently on its icy rope above the snow-covered green.
The sun, now beginning to set, made the bell shimmer like a piece of silver.
Athelstan turned and glimpsed Fitzormonde talking quietly to Cranston.
The coroner was nodding, listening intently to the hospitaller's confession.
Athelstan wandered back to Philippa's chamber but it was deserted.
He stayed for a while reflecting on what Fitzormonde had told him; first, both Sir Ralph and Mowbray's murders were connected to that terrible act of betrayal in Cyprus so many years earlier.
Secondly, and Athelstan shivered, there would be other murders.
He packed his writing tray away whilst speculating on other possibilities.
First, Burghgesh could have survived and come back to wreak vengeance.
Secondly, someone else, possibly Burghgesh's son, had returned to make his father's murderers atone for the death.
But, if it had been either of these, how would they get into the Tower, mysteriously ring a tocsin bell and then arrange for Mowbray's fall?
Athelstan sighed.
Sir Ralph Whitton's murder was simple compared to the complexities surrounding Mowbray's.
Athelstan rubbed his chin with the palm of his hand and remembered he'd promised Benedicta to meet her at the  Fleet prison where Simon the carpenter would spend his last evening on earth.
The thought of Benedicta made him smile.
Their relationship had become calmer, more gentle, then he remembered Doctor Vincentius and hoped the physician would not ensnare her with his subtle charm.
Athelstan's smile broadened.
Here he was, a friar, a priest, a man sworn to chastity, feeling twinges of jealousy about someone he could only claim as a friend.
He shook himself free from his reverie and looked around the chamber.
The murders…
What other possibilities existed?
Was it one of the group?
Not Fitzormonde, but perhaps Horne the merchant?
Or could it be Colebrooke, who had discovered Sir Ralph's murky past and was promoting his own ambitions under the guise of revenge for past misdeeds?
Athelstan swung his cloak around him, picked up his writing tray and examined the beautiful embroidery of the dorsar draped over the back of one of the chairs.
Of course, terrible though it might be to imagine, Mistress Philippa had the cool nerve and composure to be a murderess, and Parchmeiner might well be her accomplice.
Hammond the chaplain had the spite, whilst Sir Fulke had everything to gain.
Athelstan heard Cranston bellowing his name so left the chamber and went downstairs where the coroner stood kicking absentmindedly at the snow.
‘You feel better, Sir John?’
Cranston grunted.
‘And Fitzormonde told you all?’
The coroner glanced up.
‘Yes, I believe he did, Athelstan.
You think the same as I do?’
He nodded.
‘Our sins,’ he murmured, ‘always catch up with us.
The Greeks call them the Furies.
We Christians call it God's anger.’
Cranston was about to reply when Colebrooke came striding across the green.
The lieutenant looked white-faced and tense.
‘My Lord Coroner!’ he called out.
‘You are finished here?’
‘In other words,’ Cranston half whispered to Athelstan, ‘the fellow is asking us when we are going to bugger off.’
‘We will leave soon, Master Lieutenant, but may I ask one favour first?’
Colebrooke hid his distaste behind a false smile.
‘Of course, Brother.’
‘You have messengers here.
Will you send one to the widow Benedicta at St Erconwald's in Southwark?
Ask her to meet Sir John and me at the Three Cranes tavern in Cheapside.
And, Master Lieutenant?’
‘Yes!’
‘Sir Ralph's corpse — was it cold and the blood congealing?’
‘I'm a soldier, Brother, not a physician.
But, yes, I think it was.
Why?’
‘Nothing,’ Athelstan murmured.
‘I thank you.’
Colebrooke nodded and strode off.
Cranston stretched lazily.
‘A pretty mess, Brother.’
‘Hush, Sir John, not here.
I think these walls do have ears, and our boon companion Red Hand wishes an audience.’
Cranston turned and quietly cursed as the madman scampered across the snow to greet them, yelping like an affectionate dog.
‘Lots of blood!
Lots of blood!’ he screamed.
‘Many deaths, dark secrets!
Three dungeons but only two doors.
Dark passages.
Red Hand sees them all!
Red Hand sees the  shadows creak!’
The madman danced in the snow before them.
‘Up and down!
Up and down, the body falls!
What do you think?
What do you think?’
‘Sod off, Red Hand!’
Cranston muttered and, taking Athelstan by the arm, guided him past the great hall towards the gateway under Wakefield Tower.
Athelstan suddenly remembered the bear, stopped and walked back to where the animal sat chained in the corner where curtain wall met Bell Tower.
The friar was fascinated.
He stared and hid a smile, hoping Sir John would not notice, for there was a close affinity between the shaggy beast and the corpulent coroner.
‘It smells like a death house,’ Cranston moaned.
The bear turned and Athelstan glimpsed the fury in its small, red eyes.
The great beast lumbered to his feet, straining at the chain around its neck.
‘I don't know which is the madder,’ Cranston muttered, ‘the bear or Red Hand!’
The animal seemed to understand Sir John's words for it lunged towards him with a strangled growl; its top lip curled, showing teeth as sharp as a row of daggers.
‘I think you are right, Sir John,’ Athelstan observed.
‘Perhaps we should go.’
The friar watched with alarm the way the chain around the bear's neck creaked and shook the iron clasp nailed to the wall.
They turned left to collect their horses from the stables.
‘We could leave them here,’ Athelstan remarked, ‘and take a boat downriver.’
‘God forbid, Brother,’ Cranston snapped.
‘Have you no sense?
The bloody ice is still moving, and I never fancy shooting under London Bridge even on the fairest day!’
They left the Tower and rode up Eastcheap, turning into  Gracechurch, past the Cornmarket where St Peter on Cornhill stood, and into Cheapside.
The roar from that great thoroughfare was deafening: traders, merchants and apprentices shouted themselves hoarse as they tried to make up for their previous loss of trade.
The bailiffs and beadles were also busy: two drunkards, barrels placed over their heads, were being led through the marketplace, followed by a stream of dirty, ragged urchins who pelted the unfortunates with ice and snowballs.
A beggar had died on the corner of Threadneedle Street.
The corpse, now stiff, had turned blue with the cold.
A small boy armed with a stick tried to beat off two hungry-looking dogs which sniffed suspiciously at the dead beggar's bloody feet.
Cranston tossed him a penny and, standing on an overturned barrel, bellowed for half the market to hear how he was Coroner of the city, and would no one help the poor lad have the corpse removed?
‘I don't care if you're the bloody mayor himself!’ one of the traders shouted back.
‘Piss off and leave us alone!’
Athelstan drew his cowl over his head and pulled his sleeves down.
He knew what was coming next.
Cranston, true to his nature, jumped down from the barrel and grasped the unfortunate trader by the throat.
‘I arrest you, sir!’ he roared.
‘For treason!
That is the crime you have committed.
I am the King's Coroner.
Mock me and you mock the crown!’
The man's face paled and his eyes bulged.
‘Now, sir,’ Cranston continued quietly as the other traders slunk back, ‘I can ask the wardsman to convene a jury of your peers or we can settle on a fine?’
‘A fine!
A fine!’ the man gasped, his face turning puce.
Sir John tightened his grip.
‘Two shillings!’ he announced, and shook the fellow so hard Athelstan became alarmed and took a step forward, but the coroner waved him back.
‘Two shillings, payable now!’
Cranston repeated.
The man dug into his purse and slapped the coins into the coroner's hand.
Sir John released him and the fellow slumped down on all fours, retching and coughing.
‘Was that necessary, Sir John?’
Athelstan whispered.
‘Yes, Brother, it was!’
Cranston snapped.
‘This city is ruled by fear.
If a trader can mock me, in a week every bastard in London will follow suit.’
Cranston scowled as two beadles, summoned by the commotion, approached.
The self-important looks on their smug faces faded as they recognised Sir John.
‘My Lord Coroner!’ one of them gasped.
‘What is it you want?’
Cranston pointed to the beggar's corpse.
‘Have that removed!’ he bellowed.
‘You know your job.
God knows how long the poor bastard has been lying there.
Now move it before I kick both your arses!’
The beadles backed off, bowing and scraping as if the coroner was the Regent himself.
Cranston turned and flicked his fingers at the urchin.
The boy, arms and legs as thin as sticks, his eyes dark and round in a long, white face, came over, his thumb stuck in his mouth.
‘Here, lad!’
Cranston pushed the two shillings into an emaciated hand.
‘Now, go to Greyfriars.
You know it?
Between Newgate and St Martin's Lane.
Ask for Brother Ambrose.
Tell him Sir John sent you.’
The boy, the money clenched tightly in his fist, stared back, spat neatly between Cranston's boots and scampered off.
The coroner watched him go.
‘The preacher Ball is correct,’ he murmured.
‘Very soon this city will burn with the fires of revolt if the rich do not get off their fat arses and do more to help!’
He turned, his face now grave and serious.
‘Believe me, Brother, God's angel stands at the threshold, the flailing rod of divine retribution in his hand.
When that day comes,’ Cranston rasped, ‘there will be more violent deaths than there are people in this marketplace!’
Athelstan nodded in agreement and stared around.
Oh, the marketplace was full of wealthy traders, merchants draped in furs, the wealthy artisans in jackets of rabbit and moleskin.
Most looked well fed, plump even, but in the alleyways off the markets, Athelstan saw the poor, not like those in his parish but the landless men driven from their farms, flocking into the city to look for work though none was to be had.
The Guilds controlled everything and soon these vagrants would be turned out, forced across London Bridge to swell the slums and violent underworld of Southwark.
‘Come on, Sir John,’ he murmured.
They pushed on up the Mercery, standing aside as a group of debtors from the Marshalsea, linked by chains, moved through the crowd, begging for alms both for themselves and other inmates.
They found the Three Cranes tavern at the corner of an alleyway just opposite St Mary Le Bow.
Benedicta was waiting for them, seated before a roaring fire; beside her on the ground, crouched like a little dog, sat Orme, one of Watkin the dung-collector's sons.
Athelstan slipped him a penny, patted him lightly on the head, and the boy scampered off.
‘Well, Benedicta, you left my church in good order?’
The widow smiled and unloosed the clasp of her cloak.
Athelstan suddenly wondered what she would look like in a bright dress of scarlet taffeta rather than the dark browns, greens and blues she always wore.
‘All is well?’ he repeated hastily.
Benedicta grinned.
‘Cecily the courtesan and Watkin's  wife were screaming abuse at each other, but apart from that, you will be sorry to hear, the church still stands.
Sir John, you are well?’
She twisted her head to catch the coroner's eye as he scowled across at the innkeeper who was busy gossiping to the other customers around the great wine barrels.
‘My Lady,’ Cranston retorted, ‘I would feel better —’he raised his voice to a bellow' — I would feel better if I got some custom, and the attention due to a King's officer!’
The landlord kept chatting so Cranston strode across, roaring for a cup of sack and wine for his companions.
‘What's wrong with Sir John?’
Benedicta whispered.
‘I don't know.
I think the Lady Maude has upset him.
She is being mysterious and secretive.’
‘Strange,’ Benedicta mused ‘I meant to tell you, Brother, Lady Maude was seen in Southwark over a week ago.
She is so memorable, so petite and sweet-faced.’
Benedicta screwed up her eyes.
‘Yes, I am sure they told me she was coming out of Doctor Vincentius’ house.’
‘Is he a ladies’ man?’
Athelstan asked hastily, and wished he could have bitten his tongue out the moment he spoke.
Benedicta stared coolly back.
‘Brother Athelstan,’ she replied, ‘can you show me a man who isn't?’
Cranston's return saved Athelstan from further embarrassment.
The coroner swept his beaver hat from his head, scratched his balding pate, winked lecherously at Benedicta and turned to watch a now frightened taverner bring across a deep pewter bowl of sack and cups of wine for his companions.
‘You are not eating, Sir John?’
‘No,’ Cranston muttered.
‘I don't feel hungry and I suspect the innkeeper, after my blunt speech with him, would poison the bloody dish!’
Benedicta laughed merrily.
‘Sir John, you must calm yourself!’
‘No,’ Cranston replied, lifting the goblet.
‘I'll find serenity at the bottom of this cup.’
Benedicta watched in disbelief as Cranston drained his drink in one large gulp and boomed for more, smacking his lips, gently burping and belching.
Benedicta bit her lower lip to stifle her laughter.
‘Well, Brother.’
Cranston patted his broad girth.
‘With apologies to the Lady Benedicta, what do you make of Mowbray's death?’
Cranston licked his lips.
‘Or Sir Ralph's?’
Athelstan leaned against the table and ran his finger round the rim of the wine goblet.
‘First, we have found that Sir Ralph was probably murdered by someone who entered the Tower by crossing an ice-bound moat.
Secondly, Mowbray was lured to his death by the tocsin sounding.
Thirdly, both murders are certainly linked with Sir Ralph's dreadful betrayal of Bartholomew Burghgesh in Cyprus so many years ago.’
Athelstan smiled at Benedicta's quizzical face.
‘You are puzzled, My Lady.
Well, so are we.
First, how can someone enter the Tower, murder Sir Ralph, then leave the fortress without being noticed?
Secondly, why did Sir Ralph just lie there and allow his throat to be cut so savagely that his head was almost hacked from his body?
You saw the corpse, Sir John, and the chamber?
There was no sign of any struggle nor did the guards hear anything.
Thirdly, who rang the tocsin bell and, at the same time, so subtly arranged for Mowbray to fall from the parapet?’
The coroner's face grew longer at Athelstan's every word.
‘And the list of suspects,’ the friar continued remorselessly, ‘still stands.
We may have met the murderer, yet  it may equally be someone in the Tower or the city about whom we know nothing.’
‘I do not know the full story,’ Benedicta interrupted, ‘but there is rejoicing in Southwark at Sir Ralph's death.’
She lowered her voice.
‘Pike the ditcher says it is the work of the Great Community.
The secret peasant leaders wish to weaken the city before they organise their great revolt.’
‘Nonsense!’
Cranston slurred, now on his third cup of sack.
‘Pike the ditcher, with all due respect, My Lady Benedicta, should keep his mouth shut and his neck safe!
Sir Ralph was not murdered by any peasant.’
Athelstan sipped from his wine cup and made a face at the sourness of the drink.
‘One person we have not met, My Lord Coroner, is the merchant Adam Horne.
Benedicta, before we go on to meet Simon in the Fleet prison, there are certain enquiries to make.
You will accompany us?’
Benedicta agreed, so they rose and left, Cranston bawling abuse at the hapless taverner.
Outside it was growing dark, only a red glow showed where the sun had set.
Cranston steadied himself carefully on the icy cobbles and stared at the sky.
‘Why is it always red at night?’
‘Some say,’ Athelstan replied, ‘it's because the sun slips into hell, but I think that's an old wives’tale.
Come on, Sir John.’
Athelstan slipped round the coroner, tactfully linked one arm through his and, with Benedicta on the other side, crossed the now deserted Cheapside.
The stalls were being packed away, the last iron-rimmed carts crashed along to Newgate or east to Aldgate.
Weary apprentices and traders locked their shutters and put out lantern horns.
The bell of St Mary Le Bow began to toll the curfew, the sign that all trading should cease, as four urchins pulled a huge yule log  up to the door of one of the great merchants' houses.
Cranston stopped to enquire directions of one of the market stewards who sat in his little toll booth on the corner of Wood Street.
The fellow pointed down to the corner of the Mercery and Lawrence Street.
‘You will find the Horne house there,’ he said.
‘A fine place, with a huge, black-timbered door and a coat of arms above it.’
They turned, staying in the centre of Cheapside as the melting snow began to slide from the sloping tiled roofs.
The Horne house stood deserted, no lantern above the door, only a tired-looking Christmas wreath.
Cranston stepped back and looked up at the lead-paned windows.
‘No candlelight,’ he murmured.
Athelstan pulled Benedicta closer into the side of the house to protect her from any snow falling from the small canopied hood of the doorway.
He lifted the great brass knocker, cast in the shape of a dragon's head and brought it crashing down.
There was no answer so he knocked again.
They heard the patter of footsteps and a whey-faced maid answered the door.
‘Is Alderman Horne here?’
Cranston slurred.
The young girl shook her head wordlessly.
‘Who is it?’ a voice asked from the darkness beyond.
‘Lady Horne?’
Cranston queried.
‘I am Sir John Cranston, Coroner.
You sent a message earlier today to the sheriffs at the Guildhall?’
The woman stepped out of the darkness, her drawn face bathed even whiter by the light of the candle she carried.
Her cheeks were tear-stained, her eyes dark-shadowed and sad, whilst her steel-grey hair hung in untidy tresses beneath a white veil.
‘Sir John.’
She forced a smile.
‘You had best come in.
Girl, light the torches in the solar!
Bring candles!’
Lady Horne led them up a stone-vaulted passageway into a comfortable but cold solar.
A weak fire flickered in the hearth.
Lady Horne told them to sit whilst behind them the girl lit candles.
Athelstan gazed round.
The room was positively luxurious with bright-hued tapestries on the walls, and exquisitely embroidered linen cloths placed on tables, chests and over the backs of chairs.
Nevertheless, he could almost smell the stench of fear: the house was too quiet.
He looked at Lady Horne who sat on the other side of the fireplace, an ivory and pearl rosary entwined around her fingers.
‘You wish some refreshment?’ she murmured.
Cranston was about to reply but Athelstan intervened.
‘No, My Lady.
This matter is urgent.
Where is your husband?’
‘I don't know,’ she whispered.
‘That terrible message arrived this morning and Sir Adam left immediately afterwards.
He said he was going upriver to the warehouses.’
She clenched her hands tightly.
‘I have sent messages there but the boy returned and said my husband had already left.
Sir John, what is the matter?’
Her tired eyes pleaded with the coroner.
‘What does this all mean?’
‘I don't know,’ he lied.
‘But your husband, Lady Horne, is in terrible danger.
Does anyone know where he has gone?’
The woman bowed her head, her shoulders shaking with sobs.
Benedicta rose and crouched beside her, stroking her hands gently.
‘Lady Horne, please,’ Athelstan persisted.
‘Do you know anything about the message or why your husband was so frightened?’
The woman shook her head.
‘No, but Adam was never at peace.’
She looked up.
‘Oh, he was a man of great  wealth but at night he would awake screaming about foul, bloody murder, his body coated in sweat.
Sometimes he would tremble for at least an hour, but never once did he confide in me.’
Cranston stared across at Athelstan and made a face.
The friar looked at the hour candle which stood on the table behind him.
‘Sir John,’ he whispered, getting up, ‘it's almost seven o'clock.
We must go!’
‘Lady Horne.’
The merchant's wife was about to rise but Cranston gently touched her on the shoulder.
‘Stay and keep warm, the maid will see us out.
If your husband returns, tell him to come to my house.
It's not far.
You promise?’
The woman nodded before looking away into the dying embers of the fire.
Outside Cranston stamped his feet, clapping his hands together.
‘That woman,’ he observed, ‘is terrified.
I suspect she knows the source of her husband's wealth, but what can we do?
Horne could be anywhere in the city.’
Athelstan shrugged.
‘Sir John, Benedicta and I must go to Fleet prison.
We promised the parish we would visit Simon the carpenter.’
‘Ah, yes,’ Cranston replied tartly.
‘The murderer.’
‘You will go home?’
Sir John stared into the gathering darkness.
He would have loved to but what was the use?
All he'd do was sit and drink himself stupid.
‘Sir John,’ Athelstan repeated, ‘the Lady Maude will be waiting for you.’
‘No,’ Cranston answered stubbornly.
‘I'll go to the Fleet with you.
Perhaps I can help.’
Athelstan glanced at Benedicta and raised his eyes heavenwards.
The friar wanted Sir John to go; he was tired of the coroner's constant bad temper and sudden bouts of fury.
He loved the fat knight but on this occasion dearly wished to see the back of him.
Nevertheless, he agreed.
They walked through the blood-stained slush of the Shambles, holding their noses against the sickening putrid smells from the slaughter houses, and turned left into Old Deans Lane, a narrow alleyway ankle-deep in muck which ran between dark, overhanging houses.
Somewhere in the distance a dog barked mournfully.
At the corner of Bowyers Row they stood aside as a huge, wooden wagon rolled by, pulled by four horses, their manes hogged, eyes blinkered and nostrils flaring at the corrupting smell of death.
The horses' hooves and the wheels of the cart were muffled in straw so that it seemed to glide like a terrible phantasm.
On one corner of the cart a torch flared, throwing the driver into ghastly relief as he sat cloaked and hooded, a grim death mask over his face.
‘What is it?’
Benedicta asked.
She brought up the hem of her cloak to cover her nose.
Athelstan sketched a sign of the cross in the air and prayed the cart would continue, but it stopped alongside them.
The driver tried to quieten the horses as two screeching cats, fighting over some vermin, scurried out of the shadows.
Cranston knew what was in the cart.
He had recognised the driver as the hangman from Tyburn.
‘Don't look,’ he whispered.
But Benedicta, her curiosity aroused, leaned on Athelstan's arm and, standing on tiptoe, peered over the rim of the cart.
She stared in horror at the whitened, frozen cadavers which lay there under a tattered, canvas sheet.
Their limbs hung all awry but round the neck of each was a thick, purple line, while the purple-red faces were contorted, swollen tongues held fast between ice-cold lips, eyes rolled back in the sockets.
‘Oh, sweet Lord!’ she breathed, and leaned against the wall as the driver cracked his whip and the cart rolled on.
‘What was that?’
‘The hanged from the Elms,’ Cranston answered.
‘At night the corpses are cut down and taken to the great lime pits near Charterhouse.’
He glared at the widow.
‘I told you not to look!’
Benedicta retched before, resting on Athelstan's arm, following Cranston through Ludgate and up towards the Fleet.
The prison did little to lighten their mood: grey frowning walls with a few sombre buildings peeping above them, and a black gateway with an arch which yawned as if it wished to devour any unfortunate who approached it.
Cranston pulled at the bell and they were allowed through a wicket gate built into the ponderous door.
A gaoler led them into the porter's lodge, the fellow bowing and scraping as he recognised Sir John.
Athelstan was pleased then that the coroner had accompanied them.
They went through a large hall where the debtors were jailed, furnished with side benches of oak and two long tables of the same wood, all covered in greasy filth.
The people gathered around them were dirty and foul-smelling, men and women wearing threadbare jerkins and tattered cloaks.
They pushed their way through the hall and up a stone-flagged passageway, past grated windows where poor debtors shook their begging bowls through the bars and whined for alms.
At last they went down slimy, cracked steps into the Hall of the Damned, the condemned hold, a massive, vaulted cellar with dungeons in the far wall.
‘Who is it you wish to see?’ the porter snapped.
‘Simon the carpenter.’
The porter hurried across, chose a key and unlocked one of the doors.
‘Come on, Simon!’ he bawled.
‘A rare treat!
London's own coroner, a friar and a fair lady.
Who could ask for more?’
Simon crept from the cell.
Athelstan hardly recognised him: his face was a mass of sores, his hair long and matted with filth and vermin.
The man's clothing had been reduced to rags and he was loaded with fetters.
Simon shuffled awkwardly towards them, lifting his manacled hands to push his hair back.
His lips were blue with the cold and his eyes, above sallow sunken cheeks, bright with fever.
‘Father, you have brought a pardon?’ he asked hopefully.
Athelstan shook his head.
‘No, I am sorry.
I just came to visit you, Simon.
Is there anything I can do?’
The carpenter looked at him, then at Benedicta and, throwing back his head, laughed hysterically until the porter struck him across the face.
The condemned man slumped to the floor, crouching like a beaten dog.
Athelstan knelt beside him.
‘Simon!’ he murmured.
‘Simon!’
The carpenter raised his head.
‘Do you wish to be shriven?
I will hear your confession.’
The man looked up despairingly.
‘There's nothing left,’ Athelstan whispered.
‘This time tomorrow, Simon, you will be with God.’
The carpenter nodded and began to cry like a child.
Athelstan turned.
‘Sir John, Benedicta, please, give me a moment.’
They withdrew.
The coroner bawled at the porter to follow them and, for the second time that day, Athelstan heard the confession of a man about to meet Death.
At first, Simon spoke slowly and Athelstan had to fight hard to keep his composure as the chill of the dungeons seeped through his robe, turning his legs to blocks of ice, but then Simon allowed his emotions full rein.
He talked of everything, a miserable litany of failure culminating in the rape of a child.
Athelstan heard him out, pronounced absolution and rose, rubbing his stiff legs to make the warmth return.
The porter came back.
‘Tomorrow, Simon,’ Athelstan whispered, ‘I shall remember you.
And, Simon?’
The condemned man looked up.
‘You remember me before the throne of God.’
The carpenter nodded.
‘I didn't mean to do it, Father.
I was lonely, I'd drunk too much.’
‘I know,’ Athelstan murmured.
‘God help you and her!’
Athelstan turned to the porter and tossed him a silver coin.
‘One good meal, sir.’
The porter caught the coin and nodded.
‘One good meal,’ Athelstan warned.
‘I shall check on that.’
He was about to leave when Simon called out: ‘Father!’
‘Yes, Simon?’
‘Ranulf the rat-catcher came to see me earlier today.
He had been hired by a butcher in the Shambles.
He said you were at the Tower because of Sir Ralph Whitton's death.’
The carpenter grinned.
‘Even though I have been shriven, it is good to know that bastard went before me.
A strange place the Tower, Father.’
Athelstan nodded.
He felt Simon was only trying to prolong the visit.
‘I worked there once,’ the carpenter called out.
‘A strange place, worse than this!’
‘Why is that, Simon?’
‘Well, at least here the cells have doors.
In the Tower there are rooms, dungeons, where you go in, the doors are removed, and you remain until death behind a bricked wall.’
‘Is that so?’
Athelstan smiled.
‘God be with you, Simon.’
Athelstan went back up the steps to rejoin Cranston and Benedicta.
They never spoke until they were out of the prison, the wicket gate slamming shut behind them.
‘The antechamber of Hell,’ Athelstan murmured as they made their way down Bowyers Row under the dark mass of St Paul's.
At Friday Street Sir John made to leave.
Athelstan took him aside and stared into the bleary-eyed face.
‘I thank you for coming, Sir John.
Be at peace.
Go home and talk to the Lady Maude.
I am sure all will be well.’
Cranston scratched his head.
‘God knows, Brother, but I feel the only good I did today was to listen to Fitzormonde and help that child.
You know, the one who stood over the beggarman?’
‘You came with us to the Fleet.’
‘Aye,’ Cranston muttered.
‘I could not get a pardon for Simon, you know that, Brother, but I showed him one last mercy.’
‘What's that, Sir John?’
‘I left a coin for the executioner.
Simon won't dance.
He will be taken far up the ladder.’
Cranston snapped his fingers.
‘His neck will snap and it will all be over quickly.’
The coroner stamped his feet and looked up at the star-filled sky.
‘You had best hurry home, Brother.
The stars await you.’
He turned and tramped up the street.
‘I only wish,’ he called out, ‘we'd found Alderman Horne!’
9
As Athelstan and Benedicta rode slowly back across the dark, choppy waters of the Thames, Adam Horne left the Crutched Friars monastery near Mark Lane just north of the Tower.
He'd arrived just after Vespers to collect the message he had been told would be waiting for him.
The grizzle-haired lay brother had smiled toothlessly and waved Horne into the door-keeper's lodge.
‘It's been here all afternoon,’ the lay brother murmured, handing him a thin roll of vellum.
Horne anxiously unfolded the parchment and, begging the brother to bring a candle, hastily read the contents.
‘Oh, my God!’ he groaned as his hopes were dashed.
Earlier in the morning he had received a piece of parchment with a sketch of a crudely drawn ship, and a flat sesame seed cake.
He had tried to hide his fears from his poor wife and gone down to his warehouse where another message had been awaiting him: he was not to return home, the short letter instructed, but to go to the House of the Crutched Friars where his anxieties would be resolved.
He should fear nothing but put his hopes in the sender who wished him well.
Now this short note cruelly dashed his hopes: the mysterious writer apologised for not meeting him but asked him to wait amongst the ancient ruins to the north-west of the Tower.
Horne shredded the note, left the friary and made his way through the dark, ice-covered  country lanes which cut round farms and smallholdings.
He stared up at the starlit sky and shivered, not only from the biting cold but his own sombre fear of what might await him.
Horne's commonsense told him to run but he had waited too long.
The threat had hung like a sword over his head for years and he wanted to confront it once and for all.
A self-confident merchant, Horne also believed the meeting might end his fears for good.
He could then go home, absolved from his part in that terrible crime committed so many years ago.
The line of trees ended and Horne stood on the edge of the common, in the far distance the lowering mass of the Tower.
Perhaps he should go there?
He sighed despairingly.
Who could help him?
Sir Ralph was dead and the surviving hospitaller would have no time for him.
Horne gulped quickly at the realisation of his own guilt.
Should he go on?
He stared at the ice-covered ground and half listened to the cold wind moaning gently amongst the trees.
Above him a raven cawed as it flew to hunt over the mudflats along the river.
A fox barked.
The sound was strident and made the hair curl on the back of his neck.
Horne felt uneasy.
He turned and stared back down the muddy track.
Was someone there?
Had he been followed?
Home's face twisted into a snarl.
He might be a fat, wealthy merchant now but fifteen years ago he had fought as a knight, shoulder to shoulder with men who feared nothing on earth.
Yes, he had been guilty, even as much as Whitton.
Fitzormonde and Mowbray had always been soft, they could whine and moan that they had not been to blame, but Horne had agreed to Whitton's plan and built a thriving business on the proceeds.
He fondled the long dagger he'd pushed through his wallet, drawing comfort from its metal coiled handle.
If  there was an assassin about, he reassured himself, best to confront him now rather than be taken in the dead of night.
An owl hooted.
Horne snarled.
‘Let all the hell hounds come from Satan's dark abyss!
I will match blow for blow!’
His empty words comforted him as he walked across to the ruins, a collection of snow-covered boulders.
The old ones said the great Caesar once had a palace there.
Horne, deeply agitated by a mixture of fear, terror and forced bravado, went and sat in the middle.
He felt safer, despite the darkness, the white, snow-covered common and brittle ice would give him warning of any assassin's approach.
The merchant stared round the ruined Roman villa.
A few yards away was a half-raised wall.
Horne glared at it contemptuously.
If any murderer lurked there, they would have to cover the ground and he had brought something special.
A small arbalest or miniature crossbow swung from his belt, a bolt already in place.
The darkness grew deeper.
Horne studied the lights of the city.
The wine he had drunk earlier in the day, his exertions and fear, made him feel warm and sleepy.
A short stab of icy wind made him huddle deeper into his cloak and he stirred to keep the hot blood flowing through his veins.
The merchant stared around into the gathering darkness and his courage began to ebb as he wondered who his strange benefactor might be.
Horne closed his eyes, half sleeping, dozing.
That's what Bartholomew Burghgesh had always told him to do.
‘Rest whenever you can, my dear Adam.
A true soldier always eats, drinks, sleeps and takes a wench whenever the opportunity presents itself.’
Horne smiled to himself.
Brave, redoubtable man!
A veritable paladin!
Horne had liked him but Ralph Whitton had always been jealous of Bartholomew for being a better soldier than he.
But surely there had been more than that?
Something about Whitton's wife being rather sweet on the young Bartholomew when he had, for a time, served as a knight banneret in the Tower.
Horne sniggered to himself.
Strange coincidence, the same place where Whitton had met his death.
Horne looked up.
Was that a sound he had heard?
He sat still, his ears straining, but only the cawing of the ravens and the distant bark of some farm dog broke the chilling silence.
Horne moved his feet restlessly.
He would wait a few more minutes and then he'd go.
He stared at the ground.
Who was the murderer? he wondered.
Could it be the hospitaller, Fitzormonde?
Or Fulke, Sir Ralph's brother?
He'd known Burghgesh quite well.
Or someone else who believed he was God's vicar on earth to dispense justice and retribution?
Or had Burghgesh survived, been taken prisoner, and then years later slipped back into England to reap bloody havoc on his foes?
Or perhaps his son and heir?
Had he really died in France, or else learnt about his father's terrible fate and secretly returned to stalk his sire's killers?
Horne chewed on his lip.
He had to face the fact that he was a killer, he had been party to Burghgesh's murder.
Sometimes at night this thought would rouse him screaming from his sleep.
And was that why God had given him no son or heir?
Was his wife's barrenness due to divine justice?
Horne heard a sound, jumped up in terror and stared at the apparition just next to the old wall.
A man clothed in knight's armour, on his breast the red cross of the crusaders, his face hidden by that helmet!
The same steel, conical shell with eagle's wings on either side and blue tufted crest on top.
A chilling terror gripped Horne's heart.
‘My God!’ he whispered.
‘It's Burghgesh!’
Or was it an apparition from hell?
The armoured, visored figure just  stood there, feet slightly apart, mailed, gauntleted fists gripping the handle of the great, two-edged sword with the blade resting on one shoulder.
‘You are Burghgesh?’
Horne hissed.
The apparition moved closer.
Only the crunch of mailed feet on the hard ice broke the silence.
‘Adam!
Adam!’
The voice was Burghgesh's though it sounded sombre and hollow.
‘Adam!’ the voice repeated.
‘I have returned!
I come for vengeance!
You, my comrade in arms, my friend for whom I would have given my life.’
One mailed hand shot out.
‘You betrayed me!
You, Whitton and the rest!’
Horne moved suddenly, his hand going to the small arbalest which swung from his belt.
‘You're no phantasm,’ the merchant snarled.
‘And, if you are, go back to Hell where you belong!’
He brought up the arbalest but, even as he did, the great two-edged sword scythed the air, neatly slicing the merchant's head from his shoulders.
The decapitated head spun like a ball in the air, lips still moving; his trunk stood for a few seconds in its own fountain of hot red gore before crashing on to the blood-stained ice.
Horne's mailed executioner carefully cleaned the sword, drew his knife and knelt beside the blood-gushing torso of his victim.
Some hours later Sir John Cranston, muttering and cursing to himself, made his way from Blind Basket Alley up Mincing Lane into Fenchurch Street.
Dawn had just broken and Sir John, unable to sleep, had risen early to confer with Alderman Venables about the continued disappearance of Roger Droxford, still wanted for the murder of his master whose decapitated corpse Cranston had found.
Sir John had spent a restless night, tossing from side to side in his great double  bed.
He had tried to remain calm but still seethed with fury at Maude's continued intransigence in the face of his pleadings and questions: her only answer would be to bite her lip, shake her head and turn away in floods of tears.
At last Cranston had risen and gone to his personal chancery but, finding himself unable to concentrate, had finished dressing and gone to rouse Venables.
Cranston grinned wickedly.
He'd enjoyed that, letting the good alderman know what it was like to be awoken just before dawn.
The sleepy-eyed alderman, however, could give him no further information on Droxford.
‘He can't have fled far, Sir John,’ Venables murmured sleepily.
‘God knows, in this weather only a fool would try to flee the city limits, and both the description and the reward have been circulated.’
Venables had grinned ‘After all, Sir John, he's a man you would remember.’
‘What do you mean?’
‘Well, he had two fingers missing from one hand and his face was covered in hairy warts.’
The alderman pulled his fur-lined bed robe around him, moving restlessly on the stone-flagged corridor and making it obvious the coroner should leave.
‘What's so special about Droxford, anyway, Sir John?’
‘He's special, Master Venables, because he's a murderer, a felon who has stolen over two hundred pounds of his master's monies, and it looks as if he has got away scot free!’
Venables took one look at Cranston's angry face and agreed.
Sir John had then stamped off, muttering curses about public officials who didn't seem to care.
Yet, in his heart, Cranston knew he was a hypocrite.
The business at the Tower was still shrouded in mystery.
The fugitive Droxford, not to mention the easy-going alderman, were the nearest butts for Sir John's foul temper.
He turned into the still-deserted Lombard Street and up to the great stocks just before the Poultry.
A group of beadles were standing around a beggar who sat imprisoned there, feet and hands tightly clamped, face frozen, eyes open.
‘What's the matter?’
Cranston bellowed.
The beadles shuffled their feet.
‘Someone forgot to release him last night,’ one of them shouted.
‘The poor bastard's frozen to death!’
‘Then some bastard will pay!’
Sir John bellowed back, and continued up the wide thoroughfare, past a group of nightbirds, whores and petty felons now manacled together and being led down to the great iron cage on top of the Conduit.
A frightened-looking maid let him in.
Sir John suddenly stopped, eyes narrowing.
Hadn't he glimpsed a shadow in the alleyway beside the house?
He went back.
Nothing.
Cranston shook his head and, vowing he would drink less sack, brushed past the anxious-looking maid, down the passageway and into the stone-flagged kitchen.
He thanked God Maude wasn't there, he was tired of their encounters.
‘Any messages?’ he barked at a subdued-looking Leif, still sitting in his favourite place in the inglenook of the great fireplace.
The one-legged beggar lifted his head from his bowl of vegetables and spiced meat and shook his head.
‘No, Sir John,’ he replied.
‘But I have polished the pewter pots.’
‘Good,’ he growled.
‘At least someone in this city is working.’
Cranston poured himself a generous goblet of wine and seized a small white loaf the cook had left to cool on the kitchen table.
The coroner stood snatching mouthfuls of bread and gulping noisily from a goblet whilst he stared angrily at the fire.
What should he do? he wondered.
Whitton's and Fitzormonde's deaths at the Tower were still as unfathomable as ever.
He had also failed to find Horne.
Sir John knew it would only be a matter of time before his masters at the Guildhall or, worse still, the Regent at the Savoy Palace, asked for an account of his stewardship.
He heard a sharp knock at the door.
‘Go on, Leif,’ he growled ‘I'm too bloody cold to answer it.’
Leif looked self-pityingly at him.
‘Go on, you idle bugger!’
Cranston roared ‘There's more to this house than sitting on your arse and stuffing your mouth with every bit of food you can lay your sticky little fingers on!’
Leif sighed, put down the bowl and hobbled out of the kitchen.
Cranston heard the front door open and the man limping slowly back.
‘What is it?’
Cranston asked, winking good-humouredly at the maid who had also hurried down to see who was at the door.
The girl smiled anxiously back and Cranston quietly cursed himself.
He was frightening everyone with his foul temper.
He must take a grip on himself.
Perhaps he should ask Athelstan to intervene?
‘Well, man?’ he repeated ‘Who was there?’
‘No one, Sir John.’
‘What do you mean?’
‘Well, there was no one there.’
Leif steadied himself against the lintel of the door.
‘Only this.’
He held up a battered, leather bag tied at the neck and stained with watery dark marks around the base.
‘I answered the door,’ Leif ponderously repeated, ‘no one was there, only this bag.’
‘Then open it, man!’
Cranston said testily.
The coroner turned away to refill his wine cup.
He whirled around at Leif's horrified cry and the bump as the maid fell  in a dead faint to the floor.
The beggarman just stood there, eyes wide in horror, mouth slack; in his upraised hand he held by the hair the decapitated head of Adam Horne, alderman and merchant.
Now Cranston had seen decapitated heads, be they of murdered taverner or some lord executed on Tower Hill, but this was truly gruesome; it was not so much the half-closed eyes and still blood-dripping neck but the mouth forced open and, thrust inside, the mangled remains of the dead merchant's genitals.
Cranston grabbed the head from the horror-struck beggar's hand, thrust it back into the bag, stepped over the still prostrate maid and, roaring for Maude, dashed down the passage-way to the door.
He flung it open, rushing like an angry bull down Cheapside, but the snow-covered thoroughfare was still deserted, with no trace or sign of their mysterious, grisly visitor.
Cranston stopped and, half crouching, retched violently as the true horror of what he had seen seized his mind and wrung his stomach as if it was a wet rag.
‘Oh, the bastard!’ he whispered.
‘Oh, Lord help us!’
He staggered back inside the house.
Maude, white-faced, stood at the foot of the stairs.
‘Sir John, what is it?’
‘Go back to your room, woman!’
Cranston roared.
‘Stay there!’
He turned to the grooms and servants now huddled together near the kitchen door.
‘You,’ Cranston barked at one, ‘go for a physician!
You,’ he pointed to the cook and her assistant, ‘take the maid into the solar!’
The poor, half-unconscious girl was hustled to her feet.
Cranston walked back into the kitchen.
Leif sat on the stool  like a man pole-axed.
The bag and its gruesome contents still lay where Cranston had dropped it.
The coroner busied himself around the house.
He shaved, changed his doublet, put on his sword belt and took his heaviest cloak from its hook outside the buttery.
He found a heavy flour sack in one of the outhouses and placed the battered leather bag carefully in it.
‘Leif,’ he ordered, ‘tell Lady Maude I am going to the Guildhall, then on to Southwark.’
The beggar, usually so garrulous but still dumbstruck at what he had seen, just stared and nodded, open-mouthed.
Cranston swung the sack over his shoulder.
‘Oh, Leif.’
Cranston turned and grinned evilly at the beggar.
‘There's more of that rich stew if you want it.’
Leif turned away, retching, whilst Cranston stalked out of his house muttering vengeance against all and sundry.
In St Erconwald's church, Athelstan had just finished the Mass for the dead and was now blessing the corpse of Tosspot, an old drunkard who'd lived in the cellars of the Piebald Horse tavern.
Tosspot had been found dead the previous afternoon.
Pike the ditcher and Watkin the dung-collector had, in the absence of any relatives, sewn the body into a canvas sack, placed it on a wooden trellis and brought it to lie in front of the chancel screen.
Athelstan had always given strict instructions on this; any poor man or woman found dead in his parish was to be given honourable burial, so this included Tosspot.
Athelstan sketched the sign of the cross above the corpse and sprinkled it with the Asperges rod.
Around him the usual Massgoers, Benedicta included, watched fascinated as Athelstan urged the soul to go out to meet his Christ, whilst he, Athelstan, priest of that church, summoned God's army to  meet this unfortunate man's soul; they were to lead it into Paradise and ensure it did not fall into the hands of Satan.
Athelstan paused.
And what about the body? he thought.
Would that be safe?
He looked down at his fingers and noted the chalk dust on their tips.
Where had that come from? he wondered.
It had not been there during Mass.
‘Father?’
Crim the altar boy whispered.
Athelstan, startled, looked up.
‘Father,’ the boy repeated, his face creased in a mischievous grin, ‘you've suddenly stopped praying!’
Athelstan shook himself free from his reverie.
‘We beg thee, Michael the Archangel,’ he intoned the final prayer, ‘to take the soul of this our brother.’
He paused.
What could he call him?
Tosspot?
What would the angels think of such a name?
‘Take the soul of this our brother Tosspot,’ he continued defiantly, ‘into the bosom of Abraham.’
The friar glared at the congregation but they all knelt, heads wisely bowed to hide their grins.
Athelstan, trying to conceal his embarrassment, signalled at Watkin and Pike to lift the bier and follow him and Crim, bearing a lighted taper, into the cemetery.
Outside the cold wind snuffed the taper out.
Crim slipped on the ice and fell on his backside, cursing so loudly Athelstan had to bite his lip to keep his face straight.
They crossed the lonely, haunted cemetery to the shallow grave Pike had dug in the ground.
Athelstan caught a glimpse of the two lepers, shrouded in their hoods near the charnel house.
He suddenly remembered the twig he had used to push the Hosts through the leper's squint for these two unfortunates to swallow.
Athelstan smiled to himself.
That's where the chalk had come from.
They reached the grave.
Pike and Watkin unceremoniously rolled old Tosspot into the shallow hole and, whilst Athelstan  muttered some prayers, hastily covered it with icy lumps of clay.
Athelstan then blessed the grave and with Watkin darkly hoping the body would stay there, they all trooped back into the church.
Athelstan chose to ignore the dung-collector's dire speculation.
The grave robbers, whoever they were, seemed to have disappeared.
Perhaps moved on to vex some other unfortunate priest.
He swept up the nave under the chancel screen and into the small, icy sacristy.
Athelstan jumped as a large figure loomed out of the shadows.
‘Sir John!’ he snapped.
‘Must you lurk like some thief in the night?’
Cranston grinned slyly.
‘I must have words with you, Brother, and not here.’
Athelstan looked at him carefully.
‘You've been drinking, Sir John?’
Cranston smirked.
‘Yes and no.
Quick!
I'll wait whilst you divest.’
Athelstan hid his irritation.
He doffed his chasuble, stole and cope, hastily hung them in the cupboard, gave a wide-eyed Crim a penny for his help then bustled Sir John back into the church.
He beckoned to Benedicta who was standing near the baptismal font.
‘Lock the sacristy, please,’ he whispered to her.
‘And then clear the church.’
Athelstan looked around.
‘Watkin!’ he shouted.
The dung-collector ambled slowly over, one eye on Sir John.
‘Watkin,’ Athelstan confided, ‘I will be gone for some time.
You are to ensure the candles are doused and the church is kept safe and, if you are so concerned about the cemetery, keep a watch there yourself’
The sexton looked hurt and Athelstan could have bitten out his tongue.
He had not intended to be so sharp but Cranston's secretive arrival had unnerved him.
The friar led the coroner out of the church.
Cranston saw Bonaventure  fairly skipping along to greet him but he had no desire to have that bloody cat rubbing up against his leg, so hustled Athelstan out to collect their horses.
‘Follow me, my Mephistopheles,’ he murmured.
‘To a place of warmth and security.’
They crossed the beaten track, dodging between the heavy-wheeled carts, and led their horses down to London Bridge and into the welcoming warmth of the Piebald Horse tavern.
Cranston loved this place, a veritable den of iniquity but one which sold good ales, fine wine and delicious food.
Of course, the coroner personally knew Joscelyn, the tapster.
‘A real sinner,’ he had once described him as, ‘who will get into heaven because he has stolen the gates.’
Athelstan agreed; the landlord of the Piebald Horse was a one-armed, reformed sea pirate who had confidentially explained to the friar how he would love to go to church but the smell of incense always made him feel ill.
Athelstan smiled to himself.
He found it strange that he had just buried Tosspot who used to clean the platters and tankards in this very tavern.
The friar gazed round.
The place looked cleaner, fresh plaster on the wall, the beams newly painted, whilst the rushes underfoot were fresh and sweet-smelling.
Joscelyn waddled towards them.
The old rogue's vein-streaked face was wreathed in smiles, his good hand scratching his chin as he relished the prospect of a fine profit.
Sir John was a prodigious drinker and was well loved by the city's taverners.
‘My Lord Coroner,’ Joscelyn gave a mock bow, ‘you are most welcome to my humble abode.’
‘By the sod, you old bastard!’
Cranston roared.
‘Have you gone back to your old, wicked ways?
Where did you get the sustenance to clean this sewer of iniquity?’
Joscelyn shrugged and spread his one good hand, fingers splayed out.
‘I have a new partner,’ he announced proudly, ‘who sold his own tavern near the Barbican and moved across the river to be free from the prying of certain coroners!’
Cranston roared with laughter and led Athelstan over to the far corner where a table and stools were set apart from the rest of the customers.
Athelstan felt rather embarrassed.
Near the wine tuns, he noticed Pike the ditcher, the clay of the cemetery still fresh on his hands, deep in hushed conversation with a group of strangers.
The Great Community, Athelstan thought, peasants from the snow-covered fields outside the city, slipping in to talk sedition, plan treason and plot rebellion.
Pike noticed him and, eyes guarded, raised his tankard.
Athelstan smiled back but watched as, a few minutes later, Pike rose and led the rest of his companions out of the tavern.
Cranston squatted down with his back to the wall, smacked his lips and gazed hungrily up at the hams and other meats hanging from ropes on the rafters to be cured.
He watched a pot boy broach a new cask and through an open door glimpsed the kitchen with its huge oven where Joscelyn baked his own bread.
A dusty-faced boy was now raking the coal and wood from this into a tidy, white pile of ash.
The bread would then be slipped in, the oven door sealed, and when the oven cooled, the bread would be baked.
A curious place, Sir John reflected, at the heart of Southwark's squalor, yet the ales and wine were always fresh and the food delicious.
He glimpsed a table at the far end of the tavern with a huge silver nef or spice ship.
Cranston scratched his head.
So much new wealth.
He idly wondered if Joscelyn had returned to his old ways and was engaged in some petty smuggling.
Athelstan studied Cranston out of the corner of his eye.
Sir John's temper had improved but Athelstan dreaded spending a day watching him guzzle one goblet of wine after another.
The landlord waddled over.
‘My Lord Coroner, you are ready to order?’
Cranston gazed speculatively at the ceiling.
‘No fish!’ he barked.
‘Some pheasant or quail, cooked to a golden brown and stuffed with spices.
I want the sauce thick.
And some fresh bread!’
‘And the Reverend Father?’
Joscelyn asked sardonically.
‘The Reverend Father,’ Athelstan replied smoothly, ‘would like a bowl of thick leek soup, some bread, and a cup of wine with more water than claret.’
They waited until Joscelyn had walked away, roaring their order into the kitchen.
‘Well, My Lord Coroner?’
Athelstan asked.
‘What has happened?’
Cranston outlined in sharp, succinct phrases the grisly events which had taken place earlier in the day.
‘I have also been to the Guildhall,’ he mournfully concluded ‘The mayor told me in no uncertain terms how displeased His Grace the Regent Duke of Lancaster is at our lack of progress.
Adam Horne was apparently a member of his retinue.’
‘And what was your reply?’
‘I told him that I didn't give a rat's arse, and that I was doing the best I could.’
‘I suppose,’ the friar answered, ‘the mayor accepted your eloquent reply?’
Cranston slouched back against the wall.
‘Oh, we had a quarrel, but I have more sense than to seek a confrontation.
I explained we had searched for Horne but could not find him.’
He glanced across at Athelstan, his face full of self-pity.
‘I must resolve the matter with the Lady Maude,’ he  whispered.
‘It's clouding my mind.’
Athelstan waited until the slattern had served them with goblets of wine.
‘Look, Sir John, let us take these events from the beginning.’
Athelstan raised a hand.
‘No, it is necessary.
And, if you'll accept my apologies, we must for the time being put the matter of Lady Maude to one side.’
Cranston nodded glumly.
‘Sir Ralph Whitton,’ Athelstan began, ‘received a warning that he was going to die because of a terrible act of betrayal committed in Outremer some years ago.
I know,’ Athelstan quietly continued, ‘Sir Ralph was guilty of such an act.
That's why in the back of his Book of Hours, he scribbled those prayers to Julian the Hospitaller.’
‘Who was he?’
‘A knight who committed terrible murders and spent his life in making reparation.
Anyway,’ Athelstan continued, ‘Sir Ralph moves from his own chamber to the so called security of the North Bastion tower.
He is frightened and even refuses to take his Moorish servant, Rastani, with him.
He drinks heavily the night before his death and retires to his bed chamber.
What happened then?’
Athelstan asked, trying to draw Cranston from his own dark thoughts.
The coroner slurped noisily from his cup.
‘Well, my dear friar, according to all the evidence we have, Sir Ralph went to bed, and locked the door behind him, keeping the key with him.
The door leading to the gallery on which his chamber stands was locked by the guards, whilst the other end of the passage is blocked by fallen masonry.
The guards are on duty all night just inside the entrance to the North Bastion.
They are both trusted men and the key to both the gallery door and another for Sir Ralph's chamber hang on a hook beside them.
We have established, on good authority, that neither sentry left his post nor did they see or hear anything untoward.’
‘And now the murder?’
Athelstan prompted.
‘Young Geoffrey,’ Cranston continued, ‘whom Sir Ralph apparently doted upon, comes across early the next morning.
The guards search him for weapons and open the door to the gallery.
The same door is then locked, apparently on Sir Ralph's orders, and Geoffrey goes to rouse him.
The guards hear him knocking and shouting but then our young hero comes back.
He announces his inability to arouse Sir Ralph, is about to return and unlock Whitton's chamber himself, then changes his mind and goes for Colebrooke the lieutenant.
They both return to Sir Ralph's chamber and open it; the room is undisturbed but Whitton is lying on his bed, his throat slashed, the corpse icy cold, and the shuttered windows wide open.
That, my dear friar, is where our problem begins.’
‘Not if we accept our conclusion,’ Athelstan replied.
‘That someone crossed the frozen moat and, using the steps in the wall, climbed up to Sir Ralph's chamber.
The assassin prised open the lever on the shutters, entered and committed the crime.
Nevertheless,’ he persisted, ‘our conclusion has its own problems.
Why did Sir Ralph just lie there and allow his throat to be cut?
He was a soldier, a warrior.’
The friar shook his head.
‘All we do know,’ he concluded, ‘is that the assassin must have been a member of the community at the Tower who knew Sir Ralph had changed his bed chamber, and he or she either committed the murder or hired a professional assassin to do it for them.’
Athelstan stared across at a group of dicers who sat playing noisily on the other side of the tavern.
‘And Sir Gerard Mowbray's murder,’ Cranston observed, ‘is no clearer.
Who rang the bell?
How did Mowbray fall?
Of course Horne's murder,’ he continued, ‘was relatively easy.
The assassin played upon his guilt and fear and probably lured the hapless man to his grisly death in that lonely place.’
‘Where did he die?’
Athelstan queried.
‘In the old ruins to the north of the Tower.
And, before you ask, his murderer left no trace.’
‘And the suspects?’
Athelstan asked wearily.
He leaned across and tapped Sir John on the arm.
‘Come on, My Lord Coroner, apply that sharp brain of yours!’
Cranston shrugged.
‘Well, it could be Sir Fulke.
His buckle was found on the ice and he stands to gain from his brother's death.
Sir Ralph's servant Rastani was lithe and able enough to climb up that wall.’
Cranston made a face at Athelstan.
‘By the way, I checked on their story for the night Sir Ralph died; both Sir Fulke and Rastani were absent from the Tower and there are people who can guarantee their whereabouts.’
‘Master Geoffrey could be the felon,’ Athelstan remarked.
‘But on the night Sir Ralph died he was in Philippa's bed, and on the night Sir Gerard died, in his lady's chamber.
True, he went to rouse Sir Ralph but he was searched for any weapons, he had no key, and even if he had entered the room, favoured son or not, Sir Ralph would scarcely have offered his throat to be cut.’
Athelstan rubbed his face.
‘The possibilities are endless,’ he said.
‘Hammond, the felonious chaplain.
Colebrooke, the envious Lieutenant.
The gracious Mistress Philippa.
Not to mention our hospitaller who may have told us a pack of lies.’
The friar narrowed his eyes.
‘We must check on them all,’ he murmured.
‘Or Red Hand,’ Cranston observed.
‘The mad man who may not be as insane as he appears.’
Athelstan looked up and smiled.
‘But we have made  some progress, Sir John.
If Fitzormonde is to be believed, we know the reason for the murders: Burghgesh's death on that unfortunate ship in the Middle Sea so many years ago.
The picture on the parchment is to remind his murderers of their foul act and the sesame seed cake a warning of their impending doom.’
‘And that —’ Cranston almost shouted, glaring across at the landlord to bring his food for his stomach was growling with hunger' — leads us to another mystery.
Did Burghgesh really die?
Or is he back, hiding in London, even the Tower?
Or is there someone else?
Perhaps his son or some other friend?’
Cranston leaned back as Joscelyn brought across the steaming platters of food.
The landlord served Sir John himself, cutting thick slices of pheasant breast and laying them deftly with his one hand on the pewter platter whilst a maid scurried up with a jug of steaming gravy in which the bird had been cooked.
Sir John grinned his thanks, took his own pewter spoon from his wallet, drew his dagger and set to as if he hadn't eaten for days.
Athelstan watched in astonishment: Sir John's permanent hunger always fascinated him.
A slattern brought his own meal, a thickly spiced bowl of soup.
Athelstan asked to borrow a pewter spoon and ate slowly.
‘They've forgotten the bread,’ Sir John grumbled.
Athelstan called the girl back and small, fresh white loaves, wrapped in a linen cloth, were immediately served.
Whilst he ate Athelstan reflected on what they had discussed.
He waited a while until Sir John had taken the edge off his appetite.
‘There is one matter we have overlooked.’
‘What's that?’
Cranston mumbled, his mouth full of food.
‘Horne's murderer means the assassin knows us or why  should he send such a grisly trophy to your house?’
‘Because the bastard's mad!’
‘No, no, Sir John.
It's meant as a warning.
This murderer sees himself as doing God's work.
He is sending a message: Keep well away until my work is done.
Don't interfere.’
Athelstan lowered his spoon.
‘Such a terrible thing,’ he whispered.
‘A man's genitals hacked off and stuffed into the mouth of his decapitated head.
Of course,’ he continued, ‘Fitzormonde mentioned that.’
‘What?’
‘Well, how the Caliph of Egypt would punish in such a way anybody who transgressed his command.
The head and genitals hacked off and both exposed above the city gates in Alexandria.
It's obvious, Sir John,’ he continued, ‘our murderer must be someone who has lived in Outremer, someone who knows about the Hashishoni — the flat sesame seed cake, and that awful way of humiliating the corpse of an executed criminal.’
Cranston lowered his knife.
‘But who is the murderer, Brother?’
‘I don't know, Sir John, but I think we should re-visit the Tower and speak to our group of suspects.’
‘And then?’
‘We go to Woodforde.’
Cranston groaned.
‘Sir John,’ Athelstan persisted, ‘it's not far — a few miles through Aldgate and down the Mile End Road.
We must find out if Burghgesh ever returned and what happened to his son.
Moreover,’ he continued, ‘perhaps it may give you some time to reflect on the Lady Maude.’
Cranston jabbed the point of his knife into a piece of soft meat, mumbled his assent and continued to eat as if his very life depended upon it.
10
Athelstan and Cranston finished their meal and crossed London Bridge.
Beneath them the water moved black and sluggish and they heard chunks of ice crashing against the starlings which protected the wooden arches from the fury of the Thames.
They passed through Billingsgate.
The air stank with the odour from the stalls, now freshly stocked with herring, cod, tench and even pike as the fishing fleets took advantage of a break in the weather.
The Tower was all abustle when they arrived.
Like any good soldier, Colebrooke had the garrison working to break the tedium caused by the freezing weather, as well as to take his own mind off the recent murders.
The lieutenant was standing on Tower Green, shouting orders at workmen who were refurbishing mangonels, scorpions and the great battering rams.
A number of archers stood ankle-deep in the slush, practising at the butts, whilst others were being mercilessly drilled by the serjeants.
Athelstan vaguely remembered rumours about how, in the spring, the French might attack the Channel ports and even force their way up the Thames to plunder and burn the city.
Colebrooke's displeasure at seeing Cranston and Athelstan was more than apparent.
‘You have found the murderers?’ he yelled.
‘No, Master Lieutenant!’
Cranston bellowed back.
‘But we will.
And, when we do, you can build the gallows.’
Cranston stepped aside as a butcher and two fletchers rolled barrels of salted pork down to the store house.
The coroner wrinkled his nose.
Despite the heavy spices and thick white salt, the pork smelt rancid and his gorge rose as he saw insects crawling out from under the rim of the barrel.
He quietly vowed not to accept any food from the Tower buttery or kitchens.
Colebrooke, seeing his visitors would not be deterred, turned away to issue further orders.
Athelstan took advantage of the delay to walk over to where the bear, squatting in its own filth, was busy plundering a mound of refuse piled high before him.
The madman, Red Hand, sat like an elf fascinated by the great beast.
‘You are content, Red Hand?’
Athelstan asked softly.
The man grimaced, waving his hands in the air as if mimicking the bear.
Athelstan crouched down beside him.
‘You like the bear, Red Hand?’
The fellow nodded, his eyes intent on the bear.
‘So does the knight,’ Red Hand slurred and Athelstan caught the stench of wine fumes on his breath.
‘Which knight?’
‘The one with the cross.’
‘You mean Fitzormonde?’
‘Yes, yes, Fitzormonde.
He often comes to stare.
Red Hand likes Fitzormonde.
Red Hand likes the bear.
Red Hand does not like Colebrooke.
Colebrooke would kill Red Hand.’
‘Did you like Burghgesh?’
Athelstan asked quickly.
He caught the gleam of recognition in the madman's eyes.
‘You knew him,’ Athelstan continued.
‘As a young soldier, he once served here.’
Red Hand looked away.
‘Surely you remember?’
Athelstan persisted.
The madman shook his head and stared at the bear but  Athelstan saw him blink away the tears which pricked his madcap eyes.
The friar sighed and rose, dusting the wet ice from his robe.
‘Brother Athelstan!
’ Cranston barked.
‘Master Colebrooke is a busy man.
He says he cannot waste the day whilst you converse with a madman.’
‘Master Colebrooke should realise,’ Athelstan replied, ‘that it is a matter of opinion, as well as the judgment of God, who is sane and who is mad.’
‘Father, I mean no offence,’ Colebrooke answered, taking off his conical helmet and cradling it in his arms.
‘But I have a garrison to command.
I will do what you want.’
Athelstan smiled.
‘Good!
Mowbray's body, where does it lie?’
Colebrooke pointed to the Chapel of St Peter ad Vincula.
‘Before the chancel screen.
Tomorrow it will be buried in the cemetery of All Hallows church.’
‘Is it coffined?’
‘No, no.’
‘Good, I wish to see the corpse, and after that My Lord Coroner and I would like to speak with all those affected by Sir Ralph's death.’
Colebrooke groaned.
‘We are here on the Regent's authority,’ Athelstan interrupted.
‘When these matters are finished, Master Lieutenant, I shall report on the support, or lack of it, we have had in our investigation.
We will meet the group in St John's Chapel.’
Colebrooke forced a smile and hurried off, shouting at his soldiers to search out Sir Fulke and others.
Cranston and Athelstan walked over to St Peter's.
The church was a dour, sombre place, cold and dank.
The nave was shaped like a box, with rounded pillars guarding darkened aisles.
At the top a small rose window afforded some light.
The chancel screen was of polished oak and before it, surrounded by a ring of candles, lay the corpses of Sir Ralph Whitton and Sir Gerard Mowbray.
The embalmers had done what they could but, even as they walked up the nave, both Cranston and Athelstan caught the whiff of putrefaction.
The two bodies lay under canvas sheets on wickerwork mats supported by wooden trestles.
Cranston stood away, waving Athelstan on.
‘I've eaten too richly, Brother,’ he murmured.
‘Look for what you want and let's get out.’
Athelstan was only too happy to oblige.
He ignored Sir Ralph's corpse but lifted back the insignia over the hospitaller's and the canvas sheet which lay underneath.
He did not wish to look at Mowbray's face.
Athelstan had seen enough of death.
Instead he examined the white, scabrous legs of the hospitaller, picking up one of the candles to study the purple-yellow bruise just above the shin on the corpse's right leg.
Satisfied, he pulled back the canvas sheet, replaced the tallow candle, genuflected towards the sanctuary and left the church, Cranston following as quickly as possible.
They stood on the porch steps and eagerly drank in the invigorating cold air.
‘Good Lord, Sir John,’ Athelstan murmured, ‘I always thought St Erconwald's was bad but, if ever I moan about it again, remind me of this church and I'll keep my mouth shut.’
Cranston grinned.
‘It will be my pleasure, Brother.
You found what you are looking for?’
‘Yes, I did, Sir John.
I believe Sir Gerard was not pushed from the parapet.
Someone laid a spear or a piece of wood at the top of the steps whilst the hospitaller was at his usual place at the far end of the parapet walk, near Salt Tower.’
Athelstan pursed his lips.
‘Yes, it could be done under cover of darkness whilst Sir Gerard was lost in his own thoughts.’
He narrowed his eyes and stared at the distant wall of the Tower.
‘The tocsin sounded.
Mowbray hurried along the parapet.
In the dark he would not see the obstacle.
His leg struck it, he slipped and fell to his death.’
‘But we don't know who rang the bell or placed the pole on the parapet.
Remember,’ Cranston continued, ‘apart from Fitzormonde and Colebrooke, everybody was in Mistress Philippa's chamber.’
‘Colebrooke might have done it,’ the friar replied.
‘He might have seen the knight standing on the parapet, crept up, placed the pole there, and somehow or other arranged for the tocsin to be sounded.’
‘But we have no proof?’
‘No, Sir John, we do not.
But we are collecting it.
In bits and pieces.’
He sighed.
‘Only time will tell if we are successful.’
They found Colebrooke and the rest of the group sitting on benches in the Chapel of St John.
Their displeasure at being summoned was more than apparent.
Hammond kept his back half-turned; Fulke slouched, staring up at the ceiling; Rastani seemed more confident and Athelstan caught the sardonic mocking look in his dark, brilliant eyes.
Colebrooke marched up and down as if he was on parade whilst Mistress Philippa leaned against the wall, looking sorrowfully down at Tower Green.
‘Where is Geoffrey?’
Athelstan asked.
‘Geoffrey Parchmeiner,’ Fulke replied, ‘being a rather frightened, silly young man, may have many vices.’
The knight ignored his niece's furious look.
‘But he works hard.
He has better things to do than hang around the Tower answering idle questions whilst good men are killed and  the murderer walks scot free.’
‘Thank you for that speech, Sir Fulke,’ Cranston replied, beaming falsely around.
‘We have only one question and I apologise to you, Sir Brian, but it's a name, that's all.
Bartholomew Burghgesh — does it mean anything to any of you?
Athelstan was amazed at the transformation caused by Cranston's words.
The coroner's smile widened.
‘Good,’ he announced.
‘Now we have your attention.’
He glanced quickly at the hospitaller's angry face.
‘Sir Brian, you must not answer, and if you are patient, you will see why we ask.
Well,’ the coroner clapped his hands, ‘Bartholomew Burghgesh?’
‘Hell's teeth!’
Sir Fulke snarled and walked into the centre of the room.
‘Don't play games, Sir John.
Burghgesh was one name my brother, Sir Ralph, would never have mentioned in his presence.’
‘Why?’
Athelstan asked innocently.
‘My brother could not stand the man.’
‘But they were comrades in arms.’
‘Were,’ Fulke emphasised.
‘They quarrelled in Outremer.
Bartholomew was later killed on a ship taken in the Middle Sea by Moorish pirates.’
‘Why?’
Cranston barked.
‘Why what?’
‘Why did your brother dislike Burghgesh so much?’
Fulke stepped closer and lowered his eyes.
‘It was a matter of honour,’ he murmured.
He licked his lips and glanced nervously towards Philippa.
‘Sir Ralph once accused Bartholomew of paying too much attention to your mother, Sir Ralph's wife.’
‘Were the allegations true?’
Athelstan asked.
Fulke's face softened.
‘No,’ he stammered.
‘I'll be  honest — I liked Bartholomew.
He was funny, always thought the best of people.
He was both gentle and courteous.’
Athelstan suddenly glimpsed the steel in Sir Fulke's character.
‘You really did like him, didn't you?’
‘Yes, yes, I did.
I was much distressed at the news of his death.’
Fulke shuffled his feet and looked down at the floor.
‘I'll be honest,’ he continued.
‘When I was younger, I used to wish Bartholomew was my brother because, God forgive me, I did not like Ralph.’
He looked up, his eyes, sad.
‘Years ago he and Bartholomew served as officers here in the Tower.’
Fulke coughed and cleared his throat.
‘My brother was treacherous.
He was cruel.
He ill-treated Red Hand.
He even beat the priest here when he was only a young clerk.’
The chaplain blushed with embarrassment.
‘Come on, tell the truth!’
Fulke now glared round, snarling like a dog.
‘Sir Ralph was hated!’
Mistress Philippa stepped forward, her face white with fury.
‘My father is sheeted, waiting for burial, and you speak ill of him!’
‘God forgive me, Philippa, I only tell the truth!’
Fulke flung out his hand.
‘Ask Rastani!
When he was a boy, who plucked his tongue out?’
The Moor just stared back, his eyes never flickered.
‘It's true!’
Fitzormonde intervened ‘It was over the Moor that the bad blood first surfaced between Burghgesh and Whitton.’
Fulke slumped back on the bench.
‘I've said enough,’ he snarled.
‘But I'm tired of these questions.
Mistress Philippa, your father was a bastard and no one here will gainsay me.’
Cranston and Athelstan just stood amazed at this sudden outburst of hatred and animosity.
Good Lord, Athelstan thought, anyone here could be Sir Ralph's murderer.
Burghgesh had been well loved.
Did someone in this room believe he was God's executioner to avenge a good man's death?
Athelstan looked around.
‘Master Parchmeiner will not be here today?’ he asked, taking advantage of the sudden lull.
‘No,’ Sir Fulke replied wearily.
‘For pity's sake, Father, who would want to stay here?
So many memories, so much hatred.’
Mistress Philippa sat huddled on one of the benches, her face in her hands.
Sir Fulke went over to her and patted her gently on the shoulder.
Cranston caught a smirk on Rastani's face.
Was he the murderer? the coroner wondered.
He recalled Athelstan's words, how the slayer of Adam Horne used a method practised in Moorish countries to desecrate the body of a criminal and traitor.
‘We have seen enough,’ Athelstan whispered.
‘We should go.’
‘Just one more thing,’ Cranston announced.
‘You knew Adam Horne the merchant?’
‘Another bastard!’
Sir Fulke hissed.
‘Yes, yes, Sir John.
Horne was my brother's friend.’
‘Well, he's dead!’
Cranston proclaimed flatly.
‘Found murdered last night in the ruins just north of here.’
Fitzormonde swore quietly.
The others looked up in alarm.
‘I wonder where you all were?’
Cranston asked.
‘Hell's teeth, Sir John!’
Colebrooke snapped.
‘Now the thaw's come, anyone could slip in and out of a postern gate.’
Cranston smiled wanly.
The lieutenant was right: it would be nigh impossible to make everyone account for their movements.
Horne could have been murdered any time between dusk and dawn.
‘Come, Sir John,’ Athelstan murmured.
They took their leave unceremoniously, Cranston waving Colebrooke aside.
They hardly spoke a word until they had collected their horses and left the Tower, going up towards Eastcheap.
‘Oh, Lord save us!’
Cranston suddenly broke the silence.
‘What hatred exists in the human heart, eh, Brother?’
‘Aye,’ Athelstan replied, gently guiding Philomel away from the snow-covered sewer which ran down the middle of the street.
‘Perhaps we should all remember that, Sir John.
Minor jealousies and misunderstandings can fan the petty flames of bickering into the roaring fires of hatred.’
Cranston glanced at Athelstan out of the corner of his eye and smiled at the barbed reminder what was true of Fulke and others in the Tower was also true of his relationship with the Lady Maude.
‘Where to now, Brother?’ he asked.
‘To Master Parchmeiner's shop opposite Chancellor's Inn near St Paul's.’
‘Why?’
Cranston asked.
‘Because, my dear Cranston, he was not present with the rest in the Tower and we must interrogate everyone.’
They rode up Candlewick Street and into Trinity, a prosperous part of the city Athelstan rarely frequented.
The houses were spacious and grand; their lower storeys were built of solid timber, the projecting gables above were a framework of black beams and white plaster.
The roofs were tiled, unlike the houses of many of Athelstan's parishioners who had to be content with reeds and straw.
Many of the windows had pure glass and were protected by wood and iron.
Servants from these houses regularly flushed out  the sewers with the water they used to wash clothes so the streets did not reek as they did in Southwark.
Before several of the imposing entrances stood armed retainers wearing the gaudy escutcheons of their patrons: bears, swans, wyverns, dragons, lions, and even stranger beasts.
Stocky, well-fed merchants walked arm-in-arm with their plump wives, clad in garments of silk and satin, decorated with miniature pearls of exquisite delicacy.
Two canons swaggered by from the cathedral, clad in thick woollen robes lined with miniver.
A group of lawyers in gowns of red, violet and scarlet, trimmed with lambswool, sauntered arrogantly by, their cloaks pulled back to display decorated, low-slung girdles.
Pigs wandered here with bells slung round their necks to show they were the property of the Hospital of St Anthony and couldn't be slaughtered Beadles armed with steel-pointed staffs dispersed fowl or curbed the yapping of fierce yellow-haired dogs, whilst bailiffs tried to move on a strange creature dressed like a magpie in black and white rags.
The fellow loudly claimed he had in his battered, leather coffer some of the most marvellous relics of Christendom: ‘One of Charlemagne's teeth!’ he yelled.
‘Two legs of the donkey that carried Mary!
The skull of Herod's servant and some of the stones Christ turned into bread!’
Athelstan stopped and restrained the beadles who were harassing the poor fellow.
‘You say you have one of the stones Christ turned into a loaf of bread?’ the friar queried, trying hard to hide his laughter.
‘Yes, Brother.’
The relic-seller's eyes brightened at the prospect of profit.
‘But Christ didn't change stones into bread.
The devil asked him to but Christ refused.’
Cranston, also grinning, drew close to watch the charlatan's reaction.
The relic-seller licked dry lips.
‘Of course, he did, Brother,’ he replied in a half-whisper.
‘I have it on good authority that when Satan left, Christ did it but then changed them back to show he would not be tempted to eat.
It will only cost you a penny.’
Athelstan dipped into his purse and drew out a coin.
‘Here.’
He pressed it into the fellow's grimy paw.
‘This is not for your stone.
Keep it.
It's your ingenuity I am rewarding.’
The man gaped, open-mouthed, and Athelstan and Cranston walked on, quietly laughing at the relic-seller's quick response.
They passed the Littlegate of St Paul's where a lay brother was feeding a group of lepers with mouldy bread and rancid pork slices, as laid down by the city fathers who judged such food actually helped them.
Cranston glared across in disgust.
‘Do you really think it does?’ he asked Athelstan abruptly.
‘What, Sir John?’
‘Such food, does it really help lepers?’
Athelstan gazed at the grey cowled figures with their staffs and bowls for alms.
‘I don't know,’ he murmured.
‘Perhaps.’
The lepers made him think about the two who lurked in the cemetery of St Erconwald.
A memory stirred but he could not place it so pushed the matter to one side.
They turned into an alleyway off Friday Street and Cranston began to bellow at passersby for the whereabouts of Parchmeiner's shop.
They found it on the corner of Bread Street, a narrow, two-storeyed tenement with a shop below and living quarters above.
There was a stall in front, but because of the inclement weather this was now bare so they opened the door and went inside.
Athelstan immediately  closed his eyes and sniffed the sweet odour of fresh scrubbed parchment and vellum.
The smell reminded him vividly of the well-stocked library and quiet chancery of his novice days at Blackfriars.
The shop itself was a small, white-washed room with shelves along the walls stacked with sheets of parchment, ink horns, pumice stones, quills, and everything else one would need in a library or chancery.
Geoffrey himself was sitting at a small desk.
He smiled and rose to greet them.
‘Sir John!’ he cried.
‘Brother Athelstan, you are most welcome!’
He went into the darkness beyond to bring back two stools.
‘Please sit.
Do you want some wine?’
Surprisingly, Cranston shook his head.
‘I only drink when Sir John does,’ Athelstan mockingly replied.
The parchment-seller grinned and sat down behind his desk.
‘Well, what can I do for you?
I doubt you want to buy parchment or vellum — though, Brother, I have the best the city can offer.
I am a Guild member and everything I sell carries their hallmark.’
Geoffrey's good-natured face creased into a smile.
He shook his head.
‘But I don't think you come to buy.’
His face became grave.
‘It's the business at the Tower, isn't it?’
‘Just one thing,’ Cranston answered, moving uncomfortably on the small stool.
‘Does the name Bartholomew Burghgesh mean anything to you?’
‘Yes and no,’ Geoffrey replied.
‘I never met him but I heard Sir Fulke talk of him, and once Philippa repeated the name in her father's presence.
Sir Ralph became very angry and stormed out.
Of course, I asked Philippa why.
She just shook her head and said he was an old enemy of her  father's, and refused to be drawn any further.’
Athelstan watched the young man intently.
Could this languid, rather effete, fop be the Red Slayer?
The terrible murderer who stalked his victims in the Tower?
‘Geoffrey?’ he asked.
‘Yes, Brother.’
‘You have known Philippa how long?’
‘About two years.’
‘And Sir Ralph liked you?’
The parchment-seller grinned.
‘Yes, though God knows why.
I can hardly ride a horse and the call of arms does not appeal to me.’
‘You were with him the night he died?’
‘Yes, as I have said, I was with him in the great hall.
Sir Ralph was morose and became maudlin in his cups.’
‘He was drunk?’
‘Very.’
‘You helped him across to his chamber?’
‘Well, again, yes and no.
Master Colebrooke assisted me.
I took Sir Ralph to the top of the stairs into the North Bastion tower but the passageway was so narrow Colebrooke helped him the rest of the way.’
‘And you stayed with Mistress Philippa that night?’
The young man looked embarrassed and his eyes dropped.
‘Yes.
If Sir Ralph had known, he would have been most angry.’
‘But,’ Athelstan intervened, ‘he favoured your courtship of his only daughter?’
‘Yes, I think he did.’
‘Why?’
Cranston barked.
‘I mean, as you have said, you're no soldier.’
‘No, I am not.
I am not a lord or a knight but a merchant, Sir John, and a very good one.
I am one of those  who lends money so the King can hire his knights.’
The parchment-seller gestured round his well-stocked shop.
‘It may not look much but my profits are high.
I am a wealthy man, Sir John.’
‘One other matter.’
Athelstan smiled.
‘We have touched upon it before.
You went to rouse Sir Ralph.
What happened?’
‘The guards opened the passageway door and locked it behind me as Sir Ralph had ordered.
I went down and tried to rouse the constable.
There was no answer so I went back.
I told the guards and took the key to Whitton's chamber.
I was going to open it myself but changed my mind and went for Colebrooke.’
‘Why did you do that?’
Geoffrey pulled a face.
‘I knew something was wrong by the silence, not to mention the cold draught under the door of Whitton's chamber.’
Athelstan remembered the gap under Sir Ralph's door and nodded.
Someone standing outside the room would have felt the powerful draught and know something was wrong.
‘Why didn't you open the door yourself?’
Cranston asked.
The young man smiled weakly.
‘Sir John, I was frightened.
Sir Ralph was not a popular man.
Looking back, I suppose I was worried someone might be in the chamber.’
‘And the night Mowbray died?’
‘I was with Mistress Philippa, drunk as a lord.
Ask the others.’
‘And you never left?’
Geoffrey grimaced.
‘Like the rest, I went to use the privy along the corridor.
When the tocsin sounded I lurched out with the others to see what was wrong.
I didn't do much.
I was drunk and I hate those parapet steps.
I  wandered around, looking busy, and found Fitzormonde and Colebrooke standing over Mowbray's body.’
The young man paused and looked sharply at Athelstan.
‘I know why you are here.
There's been another death in the Tower, hasn't there?’
‘Yes, yes,’ Athelstan murmured and gave Parchmeiner the details of Horne's death.
Geoffrey leaned back in his chair and whistled softly.
‘I suppose,’ he said wearily, ‘you wish to question me about that?’
‘It would,’ Cranston observed, ‘be helpful to know where you were last night.’
Parchmeiner shrugged.
‘I worked in my shop, then I got drunk as a bishop in a nearby tavern, the Golden Griffin.
You could ask there.’
Athelstan smiled What would be the use? the friar thought.
Horne could have been killed at any hour.
He studied Parchmeiner's girlish face.
‘You are London-born?’ he queried, trying to look at the parchment lying on Geoffrey's desk.
‘No, Brother, I am not.
My family are Welsh, hence my colouring.
They moved to Bristol.
My father traded in parchments and vellum in a shop just beneath the cathedral there.
When he died I moved to London.’
Geoffrey picked up the piece of parchment.
‘My sister, now married, still lives there; she has just written inviting herself to town for the Yuletide season.
She, her husband,’ his face grew mock solemn, ‘and their large brood of children will bring some life to the Tower.’
He turned to Sir John.
‘My Lord Coroner, you have more questions?’
Sir John shook his head.
‘No, sir, we have not.’
They rose, made their farewells, and stepped out into the cold, icy street.
‘What do you think, Brother?’
‘A young man who will go far in his trade, Sir John.
He has his roots.’
The friar grinned.
‘Yes, Sir John, like you I wondered if he could be Burghgesh's son.
But I am sure he is not.’
Athelstan stopped and stared hard at the coroner.
‘We are looking for a killer without ties.
Sir John.
Someone who is pretending to be something he or she is not.
Someone who knows about the great act of betrayal so many years ago.
The question is, who?’
‘Well!’
Cranston clapped his hands together.
‘We'll not find it here, Brother, but perhaps in Woodforde…’
The coroner wiped his nose on the back of his hand and stared up at the sky.
‘I don't want to stay in London,’ he murmured.
‘The Lady Maude needs a rest from me.
And you, Brother?’
‘My parish,’ Athelstan drily replied, ‘will, I think, survive the continued absence of their pastor a little longer.’
They separated at the corner of Friday and Fish Streets, agreeing to meet within two hours at a tavern outside Aldgate on the Mile End Road.
Sir John stamped off, leading his horse, whilst Athelstan continued down Trinity into Walbrook, along Ropery to London Bridge.
Thankfully, he found St Erconwald's fairly deserted except for Watkin to whom he gave strict instructions about the custody of the church, and Ranulf the rat-catcher who had come to remind him of his promise that if a Guild of Rat-Catchers were founded, St Erconwald's could be their chantry church.
‘I promise you, Ranulf, I will think on the matter,’ Athelstan replied, trying to hide his amusement at the thought of St Erconwald's full of tarry-hooded rat-catchers, all looking like Ranulf.
The fellow's yellow, wizened face broke into a sharp-toothed smile.
He skipped down the steps as happily as any boy.
‘Brother,’ Watkin mournfully moaned.
‘What is it?’
‘Well —’ The dung-collector turned on the top step of the church and pointed towards the frozen cemetery.
‘We still haven't set a watch.’
‘Why should we, Watkin?
The grave robbers have moved on.’
The dung-collector shook his head.
‘I don't think so, Brother, and I am afeared worse might happen.’
Athelstan forced a smile.
‘Nonsense.
Now look, Watkin, I will be back late tomorrow evening.
Take a message to Father Luke at St Olave's.
Ask him to be so kind as to come here and say Mass tomorrow morning.
You will know where everything is?
And tell the widow Benedicta to help you.
You'll do that?’
Watkin nodded and stumped off, muttering under his breath about priests who didn't listen to tales of the dark shapes which did dreadful things in city churchyards.
Athelstan watched him go and sighed.
How could he deal with the cemetery when there was no evidence of any danger threatening?
He checked the door of the church was locked and stood engrossed in his own thoughts about Cranston.
The Lord Coroner was proving to be as difficult a problem as the dreadful deaths they were investigating.
What was wrong with the Lady Maude?
Athelstan wondered.
Why didn't Cranston ask her outright?
Athelstan smiled as he went across to his own house.
Strange, he concluded.
Cranston, who was frightened of nothing on two legs, seemed terrified of his little lady wife.
Athelstan checked that the windows and doors of the priest's house were locked, slung his saddle bags over a protesting Philomel, and both horse and rider wearily made their way along the icy track.
He stopped at an ale-house to leave further messages with Tab the tinker for Benedicta and  Watkin; they were to lock the church after morning Mass and, if the widow felt so inclined, she should take Bonaventure back to her own house.
The friar then made his way back on to the main highway, past the Priory of St Mary Overy and across London Bridge.
He stopped midway to say a prayer in the Chapel of St Thomas for the safety of their journey and then continued on his way.
Cranston was waiting for him at the small tavern just outside Aldgate in the Portsoken overlooking the stinking city ditch.
The coroner seemed in good spirits.
Athelstan concluded it was due to the large empty wine bowl in front of Sir John but Cranston, winking and burping, staunchly kept his hidden resolve not to vex Athelstan further with his own worries and anxieties.
The friar joined Sir John in one last cup of mulled wine, heated with a red hot poker and spiced with cinnamon, before they reclaimed their horses from the stable and made their way along the darkening highway towards Mile End.
Cranston remained full of good cheer, aided and abetted by an apparently miraculous wineskin which never seemed to empty.
Athelstan, tired and saddlesore, prayed and cursed whilst Cranston, farting and swaying in the saddle, chattered about this or that.
Finally Athelstan reined in Philomel and grasped the coroner by the wrists.
‘Sir John,’ he asked wearily, ‘this business at the Tower — we are making no headway.
How long can we spend on the matter?’
‘Until we finish.’
Cranston's eyes gleamed back.
‘By the sod, Brother!
Orders are orders, and I don't give a rat's fart about mumbling monks, icy roads or cold journeys.
Now, have I told you of the Lady Maude's preparations for Christmas?’
Athelstan groaned, shook his head and kicked Philomel  forward as Cranston regaled him with Lady Maude's intended banquet of boar's head, cygnet, venison, quince tarts and junkets of apple-flavoured cream.
The coroner chattered like a magpie as the weak daylight died and dusk fell like a grey powder, shrouding the wide waste stretches of snow.
The distant forest became obscured by a misty darkness which closed in round them, broken by the odd pinprick of light as they passed some hamlet or village.
No wind blew but it was deathly still and bitterly cold.
‘I am sure,’ Athelstan mumbled to himself, ‘the very birds will freeze on the trees and even the hares on the hill will remain underground.’
Cranston, the wineskin now surprisingly empty, only replied with a short stream of belches.
They passed a crossroads where a cadaver hung, black and frozen, its head twisted to one side, face unrecognisable after the crows had feasted there.
Cranston stopped and pointed down a track to a light blinking in the distance.
‘We'll stop there for the night, Brother.
A good, snug tavern, The Gallow's Friend.’
He leaned over and smiled at Athelstan.
‘Despite its name, you'll like it.’
Athelstan did.
It was a clean, well-swept establishment with secure stables, a fresh herb-smelling tap room, a large roaring fire with the logs piled high — though he baulked at the huge four-poster bed he'd have to share with Sir John.
‘No, no, My Lord Coroner,’ Athelstan murmured.
‘I insist you sleep alone.’
‘Why, monk?’
‘Because, coroner, if you rolled over in your sleep, you'd crush me to death!’
Laughing and joking, they left their bags there and made their way down to the tap room where the landlord's wife served them huge fish pies, the crust, golden and crisp, hiding a savoury sauce which dulled the flavour of the rancid fish.
Athelstan tactfully asked the landlord for a pallet bed to be placed in their chamber and sat down to eat almost as heartily as Cranston.
Of course, the coroner drank as if there was no tomorrow and when he had had his fill, leaned back against the pillar of the huge fireplace, belched, and pronounced himself satisfied.
Athelstan stared into the flames, half listening to a wind which had suddenly sprung up, now whining and clattering against the tightly secured shutters.
‘Brother?’
‘Yes, Sir John?’
‘This business at the Tower, could it be black magic?’
‘What do you mean?’
‘Well, the head that was sent to me.’
Athelstan stretched his hand out to the flames.
‘No, no, Sir John.
As I have said, we are not dealing with a demon but something worse, a soul steeped in mortal sin.
But whose?’
He looked up at Sir John, who had his fiery red nose deep in a wine cup again.
‘What's puzzling,’ Athelstan continued, ‘is why now?
Why has the murderer chosen this moment?
And how can they know about the dreadful events surrounding Burghgesh's death?’
‘What do you mean?’
Cranston slur ed.
‘Well,’ Athelstan replied, ‘we should be looking for a man or woman with no background, someone who has suddenly appeared on the scene, but everyone we have talked to has their own little niche.’
Cranston burped.
‘I don't know,’ he slurred.
‘It could still be black magic because I'm damned if I can find a way through the tangle.
Now, as I have said to Lady Maude…’
The coroner suddenly stopped and stared into his wine cup, and the good humour drained from his face.
‘Come, Sir John,’ Athelstan said quietly.
‘It's time we slept.’
Surprisingly, Cranston agreed, drained the cup and slammed it down on the table.
He stood up, swaying and smiled benevolently down at his companion.
‘But do you believe, Brother?’
‘What, Sir John?’
‘In the black arts?
I mean, the business in your cemetery?’
Athelstan grinned.
‘To be perfectly honest, Sir John, I am more frightened of the human heart than any mischievous demon.
Now, come.
Let's rest.’
Athelstan was pleased he had judged the moment right because, by the time they reached the top of the rickety wooden staircase, Cranston was half-asleep and beginning to mumble piteously about how he missed Lady Maude.
Athelstan led him down the cold, darkened passageway and into the small chamber.
He gently lowered Cranston on to the bed, pulled off the coroner's boots and made his companion as comfortable as possible.
The coroner turned, belched, and quietly began to snore.
Athelstan grinned and covered the huge frame with a coverlet.
Sleeping, Cranston reminded the friar more than ever of the huge bear in the bailey of the Tower.
Athelstan went over and knelt beneath the small, horn-glazed window, crossed himself and gently mouthed the words of David's psalm.
‘Out of the depths have I called to thee, O Lord.
Lord, hear my voice.’
By the time he had reached the fourth verse Athelstan was already distracted.
Was Sir John right? he wondered.
Did the great demon, the Red Slayer, haunt both his cemetery and the Tower of London?
He closed his eyes, finished the psalm and made his way to the pallet bed.
For a while  Athelstan lay listening to Cranston's heavy snoring and fell asleep almost at the very instant when, back in the darkened cemetery outside St Erconwald's, shadows flitted across the graveyard to crouch over a freshly dug grave.
11
In his dream, Athelstan stood on a darkened ship.
The bowsprit, mast and sails were covered in black crepe.
Above him on the poop, a skeleton, face a white, leering mask, held the wheel and grinned wickedly down at him.
The sea was smooth and clear as thick, dark glass.
The sky overhead was empty of stars and hung like a purple-blue cloth around the ship as it drifted towards the horizon where a fiery red glow lit the gateway to Hell.
On one end of the mast a figure jerked spasmodically.
Athelstan glimpsed the blackened, twisted face of Pike the ditcher hanging by the neck.
The friar turned as someone tapped him on the shoulder.
His brother Francis stood there: his face was blueish-white under a shock of black hair.
A thin red snake of blood trickled out of the corner of his mouth; his chest was an open, bubbling mass of blood where he had received his death wound.
‘You ran away from your monastery, Brother?’
His voice sounded hollow.
Athelstan stretched out his hand.
‘I am sorry, Francis,’ he murmured.
Athelstan stared around.
Was Cranston here?
He was sure he could hear the coroner's voice.
Athelstan walked to the entrance of the hold and gazed down.
A naked woman squatted there, her face hidden behind a black veil; from her mouth came a foul toad and round her neck curled an amber snake, its red-slit eyes  flashing like diamonds.
A fat-bellied rat crouched beside her.
Athelstan walked down the steps.
Behind the woman, kneeling stern and impassive, was a knight in full armour, gauntleted hands resting on the hilt of his great two-handled sword.
The hold stank of death and Athelstan could feel someone pressing close behind him.
He squirmed violently as a hand seized his shoulder.
‘Athelstan!
Athelstan!
Brother, for God's sake!’
The friar opened his eyes.
Cranston, his fat face wrinkled with concern, stared down at him.
‘Brother, what is the matter?’
Athelstan stared back.
‘Good Sir John, I was dreaming.’
He raised a clammy hand and rubbed his face.
‘I was dreaming,’ he repeated.
‘And not a pleasant one!’
‘No, Sir John.
Some succubus of the night with the power of a thousand scorpions seized my mind.’
Cranston gazed quizzically back and Athelstan grinned.
‘I am only joking.
I think my nightmare was due more to the table than the grave.
We dined too well last night.’
‘Yesterday is gone and today is today,’ Cranston pompously replied.
‘Come on, Brother, it's daybreak.’
Athelstan rose quickly, said a hasty prayer and washed himself in the freezing water from a cracked pewter jug.
They gathered their possessions and moved down to the cold, deserted taproom.
The fire was not lit and the room didn't seem as cheerful and welcoming as it had the night before; they broke their fast quickly on warm oat cakes and mulled wine, saddled their horses and rode back along the track to the highway.
The day looked as if it would be a fine one.
A weak sun was about to rise, turning the darkness to a dusty grey: their horses plodded along the frozen track, both riders  taking special care against the potholes, some as deep as a man, which could bring down and even kill both the unwary rider and his horse.
The countryside was empty and silent.
Athelstan shivered as he remembered his nightmare and the eerie stillness of that terrible dream.
The hedgerows on either side were still thickly covered with snow and, beyond them, the fields lay iron hard under sheets of ice.
A circle of hungry crows soared noisily above a clump of oak trees, branches black against the lightening sky.
‘I wish I was back in London,’ Cranston moaned.
‘I hate the bloody countryside, I hate the silence!’
Athelstan caught a blur of colour in a ditch on the side of the track and pulled his horse over to look closer.
The corpse which lay there was frozen hard, that of an old man covered from head to knee in a loose, threadbare gown.
Athelstan closed his eyes and breathed a prayer as he glimpsed the blue-black holes where the hungry ravens had pecked at the scrawny, whitening flesh.
‘God rest him!’
Cranston murmured.
‘Brother, there is nothing we can do.’
They moved on through a silent, sleeping village, only a few plumes of black smoke giving any sign of life.
After an hour's ride they approached the village of Leighton.
At the crossroads they glimpsed a group of villagers huddled round the blackened scaffold.
Thankfully, the iron gibbet which swung from its hook was empty.
The villagers were gathered round a corpse whilst beside it two burly labourers hacked the iron ground at the foot of the scaffold.
Their hoes and mattocks cleared a shallow hole while their breath hung heavy in the frost air.
Athelstan looked at Cranston.
The coroner shrugged though his hand went beneath his cloak to ensure his dagger was loose in its sheath.
The villagers turned at the riders' approach.
An old woman, her  face yellow and lined with age, scrawny body covered in the battered hide of a cow, shuffled towards them.
‘Morrow!
Morrow!’ she cried.
‘Travellers on a road like this?’
Her milky eyes grinned slyly up at Athelstan.
‘Good morning, Father.
‘Tis rare to see a priest up so early.’
‘Mother!’
Cranston bellowed back, loosening the muffler round his mouth.
‘It's good to see anyone in such Godforsaken weather.
What are you doing?’
‘Burying Eadwig.’
‘Here?’
Athelstan asked.
‘You have no church, no cemetery?’
The old hag lifted her skinny hand.
‘Come and see!
Come and see!’
Reluctantly they pushed their horses nearer.
Cranston's mount became skittish and even Philomel showed a lively interest in the group round the scaffold.
The villagers parted as the coroner and his companion approached.
Athelstan glimpsed red, dirty faces, greasy, matted hair, and the occasional glare of hatred at their well-fed horses and warm, woollen cloaks.
Cranston took one look at Eadwig's body, closed his eyes and drew away.
The peasant had been hanged.
His face was black, tongue half-bitten off but still clenched tightly between yellow teeth, whilst one eye had popped from its socket and lay grotesquely against the bruised cheek.
‘Good God!’
Athelstan breathed.
‘What happened?’
‘He killed himself,’ the old hag cackled.
‘And you know the law, Father?’
‘Oh, yes, Mother, I know the law.’
He looked at the small, wooden stake leaning against the scaffold.
‘Sir John, I suggest we ride on.’
The coroner needed no second bidding.
They turned their horses, ignoring the soft cackles of laughter behind them.
Athelstan dosed his eyes, praying from whatever psalm he  could remember to fend off the awful terrors which clung to the world of men.
Behind him he heard the faint sounds of a wooden mallet driving the stake through the suicide's heart.
‘Good God!’
Cranston murmured.
‘You priests, Athelstan, should change all that.
Only the good Lord knows why the poor bastard killed himself, but must a suicide be buried near a gibbet at the crossroads with a stake driven through his heart?’
‘The bishops have tried to stop it,’ Athelstan replied.
‘But Christ's teaching, Sir John, in certain parts and over certain hearts, lies as thin and as loose as a spider's web.’
They rode through Leighton, following the track which skirted the dark mass of Epping Forest and into Woodforde just as the church bell tolled for Nones.
The village was an unprepossessing one: a few villagers, hooded and cloaked against the cold, scurried about, shooing scrawny chickens away from the horses.
Some boys were bringing battered wooden buckets up from the well and the occasional housewife emptied the slops from the night jars out into the middle of the street.
Even the ale-house was still shuttered and locked.
‘Like a village of the dead,’ Athelstan murmured.
‘Aye, it might as well be, Brother,’ Cranston replied through his muffler.
‘The cold will stop all work in the fields.’
A young urchin, his face pinched white by the cold, suddenly appeared and walked solemnly alongside them, a dirty canvas bag clutched in one bony hand.
Athelstan reined in Philomel.
‘What's the matter, boy?’
The urchin just stared, round-eyed, at Philomel's tail.
‘Come on, lad, what do you want?’
‘Mother told me to follow.
Told me to wait for the horse to lift its tail.’
Cranston chuckled.
‘He is waiting for our horses to shit!’ he exclaimed.
‘It's good manure and, if dried, burns well and cheerily.’
Athelstan grinned, pulled back his hood, dug into his purse and threw the boy a penny.
‘You can have everything our horses will drop, boy,’ he announced solemnly.
‘And there's a penny for your trouble.
You know the Burghgesh family?
They have a manor house here.’
‘Oh, all gone,’ the lad replied, his eyes still fixed on Philomel's tail.
‘The house lies beyond the village near Buxfield but it is deserted and closed up.
Father Peter will tell you that.’
He pointed to where the tiled-roofed church with its grey, ragstone tower peeped above the tree tops.
‘Then,’ Athelstan said kicking Philomel into a trot, ‘that's where we'll stop!’
They rode through the wicket gate of the church, following the pathway which snaked between the trees and overgrown graves to the Norman church which stood on the brow of a small hillock.
Beside it was a modest, two-storeyed house, its roof made of yellowing thatch, the windows nothing more than wooden shutters.
Athelstan looked back.
The young boy still stood behind him, one hand gripping the bag, the other balled into a tight fist, guarding Athelstan's penny as if it was the key to heaven itself.
‘Father Peter's in?’
‘He will be there,’ the boy replied.
‘And, for another penny, I'll look after your horses.’
Athelstan nodded and another coin was tossed in the air.
‘That young man will advance far,’ Cranston murmured as they dismounted and knocked on the door.
They heard bolts being pulled back, the door swung open and a clean-shaven, cheery-faced Father Peter peered out.
‘Travellers in this weather?’
His voice was burred by a thick country accent but, despite the snow-white hair and slight stoop of the shoulders, Father Peter was an active, cheerful man.
He hardly waited for their introductions but ushered them into the warm, sweet-smelling room, chattering and asking questions like a magpie.
He took their cloaks and told them to sit on a bench which he pushed towards the heat of the fire.
‘A coroner and a Dominican come to visit me,’ he announced in mock wonderment, and squatted down beside them on a stool.
Father Peter took three earthenware bowls from a small cupboard near the inglenook and served them generous portions of soup from a black bowl which hung perilously from an iron hook above the flames.
‘Bits of fish, some herbs, what's left of my vegetables.’
The priest screwed up his eyes.
‘Ah, yes, and some onions.’
Both Athelstan and Cranston gripped the warm bowls and sipped at the rich stew which scalded their mouths and lips but put some warmth into their frozen bellies.
Father Peter watched, even as he sipped from his own bowl.
Athelstan smiled back and put his bowl down.
‘At the moment it's too hot to eat, Father,’ he murmured apologetically.
‘Even to hold.’
Cranston, however, had no such difficulty.
He slurped as noisily as a ravenous dog, mopping up what was left with hard crusts of bread which Father Peter shoved before him on a wooden platter.
At last Cranston burped, smacked his lips and handed the bowl back.
‘The best meal in many a day, Father.
We thank you for your hospitality.’
The coroner stretched his great hands out towards the flames.
‘We will not keep you long.
You know the Burghgesh family?’
Father Peter's eyes narrowed.
‘Aye,’ he replied.
‘I know of them.’
Athelstan began to sip carefully at his now cooling bowl of soup.
‘Will you tell us, Father?’
The priest shrugged.
‘What is there to say?
Bartholomew Burghgesh and his wife lived in a manor house near Buxfield.
Bartholomew was always a restless man, born to the sword and the horse rather than the plough and the bailiff's accounts.
He went to London and served in the retinues of the great ones.
In the old King's time he was in the garrison of the Tower, then he went abroad with others to fight in Outremer.’
‘And his wife?’
Father Peter made a moue.
‘She was a quiet, sickly woman.
They had one boy…what was his name?
Ah, yes, Mark.’
Father Peter sighed.
‘Oh, they were well looked after.
A steward administered the manor, and Bartholomew always sent gold.
Then about — oh, some fourteen or fifteen years ago — news came of Bartholomew's death.
He had been killed on board a ship taken by the Moors in the Middle Seas.
By that time Mark was a young man.
He took his father's death with little show of regret but the mother became ill and died within a year of her husband.’
‘And Mark Burghgesh?’
‘He was like his father, his head full of stories about Roland and Oliver and performing marvellous feats of arms.
For a while he was Lord of the Manor.
After the old King's victories in France, he raised money from the bankers, bought a destrier, and armour, and formed a small retinue of archers of like-minded men from the village.’
The priest paused and stared into the flames.
‘I remember the morning they left,’ he continued dreamily.
‘A beautiful summer's day.
Sir Mark on his black warhorse, his dark red hair oiled and combed; before him went his squire carrying a banner with the Burghgesh arms, and marching behind were six archers with steel caps, quilted jerkins, long bows and quivers full of goose-quilled arrows.
A brave sight.’
The priest rocked himself gently.
‘None of them came back,’ he murmured.
‘They all died in the blood and muck.’
Athelstan caught his breath.
So like his own story.
He and Francis had joined such a retinue.
Athelstan had returned but his brother's body still lay mouldering in some forgotten field in France.
‘None of them came back?’
Cranston repeated, fighting hard to control the excitement in his voice.
‘So Mark Burghgesh could still be alive?’
The priest stared at him and shook his head.
‘Oh, no, Sir John.
I spoke wrongly.
No one came back alive.
Come, I'll show you where Mark is.’
They rose.
Father Peter handed them their cloaks, taking his own from a wooden peg, and they followed him out into the cold.
The young boy still stood like a soldier, holding the reins of the horses, his eyes looking eagerly at the piles of steaming dung obligingly dropped by both Philomel and Cranston's mount.
Father Peter stopped.
‘Boy, take the horses round to the stable.
You'll find some oats there.
Then go in and take some soup.
Don't worry, the horses won't wander off.’
The urchin stared at Athelstan.
‘Go on, lad,’ the friar ordered.
‘You'll freeze to death standing there.
And, I promise, the horse dung's yours.’
They reached the church door.
Father Peter unlocked it and they entered the darkened nave.
It was cold, the air icy.
Athelstan gazed at the square, squat pillars decorated with  greenery like his own in Southwark, though not as beautiful.
He hasn't got a painter, Athelstan thought.
Father Peter caught his eye and Athelstan felt guilty at his petty pride.
‘A fine church, Father,’ he murmured.
Father Peter grinned.
‘We try, Brother.
But I would give a king's ransom for a good painter and craftsman.’
They went beneath the simple chancel screen, across the sanctuary into a small lady chapel which lay in the far corner of the church.
A large wooden statue of the Virgin and Child stood on a stone plinth whilst around the walls were raised tombs, simple and square, lacking any effigy or ornamentation.
Father Peter went across and gently tapped one.
‘Sir Mark Burghgesh lies here,’ he announced quietly.
‘His body was sent back for burial.’
Cranston stared in disappointment at the grey ragstone tomb.
‘Are you sure, Father Peter?’
‘Yes,’ the priest said.
‘The embalmers did their best to dress the corpse: before the coffin was lowered, I looked once more at the face.
Sir Mark had received a terrible death wound on the side of his head, caused by a battle axe or mace, but I am certain it was he.’
Athelstan hid his disappointment and gazed despondently at Cranston.
Their cold journey through the bitter Essex landscape had been fruitless.
‘Why do you want to know all this?’
Father Peter asked as he led them out of the church.
‘There's been a murder, Father, in London,’ Cranston answered, chewing his lip.
‘We hoped our journey here would yield fresh evidence.
Have you noticed anything untoward in the village?’
‘Such as?’
‘Anything,’ Athelstan pleaded.
‘Any news or gossip about the Burghgesh family?’
The priest shook his head.
Athelstan and Cranston looked at each other despondently as they left the church and reentered the priest's house where the boy was lapping a second bowl of soup as hungrily as a starving dog.
At their approach he scurried into a corner.
Father Peter waved them back to their seats and went across and poured them generous stoups of ale from the jar just outside the small buttery door.
‘No,’ he repeated, sitting down on the stool and cradling the blackjack of ale in his hands, ‘Woodforde is a quiet place.
Even quieter now the Burghgeshes have left.’
‘What happened to their manor house?’
‘The King's Commissioners sealed it off.
No one has been there since.’
The priest coughed.
‘I should know.
The Sheriff of Essex pays me a small stipend to ensure the seals on the doors and windows are not broken.’
He looked at Cranston.
‘And they are still sealed.
After all, there's nothing there.
All the moveables have been removed, the roof has fallen in, the surrounding meadows and ploughlands been sold off.’
‘There was no other heir?’
‘None that I know of.’
Father Peter suddenly took the tankard away from his lips.
‘In heaven's name!’ he exclaimed.
‘There was something.
Yes,’ he murmured excitedly, ‘about three or four years ago, something very strange.
It was like a dream.
Now, when was it?
Yes, it was at the beginning of Advent.
I forget the actual year.
I had said morning Mass, gone across to the house to break my fast then went back to clear the altar.’
Father Peter stared into the flames.
‘I went up the nave and was surprised to see a  man, cowled and hooded, kneeling at the entrance to the Lady Chapel.’
‘Where Mark Burghgesh is buried?’
‘Yes, yes.
Now I trod softly, and at first the man didn't hear me.
But when he did, he rose very quickly, pulled his cowl close about his head, and brushing by me, left the church, ignoring my salutation.
All I glimpsed were a few strands of grey hair and a white, neatly barbered beard.’
Father Peter picked up his tankard and sipped from it.
‘Now, it had been years since I had seen Bartholomew Burghgesh and I considered him long dead, yet I am sure that man I glimpsed that cold December morning was Sir Bartholomew himself.
He had his walk, the gait and stance of a professional soldier.’
Athelstan leaned forward excitedly.
Was Sir Bartholomew alive? he wondered.
Was he the bloody-handed slayer stalking his victims?
‘Continue, Father,’ he whispered.
‘Well, I didn't mention it to anyone.
The villagers would think I had been drinking or wandering in my wits.’
He grinned at Athelstan.
‘You can appreciate, Brother, how the sheep like to gossip about their shepherd.’
Athelstan smiled back and stole a sideways glance at Cranston who was sitting, open-mouthed, at Father Peter's revelation.
‘A year later,’ the priest continued, ‘on the Feast of All Hallows, I was in the village ale-house.
Autumn was here, the countryside was fading under the colder, harsher weather.
We were talking about death and exchanging gruesome ghost stories.
The landlord, God rest him — the fellow has since died — suddenly spoke up, declaring that he had seen the ghost of Sir Bartholomew Burghgesh.
Of course, the others laughed at him but he insisted and said that at about the same time I thought I'd seen Sir Bartholomew, a stranger  had arrived in the village late at night and stopped at the ale-house for food and drink.
The man had been cloaked and hooded and hardly ever spoke except to buy his meal.’
Father Peter closed his eyes.
‘The landlord said the fellow made it obvious he wanted to be left to himself.
After all, Woodforde's on the highway into the city.
We have many people who like to keep their business to themselves.
Anyway, the stranger was about to leave when a slattern dropped a tankard.
The man whirled round and for a few seconds the landlord saw his face.
He swore it was Bartholomew Burghgesh.’
Father Peter sighed.
‘Of course, I kept quiet about what I had seen, but I was intrigued.
I journeyed out to the old manor house near Buxfield.
If it was Burghgesh, I thought, surely he would have returned to his former home?
Yet I discovered that nothing had been disturbed.’
He shrugged and spread his hands.
‘That's all I can tell you.
Only God knows if the man I and the landlord glimpsed was Sir Bartholomew.
I heard no other rumours about his sudden return, either from abroad or beyond the grave, so I let the matter rest.’
‘Father,’ Athelstan persisted, ‘please, when was this?
Three or four years ago?’
The priest stared into the fire.
‘Yes, three years ago,’ he replied.
‘But,’ he smiled, ‘I can tell you no more.’
Cranston leaned forward and clasped Father Peter by the wrist.
‘Father, your hospitality is only matched by the value of what you have told us.’
The coroner glanced at Athelstan and smiled.
‘Come, Brother, it's not yet noon.
If we travel hard and fast, we can be back in the city before nightfall.’
He looked across at Father Peter.
‘I thank you for your  hospitality, Father.’
He turned and tossed a penny at the lad still squatting in the corner.
‘You, boy, will either make a good squire or a merchant.’
They rose, gathered their cloaks, and within the hour were clear of Woodforde.
They journeyed through Leighton, past the grisly scaffold with the freshly dug makeshift grave still visible at its foot, and back on to the Mile End Road.
Cranston, who had stopped at a local tavern to refill his miraculous wineskin, was full of chatter and speculation.
‘It's possible, Brother,’ he boomed for the umpteenth time, his bewhiskered lips red from the juice of the grape, ‘quite possible that Sir Bartholomew is still alive and hiding in or near the Tower to carry out his silent war of revenge.’
‘Sir John,’ Athelstan replied, ‘I would agree, but where would Burghgesh hide?
Is he a member of the garrison?
A kitchen scullion?
Some tradesman who has the right of access?’
Cranston made a rude noise with his lips.
‘Or,’ Athelstan continued, ‘does Sir Bartholomew squat like some dark spider in the city whilst others carry out his dreadful commands?’
Cranston reined in his horse.
‘Strange, mind you,’ he murmured.
‘What?’
‘Well, three years ago Whitton was disturbed, agitated, as if he had seen a ghost.
At the same time, Brother, a cowled and hooded figure was seen in the tavern near the Tower, and the same person, probably Burghgesh, also seen in Woodforde.’
‘You're saying Whitton's agitation was caused by Burghgesh's reappearance?’
‘Of course.’
‘But, if that is so, what has happened to Burghgesh since?’
He and Cranston were still arguing rival theories when they reached Aldgate long after dark and made their way through a small postern door in the city gate.
Cranston, full of wine and his own theories, was now certain they had grasped the truth.
Athelstan did not demur.
At least, he concluded, their journey to Woodforde had diverted the coroner's mind from his constant agonising over the Lady Maude's mysterious conduct.
As Athelstan and Cranston made their way back into the city, the hospitaller, Fitzormonde, was standing in the bailey of the Tower, staring at the huge bear now stuffing its cruel mouth with scraps from the Tower kitchen.
Like Athelstan, Fitzormonde was fascinated by the beast and secretly admired the madcap Red Hand who was the only man who dared approach the animal.
Fitzormonde, despite his travels, had never seen such a huge beast.
Most bears were small and black, sometimes no higher than a man, but this great, shaggy-furred animal reminded him of stories he had heard from knights who had served with the Teutonic Orders in the wild black forests of the north.
How they had seen deer twice the size of anything in England and bears such as this one, which would crush a horse in its huge, muscular arms.
The bear suddenly stopped eating and glared at the knight, its small, piggy eyes red with hatred.
It opened its mouth, growling deep in its throat in a display of wickedly sharp teeth.
The huge beast strained at the great iron chain clasped to the collar round its neck.
Fitzormonde stepped away and the bear went back to its meal, shuffling its food into a dirty untidy pile as if it suspected Fitzormonde would like to take it away.
The knight stamped his feet to keep  warm.
Tomorrow, he thought, he would leave the Tower.
He had already said as much to Mistress Philippa when he had met her and her rather effeminate betrothed.
Fitzormonde gazed up at the cruel gargoyle faces on the Chapel of St Peter ad Vincula.
Yes, he thought, tomorrow, he would pay the chaplain to sing one last Mass for his fallen comrades then go back into the city and request from his superiors some mission or task well away from this benighted fortress.
He started as he heard a whirring noise in the air.
He looked up.
A raven?
No, what was it?
The hospitaller suddenly stepped back in panic as the bear sprang into life, towering above him, its great paws clawing the air.
The bear roared at him with fury, its black muzzle and huge jaws covered in a thick white froth.
Fitzormonde's hand went to his dagger as the bear danced like a demon, pulling at the great chain clasped in the wall.
What was wrong with the animal?
What had happened?
Fitzormonde made to run but, even as he turned, heard the great iron chain spring loose and saw the bear rush towards him.
He tugged at his knife but had it only half-drawn when the huge taloned paw of the bear smashed his head as if it was a rotten apple.
Roaring with fury, the bear dug his claws into the dying knight's unprotected back and dragged him across the cobbles, bellows of rage proclaiming its triumph.