

OFFICE TALK Summer 1993
a quarterly newsletter for staff at Sainsbury's London Headquarters — Blackfriars and Streatham
CROSSING SECURED FOR STAMFORD STREET
Years of danger and frustration for Blackfriars staff are to come to an end this summer with the installation of a traffic light controlled crossing over Stamford Street.
Work on the crossing will begin at the end of July following completion of work in Stamford Street by British Gas.
A pelican crossing system will be installed between the traffic lights at Blackfriars Road and the box junction at Rennie Street.
Pedestrians will need to push a button to command the lights to turn red, which they will do in phase with the Blackfriars Road lights.
A gantry traffic light will be installed above the centre of the road, hand railing will provide additional protection for pedestrians, and the bus stop outside Milroy Walk is likely to be moved some metres south and recessed into the wide pavement.
The Department of Transport finally granted permission for the scheme in February following over ten years of lobbying of Southwark Council by JS.
During this time Stamford Street has become ever busier.
Hundreds of JS staff cross the road every day from Rennie and Wakefield Houses on one side to Drury and Stamford Houses for the staff restaurant on  the other.
Previous rejected submissions have been made for a zebra crossing on the site.
But traffic surveys last summer by JS and Southwark Council revealed sufficient pedestrian and vehicle numbers to justify the installation of a traffic light controlled crossing, for which JS will pay half.
of food safety in Rennie House needs to cross the road to buy his lunch from the staff shop.
He was pleased to hear confirmation that the crossing is to be built: ‘Although I am now used to crossing this busy road it is fairly dangerous.
The new crossing will obviously make it a lot safer.’
And  of ISD explained, with her staff shop sandwiches in hand: ‘It is very difficult to cross at most times of day.
I used to tell trainees that it was their first aptitude test to see if they could make it over Stamford Street!’ was not too upset to find that she will have to devise a new aptitude test from the summer.
CURTAIN TWITCHERS TO THE STARS
Overlooking the Daily Express building has its advantages for Drury House staff.
They get a first class view of the comings and goings of the national tabloid, including visits by pop stars in recent months.
Michael Jackson was seen entering the building before Christmas — minus his chimp, Bubbles.
Fans were held behind barricades when E17 climbed out of their limousine in March.
But as Office Talk snapped Take That arriving in their mean looking black Mercedes, Drury House was rocked by the screams of fans lining the pavement for a glimpse of Robbie, Mark, and the rest of the boys.
ON COURSE FOR HEALTH AND SAFETY
Six recently appointed health and safety reps passed with flying colours a course that introduces them to their basic responsibilities and duties as reps.
In March they learnt how to react to an office accident and how to prevent such accidents.
Congratulations and good luck to the new reps, who are  — watch out for their faces on your notice boards
PC TIPS
Office systems consultancy [OSC]have more advice on getting the most from your PC.
If you have any tips you want to share then contact OSC, ground floor, Rennie House or via E-Mail/TAO to office systems consultancy.
E-Mail/TAO * Date/Time reminders
Here is an easy way to remind yourself to follow up on a mailed document.
For example, when sending a document to Fred on July 14, 1993, you may want to check progress with him on July 28, 1993.
Address the document to Fred in the usual way but also send a blind copy to a folder called 193O728 — named after the date on which you wish to be reminded, in reverse.
To activate blind copies, ensure the top of the document is visible on the screen, move the cursor to the menu jump area at the bottom right hand corner of the screen and type:— BCC then press <Enter>.
The document will move down one line and insert BCC at the top.
Now type:— *193O728 — the exclamation mark causes the name to appear at the top of your list of folders.
Each day look in your file folders and read all documents for the current day, taking the appropriate action.
Wordperfect 5.1 * Marking Files
Display the files by pressing List Files <F5>, <Enter>, then press Mark Text <Alt-F5>, or <Home> followed by an asterisk [*].
This marks ALL the files ready for copying, deleting printing etc in one command.
To mark selected files, highlight each filename and press the asterisk [*]key.
Only the marked files will then be printed or copied at the prompt.
Lutus 123
The following tips refer to WYSI-WYG [what you see is what you get]formatting options, available from release 2.4 onwards.
* Centre text over columns
Text can be aligned over a range of columns by selecting the WYSI-WYG menu options: Text, Align, Centre and highlighting the relevant range of columns.
Note: 123 for Windows.
Highlight the range, then from the menu select Style, Alignment, Align over columns, Centre.
Alternatively, text can be centred over a single column so that, if the text is too wide for that column, it will overlap the left and right of the column equally.
Precede the label with two symbols [eg text…].
APPOINTMENTS
and  have both joined the financial appraisal department as financial analysts.
They will help with the preparation of store appraisals and other ad hoc projects.
has joined the marketing department as voucher centre manager.
will be responsible for the day to day running of the voucher centre, and for expanding the client database.
FOCUS ON FACILITIES  gives his regular report on changes in facilities at head office
WHAT'S HAPPENDING
The central print department has undergone some re-organisation, resulting in a number of new services.
Although a lot of high volume printing is dealt with by an external contract printer, and her team can provide a high quality same day service on a wide range of print jobs.
A new machine can provide fully finished documents at a rate of 135 prints per minute with, for example, heat seamed binding.
For more details call the print shop on 
Smokers in Stamford and Drury Houses will be pleased to know that a new smoking room is now available on the ground floor of Drury House.
It will replace the current area adjacent to the vending machines on Stamford ground floor.
Major alterations are under way on the ground floor of Stamford House in order to build a new post room servicing Drury and Stamford.
It will include a sophisticated x-ray machine to check all in-coming mail and courier packages.
Rennie House now has three new conference rooms located on the third floor for general use.
Call  to make your booking.
FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS
Rennie House ground floor post room, loading bay and print room are all about to be re-planned including a new corridor that by-passes the loading bay.
The general appearance of the area will be greatly improved, particularly benefiting those people located in the ground floor annexe.
Plans are being drawn up to enhance the pavements between Wakefield and Rennie Houses.
It is hoped to provide a new canopy over the Rennie House entrance as well as paving and landscaping.
POINTS TO NOTE
A reminder to everybody about white plastic rentacrates.
Please return them as soon as possible, rather than using them for storage.
Call  to arrange their collection.
Please do not staple internal envelopes.
Also, do not use large amounts of sticky tape to seal envelopes, as this can render them unusable.
SECURITY OPERATION GOES TO CONTRACT STAFF
Staff may have noticed some new faces and new uniforms in the reception areas of Stamford and Rennie Houses.
These belong to the new contract security officers employed since May 15, following a review of the head office security department last year
The review concluded that certain security jobs, such as static guarding and patrols, could be performed by external companies.
As a consequence, the department has been reduced from 19 to six — departmental manager  and five supervisors.
At least one supervisor will be on duty at any one time, working in conjunction with the new contract supervisor and security officers.
Office facilities manager  told Office Talk: ‘All the former JS security officers were offered Sainsbury's generous severance package and two are taking early retirement.
One has transferred to the communications department and all were offered the opportunity to work for the new contract firm.
JS is providing career guidance and counselling, and five former JS security officers have already found alternative employment.’
He also explained how the switch to contract staff is not only cost effective but gives JS access to more specialised skills and greater resources.
The new security officers will have received specialised professional training and will have National Vocational Qualifications.
Female members of staff undergoing security inspections may also appreciate that one quarter of the new security officers will be female.
Says  ‘It is sad that we must lose some experienced and valued members of staff but this move will improve the value we derive from head office security.
the security contracts that have covered Wakefield, Drury and Norwich Houses for some years now show that this is an effective method of providing security to Stamford and Rennie House.’.
Not a UFO hanging high above Rennie House but one of five new water coolers, each of ten tonnes, being hoisted onto the roof at the beginning of April.
They replaced two old units that had operated the air conditioning for 25 years.
The installation of these CFC-free units is just part of a drive to phase out ozone-depleting refrigerants at head office
BIG SCREEN NEWS
YENTL WITH GUNS
In spring's Office Talk assistant editor  slated a River Runs Through It, only for the film to pack out cinemas nationwide for several weeks!
We can only hope that this issue's reviewer, senior analyst/programmer, will be able to truly speak for the people.
‘Close to Eden is the latest offering from Hollywood veteran Sidney Lumet [Serpico, Muder on the Orient Express]and is due for release in the West End on June 11.
It stars Melanie Griffith as a New York detective who goes undercover in a Hasidic Jewish community to investigate the murder of a young Jewish man.
But have we not seen this all before in Witness when Harrison Ford tries to assimilate with the Amish?
‘The whole atmosphere is very well observed but I don't know how accurately it portrays the Hasidim.
This Jewish atmosphere is the main memory from the film, along with Melanie Griffith's character development, and a bit of action thrown in.
The murder mystery plot, however, is side-lined by her self discovery a lot of the time.
‘Close to Eden is a good looking film let down by a convoluted and complex plot in which nothing really happens.
Not completely successful but entertaining on the whole, like a good TV movie, I'd give it three out of five.’
YOU BET
The SSA would not normally condone betting, but for a good cause head office staff are positively encouraged to have a flutter by SSA chairman  On February 5 around 8O people put down their stakes for four horse and four videoed greyhound races.
And there was a fish and chip supper in between.
Losing bets helped towards a £2OO donation to the Tadworth Court Children's Hospital.
Two further video race nights are planned for 1993, so watch your notice boards.
IN A STEW OVER OXO TOWER
The decision to deny listed status is just another in a series of setbacks to the redevelopment programme for Stamford Wharf which incorporates the tower.
The 193Os Art Deco tower, with its windows spelling out OXO, was designed by the food company to defeat London County Council advertising restrictions.
The site is now slipping into a state of dereliction.
Coin Street Community Builders [CSCB], owner/developers of the site, are strugging to find continued financial support for their ambitious scheme to convert it into a complex of 7O craft workshops, a riverside food court, and flats to be let by a housing co-operative.
The public will even be able to enjoy the fantastic views across the Thames from the tower itself.
Explains  of the non-profit making CSCB: ‘The absence of listing for the Wharf would be a threat to the building if the developers wanted to demolish it.
We own it and plan to keep the exterior.
It would, nonetheless, have saved us millions of pounds in tax relief had the building been declared listed.’
Two of the three phases of the redevelopment of the site have already been completed: the substantial structural repairs to the interior and the partial demolition of the mid section along with renovation of the riverside walkway.
There is now light at the end of the runnel as the contracts are let out in the final stage this month.
It is hoped that the builders will be on site by July and the first shops will open by Christmas 1994.
.
One of London's best known riverside landmarks, the ‘OXO Tower’.
was denied status as a listed building by the Department of National Heritage earlier this year, much to the consternation of local interest groups.
The building is only a few hundred yards from Blackfriars head office and many Sainsbury's staff have become quite attached to the distinctive former cold store.
A theatre company known as Unappointed will be constructing a temporary 28O seat arene at the observation platform between the Thames and Gabriel's Wharf this summer to complement the Coin Street Festival.
From mid-July local office workers and residents will be able to enjoy free performances at lunchtimes and evenings against the dramatic back-drop of St Paul's Cathedral.
The company plans to stage Edward II, music and performance arts and contemporary films and set up bars and food pavilions on the riverside walk
SPORTING LIFE
SOFTBALL LEAGUE
Would you like to play softball?
Are you interested in forming a Sainsbury's head office team to play in the Retailer's League/ We are interested in hearing from both experienced and beginner players, supporters are welcome too.
For more information contact .
WEEKEND CRICKET
If you enjoy cricket then why not join one of the Sainsbury teams that play around South London and counties at weekends?
There will be around 2O home and away fixtures based at the Griffin Club in Dulwich until September.
They play in a relaxed atmosphere but you need to play to a reasonable standard and have your own ‘whites’.
Call .
WEEKDAY CRICKET
For those who do not take their cricket quite so seriously there is a head office indoor team which would welcome any new players, male or female, spin bowler or underarm.
They play mainly on wednesday evenings — call  .
FOOTBALL
The accounts football team seems to be the Manchester United of Sainsbury's football but the development division team was almost their relegated Palace when accounts beat them 7:1 in February.
But the building boys managed to draw 2:2 in reply on April 21 doing an Oldham and redeeming themselves in one of the last games of the season.
The only team to hold off the accounts onslaught seems to be the well-respected Streatham team who drubbed them 5:1 before Christmas, though accounts admittedly had an under par team.
The accounts team would also like to play other head office football teams in a possible five-a-side or 11-a-side tournament this summer.
If you are interested, would like to hear from you on .
GOLF
The head office golf society has a big season lined up this year, so are hoping that the wet weather on March 31 at Langley Park will not set a precedent for its forthcoming dates.
They are: June 11, Woodcote Park, South London; August 2O, Addington Palace, South London, and September 17, a day trip to France.
All events are well attended but those interested in joining may call  .
NETBALL
Since the autumn the new head office netball team have enjoyed a handful of fixtures, most recently holding their own  against a Brooke Bond team at Crystal Palace.
Problems with their original pitch mean they need a new home venue and are always looking for new members, including men.
Contact  .
MARATHON EFFORTS
Congratulations to the 16 plsu head office staff who competed in the Nutrasweet London Marathon in April.
had the best time of three hours four minutes.
He does have a slight advantage though, in that he is the manager of the gymnasium and the expert on training methods.
and  ran the race three-legged, and finished in the very respectable time of five hours 21 minutes.
Their backs even made it into The Times when the newspaper published names of the finishers.
Several charities benefited from the sweat and pain of the JS runners — almost £9, OOO was raised.
SEPARATED AT BIRTH?
.
The likeness is uncanny [if you squint ——lots]: of central payroll is pictured here [getting into bad habits with a Pretty Womna]alongside his Hollywood doppleganger, Richard Gere.
If one of your colleagues is the spitting image of a famous personality thenb Office Talk wants to hear from you
PLEASE GIVE GENEROUSLY
The Blood Transfusion Service will be at the John Marshall Hall on Blackfriars Bridge Road again on June 9 and 1O.
There are spaces for 7O volunteer donors from JS on these days.
If you would like to give so others can live contact  .
Remember — one day you may owe your life to a blood transfusion.
DARRYL HAS A WAY WITH WORDS
We were inundated with entries for last issue's Prize Wordsquare but there was little doubt about the winner at the end of the day.
Impressively, plenty of you found around 1OO words in the four by four letter grid, but  of ISD submitted a word-mungus total of 498!
We were able to confirm a total of 2O5 of his words in the Collins dictionary and Oxford English Dictionary, including ‘sot’— an habitual drunkard, and ‘bros’— a type of porridge [surely a defunct pop group — Ed].
The remainder included words such as‘oshac’ and ‘ae’, which have not been used in standard English for a hundred years — nice try   snatched the £1O longest word prize with his beautifully simple nine letter word, ‘refollows’.
has, as we suspected, previous experience with word challenges.
He is the originator of the OASIS messaging system name and is one of the UK's top six  competition Scrabble players.
has won assorted TVs, hampers and holidays from word competitions in coffee table magazines, but he resigned his membership of Mensa, the club for people with high IQs, because the members were all ‘too weird’.
has had interests in numerous word puzzles and teasers in the past.
He has written seven books on the subject and contributed to numerous specialist magazines, but Scrabble is his main love now.
You may have caught him on television in 1991 when he was the studio expert for the BBC's coverage of the Scrabble World Championship, or more recently introducing a video on the game.
He has also helped Spears, the makers of Scrabble, in compiling their 15O, OOO word long Official Scrabble Word List, and in choosing which computer version of the game to endorse.
Most difficult of all, admits, is setting foreign language puzzles: ‘I translated some puzzles into Russian once, which was not easy since I did not even know the Cyrillic alphabet!’
Any hot tips for Scrabble playing readers of Office Talk?
‘My advice is to learn lots of two letter words to bump up your score.
Ny favourite is ‘zo’ which is a type of yak!’..
of site assessment [left]and  of off licence buying, decided to tackle the London Marathon the hard way, realsing that three legs were not better than two.
They hope to raise up to £8OO for the Guide Dogs for the Blind Appeal by sponsorship.
The pair eventually finished in less time than many bipeds, got their faces on television and their backs in The Times
GIANT TOMATOES
Comic Relief Day did not pass unnoticed at head office on March 12.
Among the fund raising activities organised was a raffle held by the PR department.
Tickets were sold beside the staff restaurant for three cuddly tomatoes  ranging in size from the elephantine to the furry handful, raising £22O.
The ISD programming team also did their bit by charging colleagues in ISD for calls they made to the Helpdesk, raising around £2OO.
CHECK EARLY, CHECK CANCER
The occupational health department [OHD]held a series of cancer awareness seminars in April for staff at Blackfriars and Streatham.
Both sets of presentations, one for breast cancer and one for testicular cancer, were very well attended.
Staff learned how to minimise the risks of developing cancer and how to recognise the symptoms.
There was an opportunity to practise self examination on plastic models and discuss the subject with OHD staff following an educational video.
The women's sessions were particuarly successful, and requests were made for further sessions on PMS, stress, menopause and sexual health.
Details of these sessions will be published on noticeboards.
VOLUNTEERS WANTED
The Down's Syndrome Association desperately need volunteers to give up a few hours before or after work on Thursday June 24 to help them collect donations at mainline stations.
If you would like to help, call  .
EXPLAINING THOSE TAX CODES
On April 5 the Inland Revenue introduced K tax codes
Until now, those people who had more taxable benefits than allowances had to pay the extra tax in one sum after the following year end because the former PAYE system could not collect it.
The new system, however, will be able to collect this tax and tax codes have been sent out by the tax office.
If your new code begins with a K, you will have more tax deducted than previously from your salary each period, but you should not normaly have an extra demand for tax after the end of the year.
You will still pay the same amount in tax for the year, but some of it will reach the Inland Revenue earlier.
Whatever the K codes is, not more than half of your salary can be deducted in tax like this.
If this maximum applies, you could still end the year in arrears.
If you have any queries on K codes, of the payroll department will be able to explain.
ALL THE WORLD's A STAGE
Head office staff had plenty of opportunities over recent months to expand their cultural horizons with discount entry to the Young Vic and another successful Black Friars production.
went along in March with a grup of colleagues from ISD to see the Young Vic's presentation of Arthur Miller's The Last Yankee: ‘A psychiatric hospital: two visitors, two patients.
A simple bleak set, an undemanding plot.
Now add the magic: formidable writing from Arthur Miller, extraordinary performances from a stunning cast, including Zoe Wanamaker and Peter Davison, and the Young Vic's clever blend of fringe and mainstream production styles.
‘It is riveting stuff, especially to be treated to the first performance of a production that has attracted such rave reviews.
We are looking forward to the fruits of JS's sponsorship of the Vic in future productions.’
For further details of productions and bookings call the Young Vic box office on .
Ghost Train
The amateurs from head office took to the boards on May 11–13 for the Black Friars' latest production.
It was standing room only as the Ghost Train pulled away from the London Nautical School, expertly disguised as Fal Vale Station.
experience of project managing the construction of a new store stood him in good stead for creating a corner of Cornwall in Stamford Street in just two days.
As the team's player/manager he may have been man of the match but even our ebullient  was eclipsed by .
is back among us, and we now have concrete evidence of the effects of dealing with customer complaints all day.
All in all, a very enjoyable evening.
congratulations to the whole cast — we look forward to the next offering from the Black Friars.
Pigeon hole
director's secretary
The secretaries' duties start each day with the post and daily bulletin.
Once they have been completed, the day's work can really begin.
It is unfair that we should have to wait until 1O.3Oam for the post just because the postmen have to hand deliver a memo to every department in the company, being told the post takes second place.
This messes up our whole routine, especially when we have to make numerous trips to the pigeon holes to see if the mail has arrived, not to mention putting the post room in a turmoil.
The memo in question was a new appointment announcement.
As with most of these announcements, it held little interest or relevance for virtually everybody whom it did not concern.
Was it really so important that it had to take priority over something as necessary as post, which often contains faxes and other mail urgently required.
It would have made no difference at all if it had not been received until 11.
OO am and would have saved several people much time and hassle.
office facilities manager, replies:
Your letter has highlighted a breakdown in our normal delivery procedure to Stamford House on the day in question, Thursday May 13.
Owing to a misunderstanding, the all departments announcement was delivered separately and not with your regular post.
This is not normal policy unless it is a particularly important announcement with a specific timed arrival, ie End of Year Results, Board Appointments.
Action has been taken to prevent this occurring in the future.
Many thanks for highlighting the problem.
For information, the delivery and collection times for each building are published on the side of all post racks.
house services Outreach Romania — Final Report
The trip was a total success, and despite a few hiccups in transit we  were able to transport some 5O, OOO items to the main hospital in addition to taking supplies to the towns at Clut-Napoca and Milas.
Many thanks to all who helped by way of contributions of goods, clothes or money, and special thanks to  for their help and support.
We have produced a short diary of the trip, if you would like a copy please contact me.
£5 for letters
REMEMBER Office Talk is a publication circulated to everyone working in central departments.
It is YOUR noticeboard, so if you have anything to say that you want others to know about, drop us a line on the 1Oth floor, Drury House, &.
We will send £5 worth of Sainsbury's vouchers to the authors of all published letters.
RETIREMENTS
TOM CHANDLER
.
After 14 years working in the post room, post messenger Tom Chandler departed on a high note on March 4.
Friends and colleagues past and present got together at the Brunswick Arms in Stamford Street to give him a big send off.
Now he will have more time for his hobbies of hiking, photography and writing books on archaelogy
DOREEN GREATOREX
In April Doreen Greatorex retired from the company after 34 years' service.
Doreen was a well known face on the fourth floor of Stamford House, having been secretary to a succession of board directors since she joined in 1959.
She spent 18 years working for director of statistics and computers, Mr Ramm, and was then secretary to Len Payne, director of distribution.
Subsequently, she worked for finance director Derek Henson until his retirement last year and continued to work for his successor Rosemary Thorne.
The leaving party held for Doreen looked more like a board meeting, as the chairman and directors were there to say good-bye.
Derek Henson returned to make a farewell speech.
Doreen said: ‘I've been really lucky in that I've enjoyed everyone of my 34 years with the company.
I'm looking forward to spending my retirement relaxing and travelling.’
JOYCE HEENEY
‘If I'd known it was going to be like this I'd have gone ages ago!’
Joyce Heeney told Office Talk.
Joyce retired on April 2 after 14 years service and was delighted not only to receive gifts, including a hi-fi system, but also to be wined and dined on more than one occasion before her departure.
Joyce joined the advertising department as secretary in 1979 and moved to special projects eight years later to work in the department setting up the in-store coffee shops.
She has already been on holiday to Portugal and is looking forward to moving to Cambridge to be near her daughters and grandchildren.
HOW DOES YOUR GARDEN GROW
The last speaker in the 92/93 Executive Club season was sure to capture the attention of the produce buyers but he was a not our usual kind of supplier.
deputy director of operations at the Royal Botanical Gardens, Kew, came to Rennie House Conference Centre on April 5.
Not only does he handle the commercial activities of Kew but he is also responsible for its little-publicised conservation work.
He drew numerous parallels between the running of Kew, such as decisions on investment and their stock holding, and the running of a business like JS.
His slides also illustrated the fascinating history of the Gardens and the many beautiful plants in their collections.
If you have any suggestions for speakers at next season's Executive Club then drop a line to Office Talk and we will pass your ideas onto the organisers.
.
The chairman sneaks a look at some of the messages on Doreen's card
.
Joyce at her leaving party on March 29 with daughter Jane, former assistant editor on the JS Journal
JS Veterans NEWS JULY 1993
CHAIRMAN'S REPORT
Alan Gorham, Veterans chairman, reports on 1992/93.
This sees the end of my first year as chairman.
I must admit I had no idea how much went on concerning the affairs of the veterans.
Your general committee works extremelly hard on your behalf and I would like to say a very big ‘thank you’ to them.
It has been my pleasure to meet many members at various functions and both Mary and I look forward to meeting many more of you during the coming year.
PRESIDENT
Our new president Joe Barnes has been very involved with the affairs of the veterans.
Both he and Mrs. Barnes came to the outing at Folkestone and were pleased to see so many familiar faces.
Mr. Barnes has been attending the general committee meetings and all the members appreciate the interest, help and guidance he has given.
REUNIONS
Following the precedent set last year, we again had three reunions at the Royal Lancaster Hotel.
I am well aware that having three gatherings does not satisfy some members.
You will remember that last year Mr JD charged the veterans department to endeavour to revert to only two reunions.
Dates for this year were already booked but much work is going on in the background to see how possible it is to reduce the number of reunions and thereby enable members to meet more old friends.
VISITORS CONFERENCE
For the second year, the conference was held in the Bonnington Hotel [at the moment this would seem to be the best venue for the meeting].
It proved to be one of the best attended due to the work of the sub committee in increasing the numbers of visitors.
This year, the JS Year End Video was shown.
Its success was very evident and I would hope to keep it as a regular feature of the conference.
It is so much easier to understand detailed and complicated financial figures when they are explained graphically rather than as a mass of figures on a piece of paper.
Unfortunately, the date of this year's conference clashed with the directors' conference.
This robbed us of our president and also meant that Mr Adshead was unable to talk to us.
However, I was pleased to welcome Ms Judith Evans who is the departmental director of corporate personnel.
Ms Evans gave us an interesting talk on the company personnel and training policies.
After an excellent lunch, the meeting reconvened with the session on visitors' questions.
these questions and answers have all been circulated.
The final speaker of the day was Mr Alan Litle who represented the ‘Retired Senior Volunteer Programme’[RSVP].
The aim of the organisation is to undertake projects of benefit to local communities.
SUMMER OUTINGS 1992
Generally speaking, one could say that the ‘sun shone on the righteous’ as virtually all of the outings enjoyed good weather.
there may have been the odd light shower just to lay the dust but not a lot more.
Colwyn Bay was the replacement for Blackpool and, although the numbers attending were not fantastic, I understand that a good time was had by all.
Weston-super-Mare, Southsea, Folkestone and Lowestoft were the other venues and all proved as popular as on previous visits.
The only problem arose at Folkestone where the cliff lift was not working so some of our members were unable to get into town.
VETERANS NEWS
And finally, to the Veterans News.
This is now established and we're pleased with its success; but let's make it even better.
Plenty of us, I know, have interesting hobbies, and we have read some delightful travelogues.
If you have a story to tell, write to The Veterans News at the Stamford House address.
NEWS FROM NORWICH
On April 28 at 9.3Oam, 4O veterans met at Pound Lane for our first outing of 1993.
We arrived at Bury St Edmunds with three hours to look around and have lunch.
It was market day and there were some veterans studying the plant stalls while others studied the pub menu!
Quite a lot of members enjoyed the colourful Abbey Gardens before rejoining the coach for the second leg of our journey to Lavenham.
Lavenham, for the benefit of those who don't know, is one of the loveliest small towns in England, rich in ancient timbered houses, in particular the Guildhall.
The local ice-cream shop is run by a Norwich man who informed all who would listen that he sold more types of ice-cream than Sainsbury's.
I will admit that the rum and walnut was very good.
Off then for a drive around the edges of Constable country where the scenery was very impressive, before stopping for a welcome cup of tea before the return journey home.
Congratulations to  who organised the day, which didn't cost a bean; the coach was paid for from our raffles over the year!.
TUESDAY CLUB NEWS
On May 26 — The Tuesday Club's 12th birthday — we went on our annual ccoach trip.
We left Dulwich at 1Oam for our first destination, Whitbread's Hop Farm.
Arriving there at ll.3Oam we had time for a browse around before our Ploughman's lunch, after which we watched a delightful display of flying owls.
There was also a display of huge shire horses, so beautifully groomed.
These days they are only used for ceremonial occasions.
We left there soon after 3pm and had a lovely ride through the counryside to one of our favourite haunts, Heaven Farm, near Uckfield.
There the chickens run around your feet and will eat anything you offer, including ice cream.
Here we indulged in a cream tea, no calorie counting at all!
Fortune smiled on us for, although we only had a fleeting glimpse of the sun, the rain kept off until we boarded our coach for home at 6.15pm.
All agreed it was a very enjoyable day out.
BUTCHER, BAKER, SOLDIER, SAILOR THE SOLDIERS' SAILORS' AND AIRMEN'S FAMILIES ASSOCIATION
Founded in 1885, SSAFA is the longest established ex-service caseworking charity.
In partnership with Forces Help Society, SSAFA cares for men and women who serve or have ever served in the Armed Forces and their families and dependents.
There are more than 14 million people in the UK, young and old, who are entitled to call on SSAFA for help.
Last year alone, on 82, OOO occasions, families and individuals, all with their own special needs and varied problems, came to SSAFA for confidential, friendly help and advice.
Whatever the problem — bereavement, illness, disability, debt, marital problems, loneliness or anything else causing worry and distress — SSAFA is available locally to help.
With over 6,5OO voluntary reresentatives across Britain, any eligible person need only look in their local telephone directory or ask at the Citizens Advice Bureau for the nearest SSAFA office and write one letter or make one call.
A trained SSAFA representative will be pleased to visit you in your own home.
BUTTERPAT DAYS PART 2
Tony Dyke returns with part two of his memoirs of life in The North London branches in the fifties.
It was all good wholesome tasty food in those days.
Mind you, we did have a little exotica in our small North Harrow branch [apart from Molly, Betty etc. at the Christmas party]; there was Swiss Knorr's French Onion soup for the daring housewife, and if a customer really wanted to impress her dinner guests, then we had small tins of pâté de fois gras.
Oh yes, we could be very chic when the occasion demanded.
One day I had a mind-blowing experience; I was sent on relief to Sainsbury's Finchley Road shop.
I couldent's believe my eyes as I was shown into the delicatessen section.
It was like Aladdin's cave with the Seven Dwarves diamond mine thrown in.
Everywhere, hanging from hooks and on shelves there were breathtaking whole continental smoked sausages, braunschweigers, salamis, knackwursts, vienna sausages, bratwursts, Bolognas, smoked hams and fascinating cuts of cooked and smoked meat.
It was a world apart from my small North Harrow shop.
This was my first sight and smell of the deliciously flavoured delicacies that came from all over Europe.
Their spicy, garlic and savoury herbs invaded my senses as I was shown around my new realm.
I soon discovered that the customers in that particular part of North London were very different to any of the other dozen or so Sainsbury's shops I had worked in.
Here were many war-time refugees and exiles from every country in europe, with accents you could have cut with a cheese wire.
And it was soon made clear to me that their shopping, far from being a simple necessity, was very much a serious business.
They poked, sniffed, felt and peered at everything they bought.
Yes, I made a few mistakes at first, like cutting up their slices of salami to the thickness of a sliced loaf.
The whole critical queue of experts were aghast with horror, their watching silence turned to muttering protest, but the customer I was serving simply nodded his head kindly and proceeded to teach me, mainly by face and hand gestures, how micro-thinly I should be cutting up his precious salami sausage.
Within days my razor-sharp gleaming long knife was slicing away as fast an an Austin Seven's piston, much to the watching queue's fascinated appreciation.
I quickly adjusted to my new continental customers and I started to ask questions about their particular delicacies, and that was when my real education started.
The customers came alive with sparkling eyes, and delighted in describing special ingredients and the region they came from.
Some played up to the queue even more than I did, and at times it was quite a pantomime as they expressed themselves in their broken English with much arm waving and competitive claims.
Mind you, the education was not all one way.
I remember putting my foot down when some of my customers took a piece of their sausage as I was weighing it, and after a discerning chew they casually dropped the remaining small piece of chewed hard skin onto the floor of the shop.
A quick friendly tap on the back of their hand as they tried to snaffle a piece, made the educational aspect of the delicatessen counter a two-way affair.
Another good lesson came in the shape of a small bent old lady, with moth-eaten woollen gloves, who always singled me out to serve her with a dozen cracked eggs that were extremely cheap.
Her pleading frail voice went straight to my heart every time, and quite often I would crack her more than a few eggs to make up the dozen.
One day, as I tried to serve her on the quiet, two deep meaningful coughs from behind me raised the small hairs on my neck.
It was the manager.
‘I am sorry madam’ he called out, over my shoulder, ‘We are right out of cracked eggs today.’
To my amazement the old lady straightened up and took off her old gloves to expose several heavily bejewelled fingers.
Her face and voice were also transformed and she was quite an attractive woman.
‘Then I'll have two-dozen of your best large eggs,’ she said in a clear bell-like tone with all the aplomb of a seasoned actress.
Yes, my Aladdin's cave in Finchley road was certainly a treasure chest full of wonderful lessons, and larger than life characters.
The 5Os was a time when the hatred, fears and austerities of wartime Europe were still in recent collective memory, as were the two ounces of mildewy cheese that had to do for a whole week's ration in those blackout, blitz and Mother Hubbard's cupboard days of the previous decade.
But the 5Os was also a time of the Festival of Britain, and of looking forward with hope and determination to bury the roots of hatred and grow the fruits of love.
Those fruits blossomed into the gently loving British Flower Power of the 6Os; but that is another, more fruity story.
New survey brings hope to worriers PACK UP ALL YOUR CARES
In the last Veterans News there was an article on finding relief from pain with the use of an audio cassette.
The company which produces the pain control cassette also produces a tape to help relieve anxiety.
In the survey of people who had used the tape ‘Coping with Anxiety’, produced by the Liverpool based Council for Involuntary Tranquilliser Addiction [CITA], four out of five anxiety sufferers questioned said they had benefited from it, experiencing a reduction in their anxiety, fewer panic attacks or a better night's sleep.
CITA, Britain's leading stress counselling agency, developed the tape programme last year after starting anxiety clinics in GPs' surgeries and being beseiged by people wanting help.
One in ten of all patients seen by GPs are suffering from anxiety.
There are few specialist clinics and those that do exist cannot cope with the demand.
By producing ‘Coping with Anxiety’, CITA hopes to bring practical help to as many anxiety sufferers as possible.
It is based on the techniques taught in CITA's anxiety clinics.
Users also reported they had increased confidence, were more in control of their lives and the programme helped take their mind off their problems.
A surprisingly large proportion [three quarters]of those questioned said they suffered panic attacks.
More than half found that the techniques on the tape helped reduce these attacks.
‘Coping with Anxiety’ helps anxiety sufferers to understand their condition and explains how they can get relief from their day to day worries with techniques which include allocating half an hour a day ‘worry-time’and by using a combination of relaxation, breathing exercises and management of thoughts and actions.
One person questioned claimed their cat was hypnotised by the relaxation programme on the tape!
CITA director  said: ‘Anxiety is a tremendous problem for millions of people, particularly at this time of recession.
This survey shows it is possible for sufferers to help themselves effectively as our programme has proved.
This is not a cure for anxiety but it can help people to take their minds off their problems and regain control of their lives’.
LETTERS
Harry and Amy McGregor
On a recent visit to New Zealand, my wife and I had the good fortune to meet up with Alf and Muriel Newton.
Alf retired from the company after 4O years' service, and with Muriel settled in New Zealand around 198O.
It was a wonderful experience, they entertained us at their home and took us to see some of Auckland's wonderful sights.
Had it not been for them we would not have known such beautiful places existed.
thank you both for your kindness and your time.
You made our holiday a memorable one.
Jean Mitchell, Kent
I am sensible, indeed one of my first bosses at Js remarked that although I am not qualified in anything, I had common sense which was worth a great deal more to him.
And, if any other recommendation be needed, I was asked for the second time to be coach monitor on our outing to Brighton, so you can see that I must be OK.
But, I recently did something absolutely stupid.
I thought that out of sight was out of mind and put my handbag inside a shopping bag, which I zipped up and then left in my shopping trolley.
I now ask myself how I could have been so daft.
My handbag was stolen in Crayford store.
The trolley was behind me when I turned to choose fruit, but gone when I turned around.
The trolley had been pushed a few feet away and my handbag removed from my shopping bag.
The staff were wonderful.
All my cards were cancelled within 15 minutes.
The police came within half an hour and the officer was sympathetic although he advised me not to expect the thieves to be caught.
As my car and house keys were in the bag we had to change all the locks.
It took six days to replace the locks on the car, and all the while I was worrying that the thieves might try to steal it.
All the aggravation about replacing by bus pass, credit cards and library cards etc, all because I was thoughtless.
It happened to me, and it could happen to you.
Remember, out of sight is not out of mind, but it could be out of pocket.
Doreen and Ken Hutson
Entente Cordiale and all that.
On the weekend of May 28–3O Royston played host to our twin town La Loupe in France.
Two coaches carrying about 9O French passengers arrived in brilliant sunshine at 12 noon.
All of the people who were going to entertain these friends were there to greet them.
Our two friends Jacques and Odile were among the many.
We stayed with them last year in their old farmhouse, which was built in 1642, just outside La Loupe.
They made us very welcome and so we were happy to return their hospitality.
After a welcome by the leaders of both parties we set off to show Jacques and Odile around Royston, which is steeped in history.
We took them to lunch at the Bull Inn which dates back to the 15th century, and afterwards explored the local market.
In the afternoon we went to a barbecue at our son's house, and then, after a shower and a rest, we were off again to a buffet and reception in the town hall.
It had been a long day for our guests, as they had left La Loupe at 1Opm on the Friday evening, so it was home to bed for a good night's sleep, ready for a full day exploring on the Sunday.
We gave thm a full English breakfast and then set off to explore Essex.
We started off at Saffron Walden which has a castle some really beautiful old buildings.
After an hour here we contined to Finchingfield which is one of the most beautiful little villages in Essex.
The church here dates back to the Domesday Book.
they were enchanted by Finchingfield, but we soon had to move on to Thaxted, home of Dick Turpin.
Jacques loves history and collected lots of brochures to take home with him.
From Thaxted we went to a lovely old thatched pub called the Ashtree at Burton End.
By this time the rain had begun but it didn't  dampen their enthusiasm one bit.
we then drove through Stansted, Bishop's Stortford and into the Hadhams where we had a cup of coffee with our daughter, then on through several other villages and back home to Royston.
We sat and had a relaxing drink before we cooked them a typical English dinner of baked cod with new potatoes and vegetables, followed by rhubarb fool and cognac.
We waved them off at about 8.45am the following morning, after having a thoroughly enjoyable weekend.
We can recommend that any retired person join the local Town Twinning Association.
It's a good way to meet people from other countries.
Usually a visit is made to their town one year and to the English town the next year.
The people who run it try to fix up compatible ages, interests etc and it doesn't matter if you can't speak the lingo, they will find someone with a knowledge of the English language for you.
We have a few social events during the year, and it is also nice to write to our friends.
On October 29 we're off to spend a week with Jacques and Odile at their apartment in Gay Paree.
Oh la la what fun.
David Bennett
How not to be remembered
In March, on a visit to Leatherhead, I was walking around the JS branch when I saw an old customer.
I said ‘Hello, you are looking well’, He said ‘I don't know you’, to which I replied ‘I don't expect you to, you haven't seen me for over 2O years.
I was the manager in the old branch for many years’.
His reply was —‘Mr Bennett, how wonderful to see you.
I remember coming into the store one Saturday at five minutes to four, I apologised for being so late and you said to me ‘That's alright Sir, we only shoot the last three’.
Best wishes to all my colleagues from 1932–1974.
Irene Sales, Hampshire
I have completed one year's retirement although I didn't really retire!
It has never been listed in the Journal.
I know I have as I enjoyed the veterans reunion at the Lancaster Hotel in April.
Also my pension and magazines arrive in the post.
Joking apart, after nine years as a security operator I found it hard to readjust my life but, now I do not know how I found the time to do a full time job.
I have joined a barbershop group, I go swimming and walking, I even collected this week for Barnado's.
I still shop in J Sainsbury's or my fanmily say I get withdrawal symptoms!
Best wishes to all my friends and former work mates.
Philip Crook, St Leonards-on-Sea
How to know when you are getting old
Your house is too big and your medicine cabinet is too small.
Your black book contains only names ending in GP.
Your children begin to look middle aged.
You sit in a rocking chair but can't make it go.
Still, in spite of the above, I just want to live long enough to be a problem to my children.
Jean Stringer, former BPM, Hove
I am a veterans visitor for JS and so come into contact with veterans who have served many years with the company.
Over the past ten years or more I have helped open many of the superstores on the South coast with the interviewing of new staff, and on August 24 we shall open the new Worthing branch at Lyons Farm.
When I visit the veterans, they have such a wealth of experience to tell of the old days, some I may add, from before I was born, and it does seem such a shame they never get an invite to look behind the scenes of a present day JS branch.
Is there any hope that the Veterans News could do a feature on the old and new for a future issue of the Veterans News and wangle an invite for several of the veterans to the opening of the new branch at Lyons farm, perhaps on the day the dignitaries attend.
I am sure that it would be welcomed by them.
Rod Sellers, property and local PR manager replies:
You are absolutely right!
There is a great excitement at the opening of a brand new store, and this must be especially so for former staff who remember the old days.
We are arranging more and more ‘sneak previews
involving local residents, local shareholders and suppliers, as well as Civic groups.
These previews are one way of introducing the store to the community and, without exception, everyone is fascinated to see ‘behind the scenes
and how complx a modern store now is.
There is a limit of course to how many guests and visits the store management can accommodate during that frantic run up to opening morning.
This is made more difficult by the speed at which new stores are now built.
Work is still going on in fitting out a new store right up to the last minute.
On several occasions, we have invited former members of staff to launch previews, and I am sure it is a good idea to do the same at Lyons farm.
We will see what can be arranged with the help of the area director.
Perhaps the Veterans News could report on the outcome.
Mrs Lapham, Rotherhithe
I was very interested to see the old photographs in the Veterans News, and I wondered if you would care to see this photo of the darts team.
My late husband Mr Bert Lapham was a member of the team.
C Ingle, Ilford
Friends and colleagues, most of you I expect are experiencing heavy increases in house and car insurance.
There is a company called Saga Services Ltd, catering particularly for the older generation, who will offer excellent rates with very good cover.
I suggest you phone  for insurance.
You will be pleasantly surprised.
Mr. & Mrs Farrell
We would like to thank those who organised the day out at Colwyn Bay on June 9, which we enjoyed enormoously.
The steward, Mr. Fenton, was very helpful, as were the coach drivers.
What can we say but thanks a million.
Olive Walker, Romford
Where are they now
My husband and I came across these old photos recently and, although we know the names of some of the people, we would like to find out who the other two are.
We met Percy Brearey at the reunion this year, which was very nice.
My husband suffered a stroke two years ago which has left him partially sighted, but he loves to meet up with old colleagues.
A GOOD WAY OF QUILLING TIME
Betty Lee worked in Basingstoke depot for 17 years until her retirement in 1986.
Since then, Betty hasn't had a minute to spare.
When she and her husband Bob are not taking breaks to beauty spots such as their beloved Weymouth, Betty fills her time quilling.
Quilling is the art of making picture with spirals of paper.
The thin strips of paper are rolled up to form shapes, which are then stuck on the card to make a picture.
Two years ago, Betty bought a beginner's quilling set and set out to make a card.
Since then, she has come on leaps and bounds.
She now makes jewellery boxes, pencil holders, and Christmas decorations.
Following the example of Blue Peter, they all make use of old cheese boxes or the cardboard tube from the centre of toilet rolls etc.
Betty sells the cards to friends and relatives, and any profit that she makes goes to charity.
It takes about three hours to make a basic card, but can take weeks to produce the more exotic patterns.
Betty finds quilling a very relaxing hobby and one that is very flxible.
You can start on a card, put it down and not pick it up again for weeks, then continue where you left off.
Anyone interested in taking up quilling should contact their local library which should be able to provide a quilling handbook and possibly the phone number of a local quilling group.