

Tell us more
— people's poll plea
MORE employees than ever are committed to Courtaulds' aim of being faster, better, more distinctive.
But many feel they lack guidance about how to turn it into practical achievement.
That sums up people's views in a series of opinion surveys being carried out with Board backing by Group businesses around the world.
It was the biggest exercise of its kind mounted by Courtaulds, with questionnaires so far going to 15,000 employees across the whole range of operations in the UK, continental Europe, United States, Latin America, the Far East and Australasia.
People were asked about attitudes to Courtaulds as a whole — dealing with subjects such as pride, communications, confidence, added value and understanding.
Other sections dealt with job quality and satisfaction, management quality, efficiency, openness and other business (DRB) -related matters.
Each DRB reported separately on the results of its own survey and feedback from the core Group questions was collated centrally by Human Resources.
Three out of four employees said they understood the company's drive for higher standards and accepted the need for change.
But only one in three felt they were being told all they needed to know.
‘What comes through strongly is that we are good at communicating in one direction — the Courtaulds message is getting across,’ said , deputy director of Human Resources.
‘But we have got to spend considerably more effort on opening up a two-way dialogue.
People are loyal to the company, committed to its aims and are now saying they would like to contribute more positively.’
Too many Group businesses, he said, are not good enough yet at listening to employees' ideas and responding to them.
‘We don't think we are out of line with other companies but there is a lot of room for improvement.’
More employee opinion polls are planned this year by Aerospace, Performance Films, Porter Paints and  Fibers (all in the US) and Engineering (in the UK).
Another complete set of surveys will be carried out in 1994 and at two-year intervals from then on.
Meanwhile follow-up action from the latest surveys is being discussed with the DRBs concerned.
, currently personnel manager at George Street, will be involved in much of this work in her new role starting in April.
Bound for relief role in Bosnia
RELIEF workers in war-torn Bosnia will soon be relying on protection from a new type of armoured vehicle made by Courtaulds Aerospace.
Ten of the British-built vehicles have been sold to the United Nations in a recession-busting deal worth over half a million pounds.
They will be used on humanitarian aid projects by UN High Commission for Refugees teams providing urgently-needed food, blankets and clothing to people caught up in the Balkan conflict.
TV viewers saw the distinctive white vehicle in action in February, carrying BBC newsman Martin Bell and his crew during a Panorama documentary.
Code-named CAV100, it is built around a rugged Land Rover Defender chassis and uses high performance non-metal armour for protection.
‘News teams like it because it is roomy, fast, can carry all their kit, and has good off-the-road stability,’ said , ballistic protection business manager for Courtaulds Aerospace.
‘Most importantly, it looks non-threatening — just like an ordinary white Land Rover — and is obviously not a military vehicle.
‘This is why it appealed to the UNHCR for relief work.
The contract went out to competitive tender and though ours was higher priced than some they liked its performance and capability.’
Quick response was also a big factor — from the time the order was placed, vehicles were built and despatched to Zagreb in less than four weeks, with help from the UK government smoothing the way.
‘Everybody is excited about the UN order as it's a first for us and tremendously important for the future,’ said .
‘This is a further step forward in building ballistic protection business for Courtaulds Aerospace and follows the success we have already had with military programmes.’
A new plant opened in Coventry last September now has 60 people working on armoured vehicles.
Courtaulds Aerospace hopes the UN order will lead to more business, and inquiries are also coming in from other news organisations.
The vehicle seen in Panorama is in constant use by news teams and the BBC has now asked for another, which will be delivered in April.
Watch out for a change in publication dates for Courtauld News.
The next issue will appear in June, instead of May, with a special report on the company's annual results included.
From then on the paper will be published at two-monthly intervals, in August, October, December and so on.
News deadlines change accordingly.
NEWS
All change?
The Felling cans can!
WHEN Swedish authorities suddenly changed the wording they wanted on 50,000 yacht paint cans, Courtaulds Coatings found itself slap in the middle of a crisis.
Every single can had to be recalled to Britain, unpacked, relabelled and despatched again — all during the busiest period of the year.
The fact that the job was completed on time, without disrupting service levels, says a lot for the stamina, resilience and sheer hard graft of all concerned.
Cause of the last-minute rush was a ruling by KEMI, the Swedish chemical inspectorate, that special safety warnings were needed on cans of antifoulings.
Thousands of litres had already been delivered.
All had to go back to Felling, in the UK, where relabelling work started over Christmas and continued well into January in a 700 man-hours effort.
Changes
Artwork changes were handled through  at International's Southampton office — a complicated job in itself, involving different brand labels, sizes and colours.
Overseeing the operation were .
in Gothenburg maintained the link with Sweden's environmental authorities.
‘It was touch and go but we got all the product back to the warehouse in Sweden before the end of January,’ said .
‘February and March are our two busiest months there, so it was very important we got this one out of the way.’
Sweden is the biggest market in Europe for Courtaulds' International and VC Systems yacht paints, although recession is currently holding back demand.
Heartbeat award
THE Courtaulds Coatings site at Felling, UK, now has a Heartbeat healthy eating award to go with its sparkling new restaurant.
Presented early in March by the local healthy authority, the accolade is proof that the restaurant meets certain criteria.
Requirements include having a good diet available, staff trained in food hygiene, non-smoking area and information about the fat content of meals.
The 174-seater restaurant, run by catering manager , re-opened towards the end of last year after being totally refurbished.
AS armoured vehicles made from composite materials follow combat vehicles painted with Courtaulds Aerospace products into Bosnia, we look at how four Group companies are working together.
Project draws on Group resources
THE success of one Courtaulds Aerospace company has boosted business at three others in a four-way display of Group co-operation.
Central to the network is the manufacture of armoured vehicles made from composite materials by Ballistic and Performance Composites, part of Courtaulds Aerospace Advanced Materials Division.
The armour is built up from woven fabric supplied by Courtaulds Aerospace Performance Fabrics at Littleborough and impregnated with resin by Courtaulds Aerospace Electrical Insulation, of Runcorn.
Finished vehicles are then painted with products supplied by the Sealants, Adhesives and Coatings Division of Courtaulds Aerospace, at Shildon.
Electrical Insulation had to pitch against non-Courtaulds companies to win the prepreg work and securing the contract has doubled previous turnover.
‘The contract has a fundamental effect on our business,’ said Runcorn operations manager .
‘But we were not given an easy ride just because we are an in-house company.
Delivery
‘Meeting the quality and delivery requirements of this project has been very demanding.’
There was plenty of competition too for the Shildon operation before it secured the paint contract.
The key was being able to offer a two-coat process, instead of the conventional primer-undercoat-topcoat approach, which saved time and speeded up production.
Sealants Adhesives and Coatings also had to have the paint, originally designed for use on military truck exteriors, adjusted to provide a satisfactory finish on the composite while still meeting the MoD's demanding DEF-STAN 80–41 criterion.
‘We ended up producing a paint customised for the job,’ said , sales manager for defence and industrial coatings.
Sealants, Adhesives and Coatings supplies the two-coat process for other military end-uses.
Tank manufacturer Vickers, for example, is using it for a major contract in Africa.
Co-operation between Ballistic and Performance Composites and the Shildon site has led to plans for a joint stand at the Royal Navy and British Army Equipment Exhibition in Aldershot in September.
In the front line
COURTAULDS has been in the front line in war-ravaged Bosnia — after playing a similar role in the Gulf conflict.
Paints supplied by Courtaulds Aerospace's Shildon site in the UK coat the Warrior combat vehicles used by the United nations to ride shotgun for humanitarian aid convoys.
Shildon has 100 per cent of the paint business for the Warriors, built by GKN Defence at Telford, said , sales manager defence and industrial coatings.
The site began supplying GKN when Warriors were first built in 1986 and has an on-going contract.
Two staff are dedicated to the business, visiting GKN regularly and maintaining paint stocks.
More than 600 Warriors are already in service and by 1994 a total of 1,053 are due to roll off the production lines.
Previously Warriors played a major role in the land war in the Gulf.
Meanwhile the Shildon operation, which has 40 per cent of the UK non-aerospace defence market, has secured contracts for a new generation of military vehicles and logistic equipment.
DROPS — Demountable Rack Off-loading and Pick-up System — are trucks that can set down or pick up large quantities of supplies.
All change for McLaren
THE Courtaulds-sponsored  Marlboro McLaren racing team was set to begin its assault on the 1993 Formula One championship on March 14 with a new car, a new engine and a new line-up of drivers.
Three drivers were named by McLaren before the season got under way at Kyalami in South Africa —.
The car is full of hi-tech wizardry, including electronic engine management and chassis control, and a six-speed semi-automatic gearbox that can memorise each circuit.
An active suspension system is designed to keep the McLaren glued to the track by reading the bumps ahead and a radio link enables engineers to tweak the car's operating systems during the race.
Power comes from a Ford V8 supplied by Cosworth, replacing last year's Honda engine.
After the South African Grand Prix the teams next meet at Interlagos, Brazil, on march 28 and then in the new European Grand Prix scheduled for Donington park in England on April 11.
The rest of the 1993 Grand Prix programme is:
Merger paves the way for success
FACED by rocketing inflation and the worst recession ever, Courtaulds Coatings, Brazil, is going all out to protect its markets and improve performance.
Last year it was one of the few paint companies in the South American country to make a profit, although results were down on 1991.
This year it is taking on its biggest challenge yet, backed by a major reorganisation which has merged two previously separate businesses into one.
Tintas International, making wet paints for marine, PC, trade and retail, and Supertintas Litoverti, making powder and packaging coatings, have come together as Courtaulds International.
The aim is to streamline the business, achieve higher productivity and lay the foundations for better operational results.
‘With the reorganisation we will become leaner and stronger to prosper in difficult trading conditions and obtain high profits when the economy finally stabilises,’ said , chief operating officer.
The company has three factories — one in Rio de Janeiro, two in Sao Paulo — plus a trade paint store and two Cromadex centres.
Among the changes being introduced are:
Simplified financial and administrative controls.
One manufacturing function for all three factories.
New exports drive, serving markets in Argentina, Uruguay, Paraguay and Chile.
The workforce will be reduced by 84, bringing total numbers employed down to 512.
Courtaulds International will continue to focus on the same products and markets as before, supplying paint for a while range of end uses, from ships, chemical plants and houses to washing machines, furniture and beer cans.
Links with Group marine coatings go back a long way.
Tintas International has been an affiliate of International Paint since 1926, while Supertintas was a more recent acquisition, in 1984.
Plans to merge the two began to be put into effect last year and were completed at the end of February.
Immediate priorities in the year ahead will be to improve productivity, customer service and market focus.
‘We have to become the low cost producer in all segments and at the same time offer a service second to none,’ told Courtauld News.
Trading conditions remain difficult in a country where inflation reached a massive 1,175 per cent last year.
But other Latin American economies are expanding fast and  sees good potential for exports.
‘We are budgeting for growth in sales and profits, reflecting gains in market share and improvements resulting from the reorganisation.’
Safe paint gift helps orphans
ORPHANS in Romania have been helped by a compassionate gesture from International Paint's Retail Division.
The Courtaulds Coatings business responded to a plea for safe paint to be used on cots.
Children in an orphanage in the Romanian town of Sighisoara were becoming ill after sucking the old lead paint on the cots.
UK church-based organisation Rom-Aid appealed to International for help and the company responded by providing supplies of its Child-Safe paint.
Each batch of Child-Safe is tested to comply with the British and European toy safety standards, making it ideal for use on children's furniture, cots and toys.
It can withstand knocks, is low-odour and quick-drying.
Fifty cots have now been sanded and re-coated with Child-Safe.
, International Paint Retail Division senior product manger, said: ‘Rom-Aid director Bob Park expressed his delight with the support we provided.
‘Although it is impossible to respond to all the pleas we receive for charitable aid, it is wonderful when we can help a worthwhile cause.’
AROUND THE WORLD NEWS
CHESS moves
Coventry, UK: After 19 years with Courtaulds, 13 as head of safety, is leaving at the end of March to join the Fisons group.
Following his departure, will take on overall responsibility for the management of Courtaulds Health Environment and Safety Services (CHESS).
Training day
Le Havre, France: Twelve members of the Celomer sales force visited Lassarat, one of the company's largest customers for protective coatings, for a special training day.
They painted samples in an exercise designed to produce a better understanding of the Ecotech concept of more environmentally sensitive products.
Dynamic duo
Geneva, Switzerland: Courtaulds Fibres Cellulosics is planning its biggest and best stand for years at the Index exhibition from April 20–23, showing both viscose and Tencel.
Man of steel
Louisville, USA:, technical services representative for Porter International, has been elected treasurer of the Ohio Chapter of the Steel Structures Painting Council (SSPC).
Science tours
London, UK: Courtaulds employees have the chance to go behind the scenes at the Science Museum, under a sponsorship scheme, to view collections currently not on display.
The next tours are on April 21 and May 19.
Ring on  for details.
Key to victory
Key West, USA: The Farr 50 yacht Full Cry, overall winner of the Key West Regatta, was painted with Courtaulds Coatings' Tri-Lux II antifouling and InterSpray 800.
Role in history
Franklin, USA: Porter Paints' products have been used in the restoration of historic homes used as a command post and refuge for the wounded during the Battle of Franklin in the American Civil War.
Business lift
Damman, Saudi Arabia: Both International Paint Saudi Arabia and International Paint (Gulf) have taken delivery of high specification Hyster forklift trucks designed to cope with difficult environments.
A good catch
Chattanooga, USA: The new $45 million (£30m) Tennessee Aquarium proved quite a catch for Porter Paints, which supplied the coatings for the 13,000 sq ft building.
BRIEFING
Packaging sets sights on growth
COURTAULDS Packaging is a multi-million pound business, with 19 manufacturing plants in six countries.
Despite the recession, it's looking to grow significantly over the next decade.
Chief executive Basil Jefferies comments in the latest in our series of DRB interviews.
Q. Packaging is a vague term for most people.
What line of business are you in exactly?
We're involved in three areas: rigid packaging, such as caps and closures for cosmetics, toiletries and fizzy drinks; tubes, for toothpaste, cosmetics and other household products; and flexible packaging, mainly for prepared foods, snacks and confectionery.
Q. Who buys your products?
We are very good at supplying international blue chip companies who are brand leaders in their fields.
They include well-known names like .
Q. How do you differ from other major packaging companies?
Many of them have a wider spread of activities than we do, making things like glass containers, aluminium cans or paper and board products.
Our aim is to be a leading supplier in the plastic packaging markets in which we choose to operate, and develop sustainable competitive advantages in those markets.
The critical bit is to be very precise about choosing.
If we get it right we will be the best in the field.
As it stands, we are one of the larger packaging groups in Europe and North America and a force to be reckoned with in the industry.
Q. Has the balance of your business changed in recent times?
It certainly has.
Historically, we tended to concentrate on high volume products and maximum utilisation of capacity.
Today the focus is much more on high added value packaging.
For a number of years we have been trying to upgrade the quality of our business, in terms of the technical content of products, the level of design we build in and the price we charge.
We've dropped out of a lot of product lines, like simple caps and closures for low value household products and flexible packaging for commodity business.
So we're now supplying end users in the cosmetics, toiletries, personal care, beverages, food, pharmaceutical and health care markets.
Q. What new types of business are you developing?
Q. The medical and pharmaceutical area is a good example.
Three or four years ago we were involved in this only in a very minor way.
From humble beginnings sales have quadrupled and are set for further high growth in the next three years.
Principal products are asthma inhalers, which we supply to Glaxo.
Medical and pharmaceutical products now represent about 15 per cent of our total rigid packaging sales — a figure which will double by 1995–96.
It's the fastest growing part of Courtaulds Packaging.
Last year we put in more capacity at Wrexham to make self-injection devices for the new Glaxo migraine treatment Imigran.
Glaxo has since delayed the launch to await product approvals but it's a massive project and will take out rigid packaging business forward very quickly when it comes on stream — probably late this year.
Q. How did you establish yourselves in such a demanding market?
Having a longstanding relationship with Glaxo was a huge help.
They saw us as a natural choice to work with.
Also we have invested heavily in clean room capacity, both at Colchester and Wrexham.
This is a business where only the highest standards of manufacturing quality are acceptable.
You have to be able to control every aspect of production, be able to trace every batch of raw materials right through your process and hold comprehensive records of production, sometimes for years afterwards.
Not many companies can afford the high cost of entry or meet the stringent operational requirements.
Q. Is Courtaulds Packaging growing as a whole?
Yes, it's growing organically and also by acquisition.
Over the next few years we are projecting very high rates of growth, not less than double and up to three times the rate of inflation.
As well as growing overall, we are also changing the balance of our activities, getting out of certain businesses and into others.
A recent example was the sale of Fournier's fruit and vegetable packaging business in France, whilst retaining the industrial packaging business.
Q. Has the recession slowed you down?
Not at first, but over the past year we have noticed weaknesses in most sectors in most countries.
One of the few exceptions has been the toothpaste market in Europe and the United States.
Despite this, 1992–1993 will still be a good year.
At the business unit level profits should be on a par with last year, which was a record result.
The Courtaulds Packaging result should be further increased due to special non-trading factors.
Q. So how would you sum up progress in the last two to three years?
We've seen major investments in tubes and rigid packaging pay off.
We've also seen valuable improvements in some of our flexible packaging businesses, particularly the major investment at Colodense in moving from an old factory to a new one.
The acquisition of Wheeling Stamping in the US — now Thatcher Tubes and Knight Engineering — has been a big step and is a very valuable addition to Courtaulds Packaging.
Then we acquired Flexitainers, which is excellent as a strategic fit and will be a super business for us.
The other major factor is, as I've said, the change towards high added value products.
All the investments we've made in clean room technology have been a great success and the new laminate tubes business is doing well now after a difficult start some years ago.
Two pioneering developments in toothpaste tubes have hit the headlines recently — an all plastics laminate tube from Betts and a five-layer co-extruded product from Thatcher.
So we can quote success stories in flexibles, rigids and tubes.
The net result is that our overall financial performance has improved from a fairly mediocre position.
But there are still parts of our business that are capable of a lot of development and improvement.
Q. What are the areas you need to work at?
There are three challenges facing Packaging.
Firstly, we have to realise the full potential for growth and profitability of our plastic tube technology.
There are huge opportunities in tubes for dentrifice and cosmetics.
Secondly, we need to help all our flexible packaging companies achieve much higher rates of return.
Some are doing extremely well.
We'd like to get the others performing to the same excellent standards as the rest.
The third challenge is managing growth.
There is no shortage of opportunities in Packaging.
The skill will come in picking the most attractive projects to invest in.
This will be increasingly important as cash becomes much tighter in Courtaulds.
Q. Have you identified any specific areas of opportunity?
Our medium term plan sets out a programme for developing the business we currently have in North America and Europe.
One new initiative in the next couple of years, will be the opening of a third front — the Far East/Pacific Rim.
Far East economies are among the most rapidly growing in the world.
Economic development means more purchasing power in the hands of individuals and that means rapid growth for cosmetics, toiletries, pharmaceutical products — all the markets we supply.
Q. How important is innovation in Packaging?
It's a vital thread running through all our business development activities and the emphasis is on applications technology — designing new products for individual customers.
In the last three years we have opened three brand new laboratories: at Colchester, serving rigid packaging and tubes; at Bristol, with a new complex for flexible packaging scientists; and at Muscatine, Iowa, which is our largest plastic tubes plant.
We also plug into the research facilities available in Courtaulds and licence technology from independent sources.
Q. You're confident, then, about Packaging's future in the 1990s?
I think we've found a formula that we can be successful with in growing the business.
We've limited our ambitions to a number of very specific areas and we intend to develop those areas as rapidly as we can.
Already we have established strong positions in a number of markets.
We are the second biggest tubes supplier in Europe and No 3 in the United States.
Within these global positions we are No 1 in certain markets for certain products.
We want to grow in those areas where we are strong and our growth in the 1990s will outpace that of the 1980s by a significant amount.
However, there will be environmental pressures on packaging and this is going to be a major factor.
It should be seen as a driving force, not a threat.
Q. How well does your business fit in with the rest of Courtaulds?
Extremely well.
The things that are important to us — technology, marketing and people — are important to Courtaulds.
Like many parts of the Group, our technology is based on polymer science.
We aim for leadership positions in niche markets, using product differentiation.
And we are a people and skills intensive business.
NEWS
Teamwork — the way to stay No 1
‘POWER to the people’ is the secret behind a team-based improvement exercise which could save up to $1 million a year for one of Courtaulds' leading US businesses.
Viscose rayon producer Courtaulds Fibers has launched the project at its plant in Mobile, Alabama.
Objective: to reduce costs, stay competitive, and beat off the threat from cheap foreign imports.
The initiative was launched in response to an employee attitude survey which showed that people wanted to contribute more to the success of the business.
Pilot groups working since the middle of last year have already made giant strides in factory efficiency.
Now the programme has been launched on a full scale basis, with new continuous improvement teams (CITs) set up and trained during January and February.
Drawn from a cross-section of factory people — both hourly paid and salaried staff — they will look at ways of improving operational standards in pulp handling, acid recovery and spinning.
Groups formed last year will carry on working at four other tasks: cellulose losses, tow motor (forklift truck) costs, maintenance store stocks and quality information.
A lead team of managers and trade union members oversees the whole programme but the emphasis is on involving employees and encouraging them to solve their own problems.
Problem
‘Traditionally, if a problem crops up a manager goes in and tells people what to do.
Now we expect operators to identify the root cause and make the problem go away themselves,’ said factory systems manager .
Last year's pilot exercise showed how the approach could pay off.
Savings in a full year could reach £1 million if momentum is maintained.
Cellulose losses in the viscose ‘caves’ were cut by 80 per cent, with a significant reduction in pulp wastage.
Stock levels in maintenance stores went down, reducing working capacity by $100,000.
Maintenance costs on tow motors were slashed.
Quality awareness among operators improved, thanks to a better flow of information.
‘Ideas offered by operators were listened to and acted upon,’ said , filter stripper in Viscose.
‘In our CIT everyone has some responsibility for solving problems.’
Training in problem-solving skills is the cornerstone of the programme explained .
‘Although our current target is to have about 15 per cent of the workforce directly involved in CITs, we fully intend to involve all employees in this training and teamwork experience over time.’
The challenge comes at  a time when competition is getting tougher.
Cheap fibre imported from the Far East is a growing threat and European viscose rayon rival Lenzing has recently set up business in Tennessee.
CIT could be a major weapon in protecting Courtaulds Fibers No 1 position.
Benefits of a network
HANDLING the payment of wages and benefits should become easier for Courtaulds US businesses this year.
A new computer network, linking desktop PCs at Group sites across the country, will enable data to be processed more speedily, efficiently and accurately.
Courtaulds US Inc (CUSI) currently acts as a controlling house for benefits information from Group businesses across the US, with the help of Courtaulds Coatings Inc in Louisville, Kentucky.
The new system will provide more consistent information on Group benefits while giving US companies flexibility in managing their own payroll and human resources functions.
All benefits information is then combined for consolidated analysis and reporting.
With the new network everyone will have the same software, and Louisville will be able to retrieve benefits information at the touch of a button.
‘It should speed up the whole process and save money for companies currently using outside computer services,’ said , project manager for Management Information Services at Courtaulds Coatings Inc.
‘It will also allow us to get the most up to date information and solve any problems of inaccuracy.’
The network switched on at Courtaulds Fibres, Mobile, in February.
Louisville starts in April and other sites will follow.
AWARDS FOR QUALITY
Minibus marks latest accolade
A COURTAULDS UK company is marking its success in the quality field with a warm-hearted community gesture.
Courtaulds Films Cellophane, Bridgwater, will present a new minibus to a local school in recognition of its achieving BS5750 part two quality assurance standards.
The 15-seat Cellobus goes to the East Bridgwater Community School, winner of a competition held among 38 organisations.
Cellophane employees were involved in the judging panel.
Former Defence Secretary, Tom King, MP for Bridgwater, hailed it as ‘a wonderful idea’ when he presented the quality certificate to Cellophane chief executive Geoff Blackburn on February 19.
The Cellobus will be used by several groups attached to the school, including mums and toddlers, scouts, senior citizens and church and youth members.
Mr Blackburn said he was delighted with the BS5750 part two award (also known as ISO9002), which was ‘part of our campaign to raise standards of quality and reliability to the benefit of all our customers.’
It would help in the drive to increase productivity, efficiency and cost effectiveness, and reduce waste, he added.
Cellophane, a leading manufacturer of packaging films for more than half a century, launched its quality systems registration effort two years ago, with  and  in charge.
The task was a challenging one, covering an operation which produces 70 different types of film on a large, complex site.
All employees were involved at different stages and every member of the workforce completed a structured training session.
Engineering success
THE Process Machinery arm of Courtaulds Engineering has been awarded the BS5750 part one quality standard.
Accreditation follows Courtaulds Engineering's certification early in 1991 for its project management operation.
Process Machinery specialises in design and build projects across a diverse range of industries including aerospace and packaging.
Speedy progress
COURTAULDS Films Polypropylene at Swindon as achieved registration to the prestigious ISO9002 quality assurance standard following a six-month period of preparation.
Few companies receive ISO9002 at the first attempt, particularly over such a short period, and it reflects further major business progress.
It joins the MRPII (Manufacturing Resource Planning) Class A award — Courtaulds was the world's first packaging film manufacturer to win this distinction in 1991.
, total quality manager for CFP, said the latest achievement underlined Courtaulds Films' position as a quality conscious company committed to improvement.
Meanwhile CPF's Mantes manufacturing site near Paris is progressing towards ISO9002 certification, with a target of June 1993 assessment by AFAQ, the French quality assurance organisation.
‘First for CPF
A NEW quality accolade has stamped the mark of excellence on Courtaulds Performance Films UK.
The company has won recognition for its sales, marketing and customer service with the Marketing Quality Assurance (MQA) award.
CPF is the first film manufacturer to receive the award, which was launched in Britain two years ago to assess how companies meet customer needs.
With it comes registration under ISO9001, BS5750 part one and EN29001 quality assurance schemes.
General manager  called it an important milestone and said: ‘I believe it is a clear demonstration of our commitment to providing customers with high quality products and support services.’
He thanked all staff and customers for their help.
CFP UK based in Portchester, Hampshire, markets and sells performance films made by its parent company in the United States.
It believes the award will give its distributors and installers competitive advantage in a marketplace where quality is very important.
Only 14 other companies have achieved MQA accreditation so far — among them names like .
ITED skills training gets green light
THE ITED approach to training comes of age this year as it goes fully operational after two years of pilot schemes.
ITED — Integrated Training, Education and Development — is a tool that encourages individuals to create structured learning and development activities closely focused on improving both their performance and that of their business.
It works by identifying the key skill gaps and providing a structured approach to the delivery of the training.
ITED has been developed through a number of task groups, utilising the skill and experience of people from all sectors of the Group, and was piloted across a sample of UK businesses in 1991.
‘The results were encouraging in that we saw the benefits of assessments which enabled gaps in skills to be identified,’ said , head of functional training at Courtaulds' Training, Education and Development Centre at Woodside in the UK.
‘But we realised more work was needed on teaching people how to design and implement effectively the training necessary to fill gaps.’
The result was a broader pilot scheme during 1992, covering fibres, packaging, chemicals and films businesses.
By the end of 1992 more than 300 people had been involved in ITED, which as applications across the spectrum of working environments, from finance to manufacturing.
It examines a range of skills — functional, personal, management and general business awareness.
It has put a strong focus on functional skills, those needed to carry out immediate day-to-day tasks to a professional standard.
The structure comprises four stages.
An operations director, for example might be expected to understand the characteristics of a world-class manufacturing operation — stage four — while a shift manager may be required to understand thoroughly his or her own process — stage one.
Now the full ITED programme is being made available throughout the UK and pioneered in the USA.
The significant development is that ITED is changing from a centrally run project to an initiative driven by individual businesses.
Pilots win praise
ITED will be well received when it goes ‘live’, judging by the reaction of some of the managers involved in pilot schemes.
All managers in the production department at Betts Tubes in Stevenage have been involved in ITED and during this year it will be extended to other employees.
, production manager at the UK company, part of Courtaulds Packaging, said: ‘It has enabled us to focus on areas of development for each individual in a controlled way.
‘It has opened my eyes to the value of self-development, showing that people can acquire new skills without having to resort to external courses.’
, business accountant of Tencel in the UK, has experienced ITED both as an assessor and as the assessed.
He said: ‘In the past a great deal of training has been done on an almost random basis.
The value of ITED is that it pinpoints strengths and weaknesses precisely.’
By the end of March the 15 members of the IT department at Courtaulds Fibres in Grimsby will have completed an ITED programme.
IT manager  said: ‘ITED is a structured and disciplined procedure and it has enabled us to identify elements of training that may have been overlooked using more traditional appraisal methods.’
Move for industrial coatings
FROM April 1 the industrial coatings business of Courtaulds Aerospace, Shildon, will be transferred to Courtaulds Industrial Coatings at Silvertown, London.
About 60 accounts are involved, including major customers such as.
This is part of a move to bring all the Group's industrial costings businesses under one management team.
Buyer for DIY giant visits site
THE new speciality paint buyer for DIY giant B&Q, the largest customer of International Retail, was given a greater insight into the Courtaulds Coatings business during a tour of the Felling, UK, plant.
, B&Q's speciality paint and woodcare products buyer, was shown round by International's national accounts manager  and production manager .
Marketing manager  later presented details of the product range and explained the relationship between International and Courtaulds.
described B&Q's appointment of a buyer specifically for speciality paints as ‘highly significant’.
It recognised the growing importance of special products such as those produced by International Retail.
said he now had a clear understanding that International was a large professional organisation with a product range tested to the highest level.
Speedy service
SMART work by Thatcher Tubes, racing against the clock, helped a special toothpaste promotion hit stores in the United States bang on time.
Old Farmer's Almanac, a new toothpaste made from baking soda, was being sold with giveaway almanacs in K-Mart stores across the country.
The deadline was tight and Thatcher's production team at Florence, Kentucky, had to pull out all the stops to meet it.
It was Friday when artwork for the tube design arrived.
The customer turned up the same day and wanted changes made.
Thatcher quickly ran some samples through, got the changes agreed and called in a local studio to re-do the artwork.
By Saturday new plates had been made and the printing presses re-set.
Laminate production started that afternoon and completed tubes were rolling of the machines by Sunday morning.
Thatcher shipped out 100,000 of the Old Farmer's Almanac tubes on Monday — just in time to catch their customer's filling lines in California.
A second order for 260,000 was despatched later.
Relaunch for colour system
WHEN it comes to home decorating, the colours that find favour in Louisville, Kentucky, could soon be catching on in Rio de Janeiro and Montreal.
Porter Paints is relaunching its entire architectural colour system and making it available to sister Courtaulds Coatings companies in Brazil and Canada.
It's the latest example of a Group business ‘exporting’ home-developed expertise to benefit others.
Under the new system Porter will extend its range of house paint colours from 800 to 1,200 individual tints.
Architectural paint companies tend to change their colours only once every seven to 10 years, so this is seen as a major revamp which could hold the key to Porter's sales and marketing success for the rest of the century.
Colour specialists in Louisville have been working on the changes for three years, using information pulled in from dealers and regional sales people.
Prediction from a consultant colour forecaster have also been added to the mixing pot.
With the basic palette agreed, paint formulas and standards are now being produced and colour cards, charts and other sales aids put together, to meet a target completion date of June 1.
The international dimension throws out a challenge never confronted by Porter before: how will colours developed locally work in other markets, other countries, other climates?
Demands
Talks with Courtaulds Coatings in Australia raised difficulties which could not be resolved — customers' demands at opposite ends of the earth were just too difficult.
But Group companies in Brazil and Canada thought the idea worth pursuing.
Their way of approaching the market was more like Porter's and a joint colour system promised considerable savings.
Close co-operation between the three businesses resulted in a palette agreeable to all and some new ideas in how to present colours to customers.
‘We've got a good mixture of clean, crisp colours and more muted shades which should have appeal for everybody,’ said , Porter Paints manager of marketing planning and services.
‘All I've got to do now is think up 1,200 new names, but I'll leave the French and Portuguese translations to our partners!’
Porter Paints has the strongest house paint business in Courtaulds, selling through 125 company stores and 500 independent dealers, mainly in the south-east and lower midwest of the United States.
Paint stores are run by Group companies in Australia, Canada and Brazil — some based on the Porter model — and successful product links have been established.
Meanwhile paint from Porter will put the finishing touches to an entire village community in the United States.
The company is providing paint and wallcoverings for 120 new homes to be built at Banbury Hunt, Kentucky.
Porter's Lexington team handled the sales project, with decorator  contributing her colour expertise.
FOUR-PAGE FOCUS ON EUROPE
As the Single Market comes into effect Courtauld News looks at some of the Group businesses operating in Europe
Changes welcome
THE Single Market, which heralds a more competitive Europe, is welcomed by Courtaulds chairman Sir Christopher Hogg.
‘It is very much in Courtaulds’ interests to have a wider European Common Market with as few barriers as possible,’he said.
‘We are confident of being able to live in that climate.
It will be a more competitive one but one that we ought to welcome as a company.’
The Maastricht Treaty on European union displays a commitment to an environment that would enable businesses to develop.
It says:
‘The Community and member states shall ensure that the conditions necessary for competitiveness of the Community's industry exist.’
The treaty identifies the need to
‘foster better exploitation of the industrial potential of policies of innovation, research and technological development.’
Maastricht, which enshrines many issues apart from trade and industry, has bred a hard core of Euro-rebels opposed to further European integration.
Sir Christopher said: ‘The treaty is far from perfect and much of it concerns issues that should be debated more thoroughly.
But it is clearly the way forward.
If it is not endorsed it will be an enormous setback for Europe.’
Courtaulds chief executive Sipko Huismans said any move to isolate Britain from continental Europe would be ‘extremely damaging’ to Courtaulds and could reduce the size of the Group's UK activities.
Coatings reading as opportunity knocks
ALL FOR one and one for all — that's the way Courtaulds Coatings plans to prosper in an increasingly competitive Europe.
A major reorganisation coming into effect on April 1 will:
Replace separate marine and yacht, protective and industrial coatings businesses with one integrated operation.
Co-ordinate paint manufacturing and distribution across the whole of Europe under one management.
Reduce
Main purpose of the changes is to reduce costs and improve the service to markets and customers.
‘We are putting in place an organisation that capitalises on the opportunities presented by the Single Market,’ said , recently-appointed director of European Coatings.
‘We're also recognising the strength of local teams as we drive for increased market share in the individual countries of the new Europe.
‘Our objective is to stay a leader in key markets and build for the future.’
The new structure will operate as one big European business, sub-divided into three regional profit centres — Northern, Central and Southern Europe.
Powder and Cromadex will remain substantially as before.
‘We cannot run a European business out of one particular country any more,’ explained.
‘We need management devolved down the line to encourage greater understanding of the markets we serve, backed up by strong national teamwork across the markets and product ranges.’
Reorganising paint manufacture and distribution is an important priority, as trade barriers come down and the movement of goods across borders becomes easier.
Coatings used to have separate plants in each country, because local tariffs and duties made it too costly to import.
The plan now is to rationalise production on sites such as Felling, in the UK (making marine and yacht coatings for the whole of Europe), Gonfreville, in France (packaging coatings), Angered, in Sweden (protective coatings) and others.
This will strengthen Coatings drive for success in a market where the current flat demand for wet paint has made competition even more intense.
‘We feel the rationalisation of manufacturing and distribution under a single management is overdue because it is the single largest cost centre,’ said .
Transport
‘With the unified Europe and excellent transport network now in place, the necessity for having a manufacturing plant in every country falls away.
‘So this will the major emphasis of the initial changes.
It's essential to our plans for being a lower cost producer, in paint markets which are probably the most competitive in the world.’
What differences will individual employees see?
‘They will see a company determined to progress in key markets, with clear objectives and targets and with a more competitive cost base to ensure our future success,’ he said.
HOW THE TOP TEAM WILL LINE UP
SENIOR executive posts in the new Coatings Europe have been announced as follows:
, deputy chief executive, reporting to .
Also appointed commercial director, Coatings Europe, and head of Marine and Yacht worldwide.
, chief executive, Coatings Northern Europe, retaining responsibility for the European protective coatings market.
, chief executive, Coatings Central Europe, with responsibility for the European marine and yacht markets.
, chief executive, Coatings Southern Europe, responsible for the European packaging and coil markets.
, operations and supply director, responsible for all manufacturing, purchasing and distribution in Europe and for health and safety at all sites.
, finance director.
remains chief executive of Powder Coatings worldwide and  chief executive of Cromadex, to which is added the UK and French general industrial businesses.
All the above will be members of the Coatings Europe Executive, along with, who will have a watching brief on research and technology.
French joy in German market
AN energetic drive to broaden the customer base has led to a Courtaulds Aerospace company in France anticipating turnover 50 per cent up on last year.
, general manager of the Advanced Materials site at Tourville La Riviere near Rouen, said: ‘We have pushed very strongly to do business with many more companies and to develop new products.’
Particularly satisfying has been the successful assault on the German market where for the first time the company has secured orders for filament-wound rollers.
These carbon fibre rollers are used by firms manufacturing machines for a variety of uses including films, textiles and paper.
They are made by winding resin-laced strands of carbon fibre round a mandrel and then curing in an oven.
Five rollers, each 8.9 metres long and 400mm in diameter, are destined for the film machine makers Kampf.
Another polypropylene film manufacturer, Bruckner, has ordered a six meter × 350mm roller.
Among other exciting developments is a FF2 million (£250,000) contract to build, out of composite materials, a human centrifuge.
This structure, measuring 6m × 5m × 2m, is for Swiss-French company Acutronic and will be used for training astronauts.
A curing oven, the size of a car garage, has been built specially for the project.
Courtaulds Aerospace, Advanced Materials Division is pursuing aggressively the Scandinavian market, where there are potentially large orders for rollers from manufacturers of paper making machines.
Novaceta in shape to go forward
A LEANER, fitter Novaceta faces a year of consolidation after a difficult 12 months since the Anglo-Italian joint venture was established.
The European market for acetate filament yarn is expected to shrink slightly during 1993 — disappointing but not such a blow as that experienced during the last two years which saw the market in Europe tumble from 40,000 tons to 30,000.
Blame
The European-wide recession has been chiefly to blame, along with competition from American companies aided by a weak dollar in 1992 and by the fact that Novaceta's European customers have faced tough competition from Far East textile manufacturers.
‘After a period of rationalisation we are now in good shape to take advantage of improving markets as the recession comes to an end but we don't expect an upturn until 1994,’ said chief executive .
The rationalisation affected people and products.
Last year 226 employees lost their jobs, 196 in the UK and 40 in Italy, although many were relocated within Courtaulds businesses, or found employment through the job search scheme.
That left a workforce of just over 1,200, 44 per cent in the UK and the larger part in Italy.
Product lines were re-appraised, with some operations closing and Italy and the UK swapping certain functions to make use of capacity.
But as the joint venture, a marriage between Courtaulds' acetate filament yarn operation and SNIA Fibre, enters its second year it does so with its market share — about 70 per cent in Europe — intact.
Europe remains the key market, taking 80 per cent of production, with the United States, Korea and North Africa sharing the remainder.
Better
Novaceta is working hard at achieving better consistency to ensure the market share remains secure against established American competitors and potential rivals from the former Soviet Union.
‘Consistency is a life or death issue,’ said .
The drive for quality is underlined by the UK Novaceta operations at Spondon, Little Heath and Nuneaton achieving a BS5750, matching the accreditation of the Italian arm of the business.
Meanwhile new markets are being explored, principally by extending the acceptance of acetate yarn for suit and dress linings at the expense of viscose filament.
Turkey is providing a particularly promising territory.
Staff
The Anglo-Italian co-operation has progressed during the year as staff in each country have attended language courses.
‘The level of technical co-operation has been particularly good.
People in both countries have learned from each other,’ said .
And there has been an unexpected spin-off — because SNIA Fibre is a subsidiary of a chemicals group controlled by Fiat, cars have been available for UK Novaceta workers at discounted prices.
A major area of concern remains safety, with Novaceta carrying the burden of having the worst record among Courtaulds-owned and joint venture companies.
‘There is evidence of a significant effort being made to improve safety but we must strive to achieve a reduction in accidents that matches the efforts,’ said .
Exchange rates ‘critical’
THINKING, talking and working along European lines has been second nature to Mike Ward for many years now.
Though born in Britain, he regards himself as a citizen of Europe and Italy as his adopted home.
Ten years with Courtaulds Italia, based in Milan, have given him a Mediterranean outlook on life which squares easily with the goals of Single Market integration.
Spoken
‘I have always spoken and used European languages a lot and my wife Annie is the same.
You feel very much at the centre of things,’ he said.
‘Britain, I often think, is on the edge of Europe, not only geographically but philosophically.’
From the Italian viewpoint at least, he sees the Single Market changes making little difference to how things work.
‘Italy was already fully integrated into Europe as a country and Courtaulds is reasonably integrated into Europe as well.
‘Longer term we shall see some procedural simplifications over things like tax and documentation.
But absolutely nothing has changed in the way we work or how our customers place their orders and run their businesses.
‘One thing that is critical to us is currency.
This office is 100 per cent dependent on imports and a high percentage of our fibres is re-exported, so the kind of exchange rate troubles we have got at the moment doesn't help.
‘Developing a single European currency will take a long time but it will make the most significant contribution to European, and therefore world, financial stability.
‘If the pound note and the lira were thrown out of the window tomorrow and replaced by the ECU that would be fantastic.’
Mike has been selling Courtaulds products around Europe for 25 years.
Plastics
He started in plastics, working from Coventry and Spondon, and joined Courtaulds Central Trading in the mid-1970s — a move that took him to East Germany, Yugoslavia and eventually the whole of Eastern Europe.
Fluent in French and German, he added Italian during a two-year working spell in Italy and returned to Milan in 1982, where he now looks after fibres.
One strong English interest he has retained is cricket.
He contributes his ‘explosive’ talents to an atomic energy team in Milan and claims the sport is growing in popularity.
Paperwork mountains for Exports
A NEW vocabulary and a weighty tome of rules and regulations heralded the arrival of the Single Market for Courtaulds Exports.
The Coventry-based link between Group businesses and customers abroad suddenly found the words ‘import’ and ‘export’erased from the EC dictionary.
There is no longer any such activity as importing and exporting between EC companies — now nations have ‘arrivals’ or ‘despatches’of goods.
‘We had to become familiar with a pile of paperwork about the Single Market,’ said Exports shipping director .
‘We subscribed to a Customs and Excise newsletter to keep pace with the changes — and things were happening so fast they even brought out a special Christmas edition.
‘But we are already seeing the benefits in terms of faster deliveries and a better service for customers.’
Key to the improvements has been the reduction of bureaucracy and paperwork previously required for each truck load.
Library
Drivers had to take a library of documents, including copies of invoices, details about loads carried and transit forms to be stamped at each border crossing.
Now, with a journey through the EC regarded as the same as an internal domestic trip, drivers are not obliged to carry any special documents.
Neither are lorries subjected to delays by Customs as a routine matter.
Now the only requirement is for the manufacturer despatching the goods to send Customs a monthly record of their deliveries.
But there are still discrepancies between different countries within the EC.
If, for example, a UK Courtaulds business supplies a UK customer, VAT has to be charged.
However no VAT is payable on a ‘despatch’ from the UK to any of the continental European countries.
The reason is a disparity in VAT rates throughout Europe although when the rate is eventually standardised VAT will become payable.
Exports, which employs 43 people, deals with about 50 countries worldwide, including most of the European destinations, transporting mainly fibres and chemicals.
Easier for drivers
DRIVER Jerry Ward has first-hand experience of changes brought about by the Single Market during his regular trips from the UK to France.
Once a week for five years Jerry has driven his articulated lorry for Courtaulds from Coventry to the Lyons region, delivering acetate yarn and returning with the empty beams that hold the yarn.
Jerry, who drives for contractor Denby Transport, covers up to 2,000 miles during each five-day round trip, using the Dover-Calais ferry crossing.
‘The Single Market has made the journey quicker and more simple,’ he said.
‘There are no barriers at Calais.
It's straight off the ferry and on to the road.’
Removal of petty restrictions has also made life easier.
Previously, for example, drivers risked a heavy fine if they crossed a border with more than 200 litres of diesel — the idea was to ensure they filled up with fuel abroad.
Scrapping cumbersome Customs procedures means Jerry can head straight for the customers.
Previously he had to spend an hour at a transit warehouse near Lyons waiting for clearance.
Tygavac aims to widen horizons
THE new-look stand-alone Tygavac operation, which provides a one-stop shop service to the advanced composites industry, is stepping up its activities in Europe.
Tygavac, based at Littleborough in the UK, is a distribution company, buying in a range of treated fabric and plastic sheet materials used in the composite component manufacturing process for parts used on aircraft and racing cars.
Late last year Tygavac, part of Courtaulds Aerospace Advanced Materials, became independent from Tygaflor, now part of Performance Fabrics, and was put under the stewardship of general manager .
Remain
Close ties with Performance Fabrics remain and apart from sharing the same site Tygavac buys in about 20 per cent of its products from the Courtaulds Aerospace company.
‘We see ourselves as a one-stop shop,’ said .
‘We can supply everything the customer needs for vacuum bag moulding composite parts, including nylon bag film, sealant tapes, release films and fabrics and breather fabrics.’
The process involves placing resin-impregnated cloth over a single mould tool.
This prepreg material is then covered with a flexible membrane which is sealed on to the tool and the area under the bag evacuated.
The vacuum created ensures an even pressure is applied throughout the surface of the mould so the part follows the contours of the mould perfectly, regardless of its complexity.
Agents
Tygavac sales are generated throughout Europe by agents and distributors, with all materials being supplied from Littleborough.
Major customers in the aerospace industry include .
Now Tygavac is linking up with the growing network of Application Support Centres, set up in close proximity to customers to provide sealants and coatings, being established in Europe by Courtaulds Aerospace.
Already Tygavac products are sold via the ASC at Bremen in Germany.
Move to step up activity in Germany
A NEW Courtaulds Aerospace unit is to be established in Germany to pursue business in Europe's most significant market.
The rapid development follows the acquisition late last year of ICI's aerospace coatings interests in Europe.
Until ICI sold off its £5.5 million European business, Courtaulds' presence in Germany was a two-man Application Support Centre in Bremen.
This one-year-old venture was set up by Shildon-based , marketing director for Sealants, Adhesives and Coatings in Europe, and run by  and .
From Bremen Courtaulds began making inroads into the German aircraft coatings market, targeting the major players Deutsche Aerospace and Dornier.
After the ICI deal Courtaulds recruited five ex-ICI personnel, working temporarily in offices at the ICI plant in Hilden near Düsseldorf, said , himself recruited from ICI as Courtaulds Aerospace's business director for Germany.
But the plan is to acquire a new facility comprising warehouse and offices near Düsseldorft, and for the Bremen office to close so the whole operation comes under one roof.
Product will come mainly from Celomer's Gonfreville plant near Le Havre, where there is a new aerospace business director for France,, and from Shildon.
The major part of the aerospace coatings have still to complete the formality of receiving approval from German customers.
To ensure customers have continuity Courtaulds is supplying ICI products under an agreement to cover the transitional period.
said: ‘Our main objective is to ensure we retain the business achieved by ICI when it is transferred on to Courtaulds Aerospace sites or on to a Courtaulds Aerospace product.
‘The ICI business and the sales generated at Bremen give Courtaulds about 70 per cent of the aerospace coatings market in Germany.’
The new centre will enable the German aircraft makers to focus on a local German-run operation.
This is seen as a major improvement on the present set-up where coatings orders go mainly to Le Havre in France or Shildon in the UK.
said: ‘This is a major part of the European jigsaw falling into place.
‘We have sites in France and the UK and now we have a strong presence in Germany — a cohesive team fighting to achieve the same objective.’
He said establishing an ASC at Bremen was of ‘immense value’ in providing the groundwork for this latest development.
It gave a clear message that Courtaulds Aerospace meant business in Germany, he said.
Options for Clarifoil
THE Single Market creates new possibilities for Clarifoil, the new versatile film made by Courtaulds Speciality Plastics at Spondon in the UK, says sales director .
It is already a business committed to export, with 80 per cent of the film going abroad and 30 per cent of that destined for continental Europe.
France is the biggest single market in Europe where the company has its own operation with stock holding to ensure top quality service to customers.
Now the Single Market presents new opportunities, said .
‘For example, it becomes considerably easier to contemplate supplying across EC markets from a stock held in a central EC location.’
But the removal of barriers will also mean more competition with customers being offered a wider choice of materials.
‘We cannot afford to ignore any market area within the EC nor feel secure to sit back on a strong domestic market only to find our position eroded by competitors,’ he said.
‘The Single Market demands that we define Europe, not the UK, as our domestic market and that we make it as easy for a customer in Turin, Munich or Nice to buy from us as one in Coventry or London.’
Clarifoil has a range of end uses, from high class print lamination to shoelace tips.
Route to new sales
A BRIDGE could open up the route to sales success in France for a new product marketed by the protective coatings division of Celomer.
Wintercure, a fast-drying coating that cures in virtually any weather conditions, has been given the green light by the Ponts et Chaussees Laboratories, one of the foremost approval agencies in France.
It is now being used by the major French bridge builder Baudin Chateauneuf, on a new motorway bridge, the Pont de la Planchette.
The approval gives Wintercure credibility and should encourage architects in other fields to specify the product, said Celomer's protective coatings manager .
Boundaries ‘no barrier’
MARKETING strategy in Europe is no longer a slave to national boundaries — a development accelerated by the arrival of the Single Market.
That's the view of Matthew Banks, an Englishman working in sales and marketing at Courtelle in Paris, who is operating in a thoroughly continental environment.
A typical journey of Grimsby's acrylic fibre in the fleece market, for example, might be direct sales to an Italian spinner who sells his yarn to a UK knitter.
He sells his fabric to a French garment maker who may in turn sell his products into Germany.
Mr Banks said: ‘In a chain such as this Courtelle's distinctive brand and its colour service have to be managed as transnational assets.
That means concentrating on what our customers need and on the things we do best without allowing boundaries to cloud our vision.
‘Nowadays we regard the Single Market as our home market.
At least 70 per cent of Courtelle sales are generated here.
It is vitally important to us in France that our customers do not see Courtelle's commitment to them as in any way secondary.’
There were some short-term disadvantages of the Single Market on a practical level, he said.
The move towards harmonised VAT systems, for example, has caused some organisation and information technology headaches.
Firms need to maintain more data on all their trading partners under Single Market legislation, said Mr Banks.
And the disappearance of cross-border trade figures, which can no longer be collated in their old form since there are no trade borders, would make analysis of market trends and competitor activity more difficult.
However computerised data from other sources would eventually remedy the situation, said Mr Banks.
Overall the closer ties between European partners have been welcomed by a French salesforce that lost its manufacturing base at Calais.
Production for most of Europe is centred on Grimsby but the reduced paperwork brought about by the Single Market means that the UK site can now deliver to Europe within 24 hours.
‘It is a tribute to the French people here that they have been able to work with customers and develop such confidence in Grimsby's service.
Customers are increasingly convinced that we are partners in the same market,’ said Mr Banks.
NEWS
‘Yes’ to the bug-fighting coating
A PAINT that fights bugs has been given the green light for use in ‘sick’ buildings.
Approval from America's Environmental Protection Agency means that Portersept, made by Courtaulds Coatings in Louisville, Kentucky, can be applied for the first time to heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) systems.
Other Portersept products have already had big success countering the effects of mould and mildew on walls and ceilings, thanks to a bought-in ingredient called Intersept.
The surge in orders reflects growing concern about indoor air quality, with attention being focused on ‘sick building’ syndrome and building related illnesses, associated with micro-organisms in HVAC systems.
Market
‘This creates a growing market which we have been unable to sell into until now,’ said Portersept marketing manager .
The problem has grown with modern energy-saving building techniques, which re-circulate used air and help to spread any micro-organisms present.
Since Portersept was introduced more than two years ago, it has been used widely in hotels and health centres.
Sales have reached record levels, mainly through company stores in Florida, and it has become Porter Paints' fastest-growing product.
Other Courtaulds Coatings businesses are now showing interest in Australia, Canada and Brazil.
Phones network to grow
A GROUP telephone network set up in North America is being widened to link sites at opposite ends of the earth.
The system was started by Courtaulds Coatings, Fibers and Aerospace, and currently connects several Courtaulds US  businesses with sites in Canada and the UK.
Over the next year, other countries will be evaluated for service, with Mexico, Australia, Japan and Singapore targeted for early implementation.
Managed out of Louisville, Kentucky, headquarters of Courtaulds Coatings Inc, the network offers cheaper phone calls and the possibility of data links, including electronic mail.
It also gives the US companies far greater buying power than they could achieve individually.
As a result two US and two UK telephone companies are strongly competing for the network business, and a decision on who to use is expected shortly.
Data to deal with dilemma
THE problem of controlling corrosion on ships has prompted Courtaulds Coatings to develop an on-board computerised maintenance management system.
International Seacontrol is designed to help ship operators in a recession-hit marine industry who are increasingly under pressure to reduce operating costs while sustaining an acceptable level of maintenance.
Seacontrol represents the first time on-board maintenance software has been made commercially available to the shipping industry by a marine coatings supplier.
Developed by International over 18 months, Seacontrol has undergone extensive trials on ships around the world.
The program's features include:
Storage of maintenance specifications and crew job lists.
Management of stock levels.
Advice on preparation and application.
Health and safety guidelines.
International has set up a worldwide installation service for Seacontrol.
‘The increasing incidence of breakdowns at sea and the resulting concern being expressed by various legislative bodies emphasise the need for a well-managed maintenance programme allied to crew training,’ said , business manager, above water coatings, at Courtaulds Coatings' Felling site in the UK.
The world's bulk fleet comprises 7,798 vessels, 2,231 of which are between 16 and 20 years old.
These older tankers require continuous maintenance to keep them in good, safe working order at sea.
Charterers have recently shown growing concern about the standards of maintenance of ships carrying their cargoes.
Head start in Korea
A PIG'S head played a ceremonial role in the construction of a factory for a new can coatings venture between Courtaulds and Daihan Paint in Korea.
Before work could continue local custom dictated that the ‘raising of the beam’ ceremony was observed.
Sheets were attached to each end of a beam of wood and then secured to the highest rafter in the roof, which at this stage was still open to the elements.
Table
Meanwhile a cooked pig's head was placed on a table.
Directors and managers put envelopes containing money — destined for the workforce — in the pig's snout, ears or mouth.
They poured a drink and bowed and knelt twice before the pig's head.
Construction workers then raised the beam a few inches.
The process was repeated with different managers until the beam was at its highest point.
Then the pig's head, by now crammed with cash, was sliced and served with hot pickled cabbage and rice cake.
Antifouling launch success
A NEW antifouling that can be used on underwater metal has produced sales of more than $1.3 million in the United States during the launch period.
Tri-Lux II's first 20 weeks on the market yielded Courtaulds Coatings' Yacht Division sales of 48,000 units worth $1,350,000 (£900,000) of a product that retails at $'39.95;(£26) a pint.
The Yacht Division attributes the success to the ‘four Ps’— performance, packaging, promotion and pricing.
Tri-Lux II is the first antifouling that can be used safely over underwater metals including aluminium hulls and outdrive engines, says the company.
The packaging options include an outboard kit, providing everything needed to paint an outboard engine, which is also a first in the industry, says the Yacht Division.
Promotion has included advertisements in 15 magazines, a Press release campaign and in-store posters.
The pricing policy features discounts and special offers and these benefits also apply to mail order catalogues.
The Yacht Division expects Tri-Lux II to grow into a product with sales worth $2–3 million a year.
Cool idea looks to be a hot prospect
ELECTRICAL INSULATION, part of Courtaulds Aerospace Advanced Materials Division, is confident of a major success with a special silicone-coated glass fibre material used for insulating electronics components.
Formulated by the Runcorn, UK, Courtaulds company, the new material insulates and dissipates heat.
It is cleaner, simpler to use, and performs better than the traditional alternative, a combination of mica and ceramic paste.
The material is supplied exclusively to Warth International in the UK, which converts the rolls into its Kool Pads range.
Electrical Insulation believes the potential throughout Europe and beyond is considerable with a similar product available only in the USA and Japan.
Position
, the company's technical manager, said: ‘It has taken two years to reach the position we are now in.
But we have now perfected a unique product.’
Electrical Insulation is already benefiting from another innovation — the Channel Tunnel between England and France.
The company is providing insulation for trains, a contract worth more than £150,000 per year.
These developments extend a comprehensive portfolio, with Electrical Insulation products going into end-uses as diverse as fishing rods and violin bows.
CAD ace wins cash
COMPUTER wizard Colin Saunders has won £2,000 worth of hardware and software in an Auto CAD user-of-the-year competition.
He came out top in the mechanical engineering section of the competition, run by CAD User magazine.
Colin uses the package in his job as CAD development manager for luxury flooring company Amtico in Coventry.
Executive dies at 53
COLLEAGUES of  were shocked to hear of the senior executive's sudden death on February 17 at the age of 53.
A director of Courtaulds Textiles, he was equally well known in Courtaulds, where he worked for 25 years before the textiles demerger in 1990.
He spent his early time with the company in personnel and from 1976 moved into the textiles side of the business.
Latterly he was responsible for Courtaulds Textiles' clothing brands and home furnishings divisions.
SPOTLIGHT ON COURTAULDS ITALIA
Teamwork at the hub of Europe
IF YOU want to capture the full flavour of Europe at work, walk into the Bonola commercial centre in Milan, past the hypermarket, the elegant boutiques and the coffee drinkers queuing for their early morning caffeine jolt, and hitch a lift to the second floor.
There you will find Courtaulds Italia, a lively sales and marketing business functioning right at the core of Italy's industrial and financial heartland (‘Milan makes it, Rome spends it,’ they say).
In such surroundings the company could hardly be anything else but Italian.
Yet Switzerland is only 20 miles to the north and a three-hour car drive will take you to any one of five different countries.
The pan-European influence comes through strongly in an office where French and British accents jostle with Italian; where ‘bonjour’ and ‘good morning’alternate with ‘buongiorno’; and where the next phone call is just as likely to come from Bradford, Paris or Barcelona as from Genoa.
Historically, the most direct influence on Courtaulds Italia has been French.
The company was set up in 1970 to sell Courtelle acrylic fibre made in Calais, staffed mostly by French people and managed for many years by a Frenchman,.
Before then Courtaulds had worked through agents, supplying fibre to customers such as Luserna, of Turin, who first bought viscose rayon in 1947 and are still on the company's books.
Gateway
Today the business provides an important gateway for Group producers seeking to service the Italian market.
‘Products come from Britain, Spain or France, but the customers’ relationship is with us because we live in Italy, speak the same language and follow the same way of life,’says general manager .
‘To the people we deal with we are Courtaulds in Italy.
But we are also a part of a multi-national group, with all the security of a big name behind us.’
Sales staff have 150 customers to look after, mainly in the northern and central parts of the country.
They book orders, develop new business and sort out problems where necessary, earning commission from Courtaulds' supplying companies.
The kind of products they handle are mostly fibres, films and acetate flake, going into end uses ranging from clothing and imitation suede to food packaging, confectionery and spectacle frames.
Courtelle is still a strong runner, though mainly re-exported as yarn or knitted fabric from Italy, where temperature extremes (40C in summer to minus 17C in winter) make natural fibres more popular.
Viscose into fashion apparel, flock and nonwoven disposable garments.
For Tencel, Courtaulds' new cellulosic fibre, Italy has been singled out as a prime target in Europe because of the size, quality and design strength of its textile industry.
Until recently Courtaulds Italia was also involved in distributed bras for Gossard, now part of Courtaulds Textiles, and nonwoven materials for another former Group company, Bonded Fibre Fabric.
That arrangement ceased in December when the company moved office from the Via Bartolini to its new home in the Bonola centre.
‘Our lease was ending on the old building so we had to look for somewhere different,’ says .
‘Here it is very convenient.
The Metro station is nearby and we are only five minutes from the motorway.’
A change in office, a tilt in the balance of products handled — will the Single Market measures mean yet more change?
‘There are some difficulties with documentation because the new rules are not clear yet, but we hope it will make our job easier in the future.
Potentially we can improve and increase our business and I think the Single Market will help.’
One thing  is sure of.
‘If we want to develop we must assure Italian customers that we are committed to staying in Italy.
We want to be seen as a reliable supplier with a good record of continuity.’
Striking the right balance between continuity and change undoubtedly holds the key to Courtaulds Italia's future.
Sports-mad staff blend well
THOUGH much smaller in numbers that it used to be, Courtaulds Italia has managed to weld together a team which blends experience with freshness.
General manager  joined the company in 1979 from fibre manufacturer SNIA Viscosa.
Born in Como, he has lived most of his life in Milan, likes the city for its lifestyle and location and relaxes by skiing and playing tennis.
Most other staff keep equally active in their spare time, tempted by the climate, the wealth of local facilities and the ease of reaching desirable spots like the Alps, Lake Como and the Ligurian coast.
and  sell packaging film, covering 700 miles a week between them on the customer round.
spends weekends at his small house in the mountains, walking, trout fishing, collecting wild mushrooms and playing jazz on the piano.
Secretaries  and  have outlasted most, with 38 years' service between them.
started as a receptionist, works now on film business and keeps fit through gymnastics; 's is the first voice fibre customers hear when they ring with a query.
A close colleague in the office is .
Duties
Fibre sales duties are shared by two expatriates — Englishman , ten years into his second Italian tour, and Frenchman , who transferred from Courtaulds, Calais, in 1985, to specialise in Courtelle.
Both are sporting odd men out in a city famous for its football.
plays cricket and  top-class hockey (more of which on other pages).
Another far from home is Yorkshire-born , secretary to the general manager since 1980 and an adopted Italian for 15 years now.
likes travelling and her photographs of exotic places decorate the office walls.
The office number-crunchers are chief accountant and keen tennis player , French-born  and .
NEWS
Double act pays off for Chemicals
A LITTLE AND LARGE double act is creating new business opportunities for Courtaulds Chemicals.
Scientists at Buckhaven in Scotland who specialise in complex organic chemistry have teamed up with macro polymer science experts at Courtaulds Research in Coventry.
Precise details of what has been achieved by the liaison remain a closely guarded secret but it has involved developing new methods of using medicinal drugs in the body and has already led to a contract with a major pharmaceutical company.
‘We are exploring new fertile ground, this is an exciting opportunity,’ said , business director at Buckhaven.
Commercial director  added: ‘We are combining our chemical synthesising skills with the polymer skills of Research.
This has enabled us to secure a significant contract relating to a drug delivery system.’
The development is one of several new avenues being pursued by Buckhaven.
An intermediate — one of the stages in producing a pharmaceutical product — is being manufactured for Boots for a new heart drug called Manoplax.
Buckhaven's skills have also been enlisted by another pharmaceutical giant for an anti-asthma drug.
In this instance the role is to enhance the purity in an intermediate supplied by a third party, an operation crucial to the success of the product.
And genetic engineers seeking to develop new characteristics in farm animals have tapped in to Buckhaven's expertise for intermediates used in the synthesis of proteins.
said: ‘Seventy-five per cent of our current output is for pharmaceutical companies and 90 per cent of the effort on new product development is for pharmaceuticals.’
The value of Courtaulds Chemicals working with customers to develop new products is acknowledged by both parties.
, commercial manager of Boots Chemicals, said: ‘We regard our relationship with Courtaulds Chemicals as being the model for all our suppliers.
‘It is very much a partnership.
Both parties exchange information on respective activities and new opportunities are identified to mutual advantage.’
Also key to commercial success has been Buckhaven's dedication to meeting the exacting standards of the American Food and Drug Administration, the pharmaceutical industry's watchdog on quality.
said: ‘We are audited on a regular basis by the major pharmaceutical companies who expect us to match FDA standards.
We have developed high levels of product control and traceability.’
A six-strong team, headed by , maintains quality assurance and control.
Quality control laboratory manager  said: ‘You have to be able to prove to the customer that you meet the highest quality standards.
Quality is paramount in the pharmaceutical industry.’
Steady as she goes
ANOTHER example of the investment in Courtaulds Chemicals' Buckhaven site in Scotland is pictured being hoisted into position.
The vessel, affectionately known as a scrubber, is a reactor that ensures no gas by-products from chemical processes are vented to the atmosphere.
The large capacity of the reactor means gases can be scrubbed more quickly, removing a bottleneck and allowing the production process to operate more quickly.
Installation involved hoisting the reactor by crane and gently lowering it into a prefabricated steel structure.
Screen gems for Porter
HOW do you attract attention at America's best-attended trade show for protective coatings?
By making the most of new visual aid technology.
Porter International scored a  big hit at the National Conference of the Steel Structures Painting Council, held in Kansas City, Missouri, by mounting a screen show on several computer terminals.
Product ‘stars’ on view were Intersleek and Intershield and the exhibit also dealt with fireproofing and health and safety issues.
Word of the display travelled fast and so many people were drawn to it that Porter International had difficulty keeping up with the crowds.
Visitors were able to press a button and view a complete product line description, including technology, application information, performance charts, special features and customer benefits.
Far East target for heat-beating textiles
MARKETS in the Far East and Middle East are opening up for hi-tech heat-beating textile produced by Performance Fabrics.
The Littleborough, UK, arm of Courtaulds Aerospace Advanced Materials Division, produces a range of thermal insulation fabrics that protect against high temperatures.
Typical end-uses include fire screens and welding blankets in potentially hazardous environments such as oil platforms, shipyards and the steel industry.
The range includes the silica-based Tygasil products which attract none of the safety concerns associated with other barrier materials such as asbestos and ceramic fibres.
Until recently the products were confined to America and Europe but now the drive is on to spread the word in the Far East and Middle East.
‘We are trying to expand sales into the Far East and the strategy is to use Courtaulds’ existing resources there,’said , business manager for thermal protections worldwide.
A distribution network has been organised in Japan via Courtaulds Japan Ltd.
‘Without their local knowledge and contacts it would have taken years for us to achieve what we have managed in a few months,’ said .
Business
Export sales manager  is heading for the Far East shortly to expand the business into other countries, working with Courtaulds interests in Singapore and Hong Kong.
Although the market for thermal protection products is growing slowly, points to technical excellence as the key to winning market share from competitors.
Meanwhile sales executive  is spearheading a move into the Middle East and already a distribution agreement has been established in Saudi Arabia.
said: ‘We are extremely optimistic because of the high level of activity in the petrochemical industry.’
, general manager Performance Fabrics, added: ‘We believe there will be considerable growth in the Middle East.’
Meanwhile sales executive  is developing the distribution network in Europe.
Although thermal products are represented in many European countries, the company believes there is scope for expansion.
And in the USA, where thermal protection products are distribution by Cooperheat Inc, confidence is high as health scares associated with other barrier materials are driving customers towards silica-based textiles.
UK-USA sealant launched
A NEW hi-tech window sealant from Courtaulds Aerospace Commercial Products Division was launched simultaneously in the UK and US in February.
Called PRC 565, it is a new generation product and the result of two years' development involving American and British scientists.
It is designed to give high performance on the robotic production lines that manufacture sealed window units.
‘We have great expectations,’ said , businesses director, Europe, for commercial products.
‘The pre-launch trial went well and we are very excited.
It represents a quantum leap that takes us way past our competitors.’
Group resources have made the innovation possible because polymers have been developed specifically to meet the requirements of the chemists developing the formulations.
PEOPLE AND PLACES
John's glory days
SOCCER player John Groves fears a broken leg suffered last year may finally have ended his playing days.
He makes a joke of the injury because, at 59, it is an inconvenience rather than a disaster.
It would have been a different story 30-plus years ago when John was a professional, playing in the First Division for Luton Town at soccer shrines like Old Trafford and Anfield.
He was a member of the only Hatters team ever to play in an FA Cup Final at Wembley — that 1959 side is still talked about in the pubs and clubs of Luton, its players accorded folk hero status.
Wing-half John was forced to retire from professional soccer with a back injury after a distinguished career with Luton, for whom he played 218 games from 1953–1962, scoring 16 goals, and then Bournemouth.
For the past 26 years he has worked in the offices at the Courtaulds Chemicals power station on the Spondon site.
John joined the plant in the days of British Celanese when he was just 16.
His father Arthur, who had played for Blackburn Rovers, Derby County and Portsmouth, worked there at the time.
But within six months John was spotted by a Luton talent scout while playing in a county schools match and moved south to Kenilworth Road.
He played in the days when the maximum wage was in force for professional soccer players and, unlike his modern counterparts, never grew rich on the game.
But he said: ‘I am not bitter about it, I would not have missed my time in football for the world, it was wonderful.’
Chef Jerry strikes gold
CHEF Jerry Toth struck gold when he came top in a competition to find the best in Britain.
Jerry, 29, caters for guests from around the world as head chef at Courtaulds' Training, Education and Development Centre in Woodside near Coventry.
In January he took part in La Parade des Chefs, a competition open to team of four from throughout Britain, at Hospitality Week ‘93.
This top catering industry exhibition attracted more than 21,000 visitors at the National Exhibition Centre in Birmingham.
The teams each had to prepare a menu for 50 diners under the added pressure of working in glass-fronted kitchens so visitors could watch them at work.
And Jerry's team, representing the Midlands Association of Chefs, won gold medals for their efforts.
‘I was up all night before the event to make sure we were prepared because attention to detail is so important,’ said Jerry, whose 13 years in the business have included a spell at the Ritz Hotel in London.
Jerry, who joined Woodside last year from Swinfen Hall, Lichfield, scene of TV's Blind Date wedding, runs the Courtaulds kitchen with Martin Padbury and Marlene Cox.
Happy landings for lab analyst
LABORATORY analyst Emma Lawrie found the right formula for courage when she hurled herself out of an aircraft at 2,200ft.
Emma, 21, who works at Courtaulds Chemicals in Buckhaven, Scotland, raised nearly £300 for cancer research with the sponsored parachute jump.
‘I had always wanted to try and it was wonderful,’ she said.
‘It was so peaceful.
‘I wasn't nervous until we got over the drop zone and I thought ‘What am I doing here?’’
Emma backed cancer research after two of her relatives died from the disease.
Meanwhile Paula Roy, who works at Cromadex in Leeds, also helped cancer research by raising £200 with a parachute jump in Yorkshire.
Damien Slorach, a process operator at Buckhaven, has made several jumps as a member of the Scottish Parachute Club.
‘I enjoy the thrill of jumping out of a perfectly good aeroplane,’ he said.
But Damien has been grounded since the birth of his 15-month-old daughter Anna.
‘I'll be back up there soon,’ he vowed.
Heavy metal act
WELDER Ron Seal and son David enjoy canal cruising — on the boat they built from sheets of metal.
They bought a set of plans, hired space at a boat builders' yard and set to work.
‘We literally started with sheets of metal and welded them together,’ said Ron, who works at Courtaulds Chemicals in Stretford, Manchester.
They whole project took about 12 months and cost around £10,000, including a two-cylinder diesel engine.
Ron estimates the boat is now worth double.
David, who cruises with his wife and two children, moors the boat on the canal next to his home at Warrington.
The 40ft long boat was finished in International paints.
Eric's hot hobby
AT a time when many people contemplate slowing down, 49-year-old Eric Saunders has stepped on the gas, enjoying life in the fast lane as a hot rod racer.
‘I take a bit of stick from the younger drivers but it doesn't worry me,’ said Eric, print pre-production manager at the Courtaulds Packaging Betts Tubes site in Stevenage, UK.
Eric began his racing career only last July.
Son Stephen, aged 18, had driven since he was a junior but decided the time was right to take a back seat to pursue a career.
That left the 190bhp, 150mph heavily modified Ford Escort — prepared by Eric for his son — without a driver.
‘I'd always fancied having a go and I thought ‘why not?’’ he said.
Karaoke leads to date with danger
BEWARE of taking part in karaoke — you may end up hurtling towards the ground from a great height with only a length of elastic preventing a headlong dive to oblivion.
It happened to quality assistant Liz Stephens, who works at Courtaulds Electrical Insulation in Runcorn, UK, but happily she survived to tell the tale.
Liz won the chance to make a bungee jump after an equally brave feat — standing up at a karaoke night and singing Tie a Yellow Ribbon Round the Old Oak Tree.
The dive from a cradle secured from a crane earned Liz £650 in sponsorship money which went towards her local sea cadet organisation.
‘I was not at all nervous, it was fantastic,’ said Liz, no stranger to heights after previously making glider flights and a parachute jump.
But she added: ‘The people at work think I'm insane and when I showed them the video of the bungee jump it just confirmed their opinion that I'm a lunatic.’
Cyclists train for marathon
CYCLING enthusiasts are preparing for their latest challenge — a 100 mile marathon.
Members of the Courtaulds Coatings Cycling Club at Felling in the UK have been training throughout the winter, despite the challenges posed by the Northumbrian weather.
Last year the club, formed in October 1991 by Bill Dunk, Brian McManus and Ian Millichamp, took part in several organised rides in the north of England.
Hockey ace is on the ball in Milan
WITH top soccer teams AC Milan and Internazionale on your doorstep it's not easy to popularise hockey.
But Bruno Ramon, fibres sales executive for Courtaulds Italia, is doing his best, coaching eight-to-12-year-olds in Milan and hoping to unearth a star of the future.
Bruno's background in the game is impressive.
He started young, encouraged by his father, and reached international level in 1976–8 when he played several times for his native France.
Now 36, he has 28 years' hockey experience behind him and still turns out as a defender for Milan, training two or three times a week and playing in the Italian hockey league, which started a new season at the end of February.
Bruno is currently on the lookout for a sponsor and would love to put Tencel or Courtelle on the team shirts.
‘It would be great, particularly as Milan is bidding to hold the next Olympic Games after Atlanta,’ he suggests.
Royal honour for fibres pensioner
A TENACIOUS piece of detective work involving wartime fliers in Britain and America has had a fairy tale ending for Courtaulds pensioner Norman Bate.
The 72-year-old ex-fibres man was honoured by the Queen in February, receiving the MBE at a Buckingham Palace investiture.
His award came as recognition of many years' outstanding voluntary service, especially through his contribution to Anglo-American relations.
Fifty years ago Norman was among a group of Royal Air Force cadets sent to America for pilot training.
More than 7,000 young men spent time at American air bases in Alabama, Georgia, Florida and South Carolina, learning the arts of flying at a time when Britain was desperately short of qualified pilots.
Many of them went on to fly, and some of them to die, for their country.
Seven years ago Norman decided their exploits needed to be remembered and started compiling a record of all former cadets who took part in the Anglo-American training operation.
He called it the Arnold Register, after American general Hap Arnold, and set about tracking down thousands of people, now scattered all round the world.
Using his Leicester home as an office, he found himself working up to 80 hours a week, corresponding with people in America, Australia and all over Europe.
‘The job took over my life, although I'm slowing down a bit now,’ he says.
Eventually he plans to hand over his records to air force museums in the UK and United States.
With Courtaulds Norman worked for 15 years in Coventry, latterly for the Celon (nylon) division, before retiring through ill health in 1970.
He still has a 30-years-old Courtelle suit which he kept as a standby for the MBE investiture just in case something happened to his morning dress.
Life of birdman Tom
ORNITHOLOGY is a way of life for Tom Palmer, the birdman of Felling.
He has winged his way across the world in pursuit of his hobby, a mission that has included Venezuela, Thailand, Africa and Israel among others — with Costa Rica planned for this year.
‘It's an obsession,’ admitted clerical worker Tom, who has been at the Courtaulds Coatings UK site for 39 years.
And he can indulge in his hobby without leaving the Felling plant because the site on the banks of the Tyne has become a haven for bird life.
Kittiwakes, seagulls that normally nest on cliffs, are now installed as regular guests on a warehouse ledge.
Last year there were 80 breeding pairs which produced 100 fledglings — they are now being studied by Durham University.
Meanwhile a pair of kestrels has produced four young in a disused ventilation pipe in a raw materials store.
Cormorants, sparrowhawks and kingfishers join a wide variety of more common birds on the banks of the Tyne adjacent to the factory.
‘It's clear evidence that there are no pollution problems on the site and that the river and its banks are getting cleaner,’ said Tom.
Meanwhile the birds of Felling are being featured in a new wildlife book, sponsored by Coatings and produced by the local council.
Hooked on fishing
ANYONE at Courtaulds Chemicals in Buckhaven who fancies fish and chips knows who to ask.
Production supervisor Ian Hamilton is deadly with road and line, fishing from his 18ft open motor boat off the Scottish coast.
Ian and a friend bagged 90 cod in just two hours in one purple patch.
The biggest fish weighed 10lbs.
NEWS
Global modem mail is a step closer
GLOBAL electronic mail, with desktop computers linking Courtaulds businesses round the world, has moved a step nearer reality.
Some sites in the United States, Britain and Spain are already ‘talking to each other’ via PC screens.
Now the way has been cleared for a wider approach, through the use of software recommended as a common Group standard.
A task force of IT managers from several Courtaulds businesses looked at the range of options available and chose a Lotus package called cc:Mail as the preferred solution.
‘If adopted widely, this will greatly simplify and enhance our ability to communicate electronically across the Group,’ said Courtaulds IT executive .
‘I see no reason why we should not have E-mail linking 80 per cent of Group computer users worldwide within 18 months.’
Businesses already plugged into the system include .
Courtaulds' corporate centre in London and Research, Coventry, will install cc:Mail fully, Coatings in Louisville, USA, is committed and pilot schemes are being tried in Courtelle, UK, Aerospace, USA (Glendale), and Performance Films, USA (Martinsville).
In Spain Courtaulds Fibres, Barcelona, switched over to electronic mail two years ago, using a software package called DaVinci, which can easily link up with cc:Mail.
Cheaper
So far E-mail tends to be used within single businesses, but raising it to inter-Group level would offer the benefits of speedier, cheaper and more convenient desk-to-desk communications for all.
Data handled can range from simple messages to complex reports with graphics.
Mail shots sent to large address lists will switch automatically to fax where recipients are not on cc:Mail.
The whole question of replacing paper-based systems with electronic mail has become much more attractive with the growth of cheaper, higher-powered, user-friendly PCs.
‘From a standing start six months ago, we are seeing genuine interest in E-mail by Group business,’ said .
‘This looks like the ideal time to push ahead.’
Top level changes
THE FOLLOWING senior appointments have been announced, to take effect from April 19:
, Board director responsible for all Courtaulds' activities with headquarters in North America.
, chairman, Courtaulds US Inc (CUSI), the holding company for Courtaulds' US businesses.
He will continue to report on the Group Executive for Courtaulds Coatings in North America, Brazil and Australasia.
, chief executive, Courtaulds Coatings North America, from Coatings Australasia.
He also becomes chief executive of Courtaulds Aerospace North America, succeeding , who has relinquished the post for health reasons but remains associated with Aerospace as deputy chairman.
, chief executive of Courtaulds Coatings Australasia and Courtaulds' other operations in the region, from Performance Films.
, chief executive, Courtaulds Performance Films (currently responsible for business development in the former Soviet Union).
, general manager, Courtaulds Aerospace Europe will report to  for all European aerospace coatings and sealants activities.
, head of Courtaulds Aerospace Advanced Materials, will report directly to .
Holiday winners wish race crew good luck
THE two employees who won round-the-world trips in a Courtauld News competition were in Tasmania to wish Courtaulds InterSpray bon voyage at the start of the third leg in the British Steel Challenge.
, export manager at Courtaulds Coatings in New Zealand, met fellow winner , manager of the trade and retail paint division at Courtaulds International (Brazil), in Hobart when the yachts set off on February 13.
‘The start of the third leg was a magnificent occasion,’ said , who later flew to London with wife  before continuing to Paris and Honolulu.
He paused during a hectic sightseeing tour of London to add: ‘We're shattered but having a great time.’
and wife  visited Sydney en route to Hobart and then also set off for London before flying to New York.
Meanwhile , International Paint representative based in Southampton in the UK, also headed for Hobart to check the 10 race yachts, all of which have been painted and anti-fouled with International products.
‘I have inspected all the yachts and, without exception, all their paintwork is in excellent order,’ he said.
Courtaulds InterSpray, whose crew includes , a Courtaulds Fibres employee based in Grimsby, started the third leg in controversial circumstances.
Choosing a different route out of Hobart to the rest of the fleet, the yacht quickly established a one mile lead over the nearest rival.
But skipper  was then obliged to sail to a mark to fulfil a penalty imposed by the race officials for taking on a new sail in Hobart to replace one lost during the second leg.
branded the penalty, which resulting in Courtaulds InterSpray slipping from first to last position in the opening stages of leg three before clawing back places, ‘draconian’ and has lodged an objection.
Group's gain in Spain
COURTAULDS is buying a Spanish marine and yacht coatings business in a move to strengthen its hand in southern Europe.
Agreement has been reached to purchase the business, based in Bilbao, from Compania Espanola de Pinturas International SA (CEPI) on April 1.
The deal ends an arrangement under which CEPI has been making and selling International marine paints under licence for 70 years.
From now on Courtaulds Coatings will control its own sales and distribution in mainland Spain, the Canaries and Balearic islands and will be taking on 20 sales and technical service people from CEPI, and agents and distributors.
No manufacturing operation is involved in the purchase and CEPI will continue to make other types of paint under the name of Cepilux.
As part of the deal Courtaulds is relinquishing its minority shareholding in CEPI.
, chief executive of Courtaulds Marine and Yacht Coatings (Europe), said the deal reflected Courtaulds' desire ‘to complete its European network of operations and have a direct involvement in this important European market.’
Sales will go into shipbuilding, ship maintenance and coastal business.
The Spanish fishing vessel and yacht markets, particularly in the Balearic islands, are of particular importance.
Centre of operations in Spain will be Bilbao and the business will operate under the name of International Paint Iberia.
Trigger happy
A NEW example of industria cloning — taking a concept proven in one country and replicating it in another — is being demonstrated by Courtaulds Packaging.
Knight Engineering and Plastics at Arlington Heights, Illinois, in the United States, began the New Year by producing a cap-trigger assembly for a non-aerosol pump hairspray — technology borrowed from sister company Betts Plastic in Colchester, England.
Knight became aware in April last year that Betts was producing the assembly for L'Oreal, but only for the European market.
Tooling for Knight was manufactured in England, approved for the American market, and test runs began late last year ready for the January production launch.
The type of cap-trigger assembly used is a new concept in the American cosmetics industry and Knight believes it will open up more opportunities in the US market.
Already another major cosmetics manufacturer has declared an interest in adopting a similar system