

Call for new products and higher productivity
Growth's the No 1 priority
GLOBAL growth will be a prime target for Courtaulds businesses in the coming year.
Both sales and profits must climb if the company is to stay on course for success.
This was the message coming over strongly at a UK gathering of the Group's business chiefs on May 26–28.
‘Growth is the absolute key,’ said chief executive Sipko Huismans.
‘We have got to grow faster than the economics we are in.
That will be very tough.
We have never done it before but we are going to have to do it from .’He called for action on two fronts:
Innovation — developing new products to fuel sales.
Productivity — lowering the cost of making things.
‘Becoming better at what we do and widening the gap between selling price and manufacturing cost is the only target that will do the trick for us,’ he declared.
‘Manufacturing excellence has to be high on everybody's priorities.
It is the only sensible response to a situation where sales prices are static.’
Fellow director Eryl Morris underlined the need for productivity improvements: ‘We have to put programmes in place to drive down costs and push up return on sales.’
One business area going strongly for growth is the Far East.
It was the only Courtaulds region to lift its profits last year and a hatful of new trading ventures will be launched there this year.
Exciting
‘Concentrating on Asia was right — it's an exciting story,’ said Mr Huismans.
‘We have to allocate more resources, people and activities to the Far East.’
More than 50 senior executives from seven countries attended the Group Management Conference, held this year for the first time at Courtaulds Woodside training centre in Kenilworth.
They heard a wide-ranging review of Courtaulds' progress, in which Mr Huismans said the company was becoming highly respected in the chemical industry.
In particular, he was impressed by the way in which Courtaulds' two cultures — springing from fibres and paints — were coming together.
‘These are enormously strong roots and the melding of them may give us an organisation far more formidable than either could be on their own.’
Increasingly the Group was moving towards a regional structure based on three blocs — Europe, Asia Pacific and the Americas — he said.
But it still needed to follow ‘the art of being local worldwide’.
Other themes he touched on included:
Health and Safety: ‘It's the major success we can claim as a central initiative which was taken on board and went right through the company.
Everybody responded tremendously well and it worked.’
Environment: ‘We are improving our performance.
Our releases to air and water are falling steadily.’
Objective: ‘Courtaulds set out to be the best of its kind at what it does.
We are getting hearer that objective.
We are in fewer businesses and we have leadership positions in them.’
People: ‘We are getting there but we haven't got everything right.
Attitude surveys will make a difference but we need to change more quickly in response to what we hear.’
‘Think tanks’ spell it out: Innovate or we'll evaporate
ISSUES of major significance were discussed separately at the conference by a series of ‘think tank’ syndicates.
Here are some of the recommendations they made:
Productivity: Benchmark what we do do and aim for a minimum standard of improvement better than inflation; develop the skills base to tackle productivity problems across the Group; set aggressive goals, guided by ‘leading edge, not lunatic fringe’; push harder to transfer best practices, with more involvement from the centre.
Innovation: The major need is for a step change in culture — enabling more innovation in bringing new products to market; the key message is ‘innovate or evaporate’.
Safety/environment: Ensure that our good record on safety improvement is sustained; set environmental targets, record progress and prepare an external communications programme to tell people what we are doing; give employees the facts first so they can be ambassadors for the company.
Communication: Publicise the company's ‘people principles’ more widely; extend the appraisal process to all employees as quickly as training will allow; make attitude surveys an annual feature from 1994; build human resources into every business's strategic plan.
The productivity theme was picked up in main sessions on Coatings (Australia, Europe and North America), Fibres and Films and Chemicals.
Innovation was illustrated by progress in Tencel and a new super absorbent fibre called Oasis, new antifouling and powder technology in Coatings, and the use of replication in Amtico and the Far East.
Other talks dealt with financial issues, communication and safety improvements in Brazil.
How we fared in 1992–3
TOTAL SALES £2074 million (up £131 million)
PROFIT BEFORE TAX £193 million (up £7 million)
Finance director  spelt out the two main points emerging from Courtaulds 1992–93 results:
In a difficult economic climate we have held our own in sales and margins.
We have maintained our strong cash position and balance sheet without short changing the year's investment programme.
Chief executive Sipko Huismans highlighted:
Expansion in the Far East.
The success of Tencel.
The need for more productivity gains/
A mixed trading outlook.
‘Results were as good as we could have hoped for given the difficult economic background throughout the year,’ he said.
‘Most others in the chemical industry would have been delighted to have them.’
Merger deal agreed
COURTAULDS will have the major stake in a new business set to merge the company's European viscose rayon and acrylic fibre interests with those of German chemicals giant Hoechst.
Both parties have agreed the deal in principle, and it should be completed by autumn, subject to the necessary approvals.
The joint venture brings together businesses with combined sales of £369 million — £238 million from Courtaulds — employing a total of 2,650 people at factories in .
Courtaulds' Tencel and US viscose rayon operations are not involved.
, Courtaulds director responsible for fibres, called the merger ‘a major step in the development of the European fibres industry’.
It would create a much stronger business, able to compete more effectively and provide a more balanced service to customers, he said.
NEWS
Sniper's victim saved by helmet
A BRITISH soldier shot in Bosnia thanked his Courtaulds-made helmet for saving his life.
Staff Sergeant Peter Bristo (29), an army photographer, was hit in the head by sniper fire while taking pictures of troops escorting Moslem refugees to safety.
The bullet hit his helmet but was deflected sideways, causing a small fracture of the skull.
As viewers watched the dramatic incident on television news, Sergeant Bristo shouted ‘I've been shot.’
He then pointed to his helmet and was heard to say ‘If it wasn't for that I'd be dead.’
He was flown out by helicopter and airlifted back to England for hospital treatment.
Broadcast
A video of the TV news broadcast was shown to employees in the Coventry ballistic and performance composites plant of Courtaulds Aerospace, where the helmet was made.
Courtaulds has supplied more than 420,000 composite combat helmets for British troops over the last eight years — all made from ballistic nylon, which replaces the traditional steel.
The contract is now virtually at an end but Aerospace is hopeful of more helmet orders from Germany and Sweden.
‘The incident in Bosnia shows how effective the composite helmet is,’ said , ballistic protection business manager for Courtaulds Aerospace.
Special deal at museum
COURTAULDS has again joined the National Museum of Science & Industry's corporate partnership programme, to support educational work there.
Company employees plus a guest can get 35 per cent off the admission price to the Science Museum in London and the National Railway Museum, York.
Jakarta plant key to sales in Indonesia
The Courtaulds Coatings (Indonesia) joint venture takes a major step forward in July with the opening of a paint manufacturing plant in Jakarta.
The £5 million investment will enable the company, owned 80 per cent by Courtaulds and 20 per cent by an Indonesian-owned trading, banking and finance group Dharmala, to develop the coatings market throughout Indonesia.
‘There is massive potential,’ said , the Australian president director of the joint venture.
Courtaulds has operated a representative office in Jakarta since early 1991.
This has allowed the company to develop sales through local agents.
The opening of the factory will enable Courtaulds to expand sales in Indonesia rapidly.
Advice on equipment for the new factory, which will have an initial output of five million litres and scope for many times more, has been provided by Courtaulds Coatings staff at Silvertown in the UK.
The Jakarta operation is geared up to serve protection coatings, marine, packaging and speciality industrial end-users.
Powder coatings will be produced on the same site.
In due course the facility will also supply coil coatings and provide local support for yacht and aerospace customers currently serviced from Singapore.
Self-contained with sales, accounts, administration, laboratories and manufacturing, the Jakarta business's various facets are linked through the MFG computer network gradually being introduced across the Group.
Cost-effective labour resources and low land costs are enticing more and more Far East companies, from pulp and paper to electronics and household appliances manufacturers, to establish operations in Indonesia — all potential customers for the Courtaulds joint venture.
Of the 50 people initially employed by the business, just four are expatriates and the rest Indonesian.
A second production unit is planned for the 34,000 square metre site, involving another £5 million investment, and  anticipates more than 200 people will be employed on completion of the second stage.
Paint sites' link with fine art
RECALLING the days of the exotic Grand Tour is ‘Hareem Life’, painted by English artist J F Lewis, part of a new UK exhibition of watercolours sponsored by Courtaulds.
The exhibition runs at Newcastle, close by Courtaulds' coatings and aerospace businesses, from July 2 to October 31, then goes on tour, visiting York, Stoke-on-Trent and Wolverhampton.
Admission is free.
Supplier voted No. 1 by ICI firm
SUMMONED to a meeting by one of its biggest customers, a Courtaulds UK business feared bad news.
Was it going to be a rap on the knuckles for quality?
A complaint about late delivery?
Just the opposite, as it turned out.
The Flame Retardants division of Courtaulds Chemicals had been voted No 1 among ICI Polyurethanes' top 50 suppliers.
A vendor rating exercise had the Spondon-based business performing best overall in areas such as technical, production, commercial, delivery and quality.
‘We're delighted to get the award but it came as quite a surprise,’ said business director .
‘We knew we could have done better.
‘It shows our commitment to quality and reflects well on the efforts put in by everyone in the business.’
Flame Retardants sells TCPP, TCEP and DMMP — liquid chemicals which are used in furniture foams and building insulation materials.
Change
After several years of change, reorganisation and uncertainty, the business is doing well, helped by a strong market for polyurethane products worldwide.
Much of the improvement has come from increased sales into furniture foams, explained , commercial manager.
‘We are hoping the UK initiatives will drive higher fire retardancy standards into Europe and continue the upward trend,’ he said.
For ICI Polyurethanes, products made at Spondon are delivered to sites in Holland, Italy and France, as well as the UK.
Giants
Competition comes from chemical giants such as Akzo, Bayer and Hoechst, so quality has always been a priority.
Flame Retardants gained BS5750 Pt 2 accreditation in 1989 — the first of Courtaulds Chemicals businesses to do so — and has maintained its efforts ever since.
The ICI vendor award marks a new high point in its progress, but will not cause any complacency.
‘Complaints from customers have actually gone up and we are setting specific quality objectives for the coming year, with technical programmes and systems to achieve them,’ said operations manager .
‘The target is a 25 per cent improvement on first time quality and we're already well up on last year.’
Novel record
A CATAMARAN protected by International antifouling has beaten the fictional record established in Jules Verne's classic novel Around the World in 80 Days.
Superyacht Antifouling applied to French boat Commodore Explorer, skippered by Bruno Peyron, was supplied by International Celomer in Le Havre.
Baricol gets £2m home of its own
BARICOL, one of Courtaulds Packaging's smaller and lesser-known speciality units in the UK, has moved into the limelight, unveiling a new £2 million production centre at Highbridge, Somerset.
The company, which makes high barrier flexible packaging for the food industry, moved machinery, materials and all its support equipment from Courtaulds' Bridgwater site, where it began life in the mid-1980s, ten miles down the motorway to a purpose-built new unit.
After months of preparation the move went remarkably well, marking the start of a new chapter for Baricol.
Since its launch, Baricol had been produced on a production line in the old Courtaulds Plastic Films factory at Bridgwater.
Director and general manager  said the company had to establish itself independently on its own manufacturing base if it were to realise its potential.
Greenfield
‘The decision to go for a greenfield site was taken in June, 1992, and the countdown to Highbridge — a site within reach of all employees, with good motorway links — began soon afterwards,’ he said.
A relocation team representing all parts of the business and every production shift drew up a military-style plan to carry out the operation.
Remarkably, the five-month build programme finished two weeks ahead of schedule, despite being dogged by bad weather.
The move to the 22,000 sq ft factory had to be completed without disrupting customers' supplies and this was achieved in what  described as ‘a brilliant performance by everyone involved.’
Facilities
He added: ‘Our new facilities, with all departments under one roof for the first time, provide us with a launch pad to put Baricol on the European map.’
Baricol has installed a new computerised system, bringing with it cheaper, faster and more efficient working methods.
The MFG/Pro system, adopted by Courtaulds internationally, was introduced in just two-and-a-half months by Baricol's , working with , from Courtaulds Packaging head office at Colchester.
It runs all aspects of the business, from material purchasing and sales ordering through to production line loading, despatch of finished reel and invoicing.
‘Exceptional operation’
THIS was the reaction to the move from employees:
(right), production manager, 28 years with Courtaulds:
The move was an exceptional operation.
Everyone at every level was involved and it all went without any major problems: great teamwork, 24-hours-a-day, seven days a week for five weeks, commissioning kit, painting, erecting racking and shifting all the ancillary equipment.
(below) sales co-ordinator:
The new accommodation means we are under one roof for the first time and this means communication between departments, a critical factor in my job, is improved tremendously.
(right) senior systems and quality technician:
It will make it easier to implement the quality systems which are a key to the success of our business.
 Disciplined operating procedures can be followed more readily and this will make for smoother performances in all areas.
(below) technical and development manager, 19 years with Courtaulds:
We have shed the handicap of being in the middle of another company's operation.
We have four times the space in our new lab and this, together with plans to extend technical equipment, will create a firm future in development.
BARICOL is a high barrier, multi-layer plastic packaging material which began life in the Bridgwater research laboratories.
It is produced as a sheet or film in a single operation on a high technology coextrusion line.
Baricol is used widely by food manufacturers in the UK and continental Europe to help extend the shelf-life of goods such as bread and cakes, fresh meat and fish.
Sextuplets and quads sensation
Snap!
Two employees are multiple birth dads
ANYTHING you can do…seven weeks after a Coventry Courtaulds employee became the proud father of quads a colleague in Grimsby went two better by becoming dad to sextuplets.
The remarkable multiple birth double act means life will never be the same again for process engineer Peter Dixon, 40, and technical systems analyst Jan Vince, 36.
Peter's wife Wendy, 33, gave birth by caesarean section on April 1 at Walsgrave Hospital, Coventry, to .
She had not been receiving any fertility treatment and it was only after a routine scan that all was revealed.
Peter said philosophically: ‘There was no point running around shouting ‘how shall we cope?’
This is one more of those little challenges that life throws at you.’
Peter, who has worked for Courtaulds for 19 years, recently transferred from Research to Engineering in Coventry.
No sooner had the excitement died down in Coventry than champagne corks were popping at Courtaulds Fibres in Grimsby.
Jan Vince's five girls and a boy were born by caesarean section to mum Jean within six minutes at St James's Hospital in Leeds on May 19.
Weighing from 1lb 6oz to 2lb 12oz, the babies were in intensive care but their condition was described by the hospital as stable.
Jan's Grimsby colleague , who spoke to the proud dad shortly after the birth, said: ‘Jan watched the operation and said everything went smoothly.
He was jubilant.’
Hospital
Jean, who had been receiving fertility treatment, had gone into hospital for a scan but doctors decided to operate when she went into labour.
Only two other sets of sextuplets have been born in Britain and Jan has now appointed a media agent.
Peter and Wendy have a 22-month-old son, Michael, and Jan and Jean have a six-year-old son, Gary.
Seats take off
FLIGHT attendants on some US passenger aircraft will be sitting pretty this summer — on new lightweight seats supplied by Courtaulds and McDonnell Douglas.
The seat details have been co-designed and built by Courtaulds Aerospace Performance Composites at Bennington, Vermont, following extensive testing.
Made from carbon fibre, they are 30 per cent lighter than the  aluminium designs they replace, offering considerable savings in fuel efficiency.
Bennington won a two-year contract, worth over $1 million, to supply seat components to McDonnell Douglas for use on its MD-11 aircraft.
Programme
Welcoming the deal, general manager  said: ‘This is our first programme in aircraft seats and we're looking for more of the same sort of business.
Prospects look encouraging.’
Work on the project started last year when Bennington developed prototypes which were put through months of stringent trials before being approved for flight use.
The first 50 seats were delivered in March, ready for introduction on MD-11 intercontinental flights in the spring.
Each aircraft carries approximately 12 seats, which fold up against the wall when not in use.
The order is good news for Bennington and its 80 employees, following success with X-ray tables — its biggest-selling product — and electronic enclosures for aircraft.
BRIEFING
Specialising pays off in a hard market
Courtaulds Engineering, based in Coventry continues to win multi-million pound contracts during the recession despite fierce competition.
In the latest of our Briefing series, Engineering's managing director Rodney Haynes talks about his business and its prospects.
Q. To put the business in perspective, can you outline the size of Courtaulds Engineering — how many employees, turnover, divisions and sites?
We have 328 permanent employees plus contract staff, a total of 386 at the moment.
Last year the value of the projects represented a turnover of about £43 million.
The main business we are in is project management and engineering of capital projects for the process industries.
We have Process Machinery which designs and builds special purpose machines, for example Tencel spinning machines, and the Spinnerettes department whose title speaks for itself.
There is also Cortex which we set up last year as a process engineering consultancy with a keen interest in environmental work.
The main operations are in Coventry but we now have a satellite office in Grimsby to provide a regional service and handle smaller projects competitively.
Humberside has a big concentration of chemical and food industries and this is an attempt to get close to the market.
Q. Engineering recently announced a series of multi-million pound contracts.
Were they a coincidence or are you going through a purple patch at the moment?
It is neither a purple patch nor is it coincidence.
We have recently succeeded in bringing in a number of new projects but to put it in perspective we need something like 250,000 hours of work a year and a major project like Tencel was about 50,000 in total.
So we need at least five of that size to meet our workload requirements.
The recent contracts are all relatively small, 20,000–30,000 hours apiece, so we need to keep on winning projects like that.
We have been reasonably successful.
It is a hard market at the moment.
There is work about but it is bid very competitively and margins are under pressure.
Q. There seems to be growth in the areas in which you specialise, such as pharmaceuticals.
Is that the case?
That's right.
Our particular strength is that we have progressively focused into areas of specialisation including pharmaceuticals and fine chemicals.
Those sectors have continued to invest and that has certainly served us extremely well over the last few years when things have been tight.
Other sectors, such as oil refining and petrochemicals, have been pretty depressed so contractors used to serving those industries have all been looking for business in the same markets as ourselves.
The fact we have got a good track record and have been serving the pharmaceuticals and fine chemicals industries for some time means we can get work but we have to cut our margins.
Q. Do the recent experiences of Courtaulds Engineering suggest the worst of the recession is over?
No.
There is no sign of that from our point of view and we tend to be late in the cycle anyway.
If the recovery is starting now, it will probably  be two years before any direct effects are felt by us.
Q. You work on projects for major companies.
Can you tell us about some of the larger customers?
The food industry has been rather quiet for a couple of years but we have recently finished a Jaffa cake plant for McVities/United Biscuits in Manchester and a sugar refining job for Tate & Lyle.
We are particularly strong on the confectionery side and have excellent on-going relationships with Cadbury and Nestl é/Rowntree.; Pharmaceuticals is a growing area of business and we are involved in major projects for .
The Wyeth project is one of the largest construction jobs currently being undertaken in Ireland.
Recently we have started new projects for Glaxo and 3M.
Q. You have been involved in projects as far afield as China and South Africa.
How much work is outside the UK and how do you manage the logistics on a project far from home?
The amount that we do overseas fluctuates but I cannot remember a time when we have not had an overseas project going on.
We are trying to develop a more consistent level of business overseas, whether it is concerned with Group or other people's technology.
As far as the logistics are concerned, if you are organised and know what you are doing it is not so difficult.
You must have a good team with a good project manager on site.
We always look for a local engineering partner, with whom we can build up a strong working relationship, to provide knowledge of local practices and statutory requirements.
The team on site must be self-sufficient to a degree that depends on the location.
It is no good sitting in Coventry and trying to run the thing by remote control.
Q. When you are bidding for a contract, what gives you the edge over competitors?
Track record is all important.
All companies believe there is something special about their industry and this is especially true of pharmaceuticals.
All projects have a lot of features in common but equally there are areas that are special to a particular industry or a particular company.
We have set out to have specialised knowledge of the technology used in the industries that we serve.
Of course it is essential to be price competitive.
We are set up to be competitive for the size and shape of projects that we are shooting for and the industries we are targeting.
Q. What percentage of your work is in-house and do you receive any preferential treatment from other Courtaulds businesses?
Courtaulds is our single most important customer and we must never forget that.
On average about 25 per cent of our turnover is for Group companies.
All work for the Group is done on a commercial basis and I think that is an essential ingredient for successful project management.
We have no automatic right to Group work but we do try to be the preferred contractor.
Q. Is it important to be able to offer customers a complete package—design, procurement, construction, commissioning and project management?
Yes, I believe it is.
Most customers want that turnkey approach, from pre-authorisation right through to handover.
Most want to feel they can give responsibility to one contract.
Q. You have diversified into other markets in the past, such as the leisure industry, without total success.
Is the policy now to stick to what you know?
We are basically settled on the areas that we want to service.
If anything we will specialise more rather than become more generalised.
We are best served by being very good in a relatively narrow field.
To make money in engineering contracting you have got to work at the blue chip end of the market, people who want a top class value-for-money service and are prepared to pay a reasonable price for it.
Our leisure initiative failed because the companies that make up that industry themselves operate on too tight margins and could not afford what we had to offer.
For our part, we were not prepared to compromise on standards of safety and quality.
Q. You had a major role in the new Tencel plant in Mobile.
What are your thoughts on being part of such an historic development?
We are very proud to have participated in such a successful development, particularly because it was a real team effort alongside CFI, the Tencel team and Research, and most of our own activities were involved, with Process Machinery and Spinnerettes having prominent roles.
I am looking forward to the next stage of Tencel and we are already working with Fibers and Research to set up the teams for a new project.
Q. What could the politicians do to create a climate in which you can prosper still further?
What we need is a stable economic climate that encourages companies to invest on a consistent, long-term basis.
More specifically, we lack competitive export credit guarantees in comparison with other countries.
That can be critical when it comes to winning overseas business.
Q. Finally, what is your message to the workforce in an increasingly competitive environment?
It is a tough world in which to survive at the moment.
Our experience over the last few years has shown that there is work available in the sectors in which we operate and we have proved to ourselves that we can win business.
The thing we have to do is keep improving our efficiency and competitiveness because our rivals are not standing still.
If we work at that and strive for extra quality and performance, we can come out of the recession pretty good shape.
My JOB
Ann keeps cool under fire in the front line
WATCH receptionist/telephonist Ann Sheppard at work for a few minutes and productivity levels take on a whole new dimension.
An observer quickly loses count of how often she welcomes callers with ‘Good morning, Courtaulds, Betts & Company’ but the records reveal all.
In one month there were 7,500 incoming calls through the switchboard — that's about one every 75 seconds.
At peak times there is no let-up with an endless string of calls back-to-back.
Often Ann is juggling calls while helping visitors — in a typical four-hour spell she dealt with 42 people, a rate of about one every five minutes.
‘Sometimes at the end of the day I am drained,’ said Ann, who has been doing the job at Courtaulds Packaging company in Colchester, UK, for 10 years.
But she is conscious of being the first contact customers and suppliers have with the company and of the need to keep cool under fire.
‘I am not aware of ever having lost my patience,’ said Ann.
‘But I have noticed that the more annoyed I appear to sound when I call people over the Tannoy, the faster the response.’
She recalls one flashpoint involving a persistent representative who called regularly without an appointment trying to sell goods in which Betts had no interest.
‘When no-one was available to see him he went red in the face and started thumping the desk,’ said Ann.
‘He got so worked up he had to ask to use the toilet.
After he finished he stormed out of the building and I haven't seen him since.’
Ann works from 8.30am–5.30pm with a break for lunch when colleagues  and  take over.
NEWS
Site wins fight to curb smells
Emissions cut by 89 per cent SOLVENT emissions have been reduced by a massive 89 per cent at the Courtaulds Aerospace coatings site in Berkeley, California.
The reduction in output of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) coupled with a three-year community relations programme, has led to a drop in protests about solvent smells from the plant from more than 100 a year to one.
Early in 1991 odour violation notices from the emissions regulatory authority were arriving at the plant at a rate of four a month — and to trigger a notice there has to be at least five complaints from neighbours.
Remedy
The authority proposed a public hearing that could have led to the plant's closure.
Courtaulds' reaction was to set up a team to find and remedy the cause of the odour problem, working with the local residents.
Investigations using an emission analyser identified the bag house, where air exhausted from the paint mixing tanks is filtered, as the main culprit.
Use of the mixing tank exhaust system was restricted to times of filling and all bag house emissions were processed through a special carbon filter.
Although the main problems have now been overcome, regular meetings continue to be held between site officials and neighbours.
Last September the plant was opened to the public for the first time since 1958.
Five-year computer project complete
A 900 million peseta (£5.4m) programme at Courtaulds España has now been completed.
The project provides a control and information system that meets the needs of the Barcelona company for the  foreseeable future.
Information technology is being used to improve product quality and to help rationalise production systems and resources.
Based on a central control centre, the system extends to data processing, office automation, tank farm, solvent recovery, energy, polymerisation, dope preparation and spinning.
Courtaulds España produces 62,000 tonnes of acrylic fibre a year.
Tom celebrates sweet century
NO cigarettes, no alcohol but plenty of sugar in your tea — that's the recipe for long life recommended by Courtaulds pensioner Tom Wilford.
Four spoonfuls a cup, and bags of boiled sweets on the side, have never done him any harm, he reckons.
And Tom ought to know.
He celebrated his hundredth birthday on May 15 with a quiet family gathering at the home of his daughter Iris in Coventry, UK.
For most of his working life he was a maintenance engineer at Courtaulds ‘Main Works’, retiring in 1962.
He has two daughters and a son.
Boost for Engineering
A SERIES of major contracts worth millions of pounds have been secured by Courtaulds Engineering.
This year will see the construction of a £7 million aroma chemicals plant at Widnes on Merseyside for Bush, Boake Allen.
Coventry-based Engineering fought off five rivals to secure the business, which involves, design, procurement, construction, management and commissioning.
Supervised by a task force headed by project manager , the building is going ahead while the rest of the chemicals plant remains operational.
, director of marketing and sales for Engineering, said: ‘Years of experience in fine chemicals played a key part in securing this contract.
Expertise
‘Our expertise in safety matters was also a major factor in being selected.’
Since signing the deal Engineering is negotiating an add-on contract at the Widnes site worth between £400,000 and £500,000 to build a tank farm for chemicals storage.
Meanwhile Engineering has been awarded the contract for the conversion of a 9,000 square metre building for Glaxo Group Research at Stevenage in the UK.
The project will be completed in two phases, one later this year and the other in January, 1994.
The investment by Glaxo is for part of a new research site, due to open in 1995, which will provide facilities for 1,500 staff including more than 1,000 scientists.
Courtaulds was the main contractor for a £5.2 million chemicals plant for Norsk Hydro which opened on Humberside on England's east coast in March.
Other recent contracts include a development worth £3.1 million for healthcare company 3M at Loughborough in Leicestershire and the design, project management, procurement and construction of a combined heat and power station for British Gas at the Rhone Poulenc Agriculture site in Norwich.
East meets west in coil coatings joint venture
The best of both worlds
THE best of east and west are being fused together in a new joint venture designed to give Courtaulds a dynamic presence in coil coatings throughout Europe.
Courtaulds Nippon Paint, a 50/50 joint venture between Courtaulds Coatings in the UK and Nippon Paint in Japan, will bring together the coil coatings technology of both companies and will make available to European customers the best Japanese technology and the systems Nippon Paint has developed for providing fast-response customer service.
Coil involves continuous high speed painting of strip metal in a dedicated automated production unit.
The pre-coated metal then goes to the end-user for pressing and shaping.
The bulk of coil production is for the building industry but it has a wide range of other applications, from washing machines to venetian blinds.
Courtaulds has less than six per cent of the European coil market, with a turnover of £15 million, although it is the market leader in Spain and making significant gains in other territories.
Nippon is the world leader in coil coatings, but almost all its business is in Japan where it has a market share of more than 40 per cent.
Benefits
Courtaulds and Nippon, who have enjoyed a good working relationship in the marine field for many years, see many mutual benefits from the joint venture.
Japanese technology and culture, plus greater access to Japanese end-users with European production plants, such as car makers and manufacturers of audio-video equipment, are attractions for Courtaulds.
For Nippon, the prospect of developing a major new market, Europe, gives the company a new dimension.
There are 21 people in the new team, headed by general manager , based at Silvertown in London.
All but two of the team are from Courtaulds' current coil operation in the UK.
Joining them are .
Silvertown personnel have visited Nippon in Osaka and ‘Japanese days’ have been held at the London site to familiarise UK workers with customs, etiquette and basic language.
‘There has been a very positive reaction,’ said .
‘We will learn a lot from our Japanese colleagues and where we can benefit from Japanese methodology we will have no hesitation in adopting it.’
Over the next few years Coatings' coil operations in  will join the new joint venture.
Aiming for a dream
MAKOTO MATSUURA left Japan for England to achieve a clear objective.
‘My dream is for the joint venture to become one of the major players in Europe,’ he said.
‘The first objective is to double the existing market share, to have more than 10 per cent.
Within five years we want to be close to 15 per cent.’
Mr Matsuura, speaking just days after arriving in the UK, enthused about the atmosphere within CNP.
‘It's very exciting.
I have been here less than a week and already it feels like home,’ he said.
Team
‘We are forming a good team, everyone is friendly and we are confident of success.’
Meanwhile , general manager resins at Silvertown, has been to Nippon Paint in Japan on a fact-finding visit.
‘The plant was so orderly,’ he said.
‘There was a place for everything and everything was in its place.
‘Procedures were carried out with care and precision on a ‘right first time’ principle — they did not rely on adjusting something at the end of the process to get it right.’
The technology did not spring any surprises, however.
‘In some areas we were more sophisticated and advanced,’ said .
Car coil prospects
THE automotive industry is showing an increasing interest in coil coatings and the CNP joint venture hopes to secure business with Europe-based Japanese car manufacturers.
An early breakthrough has been achieved by British Steel, supplying coil pre-coated with a thin film of automotive primer to the Nissan plant on Tyneside in the UK.
Marketed as Durasteel, the metal is coated with the same product supplied by Nippon Paint in Japan but manufactured in the UK under licence from Nippon Paint and supplied to British Steel.
Under the new arrangement, CNP anticipates taking over the business later in the year.
Other car makers are understood to be evaluating coil coatings which are commonly used in the automotive industry in Japan.
‘Japanese companies in Europe today want to use European suppliers providing they can be sure the quality and service matches what they are used to in Japan,’ said .
Satellite strategy
KEY to Courtaulds Nippon Paint developing market share in Europe will be adoption of the Japanese ‘satellite’ system.
A range of bases are supplied from the point of manufacture to be held in stock at a satellite colour mixing unit built within the customer's own site.
As with Courtaulds' Cromadex concept, the arrangement means the customer can have any colour in any quantity supplied immediately.
‘The customer will benefit from service, speed and flexibility,’ said .
‘He orders what he wants, when he wants it.
No delay, No stock.
No leftovers.’
Implementing the satellite system depends on the coil coating companies — there are about 15 major players in Europe — reviewing the way in which they work with paint suppliers.
CNP hopes to develop the Japanese approach of partnering, where a customer is prepared to make a heavy commitment to a single supplier in return for guaranteed quality, service and delivery.
As part of the overall effort to provide quality and service, CNP is installing a mini coil coating line — another Japanese idea — at Silvertown as a bridge between the laboratory and the customer.
AROUND THE WORLD NEWS
A good judge
Florida, USA: Portersept from Porter Paints was chosen to combat sick building syndrome — bacterial growth caused by the air conditioning system — at the Martin County Courthouse.
Star performer
Glasgow, Scotland: Parts of the new Eagle Star building are protected by Interpon D architectural powder coatings from International Paint.
Model product
George, USA: Resourceful model maker Milburn Teems has created a windmill out of Porter Paint cans.
Russians visit
St Petersburg, Russia: A delegation from St Petersburg University visited Courtaulds Coatings' Felling site in the UK to study links between industry and education.
Angling date
Derbyshire, UK: Courtaulds' annual inter-works fishing match will be held on the River Trent at Swarkstone on Wednesday, September 15.
Entrance is limited to employees and their immediate families.
High fliers
Glendale, USA: Courtaulds Aerospace has had its process control and quality systems for aircraft sealant manufacture approved under the National Aerospace and Defense Contractors Accreditation Program.
Tencel on show
Frankfurt, Germany: Visitors to the Techtextil exhibition in June were able to learn more about Courtaulds' new fibre Tencel.
Hooking up
Colchester, UK: Packs jointly developed by Betts Plastics, part of Courtaulds Aerospace, with The Robert McBride Group are being used for a new range of shower gels (below) sold by the Superdrug retail chain.
They have a special hook feature for hanging in the shower.
NEWS
Tencel wins top prize in Japan
THE early success of Tencel in Japan, pioneering market for the new Courtaulds fibre, has been rewarded with a top accolade from the textile industry,
Senken Shinbun, a leading textile industry newspaper, has awarded a prize for marketing to the Tencel Kai, an association of more than 230 companies now actively developing and commercialising Tencel into fashion apparel.
The annual award is highly prized within the textile industry, said , fibres and chemicals marketing co-ordinator at Courtaulds Japan in Tokyo.
Meanwhile Tencel has been winning new converts at a month-long fair staged by Tokyo department store Matsuya.
Consumers were able to examine some of the 300-plus high quality men's and women's fashion brands now featuring Tencel garments.
‘Tencel is being well received by people interested in quality fashion,’ said .
He said consumers would handle various conventional materials such as cotton, and Tencel garments, and then opt for the more expensive Tencel version.
Meanwhile the Japanese textile industry will be invited to a major Tencel fashion show in Tokyo in September.
Continued efforts to improve safety bring rewards
Year without lost time
Coatings company International Lory has for the second time completed a year without a single lost day accident.
To mark the achievement the business in Badelona, Spain, was presented with a plaque by , chief executive of Coatings Southern Europe.
After passing the one year mark, Lory went on to reach another milestone by completing 400 days without a lost day injury.
Managing director  said: ‘The safety culture has been built up over the years and the team as a whole is to be praised for that.’
He attributed much of the success to the efforts of , technical director of International Lory, who died last year.
, Lory production director and safety representative, said: ‘The programme of training has reached everyone in the company.
‘Training has been the key issue and there is now a general awareness about safety issues.’
The Lory plant, which employees 66 people and manufactures paint for coil coating and packaging end uses, is situated in a residential area of Badelona, near Barcelona.
Previously the longest period without a lost day accident at the site, where paint manufacturer started in 1990, had been 372 days, achieved in 1989.
The business, acquired by Courtaulds in 1962, has won two SWIFT safety awards.
Double success at Engineering
Two awards in quick succession have earned Courtaulds Engineering a gratifying safety double.
The company completed one million hours without a three-day lost time accident, to join an elite Courtaulds ‘club’.
And hardly had the congratulations died down when a bronze awards for safety performance arrived from the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents.
Both honours reflect Engineering's highly-organised approach to safety, both in Coventry, where it employs 330 people full-time and 50–60 on contract, and on Humberside, where another 20 work on project design.
Businesses involved include Project Management, Process Engineering and Spinnerettes.
‘I think it's a recognition of the day-to-day attention to detail put in by people on the site, particularly the line supervisors,’ said senior safety adviser .
‘It also sets a benchmark for future improvements, which we are working on now.’
The million-hour award covered a two-year period up to last November, while the RoSPA bronze was for safety performance during 1992.
Courtaulds Engineering has maintained its accident-free record since and has set new health and safety targets in the drive to match best international standards.
A steering committee, based on the DuPont model, provides the lead and action in channelled through task groups working in seven areas of the business.
One area of special concern is the European Community's regulations on construction design and management, due to come into force next January.
These affect work carried out on client sites and Courtaulds Engineering already has a system in place to oversee the safety aspects of all its contract projects.
Great, Performance
A DRAMATIC improvement in safety standards earned Performance Fabrics, Littleborough, the first award of 1993 in a Team Safety competition run by Courtaulds Aerospace Advanced Materials in the UK.
The specialist weaving and coatings operation celebrated 150 days (300,000 hours) without a lost time accident — their best performance to date.
At the last count they had lifted this to 200 days and 350,000 hours.
Chief executive  presented a cup and a cheque for £250 to Ealees Mill operator , who received it on behalf of the Performance Fabrics team.
‘The Team Safety competitions are only one aspect of our campaign to improve safety performance across Advanced Materials,’ said .
‘They have certainly helped focus attention on the real contribution individuals and local teams can make.’
Coventry site won the second award of the year, presented to , manufacturing manager of the Armoured Vehicle Assembly Plant, which has kept a clean sheet on lost-time accidents since construction of the plant started in December, 1991.
PEOPLE BEHIND THE PRODUCT
THE luxurious floors made by Amtico grace some of the most prestigious buildings, including royal properties as well as many retail stores.
But the touch of class does not happen by accident and into every piece of flooring goes the wide-ranging skills of the UK company's workforce.
Each employee plays a part in taking the product from its beginnings as raw PVC to flooring installed at the customer's premises.
In this, the first of a new series, Courtauld News looks at the team behind the product.
PLANNING
AUTOCAD operator Andrew Sharp, below, converts customers' drawings into precise computer-generated floor plans.
His starting point can be anything from a scale drawing prepared by a draughtsman to a crude sketch, but as long as the room dimensions are correct Andrew can set to work in the Sheffield studio.
The room outline is drawn on the Autocad, a computer drawing aid familiar to engineers and draughtsmen, which runs software customised for Amtico.
From a library of designs Andrew then positions the tile patterns.
PRODUCTION
THE day starts at 5.45 am for Brian Folan, right, factory team leader responsible for three production cells.
Brian, seven years with Amtico in Coventry, has to ensure the plant is up to working temperature ready for tile production an hour later.
He supervises the calendar line which heats and stretches raw PVC into a thick film.
The second cell looks after the rotorcure process, which laminates the plies of PVC film that comprise the tile material.
The third unit, the annealing operation, stabilises the product.
DESIGN
ONE customer was so concerned about her new Amtico bathroom floor matching the sanitaryware she took the loo cistern lid into the Sheffield studio.
She was helped in her choice by interior designer Helen Hinchliffe, below, the first point of contact for visitors.
‘I help them choose colours, styles and designs,’ said Helen, who studied floor design at college and fulfilled a long-standing ambition when she joined Amtico.
She encourages customers to play around with samples so they feel they are helping to design their own rooms.
DESPATCH
MAKING sure the product leaving the factory matches the paperwork is the job of despatch manager Mal Jones, below, and his 10-strong team.
Flooring material for one customer may come from different production and store areas and Mal has responsibility for the collation of all orders leaving the Coventry plant.
Flooring is supplied both to end users and to Amtico studios and the Coventry despatch also handles all overseas orders.
Life has been made easier, said Mal, by the introduction of the ‘just in time’ concept.
CUTTING
THE 38ins × 38ins slabs of flooring material that leave the production lines have to be cut into various tile dimensions.
Ensuring the right material is cut to the correct size in the required quantities is the job of Robert Bowen, above.
Robert is team leader in the black back cell at the Coventry factory, so called because it deals with tiles that have a black PVC ply in the lamination.
The 20-strong team cuts the material into standard sizes and Robert liaises with sales offices on orders and delivery dates.
Working from paperwork supplied, he also organises product coming into his cell for cutting.
FITTING
IMAGINATIVE design and meticulous production methods count for nothing if the floor layer gets it wrong.
That's where Frank Cropper, below, comes in because his role as contracts supervisor includes training floor fitters as well as installing intricate floor designs at major exhibitions.
The first requirement is a correctly prepared sub-floor.
Then working to a computer-generated plan, he lays the tiles dry, later repositioning them after adhesive has been applied to the floor.
‘As long as we follow the plan we are provided with there are no problems,’ he said.
NEWS
Viet Nam business expands
RAPID developments are taking place in Viet Nam, a country described as having ‘enormous scope’.
Mark Knight has left Courtaulds Coatings in Hamburg to become new general manager of International Paint (Viet Nam), based in Ho Chi Minh City.
He will also be responsible for developing Cambodia, Laos and Myanmar.
Immediate plans for Viet Nam include opening a new sales office in Hanoi and extending the range of Group products.
Mr Knight said: ‘It is a very exciting part of the world and the scope for development is enormous.’
He has played a leading part in developing the Viet Nam business for the bast six years, chalking up 32 visits to the country before his permanent posting.
The immediate aim is to develop further the marine business, in which Courtaulds is market leader, serving the vast number of sea and river craft.
Rebuilding
Heavy duty coatings business is expanding fast, with protective coatings being used in the oil and construction industries as Viet Nam rebuilds its infrastructure following the war.
In 1991 a business co-operation agreement was reached with local paint manufacturer Dong Nai.
Courtaulds installed new technology and this year the plant is expected to produce 50 per cent of International's marine requirements, under the supervision of technical adviser .
Capacity
Mr Knight anticipates that over the next few years manufacturing capacity will expand and business may be further developed via a joint venture.
The possibility of introducing other Group products, such as packaging, into Viet Nam is actively being explored.
‘There will be a much stronger Courtaulds presence in Viet Nam over the next five years,’ he said.
Joining Mr Knight is  as technical manager for marine and protective coatings. , who also worked at the Hamburg office, has responsibility for some of the major marine accounts.
He said: ‘We will be introducing the sort of product technology that will enable Viet Nam to attract more foreign marine business.
Spinnerettes link with Japan
A COLLABORATION agreement has been reached between Courtaulds Engineering in the UK and Japanese company Toray Precision over the sale and marketing of spinnerettes.
The deal means Courtaulds will explore European, American and Canadian markets for Toray while the Japanese company develops business for Courtaulds in the Far East.
Courtaulds and Toray manufacture complementary types of spinnerettes, the perforated components through which fluids are forced to create fibres.
The Coventry operation makes spinnerettes used in the wet and dry-spun industry to produce viscose, acrylic and filter tow fibres.
They are about 0.5mm thick and made mainly of precious metals.
Toray specialises in the melt-spun market, producing spinnerettes from 12mm–25mm thick for making nylon, polyester and polypropylene.
Best way
Courtaulds had explored the possibility of creating its own melt-spun operation but the capital investment required and the problems of market penetration suggested a collaboration deal was the best way forward.
Courtaulds Engineering already has some business in India, Indonesia, Taiwan and Thailand an the hope is that Toray, based about four hours by bullet train from Tokyo, will develop new outlets in the region.
, spinnerette manager at Coventry, said: ‘We are breaking new ground with this agreement.
‘Spinnerette manufacturers keep their cards very close to their chests and it is unusual for two companies in the field to be in a position to reach a collaboration agreement.’
The sales and marketing deal will last initially for two years and could lead to a more formal joint venture.
‘Bonjour la class’ comes to Cromadex
FOREIGN language courses are being held for Cromadex staff working at the company's London headquarters.
The object is to help them communicate more effectively with their colleagues in France and Germany.
Tutors visit the Vauxhall offices each week, running three classes for different levels of experience.
Introduced by Cromadex, the classes are open to Protective Coatings and Marine and Yacht employees who work in the same building.
Everyone
‘The lessons are available to everyone and there has been a 75 per cent take up,’ said , marketing services manager and one of the participants.
‘It is certainly appreciated by the people in France and Germany.’
Switchboard operator , who reckons she takes at least a dozen calls a day from France, has joined the classes.
‘I try to build up a rapport with the callers and being able to speak a little French helps,’ she said.
Speed wins order
A RAPID response by Betts Tubes enabled the Courtaulds Packaging company to win a toothpaste tube order from Norway.
The company in Colchester, UK, had  less than four weeks to convert machinery to produce a new kind of tube and meet the delivery deadline set by AS Denofa.
Denofa wanted to achieve an edge over rivals by marketing its Solidox brand in tubes that stand upright on their caps without outer cartons.
That ruled out using the traditional  aluminium-based tubes in favour of all-plastic laminated tubes that retain their shape regardless of how often they are squeezed.
Within hours of the order Betts had commissioned new tooling to adapt a production line.
Courtaulds Packaging company Baricol, based in Somerset, supplied the five-layer co-extruded film.
‘It was the first production scale quantity of all-plastic laminated tubes we had made but we met the deadline,’ said Betts Tubes marketing manager .
‘The order has led to a lot of interest in other parts of Europe.’
A £500,000 investment in an additional production line has given Colchester a capacity of 60 million all-plastic laminate tubes a year.
School gets a good reaction
COURTAULDS has given a local school a leg up the business ladder by helping them ‘set up shop’ as scientific equipment suppliers.
Woodway Park School, Coventry, is assembling kits for bio-reactors — special vessels in which bacteria can be put to work — and selling them at a profit to other  schools across the country.
Seventy kits have been supplied so far, and the school is planning for its second batch of a hundred.
The bio-reactors are cleverly rigged up from glass jars, tubing and other components and driven by the pump from a car windscreen washer.
Courtaulds has provided design expertise and some of the parts through its research laboratories in Coventry.
The project began when Woodway School's head of biology,, asked Courtaulds for help in designing a bio-reactor which would emulate industrial models but at low cost.
‘Our expertise in laboratory equipment, industrial chemistry and engineering came in useful,’ said Courtaulds Research Fellow .
‘Now the operation is commercial, we also help them with the purchasing of parts.’
Exchange visits between company and school have kept the project going and Courtaulds is now looking at the possibility of helping them design a fibre spinning rig.
SPOTLIGHT
Färg thrives on new role in Europe.
If International had been around at the time of the Vikings, there's little doubt whose paint would have been used to keep those marauding longships in prime condition.
Today the horny-hatted warriors are long gone and shipbuilding in Scandinavia is in the doldrums.
But Swedish company International Färg, based at Angered near Gothenburg, has found itself a new role in the reshaped European arm of Courtaulds Coatings.
It is the main producer of protective coatings for the whole of Europe, supplying paint, through its own sales organisation and those of its sister companies, for use on bridges, chemical plant, oil rigs and anything else which involves large steel structures.
At the same time it keeps a marketing hand on the tiller for products such as marine, yacht, packaging, coil and powder coatings.
The transformation from an autonomous, self-contained operation to one which takes its part in a wider Group approach has involved fundamental change at every level of activity.
Change
‘We have seen constant change since I came here in 1976 and at an increasing pace over the last three to five years,’ said managing director .
Historically, International Färg's success was build around marine products and the seafaring traditions of Gothenburg —Scandinavia's leading port and a busy centre for  shopping .
Four big shipyards nearby and others further afield provided a ready-made market for its paints.
But when Sweden's shipbuilding industry slid into decline, it had to seek other ways of long term survival.
The company built a new factory at Angered, 10 kilometres away, and began a lengthy process of reorganisation, pulling out of some businesses and concentrating on others — in line with wider changes in the Courtaulds Coatings group.
This lead to the company's present role as a protective coatings supplier, concentrating on high quality, high margin profits for the European market.
The last two or three years have been a testing time for the 180 people who work at Angered.
Tough targets have been set in quality and service levels and everyone has had to adapt to new ways of doing things.
Lead times have been dramatically reduced, with goods moving much more quickly through the factory, and quality efforts ensure that 96 per cent of products are now going out ‘right first time’.
External approval has come with the ISO9000 certification for quality systems — International Färg was the first paint company to get it in Sweden — and the momentum for improvement is maintained by a quality committee meeting every month.
Both service and quality levels have benefited from the move towards flexible team working, with employees given more responsibility and trained to do more than one job.
One area where this  has worked particularly well is the Chromascan department, which adds colour tints to the basic paint.
Orders delivered within a day have hit the magic 100 per cent target this year for the first time.
Other issues given special attention include health and safety, in which  has a responsibility for all Courtaulds Coatings plants in Europe, and the environment, where water-borne and high-solids coatings are being used increasingly to reduce solvent emissions.
Despite the depressed state of the economy, believes the company is doing well compared to its competitors.
‘It's a strength being part of an international group and I am glad Courtaulds started to run the activity on a European basis so early.
It would have been difficult to survive doing everything as we were 10 years ago,’ he said.
Yachts steer towards recovery
AT the start of another sailing season, International's yacht paints team in Sweden is looking to make better headway this year.
Business has been held back by a combination of recession and tough environmental laws but the drive is on to recover lost sales volume.
From its new offices in the centre of Gothenburg, the team covers the whole Nordic area, selling International and VC Systems brand paints into Norway, Denmark and Finland, as well as Sweden — Europe's biggest yacht market.
Thirteen sales, technical and administrative staff are supported by another nine salesmen out in the field.
‘The recession has been very bad for our customers.
A lot are waiting to see if the sun is going to shine,’ said general manager .
‘There have also been major changes on antifoulings.
Sweden has led the way in banning tin-based coatings, and copper has been banned too in some areas.’
NEWS
Merger targets Europe
Coatings combination aims for major impact
A MERGER between Cromadex and general industrial coatings has given Courtaulds the platform to become the major player in industrial coatings in Europe.
The April 1 marriage, which creates an operation with a £38 million turnover, will enable the business to access wider markets and develop on a broader front in continental Europe.
Based at Silvertown in London, the general industrial operation produces high volumes of wet paint for about 50 customers in specific market sectors.
A key area is agriculture where customers include  and the UK market share is 76 per cent.
Other sectors in which general industrial is strong include office equipment, where the UK share is 87 per cent.
Advanced shielding paints to insulate electronic equipment has enabled great strides to be made in the information and communications technology field.
Despite a strong domestic market position, general industrial has yet to develop fully its potential in continental Europe and the merger with Cromadex, which has an established network of centres in France and Germany, is seen as a way forward.
Meanwhile Cromadex, the fast-growing area within Courtaulds Coatings, believes the merger is the route to expanding its low-volume fast delivery operation.
Its set-up is ideally suited to small orders from general industrial customers — perhaps a special livery for a handful of tractors.
And Cromadex, which serves a 6,000-strong network of end-users, aims to target the multitude of component suppliers to the larger customers.
General industrial sales staff and Cromadex centre managers have together been calling on customers to explain the advantages of the new organisation.
Over the next few months the two product ranges will be harmonised and the merger also means a combined, and enlarged, research and development team.
The UK Cromadex operation is run by new general manager , with  remaining head of general industrial.
Both men report to chief executive .
remains general manager of Cromadex in France and Germany, and will work closely with  to develop the general industrial business on the continent.
said: ‘This merger is long overdue and we now have the opportunity to be the leading supplier of general industrial coatings in small or large volumes.’
The combined business will trade as Courtaulds Coatings but the strong Cromadex service identity will be retained.
Research reshaped
COURTAULDS Research activities in Coventry and Spondon are being reorganised to fit in better with the changing shape of the Group's operations.
From April 1, some 255 scientists and support staff were put directly under the control of Courtaulds operating businesses.
Another 115, serving wider research and technology requirements, are unaffected by these changes but have undergone reorganisation as a major part of the plan for the whole R & T function.
All research groups will continue to be based in their present locations.
The move reflects a change in the approach to research in Courtaulds, as Group businesses take on responsibility for their own R & T effort, reducing the need for an independent service.
Sadly, the reorganisation has led to some job losses — 22 out of 101 at Spondon, where the dyehouse has closed, and 75 out of 394 at Coventry, where workshop engineering, catering and cleaning services previously done in-house are now being contracted out.
‘We very much regret these redundancies but overall the reorganisation will result in a more targeted and focused research effort.
Every effort is being made to help find alternative employment for those affected,’ said human resources manager .
Job shops have been set up on both sites, manned by trained staff.
Senior manager  said: ‘No people directly involved in R & T have lost their jobs and they are all still working in the same locations.
The difference is that they are now employed by the businesses to whom they have been supplying services for some time.’
Research people at Coventry providing a corporate service will be those concerned with wider or longer term projects, in fibres and performance materials, and those working at a strategic level.
Core support services such as Analytical, Technical Information Services and a small engineering technology function will continue to be maintained.
Earth Summit picks Clarifoil
A REPORT on the 1992 United Nations Conference on Environment and Development — the Earth Summit — has just been published with its cover laminated in Courtaulds' material Clarifoil.
Produced by Courtaulds Speciality Plastics at Spondon, in the UK, Clarifoil is a cast acetate film used for high quality packaging.
It was chosen for the Earth Summit because of its good looks and protective properties but also for its environmental associations.
The film is made from woodpulp, sourced from plantations with active replanting programmes.
Dexel back in the USA
HIGH quality is securing new markets in the USA for plastic moulding material Dexel after more favourable exchange rates enabled the Courtaulds Chemicals business to be price-competitive.
Dexel, a cellulose acetate moulding compound, manufactured at the Little Heath, Coventry, plant in the UK, had not been exported to  America for three years.
Now the company is on course to ship 120 tons to tool handle manufacturer Vermont between April and September.
‘We were confident we had the quality to beat our rivals but we had been held back by the exchange rates,’ said , sales manager plastic compounds.
The business is now confident of selling to other USA customers, using the Vermont breakthrough as a springboard.
Meanwhile another principal use for the plastic granules — spectacle frames — is leading to a growing order book in the Far East.
Low labour costs have resulted in the Far East emerging as a major spectacle-making region of the world.
Dexel is in the bizarre position of exporting granules across thousands of miles, only for some of the end products to arrive back in the UK.
While Dexel trades with most of the Far East countries, using a network of agents, it has targeted China as a major growth area.
Flexible
The recent success has been helped by introducing more flexibility into the production process.
, production co-ordinator, said: ‘Customers do not have the confidence in their own markets to place regular orders of hundreds of tons.
‘We have shorter runs and more colour changes these days, and we have to be flexible enough to meet these requirements.’
Apart from tool handles and spectacle frames, Dexel is used for a variety of end products, including hair ornaments, pens and livestock ID ear tags.
Ninety per cent of Dexel goes abroad and in 1990 the company won the Queen's Award for exports.
The business achieved the BS5750 quality accreditation in 1990.
PRODUCTS
First for France
PART of a giant human centrifuge to train fighter pilots is pictured about to leave the Courtaulds Aerospace Advanced Materials site in France.
Eight metres long and weighing 10 tons, the centrifuge was ordered by French-Swiss company Acutronic for the French defence ministry.
It is the first structure of its kind in the world to be manufactured from composites and illustrates how Advanced Materials is pioneering new uses for its composites technology.
Constructed at Tourville-la-Riviere, the FF2 million (£250,000) centrifuge will be used at the Mont-de-Marsan air base.
Action from Viloft
READY, set, ‘on yer bike’.
Courtaulds' Viloft fibre is pedalling hard to put the performance back into sportswear.
It's going into cycle vests like the one shown here, from the Decca range in Belgium, as well as into running shirts, thermal tops, leggings and other garments aimed at professional sports people.
The product push from Courtaulds Fibres Viscose has attracted interest from several specialist sportswear manufacturers in the UK and Europe.
Top class
SILVIKRIN shampoo packs have been re-designed for the Middle East market, with new semi-circular tops supplied by Betts Plastics.
Betts worked closely with SmithKline Beecham to produce the snap-on dispensing closures.
Jumbo contract
A NEW hangar for jumbo jets has been painted with products from Courtaulds Protective Coatings.
Almost all the 4,000 tonnes of steel used on the hangar at Cardiff Wales Airport are produced by Courtaulds, Wintercure primers and Interthane Recoatable Finish.
Energy policy boosts business
THE drive to save energy is picking up in the United States — and helping to boost demand for a Courtaulds product.
Under the Energy Policy Act of 1992 old lighting units are being replaced or upgraded with more efficient types.
This is good news for Silverlight, part of Courtaulds Performance Films, which employs 20 people at a plant in Burr Ridge, Illinois.
The company makes special kinds of fluorescent lighting fixtures and fixture inserts guaranteed to save running costs.
‘The energy conservation programme is having a definite effect on sales,’ said Silverlight head .
Full marks
TOUGH toy-approved paint Japlac is top of the class when it comes to protecting a touring educational exhibition for children.
The product from International Paint's Retail Division in the UK has been used to coat display boards and other structures used in the Daearth Project in Wales.
Lift-off
Two touring laboratories, part of an education programme called Launching a Dream by space agency NASA, are protected with paint supplied by the Courtaulds Aerospace Application Support Centre in Philadelphia.
Fishing market net results
SPAIN is the latest launchpad for Operation BlueLine — an all-out assault on the fishing vessel paint market which is netting results for International on both sides of the Atlantic.
The sales, marketing and distribution push, built around a new range of products, started in America two years ago.
Since November, it has been spreading country-by-country through Europe in a wave which International intends to ride all the way to No 1 position in the market.
Spain is an important target because it has Europe's biggest fishing industry.
‘It will be a golden opportunity for us — we'll be driving this project like a rocket,’ said , International's business manager, fishing, who has moved from America to oversee the European BlueLine build-up.
‘The market for fishing vessel coatings is very fragmented.
No one company has a big slice of the business and we're aiming to increase our share by 10 or 11 per cent over the next two years.’
Fluency
's fluency in Spanish will be a big help as he works to set up the distribution and training systems which hold the key to success.
All BlueLine sales are channelled through outside distributors, who, in effect, become a selling arm for International and deal directly with retailers and end-use customers.
The system is one which has worked well in the United States.
Two years ago International targeted commercial fishing fleets as a special market and launched the BlueLine range with coatings made at Houston.
Sales were focused first on the East Coats, then the West Coast and are now spreading to the Gulf of Mexico, pulling in new business — currently worth about £1 million a year — at a time when marine growth is static.
The same techniques will be applied in Europe, except that language considerations call for a much more complex effort on product packaging, labelling and literature.
Norway
BlueLine made its European debut in Norway last November, timed to coincide with the start of the winter selling season and supported by International's marine team in Norway.
The sales build-up reached Denmark and the UK in March and has now taken off in Spain, Portugal and Iceland.
Focal point for the European launch was the Fishing 93 exhibition at Aberdeen on March 25–27, when International's BlueLine stand attracted plenty of interest.
The European BlueLine range is based on a dozen basic products, all made at Felling, on Tyneside.
Pack sizes and colours extend the choice and labels and literature have been produced in eight languages, from English to Icelandic.
Dornier provides primer breakthrough
A BREAKTHROUGH in the aerospace industry has been achieved by Courtaulds with the German Dornier company approving a chromate-free primer.
, business director of Courtaulds Aerospace in Germany, said it was the first time in the world that a chromate-free coating had been given the go-ahead for civil aircraft manufacture.
The development takes place against a backdrop of increasing environmental pressures, with Germany leading the way in Europe, to eliminate chromate primers.
The new coatings will be adopted in a phased programme for Dornier's 328 commuter aircraft, beginning with small airframe parts before being extended to fuselage and wings.
The chromate-free epoxy primer was originally developed by ICI and acquired by Courtaulds when it bought ICI's £5.5 million European aerospace coatings business late last year.
Development has taken place over many years, with ICI and Courtaulds working closely with Dornier.
The lengthy test programme involved laboratory testing and exposure to sea climate.
Before final approval test panels flew on a customer aircraft in the Pacific for two years.
The primer has to protect metal from corrosion and provide a bond for the top coat.
said: ‘This is the first stage and work on developing chromate-free coatings will continue.
We are optimistic that other manufacturers will show interest.’
Meanwhile the first of the new European Airbus A-321 planes have rolled off the final assembly line in Hamburg sporting Courtaulds Aerospace colours.
The painting of the Airbus, the largest civilian plane to be built in Germany, was supervised by a French/German Courtaulds team.
PC gets step ahead with range revamp
NEW environmentally sensitive protective coatings have been launched in Europe as the start of a five-year programme to revise the product range ahead of legislation.
The introduction of eight mainstream products was accompanied by seminars in four countries and a comprehensive package of marketing support material.
Courtaulds Protective Coatings is investing heavily in research to devise products based on the Ecotech initiative which promotes the increased use of environmentally sensitive coatings.
Legislation expected to be adopted throughout Europe by 1998 will mean about 75 per cent of Protective Coatings' existing range would be jeopardised — the company would not be permitted to sell the products in their present form.
All major protective coatings manufacturers will be faced with the same issues.
Last year PC launched its Ecotech initiative by introducing a limited range of nice Ecotech-approved products.
Alternatives
Now the business that supplies products for use on structures from bridges to oil rigs has launched Ecotech alternatives to mainstream coatings that form the basis of its standard range.
Six of them, marketed under the Intergard and Interzinc brands, use water-borne technology to reduce solvent levels.
Reducing emissions of solvents — volatile organic compounds (VOCs)— is a key objective of pending legislation.
The other two new products are Interfine 629 HS and Interplus 356 low temperature surface tolerant epoxy.
Interfine 629 HS is designed to eliminate isocyantes, associated with respiratory problems, and the use of Interplus 356 overcomes the problem in maintenance painting associated with red lead, long recognised as potentially hazardous.
These Ecotech-approved products will be marketed alongside existing products for the time being.
‘We have to be environmentally responsible and commercially aware to secure our future business,’ said , commercial manager for Protective Coatings (Europe).
Launch of the new products has been underpinned by the company's most ambitious marketing strategy to date.
Seminars, including practical paint spraying demonstrations aimed at sales forces, technical and customer services personnel were held in April.
They took place in .
Ammunition
‘We are giving the sales force far more training and ammunition to do the job than ever before,’ said .
 Ecotech-approved alternatives to other products in the PC range will be introduced in a rolling programme over the next five years.
PEOPLE
Ace Steve pulls off a world title
TOG O' WAR ace Steve Churchill has pulled off the greatest prize — a world championship.
Steve, a maintenance engineer at Courtaulds Chemicals in Leek, was a member of the 560 kilo class England squad that won the title in Wales, beating teams from as far afield as Japan.
The indoor championship was the latest in a string of honours for the 28-year-old who has worked for the UK Courtaulds company for seven years.
He was a member of the England team that took the bronze medal in the world outdoor championships.
His club team Norton, near Stoke in the Midlands, won the world indoor championship contested by squads from 26 countries.
Norton are also UK club champions.
Now Steve has his sights set on winning the European championships for England, being held on home territory in September.
The success is the result of seven years of endeavour that involves two evenings a week and strict dieting.
The eight-man team train by hauling a barrel of concrete up a telegraph pole using a pulley system — and then digging in and holding the 810 kilo load aloft for up to half an hour.
‘You have to be dedicated,’ said Steve.
‘But there is a great sense of achievement and a good atmosphere between the teams.’
Beauty and the beast
STRIVING to be better and more distinctive is not confined to the workplace for Francisco Fabrö Riera.
The technical auxiliary in process control at Courtaulds España is a keen poultry breeder, specialising in producing the highly-rated and distinctive Raza Prat.
The breed takes its name from the area of Barcelona where the Courtaulds factory is based, El Prat de Llobregat, or the meadow beside the river Llobregat.
Considered a delicacy and popular at Christmas, the birds have distinctive blue legs.
Cockerels have red-brown plumage with green feathers in the tails, while the hens have pink plumage.
Breeders have to take great care and trouble rearing the Raza Prat, slow-growing birds that command premium prices.
Cause to Cello-brate!
SCORES of children cheered the arrival at their school of a gift of a minibus — presented by a Courtaulds company to mark a quality achievement.
The 15-seat Cellobus was handed over by Courtaulds Films Cellophane to the East Bridgwater Community School, near the company's factory at Bridgwater, UK.
Presented
Employees hit on the idea of presenting a minibus to a local needy organisation to mark Cellophane's registration to the prestigious ISO9002/BS5750 international quality assurance standard.
The Cellobus was presented on behalf of Cellophane by local MP and former Defence Secretary Tom King, who is shown handing over the keys.
Also pictured is Cellophane chief executive .
Dawn of a new era…
PIONEERING Dawn Walden pictured right, has become the first female fire fighter at Courtaulds Fibres' Grimsby plant in the UK.
A technician with Courtelle, 30-year-old Dawn is the only woman among the 50 auxiliary fire personnel at the site.
As a multi-skilled employee, her shifts involve chemical analysis, production monitoring and work as a colourist.
But at any time she could be called out to back up the site's regular fire crew.
‘I have learned a lot about the plant and things like first aid, fire extinguishers and breathing apparatus,’ said Dawn, who joined Courtaulds nearly three years ago.
She admitted she suffered some gentle ribbing when she first joined the all-male contingent but was now accepted as a member of the team.
Dawn is well qualified for her new role — before joining Courtaulds she was involved in two car fires and came to the aid of her partially sighted father when a fire broke out in his kitchen.
Shipshape sculpture
ARTIST Alein Le Dean is on the crest of a wave after finishing his sculptures with yacht paint from International Celomer.
The 34-year-old from Nantes in France used Interfill 400 and Interlux Super to complete the works.
The paints gave the curvaceous and distinctive sculptures — one is pictured — a gleaming finish before they were exhibited in Jacksonville, Nantes' twin town in the USA in May.
Fight to restore child's eyesight
Toddler flown to USA for operations
COLLEAGUES have rallied round to raise money to send blind toddler Leannda Ward, daughter of Courtaulds Fibres employee Chris Ward, to America for operations that could restore her sight.
Two-year-old Leannda was sighted when she was born 14 weeks premature.
Doctors believe life-saving oxygen administered at birth when she weighed just over 1lb 8oz led to abnormal development of the retina.
It was not until five months after the birth that Leannda's sight deteriorated rapidly until she went completely blind.
For 34-year-old Chris, a pipe-fitter and welder at the Grimsby site in the UK, and wife Lorraine, 29, it was a second blow after previously suffering the tragedy of a stillborn baby.
Specialists
‘We were numb when we realised Leannda was blind,’ said Chris.
‘But we are lucky to have her — she was given only a 50:50 chance of survival when she was born.’
Mr and Mrs Ward heard on a television programme about a couple whose child has a similar problem being helped by a specialist clinic in Boston, USA.
They passed on the details to Leannda's paediatrician and arrangements were made to fly to America to see if the surgeons, believed to be the only specialists in the world with the expertise to tackle the retina abnormality, could help.
It emerged that Leannda would require four operations, two on each eye, and the total bill would be about £60,000.
The Leannda Ward Eye Appeal was set up and local publicity, including two TV appearances, led to money rolling in.
At Courtaulds, Chris's colleague in the powerhouse, Pete Roberts, set up a committee to co-ordinate money-raising activities, from raffles to keep fit and sponsored walks to bungee jumps.
Enough money came in by mid-March for Chris, a Courtaulds worker for 18 years, and Lorraine to take Leannda to Boston for the first step in the long road to restoring her sight.
Lorraine said: ‘Leannda is our world.
We must do everything we can to restore her sight but there is no guarantee the operations will be successful.’
Anyone who wishes to make a contribution to the fund can send donations to: The Leannda Ward Eye Appeal,.
Chris Lumb fund will help little Leannda, 2
MOST of the money raised for disabled Courtaulds employee Chris Lumb, who sadly died before he could benefit from the appeal launched in his name, is going to help blind toddler Leannda Ward.
Leannda, daughter of Courtaulds Fibres employee Chris Ward —see story above — needs expensive eye surgery in America and the Chris Lumb Fund has contributed £3,644.47 towards her treatment.
Also benefiting from the fund, which totalled £5.991.47 is Courtaulds Engineering pensioner Frank Burslem.
Frank, who worked for the Coventry-based business for 10 years before retiring on medical grounds, is now disabled and the money is paying for a £2,127 electric wheelchair.
The third beneficiary of the fund is John Teasdale, a draughtsman at Courtaulds Chemicals' Nelsons Acetate plant at Lancaster.
John lost an arm and a leg as a result of a motorcycle 12 years ago and he has been provided with a £200 electronic device, the size of a cigarette pack, that uses electric signals to relieve discomfort.
Chris Lumb, data processing manager at Courtaulds Aerospace in Shildon, suffered from motor neurone disease, which causes progressive deterioration of the nervous system.
He had been confined to a wheelchair for some time and died in August, aged 41.
Lucky Liz wins a car but sticks to pedal power
QUALITY assistant Liz Stephens won a car in a competition — but she is sticking to her foldaway bike.
‘I've never been interested in driving and I'm not going to start now,’ said Liz, who works at Courtaulds Electrical Insulation at Runcorn in the UK.
She won the car, a Citroen AX Debut worth £6,720, in a Daily Express competition.
It all started when wine buff Liz entered another competition in the Express.
Answering questions about the Burgundy region and Burgundy wines won her a place on the inaugural cruise of a new P&O England-France ferry, Pride of Burgundy.
While on board she entered another competition, played with scratch cards, and scooped the car.
‘Friends at work were telling me I was a lucky so-and-so when I won the trip — but their comments were unrepeatable when they found out I had won the car as well.’
Now Liz and husband Morris are to sell their Sierra and take to the road in the sparkling new Citroen.
Softball champions
MEET the Sluggers, the table-topping United Arab Emirates softball squad backed by International Paint (Gulf).
Sluggers crushed the Dubai Gas team 17–0 to become champions in the Dubai All Filipino Softball League.
International sponsors the team jointly with one of its key clients, offshore fabrication group McDermott International.
NEWS
Congrats to a fine crew
FOGHORNS bellowed, balloons soared, champagne corks popped…it was ‘welcome home’ at last for InterSpray after eight months and 28,000 miles of seagoing endeavour.
The yacht sponsored by Courtaulds and International Paint docked in Southampton on May 25 to finish a creditable sixth overall in the round-the-world British Steel Challenge.
Families, friends and company people cheered the weary crew across the line and laid on a dockside party at Ocean Village, just across the road from International's offices.
Hardly had they found their land legs when crew members were celebrating again at a reception at the Royal Southampton Yacht Club.
, head of International's European Yacht operations, was there to lead the official welcome and congratulations came by fax from Courtaulds chief executive Sipko Huismans.
‘This was a challenge first and a race second,’ said .
‘It was all about finding how far people can go and what these crews achieved was amazing.
‘Eighty per cent of the people who took part had never sailed before they signed up, but they rose to the challenge and beat it.
It was a tremendous achievement.’
Commemorative bronze medallions were presented to the InterSpray crew — 13 who completed the whole round trip and four ‘one-leggers’.
They also received an airbrush illustration of the yacht, signed by each crew member, Sir Edward Heath and race organiser Chay Blyth, and skipper Paul Jeffes was presented with a half-hull model of InterSpray carved by Australian crewman John Davies from a piece of wood taken from the yacht.
They were mementoes of a journey which all the team will remember for the rest of their lives.
Billed as the toughest yacht race ever, the British Steel Challenge pitted ten identical boats against each other and sent them off the ‘wrong way’ round the world, battling against prevailing winds.
They left Southampton on September 26 last year and completed four gruelling legs, via Rio de Janeiro, Hobart and Cape Town.
Close bonds developed between the crew members as they lived and worked together on the 67-foot steel vessel for 24 hours a day, sometimes in life-threatening situations.
By the time InterSpray arrived back in Southampton she had been at sea for 156 days, 14 hours and 9 minutes.
She finished ninth on the final leg from Cape Town in 38-03-48.
Paintwork supplied by International for all ten yachts survived the voyage in remarkably good condition, standing up to everything the oceans could throw at it.
Ricky's back at work
RICKY SCOTT, the only Courtaulds employee in the race, was back in his old job by June 7 — as a shift process technician at Grimsby Courtelle factory.
‘It's marvellous to have a job to come back to,’ he told Courtauld News.
‘Three-quarters of the people in the race were not so lucky.’
About InterSpray's epic voyage, he recalled exhilarating moments and times, particularly in the southern oceans, when it was ‘just about surviving.’
One of the highlights was meeting up with his wife Jane and children  in Cape Town.
Top with Tencel
WITH Courtaulds' Tencel emblazoned on his helmet, Ayrton Senna won a record-breaking victory at Monaco on May 23 to retake the world driver's championship lead.
By rights he shouldn't have been in the race at all.
A crash during practice shook him up and badly damaged his car.
But the Marlboro McLaren team responded magnificently, rebuilding the four corners of the car — including suspension, brakes and electronics — in one-and-a-half hours flat.
That enabled Senna to qualify in fifth place and on race day his tactical mastery helped him to victory for a record sixth time, Alain Prost had been penalised for jumping the start.
The win was Senna's fifth in a row at Monaco and took his championship points tally to 42, five times more than his French rival.
Courtaulds' added interest in the event was the appearance of Tencel on Senna's helmet — an extension of the sponsorship which has linked Courtaulds and Marlboro McLaren for five successful years.
Senna will carry the colours of Courtaulds' revolutionary cellulosic fibre for the rest of the 1993 Formula 1 world championship series.
‘The link is highly appropriate,’ said a company spokesperson.
‘Tencel, like Marlboro McLaren, is associated with qualities of innovation and advanced technical achievement.
‘We believe the association will be of immense benefit to our customers in marketing Tencel products.