

NEWS
Who picks up the cleaning ticket?
When it comes to cleaning up the environment, it is said that ‘the polluter pays’…but who is the polluter?
Let's not fool ourselves.
When electricity generators tackle acid rain with desulphurisation equipment or water authorities clean up beaches by improving sewage treatments plants, we all end up paying via our domestic bills.
That's not unreasonable.
As users of electricity and sewers we are the polluters, so we should pay.
Similarly, the costs of environmental improvements in the chemical industry are ultimately paid for by consumers.
There are plenty of ‘green’ activists or organisations who tell us what should be done, but we need to ensure that money is spent effectively.
Change doesn't happen overnight so we must continue to address real concerns, use real science and aim for realistic targets.
This way money will be well spent and improvements will become apparent more quickly.
This must be in everyone's interest.
After all, it is you and me who end up paying.
Multi-million pound programme improves performance for Merseyside
Merseyside Operations is striving to comply 100 per cent with its National Rivers Authority consent agreements — which detail what and how much C&P can discharge into water courses.
It is currently committed to a multi-million pound improvement programme involving new plant and upgrading existing facilities.
Manager Geoff Wynne highlighted the moves as C&P admitted to magistrates a number of water pollution offences.
He said ‘We deeply regret these incidents which have occurred against the background of significantly improving performance.’
C&P has fully investigated the incidents and is taking steps to ensure they do not happen again.
Mechanical failure at Rocksavage, runcorn, led to two chemical spillages into the Weston canal, which was also polluted after chemicals spilled through drains and an outfall pipe at Castner Kellner.
C&P was fined £10,000 and ordered to pay costs.
Wilton seminar highlights plastic recycling schemes
Interest in recycling was stirred up at a free seminar organised by ICI's plastics environmental affairs group.
The next day several delegates — wanting to know more about how to exploit domestic plastic waste — called John Simmons of recoup, the joint venture partly funded by ICI for recycling used plastic containers.
More than 70 delegates, representing local authorities, environmental agencies and charitable organisations in northern England, attended the one-day seminar at Wilton.
They were told about the successes — and pitfalls — of recycling schemes in action, EEC legislation, and given an industry update.
Delegate Geoff Wright, from Leeds city Council, recently awarded an MBE for environmental services, said ‘It's clear that recycling domestic waste is fast becoming a growth industry in its own right, which can only be good news for waste avoidance in our towns and countryside and for the economy.’
Teesside display hits the road
A mobile display bus has recently been launched by Teesside's Community Affairs Group.
The bus is fully equipped with video facilities, computer, electric display equipment and exhibition boards.
The information on board has a safety, health and environmental theme running through it.
It became operational during the Summer and since then has visited over 20 events including major galas and fetes.
An estimated 12,000 plus have visited it.
GM goes for Klea
American motor giant General Motors has recently approved the use of C&P's alternative fluorocarbon, Klea 134a. as a replacement for CFC 12 in car and truck air conditioning systems.
Appealing meal for bugs
A balanced diet for bugs is on the menu, thanks to C&P.
And that's good news for the environment.
For the Watercare business' Purisource package is providing nutrients to the bugs' daily diet of effluent, making the ‘meal’ more appealing.
The efficiency of biological effluent treatment depends purely on whether or not the bugs do their job properly, digesting as much carbon material as quickly and effectively as possible.
Bugs at Wilton's terephthalic acid plant are already being treated to Purisource, which is suitable for a range of effluents from many industries, including food, paper, pharmaceutical and chemicals.
Billingham gets down to grass roots
C&P's Teesside Community Affairs Group arranged a second visit by environmental group ‘Teeswatch’ recently.
About ten members toured the reed bed scheme at Billingham and later had discussions about local environmental improvement programmes.
The tour was part of Teesside's efforts to strengthen links with local community groups and further meetings with teeswatch are planned.
Meanwhile, the Mayor of Langbaurgh, Councillor Arthur Harvison, officially launched Wilton's Nylon reed beds pilot project with a strong tribute to the efforts ICI is making to clean up its act.
The Mayor pictured with Nylon production area manager Wayne Barnacle said it was heartening to see ICI leading the way with novel technology and he wished the project every success.
Worldwide phasing out of CFCs
An engineering working party is looking at all aspects of converting or replacing CFC refrigeration equipment at ICI process plants across the globe.
This is in line with the world-wide phasing out of CFCs, found in industrial as well as domestic fridges.
The team is liaising with manufacturers on the design and development of CFC-free refrigeration equipment and identifying the skills needed to evaluate and carry out the conversions.
Project engineer Geoff Woollard, who is based at Brunner House, said ‘We have built a data base of refrigeration sets within ICI and produced technical information on good containment practice and refrigerant conversion for ICI sites.’
Solvents plant benefits from Hydecat
The award-winning Hydecat process is up and running…at Solvents' Per/Tri plant at runcorn.
If the trials prove successful further installations could follow.
A Hydecat, developed by C&P's Katalco business at Billingham, uses a unique catalyst to convert unwanted hypochlorite into oxygen and salt water.
Engineers and chemists from Merseyside Operations, runcorn research and technology and Katalco worked closely together on the design, construction, installation and commissioning of the Per/Tri process.
Not only does this destroy hypochlorite in site effluent, but also handles waste from other plants within Merseyside Operations.
Katalco business manager, said ‘Hydecat is a major step forward in the treatment of wastes and demonstrates how catalyst technology is helping ICI improve its environmental performance.’
Hydecat won the ‘Better Environment Award for Industry’ earlier this year.
Cleaning up the electronics industry
An ozone-friendly cleaning process for the electronics industry has been developed by C&P as part of ICI's £100 million CFC replacement programme.
The new Evolve process uses a unique hydrocarbon alcohol formulation that replaces CFC solvent blends like Arklone.
Evolve works with most materials used by the electronics industries in products ranging from video recorders and washing machines to defence and aerospace applications.
Next year, once customer trials are complete, the product and process will be fully launched into the UK market.
Great strides have been made in the reduction of ICI's waste over the past 20 years.
The group's environmental policy document sets out four objectives that will be
THE FOCUS OF OUR ATTENTION
Last November ICI group chairman Sir Denys Henderson announced a new set of group environmental objectives.
ICI has since published an environmental policy document with these four objectives as its cornerstones.
One year on, Environmental Issues looks at C&P's progress.
Environmental improvement is not new to C&P.
Over the past 20 years huge reductions have been made in wastes such as mercury, cyanide, smoke and ammonia.
The four objectives, however, provide a new focus.
Although much still needs to be done, great strides have been made in the past 12 months.
OBJECTIVE 2
‘ICI will require all its new plants to be built to standards that will meet regulations it can reasonably anticipate in the most environmentally demanding country in which it operates that process.’
From the outset all new C&P plant is rigorously reviewed.
Environmental advisers join the team to ensure the best environmental practices are considered during planning and design.
Business process stewards familiar with similar ICI plants and technology world-wide, and their environmental standards, also act as advisers.
By getting the right advice from the right people, C&P is on the way to achieving objective number one.
The systems and organisation are certainly in place.
OBJECTIVE 2
‘ICI will reduce wastes by 50 per cent by 1995.
It will pay special attention to those which are hazardous.
In addition, ICI will try to eliminate all off-site disposal of environmentally harmful wastes.’
First ICI had to define ‘waste’ and collect data to measure performance.
A group-wide waste definition has been agreed and for C&P this includes unavoidable waste resulting from a chemical reaction — unless a market is found for it.
That means some businesses will be hard pressed to reach the 50 per cent target.
Although some waste minimisation projects are already being commissioned, businesses are looking at more.
But it will be some time before these come to fruition and the results known.
Earlier this year ICI committed itself to making information on its waste generation available to the public.
this is being carried out at site level so more details can be given.
OBJECTIVE 3
‘ICI will establish a revitalised and more ambitious energy and resource conservation programme, with special emphasis on reducing environmental effects.’
At every C&P plant there is concern about energy conservation but emphasis in recent years has been on improving product quality — something which often uses more energy without increasing output.
Co-ordination is needed and this is where the energy conservation committee [ECC]comes in.
Comprising area energy representatives, the committee aims to improve energy performance by exchanging information and ideas on best practice.
It will measure C&P's energy performance using an index for each plant and C&P as a whole.
These measurements, which will show trends in energy use, identify areas needing urgent attention.
Chaired by Clive Whitbourn, C&P Process Engineering Group manager, the ECC is ideally placed to highlight the way forward to a more energy efficient and environmentally-friendly C&P;.
OBJECTIVE 4
‘ICI will establish during 1991 a clear policy and practice on waste recycling.’
A number of recycling initiatives have been launched within C&P and with customers.
When a customer involved in the manufacture of PVC flooring tried to recycle the off-cut waste, he failed.
But C&P's Hexaplas technology service department had been looking at the possibility of recycling flexible PVC.
Staff advised the customer how to modify his process, changing the temperature and concentration of materials, so he could recycle the waste himself.
The department is now advising other customers on how to recycle their waste.
C&P business Katalco has launched a programme to recycle the whole of its catalyst range.
the Catalyst Care programme is a joint venture with ACI Industries, a world-renowned metals reclamation company.
Landfill has been the traditional method of catalyst disposal.
With Catalyst care, customers can sell their discharged catalysts back to Katalco for recycling.
Still on the subject of catalysts, work on a £1 million unit at Wilton is well underway to recover titanium tetrachloride from catalysts used in the production of Propathene.
It is expected that three quarters of the titanium tetrachloride can be recovered, reducing raw materials costs by £600,000 a year.
DIOXINS THE BURNING ISSUE
Continuing the series of features on major environmental concerns, Environmental Issues turns the spotlight on dioxins — popularly believed to be the most toxic chemicals known to man.
of Environment Department examines the facts — and the fiction — surrounding this notorious family of chemicals.
‘Dioxins’ is the name of a family of 210 chemicals which contain chlorine.
Most are harmless but 17 are toxic.
What makes them different to other chemicals containing chlorine is their molecular make-up.
Basically, most dioxins are by-products of burning — both natural and man-made — which cling to other materials given off during combustion.
Smoke particles, with dioxins attached, can travel for long distances before falling to the ground and settling on vegetation, soil and — because dioxins are practically insoluble — to solids in water.
Plants can't absorb dioxins from the soil or smoke dust that's fallen onto their leaves or fruit, so food and drink made from these won't contain dioxins.
They get into the human diet via fish, meat and dairy products.
Grazing cattle and sheep eat contaminated grass and plants, while fish eat plankton that has already consumed dioxin-covered microscopic particles.
According to a UK government report, Dioxins in the Environment, 95 per cent of dioxins in food come from meat and meat products, milk, eggs and fish.
Less than five per cent comes from fruit, vegetables, bread and cereals.
The report states that current information suggests that in the UK and many other countries the daily intake of dioxins could be close to the recommended levels.
It goes on to say that, coupled with the large safety margin involved, it is ‘extremely unlikely that anyone is being harmed by current levels of dioxins in the environment.’
Although official records of dioxins date from the middle of last century, it was an explosion at an Italian chemical plant in Seveso in 1976 that catapulted them into the public arena.
Dioxins caused by the explosion clung to particles that settled over surrounding countryside.
Some 500 people needed treatment for exposure, 134 for a rash similar to a severe form of acne.
There were no fatalities, and the only permanent effect was some slight scarring after the acne-type rash had gone.
Following the Seveso incident, strict EEC legislation has virtually eliminated the possibility of similar accidents which account for a relatively small component of overall exposure.
Although this put dioxins in the public spotlight, there had already been at least nine similar accidents, including one in Derbyshire in 1968 and in Germany in 1953.
As a result of these, too great a blame for dioxin contamination was placed on the chemical industry.
Research published earlier this year shows that dioxins were present in english soil back in 1850.
By 1940 the level had doubled and 40 years on had trebled, suggesting that the majority of dioxins originate from fuel burning, particularly steam boilers and domestic fires burning coal, rather than the chemical industry or industrial products containing chlorine.
Statistically the chemical industry is responsible for just a fraction of dioxin ‘production’ from combustion with domestic fires accounting for a much larger chunk.
English coal contains large amounts of chlorine and dioxins have been linked to chlorine use and combustion.
Volcanoes, cigarettes, forest fires, stubble burning, leaded petrol, combustion plants and incinerators are all contributors.
Reductions in the use of leaded petrol and in smoke pollution will all help lower the levels of  dioxins in today's environment.
And so will a number of other measures, including new designs and construction for all kinds of incinerators.
Municipal incinerators were found to be a large source of dioxins.
However modern incinerators give off less dioxins thanks to tougher design standards.
Paper pulp processes have also been modified following the discovery in the mid 1980s in the US of dioxins in the sludge and effluent from paper mills.
This was caused by chlorine bleaching the pulp and reacting with other raw materials.
But although great strides have been taken in recent years to reduce the levels of dioxins in the environment, many governments recognise more research and monitoring is needed.
There is still much to learn about this family of chemicals and it is obviously prudent to reduce the levels wherever practicable to do so.
MYTHS AND FACTS
MYTH Dioxins in paper and cellulose products, like disposable nappies, that have been bleached with chorine can harm the user.
FACT The department of health says these concentrations do not pose a health risk.
MYTH Using hypochlorite — based bleaches in kitchens, toilets and bathrooms causes dioxin-pollution.
FACT Bleach used in domestic situations does not create dioxins.
MYTH The main source of dioxins is the chemical industry and chemical incinerators.
FACT Natural sources of dioxins include volcanoes and forest fires.
Man-made sources include domestic fires, leaded petrol, combustion plants and incin-.
The National rivers Authority was announced as the strongest environmental protection agency in europe.
Tom Kilgour looks at how they are…
TURNING THE TIDE
Journalist Tom Kilgour, a former BBC TV presenter, meets Malcolm Colley of the Northumbria Region of the National Rivers Authority [NRA].
Based at its Newcastle headquarters, Malcolm is regional manager in charge of water quality.
The National Rivers Authority came into existence in September, 1989, having been separated from the old water authorities.
Announced as the strongest environmental protection agency in Europe, Parliament gave it extensive powers.
Its responsibilities are equally far reaching; environmental protection and pollution control, management and development of water resources, flood defence, fisheries, recreation and — across all activities — concern for conservation.
The NRA remit covers all situations — from industrial and agricultural to domestic.
Now don't forget, Brian, the man from the NRA's coming this morning.
You've got to be there.
‘Thus the NRA enters the nation's consciousness through the radio world of The Archers.
Malcolm Colley admits that most people would be pushed to say precisely what the NRA is and does.
But with the media increasingly eager to report environmental affairs, he believes public awareness is widening.
For even though the NRA is only two years old, its profile is already higher than its predecessor — that conglomeration of bodies with good intentions but little statutory clout.
I asked what water quality conditions were like in Northumbria when the NRA was set up.
Not as bad as in some other regions with exceptionally large industrial areas, he replied.
A good deal of essential work has been carried out.
The Tyne estuary was largely rehabilitated and further work was planned for the Wear, but the Tees estuary needed urgent attention despite substantial industrial effluent reductions in the 1970s/80s.
Before 1987 legislation governing pollution control didn't fully apply to tidal waters, and discharges into the sea and many older discharges to estuaries didn't require consent at all except for substances like mercury.
Then each discharger made application for consent and simply by applying was ‘deemed’ to have it.
Wasn't this a shameful state of affairs in a civilised country?
‘Yes, and the UK wasn't the only culprit,’ said Colley.
‘But it is unfair of people to blame industry for all the filth when sewage discharge was similarly exempt from legislation.
Legislators and enforcers were largely to blame for not providing a proper frame-work of controls.’
CORRECTING BAD HABITS
I talked of correcting 50 years of bad habits.
‘Let's be a little more generous,’ he said.
‘Industry responds to legislation but argues that costs are important, so why should it spend money if it is not breaking the law?’
Wasn't that over generous?
‘No.
We must be reasonable.
Industrial sites are so massive, having grown over many years without appropriate control, so that there are bound to be deficiencies  and we aim to have them put right as soon as practicable.
‘Legislation is now stronger and we will enforce it in a tough, but fair way.’
Not particularly tough, I ventured, when last year in court cases arising from pollution at ICI sites on the Tees and Mersey, guilty verdicts led to fines of only a couple of thousand pounds in each case: ICI could find that from petty cash.
‘The publicity, and there was a great deal, is what really hurts a company concerned about its image, especially in the community where it operates,’ said Colley.
He believes most large companies respond well to environmental incidents, taking steps to ensure similar incidents won't happen again.
He sees few signs of complacency but a greater appreciation of hazards and a commitment to taking the right precautions, which he considers are the surest way of accelerating progress towards a safer future.
I asked if we might agree that ICI cares, is committed to reducing any harmful impact of its processes and is demonstrating its ‘greenery’ by building new plant to the highest environmental standards.
SIGNIFICANT IMPROVEMENT
He agrees, but stresses that another important element is ICI's effort in pollution prevention.
He praises the £66 million sulphuric acid recovery plant at Billingham which, when fully operational, will eliminate waste acid disposal in the North Sea and make a significant improvement to Billingham Beck.
He applauds ICI's harnessing of nature in reed beds to dispose of soluble pollutants and the technology introduced at Billingham and Wilton which enables 24 hour monitoring of liquid effluents.
It's worth recording that alongside NRA's regular monitoring of ICI's ‘consent’ discharges, ICI itself carries out nearly two thousand analyses each month on contents from its outfalls and drains from the three Teesside production sites.
Those ‘deemed’ consents are being converted into ‘determined’consents containing specific conditions to prevent environmental damage.
The NRA intends attaching time limits although practical difficulties and technical problems will be taken into account because ‘changes can't happen overnight, even though the gravity of the general situation demands rapid progress.’
If a firm considers it will have to spend too much to comply with the statutory requirements it can appeal to the Secretary of State.
Malcolm Colley would consider this a failure.
‘A reasonable attitude will ensure the desired result.
We have experience of what can be done, what is realistic to expect, and if industry responds we shall all make progress.’
It is a civilised way of operating.
Reasonable, realistic, practical.
But bolstered by the law, it is far from cosy.
Between September 1989 and September 1991, the NRA have won 908 prosecutions for pollution offences.
Offenders include companies, farmers and individuals.
Over the same period C&P was prosecuted 12 times.
O.
LEADERS OF THE PACK
consumers' concern over the environmental impact of packaging — both retail and industrial — is growing.
New laws are also on the cards.
Environmental Issues looks at C&P's packaging initiatives.
The main reason for packaging C&P's products is to ensure safety during distribution and use and protection from contamination.
But before any package is made it has to be designed and tested to make sure it meets all the legal, technical and commercial needs.
This is the role of commercial group's distribution services and it's this department which has drawn up a new packaging policy and code of practice.
The policy focuses on:
using less material and energy in the package
encouraging re-use wherever possible
helping recycle material which cannot be re-used
Helping recover energy from packages which cannot be reused.
Mike Traynor of distribution services said ‘All existing specifications are being reviewed to see where improvements can be made and all new specifications are being designed in line with the policy.’
Draft proposals for a European directive aimed at reducing packaging waste, cutting landfill and increasing reuse and recycling are being considered.
The directive will set recycling and energy conversion targets and limit packaging waste.
‘Our policy takes into account the possible impact of this,’ said Mike.
‘A number of initiatives are already being undertaken by C&P and by our suppliers.’
Technical developments in both polyethylene film and paper production have led to material savings of about a third for the same performance, good news environmentally and commercially.
Drum manufacturers have developed techniques to use lighter gauge steel.
C&P is currently testing and evaluating these.
Other developments are optimum draining drums [ODD].
When correctly drained these will leave a wine glass full compared to one or two pints — so customers and drum reconditioners can recover more chemicals.
ODDs have been introduced in small quantities and will be used more now the design criteria has been agreed.
New inner liners for solids packaging help prevent contamination and mean the package can be re-used.
And if current tests prove successful they could also be used with liquids.
The same applies to multi-trip collapsible and returnable packages — introduced for solids and being trailed for liquids.
If accepted, new standards for pallet construction will make re-use much easier in Europe.
Present ‘Europallet’ specifications are not suitable for many chemicals, particularly those in drums and sacks.
It is hoped that new international standards will also be set for code marks that identify which polymer has been used in plastic packaging manufacture, making recycling that much easier.
C&P is currently looking into the possibility of moving away from combined steel and plastic packaging to all plastic, making recycling easier.
Said Mike ‘We want to achieve real reductions in the environmental impact of our packaging.
‘It is essential that all changes take account of the package's whole life-cycle, not just part of it.’
DARK SECRETS OF WILTON
A new video reveals the dark secrets of those living on Teesside…
It features close-up shots of fox cubs playing in woods near Wilton, bats flying through open windows into laboratories and a mole digging for worms within yards of workmen sinking salt wells at North Tees.
Narrated by actress Joanna Lumley, the 25-minute film uncovers the natural history of Teesside — one of the world's largest concentrations of industrial assets.
Called The Hidden Kingdom: A Natural History of Industrial Teesside, the venture has been funded by ICI and British Steel and demonstrates how industry and the natural world can live side-by-side in harmony.
It highlights the way nature uses the same raw materials as man and carries out equally complex chemical reactions, night and day.
Local man David Bellamy, whose environmental consultancy produced the film, said when he first came to Teesside at the age of 17 ‘it was a really mucky, foully polluted place,’ and he had witnessed the clean-up.
Copies of the video, played at Billingham to some 100 people representing the local community, and the accompanying book are available for loan.
EARLY WARNING SYSTEM ON STREAM
A new system has been installed to monitor 10 miles of underground drains at Wilton.
It's the latest move in Teesside Operations' environmental improvement programme.
Using the latest technology, the effluent monitoring system continuously measures the flow, acidity, temperature, total organic carbon and suspended solids at five strategic points.
This information is transmitted to Billingham's River Tees monitoring centre where visual display units and alarms will give an early warning to staff if something is wrong.
Tony Lewis, environmental services group manager, said ‘The use of the latest measurement technology incorporated in this project is an essential part of our efforts to meet the increasing demands upon us.’
C&P experts working to improve air quality knowledge
London legal firm specialising in environmental matters is reportedly preparing a case against ICI and British Steel on behalf of some 30 residents of Grangetown, near Wilton.
They blame respiratory problems on emissions from the Teesside plants.
At the time of going to press, ICI had not received any formal approach.
Teesside Operations has no data to indicate that Wilton operations is the cause of any ill health in the surrounding community.
It takes seriously the health and well-being of neighbours and is doing everything possible to help identify the cause of these problems.
C&P occupational health experts are co-operating fully with their counterparts in community health and are working with Langbaurgh Environmental Health to improve knowledge of local air quality.
Regular meetings are held with residents to better understand their problems and share information on C&P operations.
Data available from analyses done in the community show measured concentrations of pollutants such as sulphur dioxide and nitrogen dioxide well below EEC guidelines.
Teesside Operations is co-operating fully with all local and regulatory authorities in various studies to identify the causes of poor health.
It will also continue to seek ways to reduce emissions further, in line with corporate objectives for continuous improvement in environmental performance.
RAISING AWARENESS
Raising environmental awareness among employees and their families is a priority at C&P.
Some staff have taken part in three ICI group-wide projects — a one-day Environmental Focus programme, a new Environmental Values package and a one-day conference at Runcorn organised for senior representatives from ICI's business teams.
The Environmental Focus programme — given a note of approval by C&P environmental advisors and operating staff who ran a pilot — is for people involved in manufacturing and business.
It covers ICI policies, national and EEC legislation, ‘Green politics,’ management techniques for improving environmental performance and the environment as a business issue.
The trial Environmental Values package — geared for all the family — gives people a basic understanding of environmental issues facing businesses, enabling them to become ambassadors for ICI in their local community.
A cross section of employees helped test the package.
Divided into two sessions and a home pack, it includes presentations, videos plus group discussions.
The home pack relates to domestic environmental issues and has been designed to capture the interest of the whole family.
Feedback from the trials is being reviewed and the final package will be released early next year.
Some 80 delegates attended the Environmental and Business 1990s conference and heard presentations from speakers across the globe.
These included ICI executive director Tony Rodgers who told them ‘In ICI we must be environmentalists as well as businessmen.’
The aim was to examine the impact of environmental trends on business competitiveness and on environmental management.
C&P goes ‘green'
For the first time C&P has been seen to be green through a prominent presence on the ICI stand at a ‘green’ exhibition at Olympia, London.
It is the first time ICI has taken part in such an event, attracted by the sponsors — The Sunday Times — and distinguished patrons, including Sir David Attenborough, Sir John Harvey-Jones, Jonathan Porritt, Bill Oddie and Spike Milligan.
Tens of thousands of visitors from school children to the Prime Minister attended the six-day environment, wildlife and conservation exhibition.
Many stopped at the ICI stand, which covered topics such as environmental policy, discharge improvements, reed-bed water treatment and the ozone layer.
Butterfly farm earns its wings
A painted lady caught the attention of government minister during his visit to Wilton.
For the lady — accompanied by red admirals, peacocks and common blues — was fluttering her wings in the new butterfly centre.
David Trippier, responsible for the environment and countryside, visited the centre where butterflies are bred and then released in C&P conservation areas — some of which are being specially managed to create the right habitat for the colourful creatures.
He said ‘It's good to see a chemical complex such as ICI taking an active interest in protecting and enhancing the environment.
It must be good for the community and the people who live in it.’
The butterfly conservation project is one of C&P's ecology and conservation initiatives for land on Teesside.