

INSIDE THE WORLD OF CHEMICALS & POLYMERS
A NEW FORCE
A REVIEW OF ICI WORKING IN PARTNERSHIP WITH INDUSTRY
NEARLY TWO YEARS AGO, ICI DID SOMETHING EXTRAORDINARY.
It pulled together four very big organizations to make an even bigger one — and then created many smaller businesses out of the merger.
The result: a very effective, powerful manufacturing and product base combined with a very individual service to all its customers.
That is the key to the new organisation, ICI Chemicals & Polymers; a new force in Europe and beyond, designed to provide superb quality products and services tailored to the needs of customers at a very competitive price.
This issue of Innovation is devoted to outlining the story behind how ICI became big in order to remain small.
BLAZING INTO THE FUTURE
IT IS NEARLY TWO YEARS SINCE ICI Chemicals & Polymers was formed on New Year's Day in 1987 as a new group within ICI responsible for about a third of the Group's total assets and turnover.
With a trading profit for C&P last year of £473 million on sales of £4.2 billion [9 per cent up on 1986], there can now be no doubt that the move has been a great success and that the thinking behind it was sound.
But not everybody saw it that way at the time.
There were those who considered it to be a purely defensive step, and this gave rise to rumour.
Had ICI decided to hive off its less promising activities to struggle on as best they could, leaving the main field to more glamorous products?
These worries can now be seen as exaggerated.
Nevertheless, they caused concern among employees, especially in sections of the new set-up that had been hard hit in the recession only a few years before.
Although these had largely recovered by the end of 1986, the experience was recent in memory and confidence had not completely returned.
Dick Lindsell, C&P's chief executive, readily explains the real logic behind what was perhaps the most fundamental reorganisation in ICI's history.
‘The problems and opportunities in the four divisions [Agricultural, Fibres, Mond, and  Petrochemicals & Plastics]making up the Group's heavy chemical interests were broadly similar, and their activities were already closely linked in terms of mutual dependence on material supply.
We saw that, by creating a single management structure, we could bring a common strategic approach to their entire product portfolio, large as it is.
At the same time, there was clearly ample scope for trimming the cost base to its feasible minimum through the provision of common services.
There was perhaps a feeling at the start that we should be seen to be a body apart from the rest of ICI.
But it has become very apparent that our strengths and skills, especially in R&T, are valuable elsewhere in the Group — and, of course, vice versa .
So we are determined that there should be no hint of an ‘iron curtain’— very much the reverse!’
The choice of the headquarters site lay between Merseyside and Teesside.
In the end, Runcorn Heath was preferred mainly because some of the functional departments, notably research, were already concentrated there and access to road, rail and international air communications is excellent.
But because the North-East houses a significantly bigger part of C&P's assets than the North-West, it was decided to make Wilton a second major administrative centre.
The four precursor divisions were not lumped together willy-nilly as a whole to form C&P.
The criterion was that, if a particular business was essentially pan-European from a production standpoint, it should go into the new grouping.
[No less than 85 per cent of C&P's output is sold in Europe, although its products reach over 130 countries in all throughout the world.]
Some other activities involving global manufacturing responsibilities and bound up with ICI's rapidly growing interests in North America were placed under the control of separate single managements.
That is why, as examples, the Films Group and ICI Advanced Materials are outside C&P and not part of its plastics business.
Lindsell agrees that C&P's 11 businesses [see separate list overleaf]are in several cases mature and that assessment of their future growth potential has to take account of this.
But he emphasizes very strongly that in no way does this mean that there is no longer scope for their further development, or that their return to profitability is a flash in the pan, to be reversed whenever the next downturn comes.
Certainly, trading conditions over the past 18 months have been very buoyant.
However, the sheer size and mix of activities in C&P give it ‘swings and roundabouts’ protection against the ups and downs of the economic cycle.
Thus, while the heavy organics industry — petrochemicals, plastics and fibres — went through a very  bad period in the early 1980s and lost much money, many of the inorganic chemicals such as chlorine derivatives retained their traditional stability.
At that time, too, fertilizers were a bedrock and continued to be highly profitable for ICI.
Now these in their turn have fallen on hard times at a time of agricultural rather than industrial recession.
As an early priority, C&P management thoroughly reviewed its strategy for each individual business.
No longer inhibited by the old divisional frontiers, it was able to bring together activities whose separation now seemed unnatural.
For instance, a unified acrylics business was created from two that were previously in Mond Division and two in Petrochemicals & Plastics.
It handles all products right through the whole chain from hydrogen cyanide to ‘Perspex’ and ‘Diakon’plastics and newer added-value materials such as‘Asterite’and ‘Avron’.
Thus, the basic materials and the market for building products far downstream are covered by a single team — a position which Lindsell sees as being of great commercial benefit.
THE RESULT OF THE INITIAL review served to confirm the view that the future for the majority of C&P's businesses was robust.
In fact, the only one not now in profit is fertilizers, and strong action has already been taken that Lindsell is confident will lead to renewed health in this remaining problem area over the next two or three years.
The future expansion of very large, mature businesses such as petrochemicals is unlikely to be spectacular.
However, Lindsell believes that nurturing their individual marketing and technological strengths will guarantee that they continue to thrive and go on generating major cash for C&P.
The review also revealed some areas of very exciting potential.
As a result, proposals have already been laid before the ICI Main Board for exploiting two of them on a world scale — acrylics [as mentioned above], and terephthalic acid, part of the petrochemicals business.
These plans have been broadly accepted and, with others to follow, Lindsell expects them to account for substantial investment and allocation of human resources over the next five years or so.
Thus, the long-term strategy is on the one hand to keep the major but low-growth areas stable but producing profit, and on the other to identify new areas which will enhance C&P's overall performance.
Each of C&P's businesses has its own important role.
Lindsell feels that much progress has been made in less than two years — more, he admits, than he would have dreamt possible at the outset.
He is sure that, although there is still much to be done, C&P is already past the critical point.
‘We are well down the track, and up and running as a forward-looking and fully structured body recognised as being a vital element in the ICI Group,’ he says.
This success has not been achieved without close attention to methodology.
It was decided early that the organization should be strongly business-led with unified functional departments in support.
To create this structure and make it work meant harnessing all C&P's human talent — and the response was there.
Another resolve was to put maximum weight behind the concept of total quality, embracing every facet of the operation, involving in due course all C&P's 37,000 employees, and aiming to improve standards of performance across the board.
Lindsell attaches the greatest importance to this quality drive —‘the key to our future prosperity.’
Another radical change has been in the traditional structure for production management on the major multi-business sites.
Manufacturing operations and supporting services at each of the two main plant complexes in the UK are now respectively controlled by a Teesside and Merseyside operations manager.
Placing undivided responsibility for a site on an individual is regarded by Lindsell as very effective and beneficial.
All multi-business operations in continental Europe, such as at Rozenburg in the Netherlands where C&P has major facilities, similarly come under one man.
However, where a plant is directly concerned with one product group — as with fibres in West Germany — management remains directly with the business concerned.
Special meention must be made of C&P's responsibility for ICI's 50 per cent holding in European Vinyls Corporation, which was formed in partnership with the Italian company EniChem late in 1986, and which makes vinyl chloride monomer and polyvinyl chloride plastics.
ICI puts its massive production capacity at Barry, Hillhouse and Runcorn in the UK and at Wilhelmshaven in West Germany into this deal, and C&P continues to control these sites for EVC.
Indeed, Lindsell regards this as virtually a twelfth business — and one which has also returned to profit after losing money heavily in the past few years.
Dick Lindsell sums up a notable achievement in this way: ‘C&P having been conveived and put into motion by ICI in a move which some saw as defensive, I believe that we are now increasingly demonstrating that we are as attractive as other ICI businesses.
Our current performance is at around the Group average, and I have no doubt not only of our ability to keep this up, but of our potential for doing even better in the longer term on any standard of assessment.
In less than two years, we have quickly demonstrated that the third of ICI that we represent is fully paid up!’
LOOKING GOOD AS A WORLD PLAYER
From a world slump in the textile industry, ICI Fibres has bounced back by its own efforts to claim world class status.
Stuart Birch describes this remarkable turn-about in the Fibres business
THE YEAR WAS 1972 AND ICI FIBRES — formed seven years earlier — was riding the crest of the wave.
Business had never been better and was growing strongly, with the prospect of a six per cent per annum growth rate.
To-day, ICI Fibres is also very successful.
Every other skier on the fashionable slopes of Europe wears the Company's clothing; and its carpets bring comfort and elegance to floors from Seattle to Salzburg.
But the story of ICI Fibres is one of victory snatched from the jaws of defeat.
For the years between 1972 and the early 1980s were commercially traumatic.
They saw costs escalating and sales slumping as the effect of oil crises and world recession hit the Company.
Losses mounted rapidly and ICI Fibres was forced to take painful and far-reaching decisions as its only hope of survival.
‘We set about a vigorous reconstruction programme supported by the ICI Group.
There must have been times when their hearts were in their mouths, for it was not just an act of business long-sightedness, it was of some bravery!
In our worst year, there were losses of nearly £90 million and there was heavy debate about the future of the Company's fibres business.
‘But that confidence and fibres’ own efforts have been rewarded.
We are now a highly successful and viable part of ICI chemicals & Polymers — and we will grow, that's for sure.’
The words are from John Coleman, ICI Fibres' commercial director, who has seen the  Company fight back to success.
ICI Fibres' beginnings were with British Nylon Spinners [BNS]which was owned equally by ICI and Courtaulds and had grown out of a wartime industry.
Du Pont in the USA had invented nylon in the late 1930s and it was clear that the material would be of tremendous use to countries at war.
BNS was established at Pontypool in South Wales post-war, and became the biggest nylon producer in Europe.
ICI though, was also busy, establishing its polyester business and in 1965 ICI bought out Courtaulds' interest in BNS to form ICI Fibres.
‘Production at that time was polyester and polyamide for a wide variety of end uses including almost all types of clothing — and for carpets and industrial needs from tyre reinforcement to sewing threads,’ said Coleman.
The business moved onward and upward with strong exports — BNS had built two factories in West Germany but UK sales predominated.
Fibres also went in for a spot of acquisition, buying into the British texturizing industry to give downstream processing capability.
By the early 1970s, growth was continuing strongly and at that time high growth rates were being estimated as likely to last out the decade.
‘But in 1973 came the first major oil shock.
As both polyester and polyamide are ultimately derived from oil, the industry suffered a major trauma; raw material prices went up between three and four times — and that led to a rapid revision of growth rate potential.
It was plain that these would be down to nil — or worse.’
The difficulties of ICI Fibres were compounded by the fact that throughout the European industry, capacity was already ahead of production in anticipation of still better things to come and there were programmes for further expansion.
This momentum throughout the industry was difficult to halt and later in the 1970s with the second oil shock and over capacity of 40 per cent, an added pressure element came from a weak US dollar which allowed relatively cheap American products on to the market on this side of the Atlantic.
‘Practically all fibre production in Europe fell into very significant loss about 1980 and ICI business was no exception; we went into heavy and traumatic loss,’ said Coleman who was then part of the Fibres production management team.
Coleman had joined BNS in 1963 with an Oxford history degree and initially cconcentrated on work study.
He had always been confident that Fibres would survive even during its darkest days: ‘Parts of our business are volatile and people are used to reacting quickly and decisively — that is what we had to do but on a very big scale and at very considerable cost.’
The remedial action that had to be taken was painful in the extreme but it saved ICI Fibres and put it in a position of strength for the future.
ICI underwrote massive losses as its Fibres operation struggled hard with a series of ‘single-minded programmes’ to secure a future.
At first, these involved cost-cuting.
In 1973, the workforce had been over 23,000.
Today, it is 7,400 under managing director Alan Pedder — and production is now greater, making Fibres highly competitive, with solidly based and improving profits.
By 1984, Fibres had moved through the period of mere survival to realize that it was on a winning track and could expand, guided by some astute marketing of some of the exciting new products then coming through.
In the recovery process, though, a major casualty was polyester.
It had become a worldwide traded commodity.
There was gross overcapacity, as there still is.
‘Its end uses are generally similar to polyamide with the notable exception of carpets.
But it is a less flexible fibre than nylon, and lacks nylon's performance edge,’ explains Coleman.
The problem facing ICI fibres, though, was that for clothing in Europe, polyester use is greater than polyamide by a ratio of 3:1.
However, profit margins are tiny where they exist at all and ICI had made it clear that it was not chasing ‘profitless prosperity.’
We took a strategic decision to leave the commodity polyester business,’ Coleman said.
So Fibres' polyester capacity is small today and aimed at niche markets, in such areas as automotive upholstery and trim.
It represents only a small percentage of total production.
But Fibres' nylon business is a different matter.
For example, its outerwear sector has brought tremendous success in sports and leisurewear sales, said Coleman.
It is a fast growing market: ‘Our product range links performance with fashion and aesthetic appeal and our marketing is capable of pinpointing market forces, analysing them and predicting fashion directions.
That ability has led us into the more specialized areas and it has demonstrated that success was not just getting through the traumas of the 70s and taking costs out of the business, but in finding different directions in which to take the business.’
ICI Fibres promotes its sporting and leisurewear products heavily via famous sporting personalities, including former World Champion formula One driver Keke Rosberg and current Williams team driver Nigel Mansell, athletics stars Greg Foster and Jackie Joyner — and top skiers including Martin Bell, Regina Moesenlechner, Michaela Figini and Karl Alpiger.
‘Tactel’ is the clothing range which is of particular importance in the sports and leisure area, and was introduced five years ago in skiwear.
Now, of all the skiwear sold in the UK and Western Europe, more than 50 per cent is made from ‘Tactel.’
It is also becoming a substantial force in team sports, with virtually all UK First Division soccer clubs using it.
It is also popular for rugged outerwear use and is establishing a presence in polo shirts and track suits, not to mention the key innerwear section of hosiery and lingerie.
ANOTHER MAJOR PART OF FIBRES' business is its carpet materials.
Its latest brand is the up-market ‘Tactesse’ for contract use in offices, and increasingly for the upper ranges of the domestic market.
‘Tactesse’ appeared 18 months ago and ICI Fibres has been working very closely with leading manufacturers, particularly at its development centre at Oestringen, West Germany, to establish new ranges across Europe and in the USA.
Fibres' major domestic carpet brand is ‘Timbrelle’.
Introduced in the early 1980s, it has been — and still is — very successful.
A key added element to the Fibres' carpet capability is the announcement of much improved stain release technology, developed in collaboration with 3M, and destined to be a leader in the industry.
Currently, clothing represents almost 50 per cent of Fibres' business, with carpets and products for industrial uses [from conveyor belt reinforcement to computer ribbons and parachutes]both expanding rapidly and profitably.
Headquarters of Fibres is at Harrogate, with manufacturing at Doncaster, Pontypool and Gloucester in UK and Oestringen in Germany.
There is a fibres research centre at Gloucester plus two development centres — one for textile applications and one for carpets.
So ICI Fibres is looking good.
It is number one nylon producer in Europe and second in the world and looking to narrowing the gap between itself and world leader Du Pont, says Coleman.
But there is still room for improvement.
Fibres, confident of its innovative ability, quality and ‘value for money’ is now engaged in a race to up-rate further its technology and reduce its cost base by substantial investment.
It also wants to widen its international presence.
It has expanded into Europe and North America and is currently looking to the markets of Japan, the Far East and South America.
There is still plenty more potential for growth.
Said Coleman: ‘Now we are going to be a world player.’.
ICI Fibres is the number one nylon producer in Europe.
Its range of fibres is used in inner and outer clothing, leisure and sportswear, carpets and industrial goods.
Free-fall parachute canopies, sails, military clothing and tyres are just some of the products.
‘Tactel’ is also of particular importance in the sports and leisure area and is promoted by ICI sponsoring several world class sports personalities
Fertilizers A NEW PRIORITY The Marketplace
From a business in crisis, ICI Fertilizers is pulling itself back into viability by concentrating on the needs of its customers.
Andrew Chuter examines a business facing up to change and uncertainty.
RESTRUCTURING AND RETRENCHMENT ARE beginning to pay off for ICI Fertilizers.
It's still a business in crisis but reduction in the scale of losses compared with 1986 means that managing director Paul Marsden and his management team can take satisfaction that their efforts to revive one of the giants of ICI Chemicals & Polymers are on course.
In 1986 the Company's worldwide fertilizer business, of which ICIF represents the lion's share, was in the red to the tune of £21m on sales of £915m.
The business then came under the banner of C&P and results for 1987 slashed the deficit to £4m with sales of £858m.
The first half of 1988 showed an increase of that loss to £12m, but as Marsden points out, you need to take a yearly view of the business rather than a 6-month snapshot so such figures can be misleading.
Much of the overall improvement owes itself to improving fertilizer prices and better productivity.
The losses also continue to be cushioned by the performance of ICI fertilizers' carbon dioxide and argon gas sales in the industrial sector.
Nevertheless, Marsden says the target is to raise ICI Fertilizers' performance ‘to the level where we are earning average C&P return on capital — that is possible and it can be done by the early 1990s.’
It's a formidable task in a Western European market wracked by a crisis brought on by overcapacity, the dumping of products from Eastern Europe and falling demand for fertilizers in general.
Lying in wait for the industry are further pressures from environmental issues such as the level of nitrates in water and continuing EEC attempts to tackle the problem of its Common Agricultural Policy.
Marsden says there is more change, more uncertainty, than at any time in his 33 years in the fertilizer business.
To survive those conditions, ICI Fertilizers will, he admits, require fundamental change.
‘People have to face the reality of the commercial world.
Reducing our costs is paramount and internal efficiency is the key.
This has to happen in the face of a continuing decline of the fertilizer business in general.
What we have had to look at was how to adjust the decline.
We have already closed sites which have become yesterday's plants serving yesterday's needs and we'll keep looking for other areas of adjustment.
‘I don't know the size of the decline, but it is incontrovertible that the market and ICI Fertilizers will be smaller than it is today.
With such problems, you have to be flexible — flexible in production and flexible in supply.
We are creating a business which can think on its feet and we are committed to building a company of quality.’
The move into C&P has helped this process by making ICI Fertilizers more independent, with shorter lines of communication and as a result, faster-moving.
The amalgamation has also helped Marsden tackle head-on the problem of cutting internal overheads.
Employee numbers are coming down by ‘15 per cent a year on a sustainable rate’ to match rival manufacturers' manning levels.
Being part of C&P has softened the blow because it has enabled many employees to switch to other growth areas of the chemicals business.
But getting the internal cost structure right for the 1990s has not simply been a case of manning level reductions.
At ICI's Severnside plant in the west of England, a revolutionary new low cost ammonia process, developed in-house, is being used on two smaller plants now being brought into action.
If all goes according to plan, the £60 million investment will produce around 300,000 tonnes per year of ammonia at the lowest costs in Western Europe.
However, Marsden was reluctant to dwell on the subject of technological progress.
‘We have a new priority — the marketplace,’ he says.
What had driven the Company in the past had been technology and not the market.
When pressed, Marsden concedes that previously ICI had not always supplied the farmer with what he wanted, rather that he was sold those items the Company technologists had produced.
Now that process is beinng stood on its head.
‘We are shifting the culture, structure and behaviour of the Company towards marketing.
It is our number one priority,’ he says.
‘Overall, our aim is to protect our position in the British Isles.
And we are still successful in having the biggest market share of any Western European producer in his own national market.’
This commitment to marketing and the British market in particular— although some exporting is done — is in evidence throughout the Billingham headquarters of ICI Fertilizers.
On the package front, the Company is investigating several innovative approaches for making the handling of fertilizers easier and safer for the farmer.
First off the production line in March was ‘Dumpy’ 2 — a pack design which allows the farmer to lift three-quarters of a tonne of fertilizer from either the bottom or the top, depending on what sort of agricultural equipment is available at the time.
The squat shape of the bag, and its method of filling, gives better stability in storage and transport than conventional big bags.
First response from British farmers has been excellent.
‘Kaynitro’ packed in ‘Dumpty’2 was introduced in the spring and other fertilizers will be available in pack from the autumn.
2 Market research suggests that by 1990, some 60  per cent of all straight nitrogen fertilizers in the UK will be supplied in ‘Dumpy’ 2 or other more conventional Intermediate bulk containers — the rest in 50 kg bags.
At least 30 per cent of all ICI sales in this product area are expected to convert to ‘Dumpy’ 2 in the next three years.
From his desk in Billingham, Tim Davies is also playing a part in Marsden's marketing drive.
Davies, an arable crop specialist, is one of a team of four ICI Fertilizer experts offering ‘Nitram’ users a free computer service which pinpoints the exact day when a farmer should apply his product in order that the crop can best use the nitrogen.
Called the N-Sure Service, it is only available to wheat farmers at present but there are plans to extend the service to growers of winter barley and other arable crops in the near future.
Davies claims that N-Sure, which has already found 5,000 users around the country since it started in 1986, has turned fertilizer applications from a black art to a hi-tech service.
The N-Sure team can achieve wheat yield improvements worth £10/15 per acre to the farmer — without ever setting foot on his farm.
Simply by filling in a form giving a few details such as variety of wheat to be grown, date of planting and previous cropping in the field, Davies and his colleagues can, with the addition of weather data fed in 365 days a year from 45 centres around the country, predict with unerring accuracy exactly when the farmer should spread his ‘Nitram’ to get the best results.
But it is not just the fertilizer side which is developing the business with marketing innovation.
ICI fertilizers is also Europe's leading liquid CO2 producer and it intends to stay that way, selling some 400,000 tonnes per year of product to industries as diverse as nuclear power and soft drinks.
One of the methods that the business intends to use to stay on top is now coming into play.
the computer-based Stockmaster system does some of the customer's work for him by maintaining a constant watch on CO2 stock level in his tanks.
A simple telemetering station at the customer's plant is linked via a dedicated telephone line to the Stockmaster computer at Billingham.
The computer regularly calls the telemetering station and when it is time for the customer to replenish his stocks, the ICI Customer Service representative simply calls to confirm the next order.
Will the new ICI Fertilizers succeed?
I will leave Marsden to answer that.
‘We have so many things going for us.
Mainly, we have some bloody good people — we'll get there.
THE BUSINESS
ICI FERTILIZERS IS BASED at Billingham on Teesside and has other production facilities at Bristol and Leith.
The major Billingham-based production includes ammonia, nitric acid, urea and both straight nitrogen and compound fertilizers.
Large tonnages of CO2 are also produced.
At Severnside, near Bristol, production covers ammonia, CO2, nitrogen fertilizers and compound fertilizers.
This site is in the process of commissioning two low cost ammonia plants, costing £60m, as part of a continuing commitment to the business.
Compound fertilizers and ‘Nitram’ are also made at Leith, near Edinburgh.
There are also liquid fertilizer mixing plants strategically placed on the eastern side of the country.
In addition to these production sites, ICI Fertilizers has two wholly-owned subsidiary operations specializing in supplying the needs of farmers.
SAI, Scotland's leading agricultural merchant with sales of over £100m, concentrates on seeds, agrochemicals and grain trading as well as fertilizers.
BAI, based at York, is a leading agricultural merchant with a similar portfolio.
ICI Fertilizers also owns five farms.
One is used for trials purposes, the others are all commercial profit-making operations.
In Ireland, ICI Fertilizers has recently merged its Richardsons Fertilisers operation in Northern Ireland with Nitrigin Eireann Teoranta in the Republic.
The resulting company is known as Irish Fertilizer Industries, in which ICI has a 49 per cent stake.
Richardsons Fertilisers now operate as a wholly-owned subsidiary of IFI.
Together, the operations produce ammonia, nitorgen fertilizers, compounds and urea from plants at Marino Point in Eire and Belfast in Northern Ireland.
THE PEOPLE
THE NEW ICI FERTILIZERS Executive Team consists of six key managers who report directly to Paul Marsden, the managing director.
DERYCK KING is the commercial manager, responsible for marketing and selling.
KEN ATKINS is the planning and business development manager, responsible for strategic planning and technology.
KEITH FARMERY is Fertilizer Works manager at Billingham, the Company's largest production site.
TOM KENT is responsible for production at Severnside and all manufacturing sites other than Billingham.
TOM BAXTER heads the ICI Fertilizers team of accountants responsible for all aspects of financial performance.
RICHARD ECKERSALL is responsible for the trading activities of the subsidiaries SAI and BAI.
Fertilizers available in ‘Dumpy’ 2 packs.
fertilizer application is becoming a high-tech activity with the introduction of the computerized N-Sure service advising farmers of the exact day that ‘Nitram’ should be applied for optimum crop production.
Paul Marsden —‘internal efficiency is the key.’
Petrochemicals OPTIMISTIC ABOUT THE FUTURE
‘The engine room for ICI Chemicals & polymers ,’ is how Dr Nick Carey, the head of the £1.5 billion Petrochemicals business, describes its role, to Robin Penfold.
LOOKING OUT FROM HIS headquarters at Wilton, there is no difficulty in believing Nick Carey.
Despite the cut-backs of the early 1980s, the ICI complex on Teesside remains a mighty assembly of hardware.
‘In fact we did more to rationalize in the bad years than most companies in the field by closing down surplus plants and so on,’ he continued.
‘And, as a result, we now find ourselves with perhaps the best assets in Europe.
Certainly the petrochemicals industry as a whole has done very well in the past couple of years, and we with it.
Long may this continue, but I am sure that we are robust enough to weather the next downturn when it comes.’
Everything about the petrochemicals business is big.
Its annual turnover is around £1.5 billion.
This means that it accounts for perhaps a third of the sales of ICI Chemicals & Polymers — about the same proportion as does the latter in the whole of ICI.
For a major chemicals company aiming to be an all-rounder, the sheer size of a petrochemicals operation and the cash it can generate is needed to complement the higher-value but far lower-tonnage manufacture of such products as pharmaceuticals.
‘The world's hunger for bulk consumer products like plastics and fibres — as well as for all sorts of industrial chemical intermediates — will not go away.’
Carey points out.
‘To satisfy this, ICI must have a strong upstream capability.’
Thus, his primary task is to serve dependent UK plants of ICI, most of them either on Teesside or in north-west England which is linked to the former by pipeline.
Carey further aims to supply the company's needs abroad in locations such as Roxenburg [Holland]and Wilhelmshaven [West Germany].
Even then it must be remembered that some 65 per cent by value of sales is to non-ICI customers — and many of these are also overseas, with Europe accounting for the greater part of both internal and external business.
A great deal of expertise has been built up over the years in the shipment of petrochemical cargoes all over the world, often in custom-built vessels.
Since petrochemicals are, by definition, derived from crude oil or gas, must not the concept of a secure supply base also embrace these?
Carey explains that the ICI upstream strategy has changed in recent years with the collapse of the oil price from its post-crisis peak in the 1970s and the removal of worries that oil might run out — at any rate in the foreseeable future.
Thus, there were not too many qualms about transferring the Company's North Sea interests to Enterprise Oil at the beginning of 1987.
When asked how ICI rates alongside the big oil companies that also have a large ingtegrated stake in petrochemicals, Carey points to the company's long-standing partnership with Phillips Petroleum in the PIP refinery on the North Tees site which is part and parcel of the complex.
Refiners who have to give priority to products such as petrol and lubricating oils may tend to treat chemicals as a convenient way of dealing with unwanted fractions.
By contrast, PIP's first task is to supply the ICI petrochemical plants.
As our diagram shows, its most important product is naphtha which is the key feedstock for the whole operation.
However, the steam cracker which processes naphtha can also handle liquefied petroleum gases [LPG], giving great flexibility.
Heavy fuel oil and gas-oil are sold by PIP.
The diagram also indicates how the main petrochemical products fit into the manufacturing picture.
Broadly, the steam cracker makes olefines [ethylene, propylene and butadiene], while the aromatics plant turns out benzene, toluene and zylenes, known collectively as BTX.
The main downstream uses within ICI are also shown, and described more fully under their respective businesses within C&P.
If this structure seems fairly simple, it must be remembered that each of these materials is made on a massive scale — often hundreds of thousands of tonnes per year.
There are numerous by-products from these plants, most of them useful as chemicals and the rest as fuel.
Nothing is wasted.
It will be noticed that both the crackers and the aromatics plants produce petrol.
ICI was in the petrol business for many years, but the ICI roundel logo has now disappeared from the pumps following the sale of the stations to Burmah Oil in 1987.
‘The retail petrol market is intensely competitive and the product very basic,’ says Carey.
‘We felt that we should leave it to a company that specialized in the business and concentrate on adding value to our chemical materials.’
Trading is an important part of the petrochemicals scene, and ICI is expert in this area.
The basic feedstocks like ethylene and BTX are outright commodities, in that one producer's material is identical to another's in its manufacturing so it is marketing expertise that gives the edge.
Geographical location is another vital factor where such huge quantities of comparatively low-cost products are concerned, and Teesside is exceptionally well-placed for European trade because it is on the North Sea.
However, where another   company is making the same material close to where ICI needs it — or vice versa— it makes sense to do a deal.
This might be a straight ‘swap’ but matters are not usually as simple as that.
Another aspect of this within the UK is ICIs favourable position in the middle of the pipeline system which links Teesside with important petrochemical complexes at Grangemouth in Scotland to the north and, as mentioned above, those of ICI and others in the Merseyside area acorss the Pennines.
[There is in addition a network of pipe links on Teesside itself, joining Wilton, Billingham and the PIP refinery.]
The product transported by long-distance piepline is ethylene, which is the most important of the petrochemical ‘building blocks,’ and is also made on the largest scale.
This gives further flexibility.
For instance, the steam cracker at Wilton is jointly owned by ICI and BP Chemicals.
The latter also makes ethylene at Grangemouth so that, in case of any shortfall at Wilton, alternative supplies can be arranged.
A change which came with the formation of Chemicals & Polymers was the switching of methanol to the petrochemicals business.
Made at Billingham, this had traditionally been handled by Agricultural Division [one of the precursor divisions to form C&P].
However, it has many applications, particularly within the petrochemicals industry.
ICI is the only British producer, and the fortunes of methanol are intimately linked with those of natural gas, its principal feedstock.
We shall see how the petrochemicals business has a particular interest in gas.
There are two instances where the business goes further downstream — one relates to ‘nylon salt.’
which mainly depends on benzene and is needed for the ICI fibres business and for plastics.
The other is terephthalic acid, based on para-xylene, for which the main market is polyester fibre but for which there are also especially fast-growing outlets in polyester [PET]bottles and film.
In both cases, it is sensible for the petrochemicals business to handle the products because their manufacture at Wilton is so closely integrated with the aromatics plant.
WE HAVE NOT SO FAR MENTIONED one of Dr Carey's most important responsibilities.
This relates to the purchase of ICI's entire energy needs in the UK, in whatever form — gas, coal, fuel oil and electricity.
What this means is well illustrated by the fact that the Company accounts for as much as two per cent of UK power consumption.
The tie-up with petrochemicals is logical.
As we have seen, the business is very close to oil and natural gas in many ways, and it is also geared to dealing with large utilities like British Gas, British Coal and the Central Electricity Generating Board — when clout helps.
It should be evident from all this that the business must keep the closest watch on the prices of oil and gas and their derivatives all over the world, from day to day and, on occasion, hour to hour.
It must, moreover, try to predict how they will move in the future.
If, for instance, ICI were to buy into stock for use in later months a product whose price collapsed in the meantime, the loss could amount to hundreds of thousands of pounds.
Or it might, of course, work the other way.
To handle these matters, there is at Wilton a team which is as smart as any in the City of London, and operates in futures markets in the same way.
Because even the most inspired forecasts of how prices are going to move can't be right all the time, some forward purchasing is arranged on a ‘hedging’ basis.
Often, too, this team is dealing in material which ICI will sell before it even gets it — and aiming to make a profit thereby.
The petrochemicals business employs some 3500 people on Teesside, of whom rather less than 100 are in the headquarters group.
It might be thought that there is not much need for R&T by an established producer of bulk commodities.
Carey is quick to deny this.
‘Research is important, although we have to be selective.
For one thing, we have to be smart at spotting new trends in feedstock usage, because this can make or break our profitability.
Then there is new chemistry to be developed — on ways of making nylon and terephthalic acid, for instance.
We are also looking at how we might make more intensive use of many co-products from our plants.
These can be on the scale of several tens of kilotonnes — for example, the C4 and C5 steams which can be used for such things as petrol additives.
Basic research on petrochemicals was at a low ebb around 1980.
However, the industry won't stay on a plateau and there is still much to be done in improving the processes in engineering as well as chemical terms.
We are committed to boosting our R&T effort on base petrochemicals.’
Summing up, Nick Carey believes that ICI has been innovative in its approach towards the rationalization of its petrochemicals business — necessary because production capacity in europe was far too high.
this has got costs back on to a sensible basis, and he is convinced that this assures the Company of its place at the forefront of the european industry.
‘The future seems set fair, and I am very optimistic.’.
Dr Nick Carey — everything about the Petrochemicals business is big and requires a sharp eye on future trends to maintain maximum profitability
General chemicals TURNING MOND IN HIS GRAVE
ICI's founding father, Ludwig Mond, was research-driven whereas his successors today are market-driven.
A century later Bill Cater, parallels the similarities between the old and the new.
LISTENING TO TONY FOSTER TALK about his territory — General chemicals — you could find yourself wondering how he and old Ludwig Mond would get on, were someone to introduce them across the gap of more than a century.
Mond left Heidelberg in 1858 without taking a degree and straight away became a practical industrial chemist.
Foster left Oxford with a degree in chemistry and straight away became a practical marketing man.
Mond made his first steps in the business that would one day help form ICI, by finding better ways to make ‘soda ash,’ sodium carbonate.
These improved the product, lowered the price, recovered valuable sulphur from waste, cut the appalling environmental damage caused by acid going up those 1860s chimneys, and saved money.
In fact recovering valuable materials from waste was one of Mond's driving passions.
Now listen to Foster — whose General Chemicals covers parts of Mond's old empire — talking about today's acid rain.
‘Acid rain can be abatted by taking the sulphur from power station flue gases, using the Wellman-Lord process, which extracts it as sulphuric acid.
‘Instead of manufacturing sulphuric acid as a feedstock for our plants, we can use the acid produced in this way by a power station.
No one else in the counry has the capacity for doing that; you've got to be able to take the acid away from the power station 24 hours a day, every day of the year.
In fact, the station which is going to use the process is right next door to one of our major consuming plants.
‘Another way is by treating the flue gases with limestone — which we can supply from the ICI quarries at Buxton in the very large quantities required.
The limestone process results in gypsum, calcium sulphate, which can be sold as a building material.
‘We already get gypsum, in making the hydrofluoric acid.
It was a waste product — until we realised it could be used as a self-levelling screed in floor covering and to reinforce roadways in coal mines.
Since then, in the last seven years, we've built up a market of 50,000 tonnes of it at good prices, under the name ‘Andricite’— from anhydride and JCI.’
So some of the sulphur which has been blamed for causing environmental problems, may before long emerge in the form of ‘Andricite,’ plaster and wall-boards in our houses — courtesy of ICI.
An area of immediate and urgent concern to the Business is the task of developing alternatives to the current generation of chlorofluococarbons, said to be associated with changes in atmospheric ozone concentrations.
Foster fully supports the International Agreement signed in Montreal to eventually phase out society's dependence on these products which have important uses in refrigeration, air-conditining and foam-blowing.
‘Our task is to help our customers in the short term use them more efficiently, and as quickly as possible bring to the market new products which will not have any interaction with the ozone layer.
‘We've identified three new compounds, ‘Arcton’ 134a as a refrigerant and Arctons 141b and 123 as foam blowers.
They have little or no potential to effect the ozone layer; either they contain no chlorine or they break down lower in the atmosphere.
‘We are working hard on the process to make these economically, and have two pilot plants on Merseyside.
It is an unusual technological challenge to be certain of the market and racing to produce the chemical to meet it.
Racing, because we are not alone.
Du Pont and others are neck and neck with us.
Where Foster and old Mond might not get on so well is in the argument of research-driven v market-driven advance.
[Mond is said to have complained, away back in the 1880s, that his company wasn't concentrating on chemistry any more but on making money, a complaint perhaps most easily made by those who have already acquired as much money as they can reasonable need.]
‘The old Mond Division of ICI did a lot of research-led work.
‘Saffil’ was a successful output of that.
But, frankly, the policy of inventing interesting things and then trying to find a market for them was not generally very successful,’ says Foster.
‘If you look at Chemicals & Polymers now, the majority of research is market and demand led, being done because you can see a customer need.
In General chemicals, all research is for a market.’
Examples?
‘We've sold sodium perborate to detergent makers for a decade.
These are now increasing needs for detergents to release oxygen at lower temperatures for modern fabrics.
Monohydrate is an alternative form  which releases oxygen at lower temperatures, but has disadvantages — including that we would have to make considerable expenditure on a new plant.
‘Instead, we have been able to invent a totally new form, an agglomerate.
We mix sodium perborate from our existing plant with other alkalis, sodium sesquicarbonate or bicarbonate.
We can tailor-make the product to the detergent manufacturer's requirement: to release oxygen at a certain temperature range, a certain speed, with particular dissolving characteristics.
So, instead of a straightforward chemical manufactured by everybody else we can now offer a range of different properties to meet what the market wants.’
GENERAL CHEMICALS IS PROFITABLE.
‘Always has been.
Profit on sales is above the ICI average and there's a good return on capital.
Though many of our products are simple and old-fashioned, they have a very high added-value in use.
They are mostly mature products, with very few competitors.
Many are made by processes capable of being stretched and ‘debottle-necked’ many times.
The BCF fire-fighting chemical plant is now producing more than twice its original capacity by a succession of small extensions.
‘We haven't as a rule the problems of the petrochemical industry, where some parts of the industry in the past put in huge new additional capacity and got gross over-production.
Though we did that about eight years ago with a new methylene chloride and chloroform plant — overestimated the market.
It was a difficult period for a few years until the market caught up with us.’
This profitability is maintained by a balancing act; the fundamental chemical industry balance summed up in the fact that if you want to get the utmost out of sodium chloride, you shouldn't have either sodium or chlorine left over unsold at the end of the day; not much use increasing the use of one if you can't increase use of the other in proportion.
The other balance, Foster explains, is between industry-wide demand and supply.
‘The key to a successful business in older chemicals is to keep supply and demand in balance.
That way we can supply our customers’ needs in the most economic way.
Sometimes we have taken an independent decision to shut down one of our plants and bought in tonnage from a competitor, sometimes they have shut down and brought in tonnage from us.
For example, ICI will cease sodium production in 1988, and in future buy in its requirements on a more competitive basis.
‘We try to keep our own plants running flat out, at maximum efficiency, and make up changing needs by buying in the varying five or 10 per cent above that from other manufacturers.
That can also be used to build up a market which then justifies a new plant or extension.’
It is to market demands that Foster returns.
‘For instance, Du Pont in Northern Ireland need absoloutely pure 100 per cent sulphuric acid, not made before in Britain.
We have now commissioned a plant to supply 10,000 tonnes a year to them…’
On the other side, ‘some years ago we observed that quite a large proportion of the concentrated acids we sold was diluted by our customers on site and sometimes in rather unsatisfactory conditions; small companies didn't have facilities to dilute acid safety — it generates a lot of heat.
So we had a plant built to dilute our own acid, supplied customers with tanks and sent them dilute acid.
‘It saved them expense, it removed considerable hazards — and enabled us to add value and increase our market share.’
The contents of a bookcase tells a lot about the owner, people say.
Foster's office bookcase contains about equal numbers of books on chemistry and on accountancy.
It also contains a sample of ‘Saffil,’ that near-miraculous aluminium oxide fibre which looks like cotton-wool, withstands heat up to the melting point of steel, strengthens metals, and is used to line furnaces and between the tiles which protect the space shuttles in their searing return to earth — and was, after all, a research-led, rather than a market-led discovery.
Perhaps Mond the chemist and highly successful businessman would approve of the mixture.
THE CHEMICAL MAN
TONY FOSTER — NOW 42 — read chemistry at Oxford, decided he wanted a commercial career, joined ICI in the London sales office, then had two years as a Midlands sales rep selling chemicals for the Mond Division followed by three years as a product manager for sodium cyanide.
After that he was seconded to a research department to lead a team of 20 on commercial development of ‘Saffil’, the heat-resisting alumina fibre.
There were 10 PhDs in that team, all older than me,’ he remembers, with what could be a shudder.
In 1978 he became marketing manager in General Chemicals and in 1982 went to ICI's Agricultural Division as general manager, industrial chemicals.
A year as Agricultural Division personnel manager followed; he moved to General chemicals as general manager in 1986.
He regards such constant movement as essential.
‘I'd never spend more than five years in a job.
If the Company didn't move me, I'd move.
If you are going up to senior positions movement is essential; even people who may plateau out at middle management will have done a lot of different jobs for three, four, five years.
‘I would be very reluctant to see product managers more than five years in the same position, because most people run out of ideas for a particular product.
We move them around deliberately, to gain experience and to put them in a different environment so that they come forward with fresh ideas.’
General Chemicals has three working areas — Runcorn on Merseyside, Buxton in Derbyshire, and a slice of Billingham, Cleveland.
Billingham's inputs to General Chemicals' business are sulphuric and nitric acids, sodium nitrite and ammonia; sales, £34 million.
Buxton is all lime — limestone, ground lime, hydrated lime and cement; sales £45 million.
The Merseyside complex produces sulphuric and hydrochloric acids; soldium sulphide; sodium perborate [for detergents]; ‘Saffil’, the various chlorofluorocarbons —‘Arcton’[used in refrigeration and aerosol propellants]; BCF [fire extinguishing]; and chloromethanes [solvents, petrol additives].
With the Chance and Hunt trading arm added, General Chemicals Merseyside sales reach £260 million.
Quality Doing It Right, FIRST TIME
In the past, a plea for quality might be dismissed with a cynical shrug of the shoulders.
Not any more, not here at ICI.
Hester Thomas describes a work ethic aiming for zero defects.
WHEN THE PLANT OPERATOR STARTS talking about ‘zero defects’, the price of non-conformance' and ‘corrective action teams.’
it's tempting to think that he's using phraseology picked up on a recent voyage on the Star Ship Enterprise.
Actually, he is describing his work on Wilton's terephthalic acid plant.
For this is the real stuff — the language of the quality improvement process [QIP]— and it is being taken extremely seriously by everyone at ICI chemicals & Polymers.
What is the quality improvement process?
In essence, it is the means by which C&P will provide customers, internally and externally, with exactly the products and services agreed.
It is also a commitment to a target of annual improvement in the quality of everything they do.
The reason for this commitment to quality is quite simple: ICI Chemicals & Polymers intends to be seen in all its markets and across its product and service range as the quality leader among the companies with which it competes.
Now, that might seem like the kind of high falutin’ ideology to which most businesses aspire.
Indeed, it is the kind of statement which will provoke a cynical shrug of the shoulders from most business commentators, having heard it all too many times before.
the difference here is that C&P really mean what they say and are doing everything possible to make the quality improvement process happen.
And if that sounds like a naive statement, read on.
Quality improvement, as a concept and as a reality, has been around in its present form for a number of decades.
Several American management consultants, notably Dr W Edwards Deming, Dr JM Juran and Philip B Crosby, developed the concepts; the first two of these, unable to sell them to American companies, turned instead to Japan.
After the second world war, Japanese industry was renowned for its manufacture of cheap, shoddy goods which had always been invented elsewhere.
Recognizing the efficacy of the quality improvement process also known as total quality management, many leading Japanese companies decided to apply the concepts.
Gradually, during the 1960s and 1970s industrial businesses did an about turn, transforming Japan into one of the world's most successful industrial countries manufacturing high quality goods at acceptable costs.
By the late 1970s the quality improvement process began to gain credence in the USA and is now being applied by some businesses in Europe.
C & p began their involvement with QIP in 1985.
According to Tony Harrison, quality manager for petrochemicals and chemical products businesses.
‘It was seen as one way mediocre trading performance.’
Petrochemicals and Plastics Division, as it was then, had sustained huge losses in 1980-81.
Cutbacks were instigated, including the reduction of employees from 21,000 to 14,000.
‘That pulled us out of trading losses, but it still didn't really get us into a healthy trading position,’ Tony Harrison recalls.
The directorate searched for some method, other than a quick fix-it, which would draw the business into acceptable profitability and then develop that position.
‘The quality improvement process seemed to be the most sensible solution,’ says Harrison.
‘It's concerned with making everything about the business be about quality — from the quality of the management process, the quality of the way the operation works to the quality of manufactured products.’
There were other reasons, too, why C&P needed to improve their business.
Customers were becoming much more discerning — interested not just in price, but quality of products.
At the same time, the market was becoming much more competitive and international customers, such as Ford, were reducing the number of suppliers.
Ford were amongst an increasing number of customers who were insisting upon suppliers meeting quality assurance standards such as British Standard [BS]5750, ISO 9000 [the international equivalent]or in Ford's case, their own Q101.
With much of the output from C&P's engineering plastics, films and fibres businesses going into the automotive industry, it was vital to meet any new standards.
‘Indeed,’ says Jim Whiston, quality manager for C&P, ‘without the correct accreditations, ICI could eventually have lost the bulk of its engineering plastics business.
For us, quality improvement was a necessity, not an option.’
It's not just the automotive industry which is  looking critically at the suppliers.
Pharmaceutical company Ciba-Geigy recently carried out an internal assessment of their 30 major suppliers' performance.
ICI, as a Group, supplies about £31m of products per year, with £13m coming from C&P's Chemical Products Business.
The assessment covered aspects such as product quality, delivery performance, commercial flexibility and ethical standards.
Using a scale of 1 to 5 [5 best, 1 worst], the top score was 4.48 and the average for all 30 was 3.74.
The top ten suppliers identified by Ciba-Geigy were five Japanese, two Swiss, two German and one USA company.
ICI's score, overall, was 3.62.
The Chemical products Business was well above this average figure, but still nowhere near the top.
The management of this particular ICI business is convinced that the quality improvement process is the best way to get it there.
‘Do it right the first time,’ is probably the best and shortest way to sum up the quality improvement process.
Four principles provide the building blocks in achieving that:
The first: ‘quality is conformance to requirements,’ means that a product or service is of quality only if it meets the customer's requirements.
So, a £30,000 car that meets customer requirements is a quality car.
A £5,000 car that meets customer requirements is also a quality car.
There is no high or low quality; either an item conforms to requirements [quality]or it doesn't [non quality].
The second principle: ‘the system for quality is prevention’ involves considering where errors could occur and then taking action to prevent them.
The third principle is: ‘the performance standard to use is zero defects.’
In other words, everyone should be aiming to meet the requirements first time, every time and without errors.
Tony Harrison recounts a story about a meeting which is likely to become apocryphal: ‘There had been over ten accidents in a year on one particular plant and a meeting was held to consider targets for the next year.
It was decided to plan for only eight accidents.
The shop steward then stood up and asked whether the management would be so kind as to tell him which men would be involved so that he could inform their wives now.’
As Tony Harrison points out, it was an excellent way for the shop steward to make the point that the only acceptable standard was no accidents.
The fourth and final principle is: ‘the measurement of a quality performance is the price of non-conformance.’
By calculating the cost of doing something wrong or ‘the price of non-conformance,’ it is possible to understand just what it means to a business in monetary terms.
It has been estimated that the general cost of correcting errors including scrap and rework can be as high as 20 per cent of turnover in manufacturing industry.
C&P are currently calculating that their cost of non-conformance could be as high as £400m or 10 per cent of turnover — a sum which could, in theory, be added to profitability if the various defective jobs were only done right, first time.
Putting things right, of course, is integral to quality improvement and this is where the corrective action teams come in.
Each team is composed of a group of people from a particular ‘faulty’ area, whose task it is to resolve any problems once and for all.
When that is achieved, the team is then disbanded.
What has been the reaction by C&P employees to the quality improvement process?
Arthur Thomas, quality, finance and planning manager for research and technology in the Wilton Materials Centre, says that reaction has been mixed: ‘At first it was greeted by some of the senior managers as ‘hyped up’ JS jargon, though they're fully committed to the process now.
Much of the general comment has been that quality improvement is just common sense and that we have been doing it all of the time anyway.
That's true to some extent.
But we've never followed it in such an organized way, or with such great commitment.’
Jim Whiston, quality manager at C&P, quite happily admits that, ‘there's nothing new in the quality improvement theory.’
He is a bluff, straight talking, down-to-earth character who has no time for precious notions.
‘Yes it has been greeted by cynicism in some quarters and we need to be able to answer the cynics’ questions,’he says, adding.
‘We need the cynics to balance out the charismatic types.’
The idea may not be new, but the management of it is.
Actually communicating the need for quality improvement to all 37.000 C&P employees, educating everyone and then implementing the process, is no mean task.
It is readily acknowledged that QIP needs management support if it is to succeed.
It is for that reason that the education process initially started at the most senior levels and included the allocation to C&P deputy chief executive Ralph Hodge of overall responsibility for quality improvement.
Each business area now has its own quality improvement manager, a Quality Strategy Group has been appointged to look at long-term policy making, and corrective action teams are busily at work.
INTEGRAL TO QIP IS THE NEED FOR quality assurance [QA].
Customers such as those in the automotive, plastics and rubber industries, are increasingly demanding tighter and tighter product specifications and also the right to assess a supplier's capability to produce to consistent standards.
QA standards, such as BS 5750, formally demonstrate and certify that a company has such an ability.
Furthermore, C&P are increasingly using Statistical Process Control [SPC]— the use of statistical techniques — to maintain a process within specified requirements and so reduce or eliminate the manufacture of off-specification product.
C&P have already made significant achievements through the QIP.
The pure terephthalic acid business, based at wilton, has significantly increased its profitability over the last three years through improved control of product quality.
New procedures and improved works instructions have led to a dramatic reduction in the manufacture of below-specification material.
Figures for 1987, compared with those for 1984, show that the total annual output has increased by 18,000 tonnes, while manufacture within specification has gone up by 36,000 tonnes.
In addition to the output improvement, this work has led to savings in variable production costs.
C&P's north-east distribution department has reviewed the performance of its contract hauliers and, by making improvements and efficiencies, is instigating a programme which will save the Company between £10-12m over the next three years.
The Company has also gained 14 accreditations to BS 5750 [just over a year ago they had one]plus an approval under Ford's QA standard.
Says Jim Whiston, ‘This time next year we'll have double the number of accreditations and by 1990 the vast majority of businesses in C&P, ICI Films and ICI Advanced Materials will have attained BS standards or those laid down by manufacturers.’
Quality improvement is also affecting C&P's suppliers.
the company is involving them in the quality process and they are now under pressure to meet ICI's quality standards.
ICI is currently assessing its raw materials suppliers with only one of six criteria being price.
At the same time, it is drawing up a list of preferred suppliers and aiming to reduce the total number.
It is still early days for C&P's programme and Arthur Thomas points out that it may be many years before some changes will be seen: ‘For example, look at the way we view the building of plants.
We accept that they will be shut down for improvements, accept the loss of production capacity and profit.
Maybe we have to think anew.
Maybe plants should be designed so they don't need to be shut down.
That could be a result of the QIP, but it will take years to appear.’
Perhaps the biggest change, and one which will gradually be effected, is that of attitude and culture.
One shop steward remarked that, ‘that is the first time management have trained us as they would train one another.
We're all being treated equally.’
We're commissioning the talent of the whole organization to achieve business success,’ says Jim Whiston, ‘and we're in this for the long-term results.’
Now everyone is working towards the same end: the target is zero defects.
THE SPAGHHETTI BOWL
Chemical Products
This business makes and sells up to 800 different chemicals.
The flowchart, to explain how the chemicals are made, is so complicated it resembles a bowl of spaghetti.
Robin Penfold untangles this intricate £500 million business.
THE CHEMICAL PRODUCTS business of C&P is not the easiest to define.
After all, just about everything ICI makes might by held to come under this umbrella title.
In fact, it broadly covers products that were handled by the old Petrochemicals Division which are not now the province of the Petrochemicals business itself.
The latter lis primarily concerned with supplying the basic ‘building blocks’ that C&P needs for its major downstream manufacturing operations.
This contrasts sharply with chemical Products, by far the greater part of those sales are external.
The Chemical Products set-up is divided into two interlinked parts.
One of these deals with the further processing of base petrochemical feedstocks into first-stage derivatives: the oxidation of ethylene to ethylene oxide and then its conversion to ethylene glycol is a good example.
Both these products are made on a large scale and can still be regarded as commodities.
However, their pattern of usage both inside and outside ICI is rather more complex than that of, say, ethylene or benzene.
The other part handles the manufacture and marketing of a very large range of ‘effect chemicals’ whose uses are legion: there is scarcely an industry that does not need them as intermediates to a greater or lesser extent.
Many of them were first made by ICI in the Oil works at Billingham, and predate the birth of the modern petrochemicals industry.
Throughout the years, ICI chemists have always been able to make good use of the profusion of basic materials available on Teesside to make more complex organic compounds.
The result is that a complete flowchart of both wings of the Chemical Products business — which manufactures up to 800 different specific chemicals — strongly resembles a bowl of spaghetti.
All these materials are part of a structure which is very highly integrated, not only within itself but also both backwards and downstream.
It is this operation that George Ewart, general manager for Chemical Products, describes as a giant chemistry set.
It has undergone drastic changes over the past few years.
‘The whole of this sector became a disaster area in the early 1980s,’ he recalls.
‘Virtually every product was in gross oversupply, largely because of too hopeful economic assumptions which didn't come off.
Like everyone else, ICI was losing significant sums of money on petrochemicals and we had to take a very hard look indeed at where we were going.
It was not difficult to spot that some of the products in our portfolio could never again be profitable.
On the other hand, we could see areas where we continued to hold the best cards and could build on our strengths.
Putting this strategy into effect has already returned the business to good health.
Chemical Products should achieve a turnover of around £500 million this year.
the business employs 1700 people on six sites.
three of these are on Teesside: at Wilton, also the location of the headquarters; Billingham; and North tees, alongside the PIP refinery.
The others are abroad — at Caleycourt and Chocques, respectively near Verdun and Lille in France; and at Renory, close to Liege in Belgium.
In addition, certain specialized products [brake fluids are an example]are made in outside plants contracted to ICI.
External sales by chemical Products in Western Europe apart from the UK account for no less than 39 per cent of the total, and a further 31 per cent goes to non-ICI customers in Britain itself.
As stated above, only a small proportion — no more than 2 per cent— is consumed elsewhere in C&P, plus 12 per cent by the rest of ICI in Europe.
The remaining 16 per cent is marketed elsewhere in the world, where Dr Ewart sees good opportunities for expanding business, especially in the USA and, more selectively, in Japan and other countries in the Far East.
He points out that at present some two-thirds of output by value is of commodity materials as opposed to the more profitable effect chemicals.
While emphasizing that commodities will continue to be vital to the overall business and that there will be no diminution in efforts to market them, his aim is to make the split nearer 50.50.
The accompanying diagram shows the ‘spaghetti bowl’ of the flowchart in a simplified way, together with the main end-uses for the products.
The latter mostly fall into or spring from one of four fundamental manufacturing areas: ethylene oxide and derivatives; carbonylation alcohols; phenol and derivatives; and amines and derivatives.
In each of these areas, ICI is determined to remain a world-scale producer at competitive cost.
‘We are putting a lot of money into these core plants to improve their efficiency and reduce variable costs,’ Ewart emphasizes, ‘It is vital that we keep them in good shape.’
Despite a number of withdrawals from the field, there are still some 15 European producers of ethylene oxide, and about seven of phenol and four each of carbonylation alcohols and amines.
On the face of it, the competition remains intense — and so it is where a product meets a similar one head on.
But nobody else is in all four of these key areas of chemical technology, and there are no new entrants into what Ewart describes as a club with an extremely high entry cost.
He compares the position with that of a pentathlon athlete, who is good enough to compete at top level in each event separately — along with quite a lot of other people.
His real advantage comes from being proficient in all of them at the same time, and this is a much rarer ability.
So that much of ICI's opportunity  comes from being able to bring together its manufacturing skills in each area to get into less competitive markets.
The organization is heavily oriented towards research, with about 150 people engaged in this area.
Some ensure that manufacturing technology remains up to date, while others are concerned with new products.
At one time, this tended to be a matter of seeking outlets for something interesting emerging from the laboratory.
This is definitely no longer the case, and Ewart emphasizes that R&T is nowadays highly geared to market pull.
Thus the same researcher not only carries out the basic work on a new product but — equally important — is out in the market-place looking for and trying to solve customer problems.
‘We are not only doing smarter things in our plants, but also looking downstream to see how we can use our products in new and more profitable ways,’ Ewart explains.
‘Our purpose is to satisfy customer requirements in industries as varied as, for example, oilfield services, detergents and the automotive field, and our whole future success depends on how well we can do this.
We have to get very close to our customers and find out what they really want.
Once we have identified a need, we can go back and work out how we can satisfy it at a price that the market is prepared to pay.
Often, too, our skills enable us to suggest at the same time how technical problems might be solved.
And this is in a nutshell what the Chemical Products business and effect chemicals are all about.’
TO ILLUSTRATE THE ABOVE philosophy, Ewart points to ‘Synprolam.’
ICI has long been a major supplier of surfactants, which are the active ingredient in detergents.
There are three types, called cationic, anionic or nonionic depending on whether they work by carrying a positive, negative or zero electric charge respectively.
for years, ICI was only in the nonionics field.
More recently, ‘Synprolam,’ which is used for cationic surfactants, was developed using feedstocks both from the carbonylation and amines plants to make long-chain fatty amines, which can then be reacted with ethylene oxide in the final manufacturing stage.
Thus three core manufacturing technologies have been brought into play in a single product to enable ICI to fill a gap.
However, this still left the anionics market unsupplied.
This was dealt with by buying the plant at Renory in Belgium already mentioned from BP Detergents — acquisitions as necessary being part of the business strategy.
Mention should be made at this point of a responsibility of the Chemical Products business which is outside of the mainstream.
This is for ICI's Physics and Radioisotope Services Group and also Tracerco in the USA.
These companies have developed great expertise in radioisotope technology for their own use over the past 30 years, and these skills, together with special instruments, are now offered by the Group to the chemical, oil and other process industries at large.
What of the future?
Despite the satisfactory turnround into clear profitability, Ewart is not complacent and reckons that there is still much to be done to secure an even more robust business through the 1990s.
He regards the closest attention to plant and product safety and to quality in all its aspects as an absolute essential, not an option.
‘We can obtain significant improvements in our performance by getting things right first time,’ he stresses.
This diverse business with its many products and markets is not simple to explain to the world, and George Ewart is greatly concerned with getting its image across.
‘We are not automatically recognised in the market-place as innovative and technically oriented, and this belies our actual achievements,’ he says.
To correct this, he commissioned a major survey to find out what his customers thought of the business and how it might be improved.
The results are now being followed up with an intensive programme for new technical literature an an advertising campaign.
Of strikingly fresh appearance, all this publicity material bears the common slogan.
‘We'll make it happen.’
In every sense, this seems to sum up very well just what the Chemical Products business is doing.
Research & Technology A BETTER BALANCE
The philosophy is to blend the right people with the best technology to support existing business and explore areas for future growth synergy.
Robin Penfold describes how this has been achieved.
RELEVANCE WITH EXCELLENCE HAS been the twofold goal of Rob Margetts, C&P's first research and operations director and of his research and technology manager, John Colchester,.
Relevance in that C&P's whole philosophy is to identify market requirements and fulfil them, and excellence in terms of using all its scientific power to achieve world leadership in selected areas.
He points out that these aims can and often do conflict in an industrial R&T organization.
In some cases, groups that are too closely targetted on short-term management objectives lose touch with the scientific community and longer-term thinking.
In others, central research laboratories produce wonderful results which are of no use to the business.
He believes that C&P is well on the way to achieving a better balance.
They inherited very considerable R&T resources from the four major ICI divisions that went to make up C&P.
With an annual R&T budget of about £70 million, the organization now employs more than 1500 people in this area, of whom about 900 are at Runcorn and 500 on Teesside.
Relevance took priority.
It was tackled by forming primary R&T groups aligned with the strategy and objectives of each of C&P's 11 businesses.
Varying in size from about 30 to 150, these teams can draw on the expertise of support groups dealing with specific areas such as material composition and structure, analysis and measurement, property characterization, electrochemical technology, process engineering and so on.
Others cover patents and information technology, and there is back-up from library and other information services.
At the same time, a third tier has been added to the R&T structure through the concept of skill centres which bring together the interests of more than one primary group working in the same field — that at Runcorn serving the acrylics and resins businesses is an example.
[But this does not mean that a primary business group has to be kept together as a unit for example, polymers research on fibres is carried out at Wilton, but that on spinning at Gloucester.]
Because scientific needs often overlap the sharp boundaries drawn for good commercial  reasons, such combined resources are not necessarily confined to C&P. thus, a further 500 researchers work for ICI Films and ICI Advanced Materials alongside C&P personnel at the Wilton Technical Centre, which is mainly concerned with materials.
Together, they cover fields of common interest such as polymers and composites.
There are many other links of a similar kind — indeed, C&P does a lot of work for other parts of ICI in areas such as catalysis and fluorine chemistry.
Margetts is sure that the scientific and technological synergy that has been developed is real and extremely valuable.
In fact, he believes that the formation of C&P has in the event been a powerful factor in enabling research to be rationalized throughout the whole ICI Group.
The interaction between scientists thus promoted has also made it easier to approach the other goal of excellence.
A conscious decision was taken to devote a proportion of the R&T budget [at present about 10 per cent]to strategic work, the remainder being funded by the businesses.
This long-term programme is drawn up by John Colchester, research and technology manager, on the basis of suggestions from all R&T personnel.
Further, each group is allocated at least some such work.
This is seen as an important means of getting away from the elitist concept and encouraging everyone to take a longer view, even if his or her immediate task involves short-term objectives.
The result has been to generate a flood of good ideas — many of which have come from people working in market-oriented sectors.
The yardstick by which each proposal is judged is its potential for success within C&P;, or it may be passed on elsewhere in the group.
With greater individual involvement, there has also been a great increase in the number of links with universities and other outside research centres.
A certain amount of work in academic laboratories is being funded by C&P.
The R&T function is divided into three sectors each of two parts which, over C&P as a whole, split more or less evenly.
Together, they show the breadth of work covered.
The first sector is concerned with maintenance of the business, covering technical service [product application work with customers, testing, etc.], and plant and process investigation [assisting plant managers, trouble-shooting and so on].
Second comes the business expansion sector, the main source of profit improvement.
This involves work on product line extensions, such as on new grades, and on process improvement.
In the latter area, incremental rises in efficiency, e.g. through the use of new catalysts or energy-saving measures, have enabled the output of some C&P plants to be increased by up to 50 per cent for a relatively small capital investment.
The third sector, in part funded by ‘strategic’ money, is concerned with completely new products, which are becoming increasingly dependent on new processes.
The creation of C&P, thinks Margetts, has led to a much wider appreciation of how its scientific and technological resources can be harnessed to develop both the overall business and its individual parts, each of which has an R&T representative on its business executive team.
The demands have accordingly become greater.
Some notable examples of success to date include improvements to the terephthalic acid plants; the development of new surfactants; major extensions to the resins and acrylics ranges using innovatory polymer systems; fibres with better finishes; and work on the hot topic of the replacement of chlorofluorocarbons, claimed by some scientists to damage the earth's ozone layer.
In the process area, there have been major developments in catalysts for polypropylene manufacture and in the technology for making chlorine and also ammonia — both very mature products indeed on the face of it but where the story has by no means ended, even after a century.
Recruitment clearly has to continue at a high level so as to maintain C&P's scientific excellence [and relevance!].
At present the needs are being met because ICI is able to offer an attractive career from all points of view.
However, the supply of graduates is expected to become tighter over coming years, partly as a result of the lower UK birthrate in the 1960s and 1970s.
Steps are being taken to ensure that this and other factors do not impair the future.
As he leaves C&P, Margetts is happy with what has been achieved so far.
‘Confidence in R&T is related to results, and demand for it is recognition of its potential.
I still meet research managers from other businesses who feel that their companies don't really understand or want them.
This is the reverse of the case in C&P, and this has been most encouraging to see.’
Chlor-Chemicals PROTECTING A LADY
Few people outside know much about a business which quietly supplies products made from salt — and is a substantial contributor to ICI profits.
Nigel Davis reports on an industry whose products protect both an ocean liner and a girl's dress.
FEW PEOPLE WAITING EXPECTANTLY to board the passenger liner QE2 for the holiday of a lifetime are likely to give much thought to the part that ICI's Chlor-chemicals business will be playing in their journey.
But those about to leave the damp and wintry British Isles for sunnier climes could do well to reflect on just two products from one of ICI's most successful businesses which derive, ultimately, from salt deposits found beneath the Cheshire countryside and the technology used to extract useful materials from it.
ICI Chlor-Chemicals takes salt solution from its brine fields and turns it first into chlorine and then into a host of downstream products.
Over 100 million men's suits and many other items of clothing are dry-cleaned using ICI solvents.
And now, Chlor-Chemicals lis using its electro-chemical technology expertise to protect over 100 ships, including the QE2, from corrosion.
Although it receives little publicity outside the ICI Group, Chlor-chemicals is one of ICI's longest standing and most consistently successful businesses.
With headquarters in Runcorn, it controls the Company's salt deposits and the chemicals produced from that salt, including chlorine and caustic soda, chlorinated solvents, chlorinated paraffins and other products such as hypochlorite bleach, water treatment chemicals and hydrogen gas.
The management and control of ICI's large UK salt deposits became the responsibility of Chlor-Chemicals shortly after ICI chemicals & Polymers was established.
Salt solution is extracted from three brine fields and is used to produce both chlorine and caustic soda) chlor-alkali — which is Chlor-Chemicals' largest business.
Rock salt is also mined from the only dedicated salt mine in the UK at Winsford.
Most rock salt [about 90 per cent of production]is sold by ICI to local authorities for use on the country's roads during the wintertime.
And for two years a de-icing service run jointly with the UK Department of Transport has advised local authorities on proper road maintenance in freezing weather and helped promote safer driving.
About £60m worth of salt was sold by ICI to outside customers in 1987.
Although much was spread on British roads, some found its way on to the nation's dinner tables through stores' own label brands.
Chlor-Chemicals' single-stream vacuum evaporation salt plant at Weston Point, Runcorn, is the largest in the world and produces undried vacuum, pure dried vacuum and granulated salt.
Low density, dendritic salt has been pioneered by ICI.
Produced at Winsford, this is sold principally to Nigeria where it is able to withstand highlevels of humidity.
Central to Chlor-Chemicals business is the production of chlorine and caustic soda [chloralkali]from brine.
This is carried out in relatively modern mercury and diaphragm electrochemical cells and consumes huge amounts of electricity — more than enough to power the city of Liverpool.
In Europe, chlor-alkali production is concentrated in the UK and at Wilhelmshaven in West germany.
ICI is Europe's second largest chlor-alkali producer and number three in the world.
Outside Europe it produces chlor-alkali at C-I=L Inc in Canada and ICI Australia.
ICI produces about 2 Mt of chlorine each year and this is used both in-house and by other chemical producers to make a variety of different types of chemicals, including polymers, solvents, rubber chemicals, agrochemicals and pharmaceuticals.
Large quantities are also used to treat drinking water supplies and in the power generation industry.
About 85 per cent of the 1.2 Mt of chlorine that Chlor-Chemicals produces in Europe each year is used by ICI itself and by businesses in which ICI has an interest.
Substantial quantities are sold to the ICI/EniChem joint venture, EVC, to produce polyvinyl chloride [PVC]while the remainder is used to make chlorinated fluorocarbons [CPCs], chloromethanes, solvents, polyurethanes, ‘Cereclor’ chlorinated paraffins and ‘Alloprene’chlorinated rubbers.
Efficient cell room management during chlor-alkali production is vital to the success of this business, not only because of the large amounts of energy used but also because of the number of downstream businesses which rely on it.
Likewise, efficient marketing of both chlorine and caustic soda is essential as demand for the two chemicals is rarely in balance.
Caustic soda is used widely in industry and is sold in bulk to the paper, textile, soap and detergent and alumina industries, to name but a few.
Most caustic soda is used in the production of aluminium and ICI is one of the major importers into the world's largest alumina-producing country, Australia.
ICI's CHLOR-CHEMICALS BUSINESS actually comprises five separate businesses; Salt, Chlor-alkali, Solvents, Effect Products and Electrochemical Technology.
It also includes the Brinefield and many of the Power Services assets of ICI in the UK.
In 1987, turnover reached about £500m.
Certain sectors may suffer in a bad year, for instance, salt sales may plummet if the UK has a mild winter [as has been the case in 1987/8], but product diversity usually ensures that the business as a whole is more robust and less cyclical than might at first seem apparent.
This robustness has been proved over the past few years even through the economic downturns of the early 1980s.
The increasing internationalization of Chlor-Chemicals, both in marketing and production also helps provide a buffer against economic uncertainties.
Today, over 5000 people are employed worldwide in plants as far afield at Wilhelmshaven, West Germany, Chung Li in Taipei, Lostock in the UK and Emeryville in California.
Packed chlorine is used to treat the water used in almost 70 per cent of Britain's homes while about 50 per cent of the household bleach sold in the UK contains Effect Products sodium hypochlorite.
The same chemical is also used in the pulp and paper, brewing, dairy and agrochemicals industries, and also to purify water used in swimming pools.
Caustic potash, produced in membrane electrochemical cells developed by ICI, is being sold now as a higher value-added effect alkali.
Anhydrous caustic soda, hydrogen gas and phosgene, all well established product areas, are being developed to produce maximum returns.
Chlorinated solvents have been produced by ICI on Merseyside for over 50 years but new ways to develop and expand the business in the face of stiff international competition are continually being sought.
Now, more often than not, solvent-cleaning systems are sold as a package to customers rather than just the solvents themselves.
‘Perklone’ and ‘Arklone’are used in dry-cleaning outlets throughout the UK but similar products, although a little more specialized, are marketed to large electronics manufacturers and precision-engineering companies.
Although the UK and Europe account for two-thirds of sales of the business, growth in the USA, Far East and Japan in particular is seen as being very important.
Use of ICI's ‘Cereclor’ chlorinated paraffins rose rapidly throughout the 1960s and 1970s in cables, footwear, vinyl wall coverings, flooring and in a wide range of domestic articles.
Now operated within Effect Products, this business is still considerable, with new opportunities arising in markets in the developing world, but the product range for sales in Western Europe has been broadened over the past 10 years or so with the development of more specialized products for use, for example, in carbonless copying paper.
The Electrochemical Technology business has been built up since 1981 to capitalize on ICI's expertise in chlor-alkali production and electrochemistry. the FM21 membrane cell has been sold since that year, mainly as part of a chlor-alkali production package, but recent developments have led to its use in the manufacture of more complex speciality or ‘effect’ chemicals.
Eighteen FM21 membrane cell plants have been sold, to date, acros the world.
Coupled with the FM21 cell development, the Electrochemical Technology business has also grown its expertise in electrode-coating technology.
Using this technology, electrodes have been coated for use in an extremely wide variety of applications, including the cathodic protection of oil rigs and reinforced concrete bridges, and for use in electro-dialysis, metal plating and effluent treatment.
TO MAINTAIN PROFITABILITY in the face of growing international competition Chlor-Chemicals has to become increasingly market-driven.
And general manager, Bob Hunt, foresees a great future, particularly through the development of higher added-value and high-technology products.
To support this, the commitment to annual expenditure of over £6m in research and technology will continue.
Substantial growth is possible in Electrochemical technology, Bob Hunt believes.
Today, this business has a turnover of only £10m a year but there are some interesting new products in the pipeline.
Most of these products and packages will move ICI further away from traditional chlor-alkali technology and towards the new electrode coatings and membrane cell technology area such as in situ water treatment and cathodic corrosion protection.
Towards the end of 1986 this part of the business was expanded with the acquisition of the electrode coatings manufacturer, Marston Palmer in Wolverhampton., UK, and by the purchase of a controlling interest in a company in California, Ebonex Technologies, which has developed a conducting ceramic.
This ceramic could play an important part in the development of electrode technology over the coming years.
The electrochemical technology business will be expanded by further small acquisitions, or joint ventures, Hunt says, and by the bringing to market of products already in the ICI development chain.
Elements from the Effect Products business are also ripe for expansion.
Hunt believes, through more aggressive marketing and, possibly, acquisitions.
the full extent of uses of potassium hydroxide, which is currently used to produce ‘Victrex’ thermoplastics, have not been fully developed; This chemical could be used as the starting material for the development of a range of potassium salts, Hunt believes.
Similarly, phosgene, which now is only merchanged, could be used in-house to produce a range of higher value-added chemicals.
A move further towards the end-user is being forged by linking the chlorine, hypochlorite and electrochemical technology businesses.
By combining product sales and technical expertise in these two areas, ICI will have all the elements for a water treatment business.
According to Bob Hunt, the ICI Chlor-Chemicals business must aim not only to maintain and enhance its competitive position in traditional high-tonnage products, but also to develop subsidiary businesses through a combination of increasing technical sophistication and aggressive international marketing.
Higher value-added products will doubtless become more important but the business will also move closer to the consumer.
As is already happening in electrochemical technology, the provision of product packages, backed by technical expertise and know-how, could well point the way to the future.
Acrylics NO RESTING ON THEIR LAURELS
for more than 50 years ICI acrylic materials — sheet and mooulding powders — have been used and enjoyed worldwide, Ken Barrlett reports on a business looking forward to the next 50 years.
A TURNOVER OF AROUND 3200 MILLION a year is big business in anyone's terms.
And that's about the current size of ICI's business in acrylics.
Most readers of Innovation will associate ICI with acrylics through the plastics ‘Perspex’ and ‘Diakon,’which ICI has been making, publicizing and selling for over 50 years — ever since one ICI chemist produced and patented polymethyl methacrylate and another devised a practical and economic process for the manufacture of the monomer on a commercial scale.
During those 50 years ICI's acrylic plastics have been used by thousands of customers for tens of thousands of applications and current sales worldwide are of the order of 60,000 tonnes a year.
But there is far more to ICI's acrylics interest than just the plastics.
With the recent establishment of C&P Ltd, all of ICI's interests in acrylics are fully integrated as a single Acrylics Business [which wasn't always the case].
Philip Felcey, general manager of the new Acrylics Business, has no doubt that the current organization is good for both ICI and its customers.
‘Within the group,’ he says, ‘we have already seen benefits in both operational and strategic terms, enabling us to operate more efficiently and plan more effectively.
And the benefits to customers are beginning to come through.
Our shorter lines of internal communication are leading to better service; and our co-ordinated and increased research and technology effort will lead to innovation and product improvement.’
The responsibility of the Acrylics Business begins with the production of methyl methacrylate at Billingham inn the UK from raw materials all on ICI's own range and deriving primarily from naphtha.
[In passing it must be mentioned that one of those raw materials, hydrocyanic acid, is also used for another very important material in the portfolio of the Acrylics Business, sodium cyanide, the main use of which is in gold extraction processes.
Over 95 per cent of ICI's sales of sodium cyanide are outside the UK — in more than 60 countries — and it is C&P Ltd's second largest export earner].
With a capacity of over 100,000 tonnes of methyl methacrylate, ICI is the second biggest producer in Europe, fifth in the world.
The major part of the output is used within ICI, chiefly for acrylic plastics, paints and a group of products called functional methacrylates.
The term ‘functional methacrylates’ embraces a wide variety of methacrylic esters with a wide range of important industrial uses — in surface coatings, adhesives and printing inks, as oil additives and as flocculating agents in the treatment of sewage and industrial effluent.
‘The man in the street has almost certainly never heard of functional methacrylates,’ says Trevor Childs, methacrylates manager in the Acrylics Business, ‘but his life would be very different without them.
Most of the uses of those currently available are firmly established, but there is scope for new products and prospects for growth are exciting.
It is possible to tailor functional methacrylates to donate desired properties to the products they are usd in and we are continuing to add to our range.’
Important [but unrecognized]though they may be to the man in the street, functional methacrylates are no more than a small side-branch in ICI's acrylic chain.
The main line is the methyl methacrylate that goes into paints, surface coating resins and, above all, plastics.
Worldwide business in acrylic plastics is highly competitive.
ICI is by no means the only producer — not even the largest [third, in fact, after the Rohm/Cyro Group and Rohm and Haas].
But ICI reckons that in a number of key areas it has the edge over the competition.
‘We have more experience, and our technology and marketing are better,’ says Philip Felcey.
He cites ‘Perspex’ cast acrylic sheet as an example.
The original method of producing acrylic sheet, which involved casting a thickened and part-polymerized methyl methacrylate syrup in plate glass cells and completing polymerization by heating in an oven, was devised in the 1930s.
It may not sound a very high-tech process, but it is still the one used today for sheet of the very highest quality.
There have, of course, been many developments and improvements in the cell-casting method over the years and, while details are not disclosed, ICI has no doubt that its latest version of the process gives a better product than any other.
Customers agree, apparently, for cast ‘Perspex’ is able to command premium prices in the market-place.
Acrylic sheet has a notable combination of valuable properties — toughness, rigidity, lightness, water, chemical and weathering resistance, excellent surface finish, easy  shapability and virtually infinite colour range — and it is from these that its major uses arise.
Chief among them are signs and fascias, which have changed the appearance of Europe's streets and shopping malls; baths and sanitary ware [a fast-growing market which ICI pioneered and now dominates]; glazing [including aircraft glazing]; and domelights.
Besides these there is an enormous variety of miscellaneous applications ranging from architectural models through elegant furniture to engineering components.
In the early 1970s a few producers [through none in europe]adopted a continuous method of producing acrylic shet by casting the thickened monomer on to a moving stainless steel band, but this was not very suiccessful.
Then came a process which gave a product that quickly made an impact on the market — the extrusion of sheet from polymer granules.
Martin Casey, ‘Perspex’ business manager in the Acrylics Business describes it: ‘Because extruded sheet is made by a continuous process that lends itself to long runs, it is offered in only a limited range of colours and thicknesses.
It does not equal cell cast sheet in surface finish [because of the method of production]nor in physical properties [because of its lower molecular weight].
On the other hand, this lower molecular weight is an advantage in some applications since it means that extruded sheet thermoforms more easily than cast sheet.’
In its early years, extruded acrylic sheet, particularly in thin clear form, rapidly established a position in the market for applications for which surface finish is not important.
‘We produce extruded sheet to complement our cell cast range,’ says Dr Casey, ‘And have reently introduced a new variety —‘Perspex’TW — which is rapidly establishing itself as a rigid transparent building material for roofs and non-structural walls.’
All told, ICI has capacity for about 25,000 tonnes a year of cast ‘Perspex’ and about 8000 tonnes of extruded — all of it at Darwen, Lancashire.
The main distribution centres are at nearby Blackpool and at Rozenburg, Holland.
In the UK, supply to the final user is, in the main, through a number of major stockists — a system which is rapidly being developed in Western Europe, generally.
It was a classicist, no doubt, who translated the Latin-derived ‘Perspex’ into the Greek-derived ‘Diakon’as the trade name for polymethyl methacrylate resins in particle form, which ICI introduced inn 1934.
Today, production is of the order of 25,000 tonnes per year — at Billingham and Wilton in the UK and Rozenburg in Holland.
Part of the output is sold as compounded granules, clear or coloured, and part in the form of small ‘beads’— clear or as dry-coloured blends.
The earliest uses of ‘Diakon’ were for the injection moulding of television implosion guards and telephone handsets and dialling rings.
Those applications have now disappeared but have been replaced by a wide range of others which utilize the material's excellent weatherability, clarity and surface hardness — for example, automotive rear lights, lighting fittings and drawing instruments, produced by injection moulding; and sheet and profiles, mainly for the sign, lighting and building industries, produced by extrusion.
The ICI polymerization technology which gives the ‘bead’ form of ‘Diakon’leads to a range of speciality acrylic resins.
These include grades for prosthetic applications such as false teeth and false eyes, and grades for such highly specialized applications as glass interleaving and the viscosity modification of tars and adhesives.
There is also a range of  emulsion-polymerized acrylic processing aids, used to improve the production and surface finish of rigid PVC extrusions.
Joe Longland, ‘Diakon’ manager in the Acrylics Business sees a very healthy future for the product.
‘Even a mature product such as‘Diakon’ offers scope for exciting new developments to extend its range of applications,’he says, ‘We have recently introduced impact modified grades with improved toughness and craze resistance, which are being used for such things as food mixer bowls, blood filters and tooth-brush handles, and a research programme we are engaged in has produced acrylics with very much higher softening points — likely candidates for automotive head lamp lenses and other lighting applications.’
ICI has been responsible for many major developments in acrylics since the 1930s.
In 1983 came another one — the introduction of ‘Astrite’ filled acrylic dispersions.
‘Asterlite’ is a ceramic-like material and so far it has only one major use — kitchen sinks.
It was introduced to the market at just the right time, when demand for coloured sinks of complex shape that could be integrated into an overall design scheme was just beginning to emerge.
Stainless steel, the dominant material in the sink market, could not meet those needs: ‘Asterite’ could, and its sales have grown very rapidly in the few years since its introduction.
Acrylics Business general manager, Philip Felcey, forecasts continued rapid growth for it and similar products into the 1990s.
‘The market for filled acrylic dispersions,’ he says, ‘will eventually be as big as that for sheet or resins.
ICI has important patents in the field, covering a number of different monomers and fillers and a variety of techniques for their use and we intend to exploit the position by developing a range of filled dispersions and materials based on them.’
In fact, the first such new material was introduced in November 1987 —‘Avron,’ impact resistant sheet material with a feel like marble and a smooth satin surface texture, available in a well chosen range of colours.’
It is being promoted to designers, architects and interior decorators for wall cladding, working surfaces in kitchens, hotels, shops, banks and offices and for shaped articles such as washbasins.
It is early days yet, but Felcey has high expectations of ‘Avron.’
INDEED, HE IS VERY OPTIMISTIC ABOUT the future of ICI's Acrylics Business as a whole.
‘In broad terms the acrylics are mature products,’ he says, ‘So the general expectation must be that they are likely to grow at much the same rate as the economy of the industrial world as a whole.
But there are opportunities for developments that will push the growth rate up — for ICI, at least.
‘Asterlite’ and ‘Avron’are cases in point.
Overall, we are in a very strong position technically — especially in our cast sheet technology, in colour technology and now in the field of filled dispersions.
Our research and technology work is second to none and now, with the integration in C&P Ltd of all aspects of our interests in acrylics, it is even more efficient.
There are several interesting new developments in the pipeline which could lead to the introduction of more advanced grades of acrylic plastics, opening up new fields of use to them and increasing the rate of growth appreciably.’
Whether or not Felcey's hopes for growth from new applications of new grades of acrylic plastics are fully realized remains to be seen.
But one thing is apparent.
After more than 50 years in the acrylics business ICI has no intention of resting on its laurels but rather of seeking to earn more.
Plastics MAKING POLYMES PERFORM FOR CUSTOMERS
Looking after the needs of customers means that performance plastics sold by ICI have to have special properties built into them to make them competitive and effective.
Ken Bartlett examines the qualities of the performance polymers.
ICI's PLASTICS BUSINESS IS VERY clear about the sort of materials that it makes and sells.
Its major plastics —‘Propathene’ polypropylene and ‘Melinar’polyethylene terephthalate — are not simple commodity products, although they are made and sold in large volumes.
They are performance polymers relying upon considerable ICI technology for their properties which enable ICI customers and the customers' customers to produce end products with functionality in a wide range of applications, and end-use properties which are best achieved, both technically and cost-effectively, by using ‘Propathene’ or ‘Melinar’as raw materials.
In both, ICI employs world-scale state-of-the-art technology, offers a competitive range of products and is recognized for the application development work it undertakes in co-operation with customers.
Polypropylene is by no means a simple material.
There are various methods for its manufacture and it can be produced in various forms, chief of which are homopolymers [propylene alone]and copolymers with ethylene in which the ethylene constituent can be located either randomly in the polymer chain or in controlled blocks along it.
The properties of the polymer, and hence the end-uses for which it is most suitable vary, of course, with the type.
ICI has been in the polypropylene business since the early 1960s and currently has capacity for 300 kt per year, part at Wilton in the UK, part at Rozenburg in Holland.
Two methods of production are used — a well established and proven diluent process and a more recent gas-phase process, originally licensed from BASF and first taken into use by ICI eight years ago.
It has recently been announced that the gas-phase plants at Wilton and Rozenburg are to be expanded and uprated — at a cost of more than £20 million — to bring ICI's total production capability to over 400 kta by early 1989 — 300 kta gas phase, the balance by the diluent process.
For many years, ICI has offered one of the broadest polypropylene product ranges in Europe to serve an ever-widening variety of uses.
Since it began using the gas phase process in 1979, ICI has been at the forefront of process control and development and has succeeded in covering the whole product range with this new technology.
Emphasis has been on the development of premium products such as block and random copolymers, although the gas phase technology is also naturally suited to homopolymer manufacture.
The expanded and uprated gas phase plants will be operated with ICI's variant of the latest generation catalyst system which, in the words of Tony Mash, ‘Propathene’ commercial manager, represents a sound platform for future growth and development of the business.
‘The potential is there to optimize the technology and create new products,’ he adds.
Polypropylene has earned its place as a large volume high growth polymer [11 per cent per annum compound for the past give years]because of its attractive balance of properties, its ability to be processed by a wide variety of techniques, and its competitive economics and cost effectiveness.
Much of its early growth came from jute replacement in carpet backing and from the replacement of wood in the materials handling and furniture sectors.
To these have now been added a vast range of applications in fibres, films, housewares, rigid packaging and building.
ICI supplies large quantities of ‘Propathene’ for all of those applications [including, of course, its own ‘Propafilm’]and expects their growth to continue [though perhaps at a slower rate than in the immediate past].
Tony Mash expects to see considerable growth in applications requiring speciality materials — block copolymers with their high-impact strength, random copolymers with enhanced transparency, flexibility and gloss and high-flow homopolymers for the fine fibre and rigid packaging markets.
And it is just such materials that ICI's uprated gas phase plants using the new generation catalysts will provide.
‘Much future growth will come from continued substitution of older materials in the automotive, domestic appliance and packaging sectors,’ says Mash.
‘There is a wealth of opportunity for the replacement of metal and complicated polymer blends with polypropylene in automotive applications.’
ICI's strength in the polypropylene market lies not only in its manufacturing technology which enables it to produce materials specially adapted to customer's needs but also in the integrated structure of Chemicals & Polymers Limited.
Through the Petrochemicals Business the Plastics Business has an assured supply of feedstock — no minor benefit in these days when availability of propylene is tight.
And through the Company's Materials Centre at Wilton it has the backing of a large, highly qualified team of scientists and technologisdts working to develop new products and processes and to solve customers' specific problems.
‘Melinar’ polyethylene terephthalate, the other polymer within C&P's Plastics Business, also has the backing of the Materials Centre, of course.
And, again like polypropylene, its basic materials — pure terephthalic acid and ethylene glycol — are produced within C&P and its manufacturing plants at Wilton in the UK and Rozenburg in Holland.
ICI has been in the polyethylene terephthalate business since the 1940s when it began to develop the material as a fibre —‘Terylene’— following its invention by two British chemists.
Later came the introduction of polyethylene terephthalate film —‘Melinex’— for the packaging, photographic and printing industries and as a drawing office material.
It was not until the 1970s that the use of polyethylene terephthalate as a polymer for the rigid packaging market began, but since then its growth has been explosive.
The first stage in the manufacture of ‘Melinar’ is the production of base polyethylene terephthalate, for which ICI has a European capacity of about 120 kt, part at Wilton and part at Rozenburg.
Much of that base polymer, particularly from Rozenburg, is transferred to the Films and Fibres Business for their end products.
The remainder, currently 53 kta at Wilton and 10 kta at Rozenburg, is further developed by increasing its molecular weight in a solid phase polymerization process, into ‘Melinar’— a product with, currently, one predominant application, namely the manufacture of PET bottles.
The use of polyethylene terephthalate on a commercial scale for bottles — by a process known by the clumsy name of injection stretch blow moulding — began in the USA in 1977, and by 1979, when ICI in Europe took up the development, American consumption had risen to 140 kta.
Polyethylene terephthalate is, it could be argued, the ideal bottle-making material — immensely strong, very light in weight, with glass-like clarity and excellent gas barrier properties, pure and inert, capable of being produced to any desired shape and in any colour.
It is these properties that have accounted for the explosive growth of the material in the past few years — at about 15 per cent per year in Continental Western Europe, according to Phil Bruce, ‘Melinar’ commercial manager in C&P Ltd.
Starting with carbonated soft drinks [which is still the largest sector]the market has expanded to include mineral water, wine, beer, edible oils, cosmetics, chemicals and spirits.
Bruce is particularly proud of ICI's role in opening up the spirits market.
‘The idea wasn't greeted with much enthusiasm at first,’ he says, ‘But we continued plugging away at the distillers and mounted a back-selling campaign to the airline industry, pointing out what a boon light-weight ‘Melinar’containers would be to them for their in-flight miniatures and duty-free supplies.
The fact that such leading brands as Remy Martin cognac, Bell's Whisky and Bols Gin now use ‘Melinar’ containers shows we have done a good job througout Europe.’
Bruce is aware that with something like 85 per cent of ‘Melinar’ going into bottles he faces the marketing man's nightmare, the one-product material.
But all the signs are that although bottles will continue to be the major end product for ‘Melinar’ and will continue to gain business, mainly at the expense of glass, other very important applications will also develop.
Markets already exist for ‘Melinar’ PET in wide-mouth containers for foodstuffs and cosmetics as well as for oven-to-table containers for foodstuffs [made from thermoformed crystalline, opaque ‘Melinar’foil].
Further opportunities are growing in non-oriented amorphous PET foil for food storage trays and blister packaging, in aerosol containers and in injection moulded or extruded engineering components.
‘In addition to doublle-digit growth for use in bottling, I can see a market for 50-70kta of polyethylene terephthalate in Europe in these new applications by 1990,’ says Bruce, ‘And as a successful outcome of the research we are doing to produce materials of high-temperature resistance [which would take us into the hot-fill container market]and materials of improved gas barrier properties could add considerably to that.’
On future demand for polyethylene terephthalate in Western Europe, ICI forsees a doubling of the 1987 consumption of 160 kta by the early 1990s.
With such a substantial growth opportunity, ICI, currently the largest European manufacturer, plans to keep well ahead of its competitors.
Its intention to increase ‘Melinar’ capacity at Rozenburg by 6000 tonnes in 1988, to give overall capacity of 70 kta, has recently been announced, and plans for further expansion are well advanced.
With significant investment currently in both ‘Propathene’ and ‘Melinar,’it is clear that C&P regards its Plastics Business as one of its strengths.
The outlook for ‘Propathene’ and ‘Melinar’is very positive and exciting.
It is the responsibility of the Business to ensure that its own profitability pursues the above-average growth of its lkprincipal markets.
To do that the changing needs of customers has to be met with regard to materials, marketing and services by anticipating their future needs and working with them to achieve these objectives.
ICI's Plastics Business is continuously striving to improve its performance in meeting customer needs.
The current round of investment is a strong vote of confidence from the main ICI Group that the Plastics Business will continue to build on recent success and go from strength to strength.’
Catalysts & Technology Licensing THE MAHARAJAH'S ELEPHANT
Although they are vital in making 90 per cent of all chemical processes work, catalysts remain an esoteric mystery.
It needs an elephant to explain why catalysts are so essential.
Stuart Birch reports.
THE PROBLEM WAS TRICKY: AT BEST IT was going to concentrate minds for a very long time indeed.
It involved the will of a wealthy Indian and his last wishes concerning the sharing of his elephants between his sons.
The eldest was to receive half of them, his younger brother a third and the youngest member of the family a ninth.
But the number of elephants involved was 17 — not easily divisible in those proportions.
Fortunately, a wise old Maharajah was drawn into the deliberations.
He ordered the 17 elephants lined up and his own fine beast was ranged alongside them, making 18.
‘Now,: he said, ‘Half the elephants to the eldest son, so take nine; a third to the middle son, so take six — and a ninth to the youngest, take two.
That is 17 elephants — and I take mine back.’
‘Mine is the catalyst!’
The story may be apocryphal but it neatly illustrates the role of the catalyst.
If you cast your mind back to school chemistry lessons, you may recall that a catalyst is a substance able to make a chemical reaction go faster without itself altering that reaction or undergoing change.
it helps, without getting directly involved — rather like the Maharajah's elephant which doubtless saved years of wrangling.
That is the basic role of ICI; s catalysts business although it uses a shade more technology than the Maharajah's elephant.
For ICI Catalysts and Technology Licensing [C&TL]can offer services that not only speed up and enhance chemical processes but also provide countries with the ability to build highly efficient industrial plants that play a key part in enhancing food production.
Catalysts are rather esoteric thins which look — in the form industry uses them — either like macaroni or granules and they come in any colour of the rainbow.
They are used to produce 90 per cent of all chemical products at some stage in their manufacture.
They can operate at temperatures up to 1,000°C and very high pressures; and they may be in constant use for 10 years.
They are technically very advanced, they must be utterly reliable and effective for they are vital to industry.
Without them, some processes would be impossible and most would be economic absurdities.
By the early part of the 20th century it had been discovered that by using an iron catalyst, hydrogen and nitrogen could be reacted at 400°C and at more than 100 atmospheres of pressure to create ammonia.
And by 1923 ICI's forebears had built an ammonia plant at Billingham with a capacity of 30 tonnes a day to produce agricultural fertilizers.
Knowledge and expertise in catalysis and high-pressure technology steadily improved and in the 1930s ICI developed a process for converting coal into petrol which involved using what were the forerunners of today's primary reforming catalysts of nickel and supported nickel.
The achievement was really the beginning of ICI's commercial catalyst business.
Today, the worldwide value of the total catalyst market is about $2 billion — and the value of goods deriving from it about $200 billion.
ICI's catalysts are used extensively in the production of ammonia, hydrogen and methanol, although it is developing markets in refining petrochemicals and organic synthesis.
‘One of our strengths is that we have been making catalysts for many years and only market those which we have used in our own plants,’ explained Dr Barrie Pearce, commercial assistant for ICI Catalysts at Billingham, Cleveland.
‘so the customer knows that he is getting an excellent product proven to our own satisfaction.’
ICI's ability to license its technology means that its catalysts have been used in more than 60 countries, many making a vital contribution to food production in areas of the world where need is greatest.
About 85 per cent of the products, know-how and services of C&TL are exported.
Despite the high technology generated by the industry, most modern ammonia plants have been designed so that they are relatively simple to operate and use minimal manpower.
Before World War II, an ammonia plant would demand a workforce of 1000 or more.
Today, says Pearce, the figure is about 10.
The reason for that is the ability to use natural gas as a feedstock.
In the 1930s, it was only the Americans who had natural gas.
But now it is widely available and is used to create about 95 per cent of the world's ammonia.
The gas passes through various catalysts of differing shapes according to their ‘duty,’ to purify it and then speed and enhance the chemical processes in making ammonia.
Most of the catalysts are based on transition metals  like nicke, copper and zinc molybdenum with calcium aluminate or aluminium oxide as an inert support.
Catalysts are produced by ICI in the UK, in the USA and in India.
The advent of natural gas for use in the ammonia process occurred in the early 1970s.
Ten years before that, ICI had come up with a world first with its Steam Naphtha reforming Process for the production of ammonia, methanol, hydrogen and town gas.
More than 400 plants using the technology were licensed and again it was ICI-developed catalysts that made it all possible.
‘the world beat a path to our door,’ said Pearce, ‘We were supplying the technology and the catalysts world-wide.
It really established us as a catalyst business.’
However, little remains static in the chemical industry and, as natural gas became available ICI had a new challenge and new opportunities for selling catalysts and for licensing its technology.
The strength of this business lies in its process design creativity and its operating expertise.
It has been able to anticipate requirements of operators around the world.
FOLLOWING THE ENERGY CRISIS of the 1970s, ICI developed its AMV ammonia process, which boasts low capital cost, low energy usage, and flexibility among its attractions.
Technology for that has been licensed to Canada, China and Australia.
Latest breakthrough, though, is the Low Cost Ammonia [LCA]process.
‘We have re-examined the design economics and whole principle of ammonia production,’ said Pearce, ‘The result is a design that gives a small plant all the economic advantages of very large-scale plants.
We are building two ourselves of our Severnside, Bristol, site — and already there is great interest in the concept, particularly from countries like India whose infrastructure restricts distribution of fertilizers from a plant to a radius of perhaps 150 kms; large-scale plants can result in over-production in these situations, but our LCA ammonia process is just what we believe is needed, with a production rate of about 500 tonnes a day instead of over 1000 tonnes from a full-sized plant.
In many instances, it will lead to a substantial saving.
‘When we supply technology of this kind, we license it and a contractor builds the plant.
It is high technology made easy.
Our skills are invention; we supply the technology and the catalysts — and the service which ensures continued efficiency.’
More than 300 people are employed by C&TL; a major strength of its business is the reputation of its operations and its staff.
Now it wants to expand from what is a relatively narrow base to create other catalyst uses and processes while maintaining and even enhancing quality.
General manager of C&TL is Ken Arkley: ‘Our first priority has been to devise technology and catalysts for our own, internal use.
And only after they had been proven would we sell them to others.
We intend to make maximum use of our special skills for creating technology and developing catalysts.
We are now actively exploring new markets where they can be applied.
‘As an example, we have come up with a de-sulphurization system to prevent damage to natural gas pipelines and a North Sea gas rig has had the equipment installed.
With this system, we have substantially reduced the capital cost compared with other processes and made it easy to integrate into existing equipment.
‘We are the only catalyst producer with a strong process technology base of our own with operating experience in our field.’
Arkley stresses the need for quality: ‘The customer is buying confidence when he buys our technology and our catalysts.
They are relatively expensive items — but not compared to plant downtime.
So a customer wants to be sure they will work; we can offer a very high standard plus a technical back-up.
‘Technological capability is of great interest to the customer but above all he wants a quality product at what is perceived to be value for money.
Both our catalysts and our technology licensing opportunities offer that in large measure.’
Resins & Coatings Intermediates OUR TARGET The Growth Niches
THE CAREFULLY CONTRIVED atmosphere of tranquillity that greets the visitor to ICI's chemicals & Polymers headquarters at Runcorn in Cheshire, extends well beyond the carpeted and muted calm of the main reception area.
It reached — by way of considerable corridors along which the carpet gives way to an altogether appropraite covering of coated vinyl tiles — the general manager of the C&P Resins and Coatings Intermediates Business Group.
The well ordered tranquillity is genuine enough.
But it is also deceptive.
It conceals, both in Adrian Bromley himself and the enterprize he controls, a powerful dynamic which, in a relatively short period of time, appears to have created the potential to make it something of a jewel in the crown of the C&P operations.
Major growth, international development, innovations in many areas, a strong customer-driven marketing strategy, backed by precisely targeted, high-calibre research and technical services, plus a clear vision of the future in an expanding but highly competitive sector.
All of these things are already well established features of the Resins Group [a convenient contraction of its full title].
But…to begin at the beginning!
The Resins Group, subsequently to become part of the Chemicals & Polymers Group, was formed in 1985 by bringing together three separate elements — the ICI Mond Division's resin and filler activities and two polyvinyl companies acquired as part of Beatrice Chemicals.
This created a business grouping, with a spread of research and technical facilities and sales operations, from which it was possible to forge a rationalized enterprise to attack international markets for a range of products to meet specific requirements in a spread of user industries — acrylics, urethanes, polyesters and a variety of novel surface-coatings and adhesive polymers.
To illustrate the group's sales philosophy, Adrian Bromley sketches a long-sided, short-based isosceles triangle which, he says, represents the worldwide total market for resins, currently worth around $45 billion.
He then shades in a substantial area of the triangle's pinnacle, and explains, ‘That's our target area; the selected, high value-added, growth niches.
They demand an advanced level of quality technical sales support and the tailoring of research and technology to meet customer requirements.
And that's where our strength lies.’
The spread of user markets is a broad one, including industrial and heavy duty coatings, the automotive industries, traffic marking paints, inks, floorcare, adhesives, decorative paints, sealants, mastics and fillers, electronics and telecommunications, photocopying, filled plastics and elastomers, cement coatings and additives, textiles and leather.
The business group's international marketing effort is sourced by six plants in Western Europe [three of them in the UK], three in the United States, one in Singapore and one in Mexico.
It is supported by new business operations in Canada, the Far East and South America.
When Adrian Bromley constructs a model of his group's activities, its starting point is the customer at the apex of the triangle, with the sales applications and technical staff immediately below.
Other tiers of activity and management follow with senior management, including himself, as the base line.
This is not false modesty.
it is a clear statement of what he sees as the group's essential mission — to construct and operate a customer-driven enterprise.
He says: ‘In the sectors we are targeting, the need is for a highly specialist sales force which can identify and respond to ever-changing demands.
It is essentially a problem-solving exercise in which there must be a close relationship between sales effort on the ground and the ability of the applications and research staff to come up with the answers, within the boundaries of what is commercially viable.
That's the reason why almost all of our R and T activity is specifically targeted at demands which have been identified in the markets.’
Those demands, he says, will constantly take the group into new areas and he sees a liklihood that major parts of the product range will change completely at least every decade.
Environmental factors, to which product users themselves must respond, are one important element in the pace of change.
In this area, perhaps the most significant development in which the Resins Group has already achieved considerable advances, is the increasing trend to eliminate solvents through the substitution of water-borne products.
Bromley says: ‘This is a road we have to go down because, once again, it is the clear demand of the market.
On environmental grounds, use of solvent-based product is falling and our job is to come up with the right alternative across a whole spectrum of end uses.’
Another key area is that of alternatives to heat curing of coatings.
It is one in which the group achieved a major breakthrough only last year.
In the high growth area of optical fibres it produced not only a new coating to protect the delicate fibres themselves but the technology for continuous [and cheap]ultra-violet curing during the production process.
This is something that Adrian Bromley proudly quotes as an archetype of the group's customer-driven ethic.
He says: ‘What we came up with was not initially a new product but a ‘new product model.’
Something with which we could go to the customer and say, ‘This is the sort of thing it is now possible to do.
Now you tell us how you would like us to adapt this model to meet your specific requirements.’
Out of that approach came both the new product itself and the technology for its application.
It is the way we intend to proceed in a whole range of different market areas.’
The growth of the Resins Group over its, so far, brief history as a business entity, can be measured by a number of different bench marks, quite apart from the most obvious one of its international market share in which there is a healthy upwards trend.
The construction of new plants — in the US, Spain and Holland and the sanctioning of others — is one indicator.
Another is the full implementation of an integrated research and technology programme for the entire group and so, too, is the completion of preparations for the start-up of a new European sales organization.
However, perhaps the most telling, if simplistic, feature is the fact that the group's total workforce has expanded by some 25 per cent to toal about 1000, of which roughly 300 are employed in the UK.
Recruitment has, to a large extent, centred on the key areas of sales and research staff.
The percentage growth in both sales and group profits over the period from 1985 are impressive but its objectives to the end of this decade and half way through the next are even more so, especially since a clear and detailed strategy for its achievement is firmly in place.
The formation of the new European sales force is a clear indication of the potential that has been identified there.
But the group's general manager sees a world full of markets waiting to respond to the kind of ‘bespoke tailoring’ approach he has on offer.
the Far East, including Japan, Australasia and South America are among the areas that bring a gleam to his eye when he talks of the future.
It will be a future full of change, bringing new materials, new products and new technologies.
And the Resins Group will continue its growth, not only through the further exploitation of its existing potential but in other ways.
It will be looking, indeed it is already looking, through the work of a business development section set up a year ago — at a range of options.
They include company acquisitions [a short-list of companies is already targeted in Europe and the United States for their market positioning and synergy with existing activities], joint ventures, product acquisition and various licensing arrangements.
Exciting!
That the future certainly promises to be.
But tranquil?
I doubt it very much.
Except, of course, in that quiet haven — the reception foyer at Runcorn.
Soda Ash THE PARTNERS WOULD HAVE APPROVED…
when John Brunner and Ludwig Mond teamed up as partners to start up soda ash production in mid-Cheshire in 1873, they opened a new and significant chapter in the history of the British chemical industry.
Walter Boag assesses their present-day successors who are currently expanding the text of the soda ash story in a way which, for enterprise and determination, would surely win an approving nod.
UNDER THE BANNER OF ICI SODA Ash Products [SAP], this Northwich-based operation is working as a free-standing business unit within ICI chemicals & Polymers, and increasingly is running its own show.
Since the beginning of 1987, SAP has been in business for itself, with its own field sales, distribution, marketing and manufacturing operations.
Why the decision to go it alone?
In the words of SAP general manager Bob Collicutt, ‘to help us provide an all-round first-class service to customers and to get our costs — particularly overheads — under really tight control.’
The ICI soda ash business began to face problems with the recession caused by the oil crisis of the 70s, combined with the development of natural ash deposits in Wyoming, USA.
Before the end of the decade, plastic containers — notably ICI's own PET bottles and jars — had begun to threaten the glass container industry — a major consumer of soda ash.
Both flat glass and glass containers also came under threat from imported glass-made substantially cheaper to UK users by exchange rates prevailing at the time.
And — yet another blow — caustic soda, that other great alkali, became available to British industry at increasingly competitive prices.
Soda ash and its co-products are many things to many manufacturers.
Ash itself — sold principally to the glass, detergent and chemical industries — is only one member of this close-knit family, though by far the largest.
Another is sodium bicarbonate, the familiar ‘bicarb’ or baking soda used extensively in food and the food-processing industries.
You find, it, too, in pharmaceuticals — in, for example, health salts and mouth washes.
And there are outlets for it in plastics, rubber and man-made fibres.
But who would expect it to have a place in fire extinguishers and on oil rigs?
The product that helps in the kitchen is the same product that controls certain types of fire and thins down drilling muds.
Its newest development further demonstrates the versatility of sodium bicarbonate.
‘Dessikarb,’ a dust-explosion suppressant for the food-processing industry, combines its fire-extinguishing, water-soluble and edible properties.
And SAP are actively developing a further range of consumer products, soon to be tested.
Another co-product is ‘Crex’— sodium sesquicarbonate — the choice of many manufacturers of bath salts and other water-softening additives.
And the special properties of sodium silicate — liquid, settable, and non-toxic at any temperature — are being developed to create fire-resistant paints, adhesives, binders and building materials.
These are in addition to applications in the detergents field, in which it has been used for many years.
There are projected outlets, too, for new, high-purity silicates currently being developed for applications in high technology.
Other co-products include calcium chloride, with applications ranging from the oil and chemical industries to dust-laying in coal mines.
That dog food advertised extensively on TV only slices clean because SAP's calcium chloride is in the recipe.
And the one that over th years has helped to make ICI a household name — the familar Soda Crystals.
SAP is the UK; s only producer of soda ash and, following rationalization, its co-products and the bulk of its sales are to the home  market.
But the competitive threat from overseas is very real, particularly from the United States and Europe, both West and East.
So, far from having the home market to itself, ICI Soda Ash Products has to be internationally competitive —‘service and quality being every bit as important as price,’ to quote Donald McLeod, commercial services manager and also a member of the five-man SAP executive.
They believe that only as a free-standing business will SAP be able to hold its own against the competition — particularly with world demand for soda ash growing at less than one per cent a year.
‘We see that trend continuing,’ commercial manager Peter Hollins says, ‘tight control is the key to our future.’
Bob Collicutt acknowledges that he is presiding over a mature, commodity business with limited growth opportunities, but sees the free-standing role as an opportunity for it to remain profitable in the longer term.
And after two or three years of ‘what seemed like free fall’ in the early 80s, there has been a significant levelling off in the sales graph and the cost base has been radically improved.
He is seeking the whole-hearted co-operation of every SAP employee and believes he is getting it.
‘That after all, is what it means to be free-standing.
Everyone must contribute — and want to contribute.’
Site manager Ian Bruce agrees, ‘We are achieving increased output and improved effiency, and there is still much that can be done to keep the business profitable.’
SAP has the benefit of close proximity to raw materials.
It has ready access to the coal pits of south Lancashire and North Wales, the limestone quarries of Derbyshire, and plentiful supplies of salt ‘right beneath our feet.’
These, after all, were the factors which brought The Brunner Mond Partners to the Weaver Valley in the first place.
Nor has the technology changed that much since their time.
The plant may be different but it uses basically the same manufacturing processes that the Partners licensed from the Belgian company of Solvay et Cie in 1872.
The aim, as Peter Hollins explains, ‘must be to increase our level of performance to the point where, even if external factors turn against us still further, we will not only survive but prosper.’
And to say all of us, is the likely view of their customers.
For, in the words of national sales manager Owain Pugh, ‘without profitable customers we won't have a business, and without competitively-priced raw materials our customers won't have a business.
It is early days yet, but it would seem that deep within this free-standing enterprise is a determination to achieve long-term success.
The future, as Bob Collicutt says, is in their own hands.