

The Grid Control Centre
IT'S about knowing what you want
Every day British Gas South Western's 1.1 million commercial and domestic customers, throughout the region's 21,367 square kilometres, require an average of 86 million kilowatt hours of gas for heating, cooking and running their businesses.
Naturally, this gas is never needed in the same quantities, at the same time or in the same areas.
This means that we have to respond to customer requirements minute by minute.
A simple change in the weather can make significant changes in demand on the gas supply system.
The task of meeting customers' demands, instantaneously, falls into the skilful hands of the Grid Control Centre:
Grid — because gas moves around the region in a network of pipes known as a Grid
Control — because we have to control that network
Centre — because we need to be able to cover the whole region from one central site.
GETTING gas from the coast to the South West
The National Transmission System is a network, 5,500 kilometres long, of large diameter steel pipes taking gas throughout Great Britain.
It brings in supplies from gas fields in the North Sea and the Irish Sea through five coastal terminals.
Theddlethorpe in Lincolnshire and Bacton in Norfolk bring the majority of gas to the South West, having been transported along subsea pipelines from offshore production platforms.
At the terminals the gas is processed and measured for quality and quantity and injected with an odorant which gives it that recognisable smell.
The clean, natural gas enters the National transmission System at a consistent rate and is transported around the UK to a number of strategically located compressor stations which increase the pressure in the pipeline systems up to 75 bar, equal to 1087 pounds per square inch [psi].
During the summer off-peak months a proportion of gas is fed into storage units above and below ground.
This seasonal storage includes the cavity of the depleted Rough field in the North Sea and underground salt cavities.
This enables the National Central Control to supplement supplies coming ashore in order to meet demands during the coldest of winter days.
In the South West there are national storage facilities at Avonmouth.
Here gas is stored in a liquified form [Liquified Natural Gas]at about minus 160 degrees centigrade.
GAS in the region
The Regional Transmission System
In the South West we receive gas from the National Transmission System at ten different locations.
These are called National Offtake Stations.
The offtake stations supply gas into the Regional transmission System which operates at about 35 bar — about half that of the National Transmission System.
From the Regional Transmission System the gas is fed into networks which operate at a pressure of either seven or two bar.
These are the mains which supply the major towns and cities.
The final pressure reduction is to about 50 millibars to supply the local network, which then takes gas to individual properties.
This sequential reduction of pressure stage by stage is carried out, initially, at the ten national offtakes, then at 78 regional offtakes and finally at local district outstations feeding into the low pressure network.
Gas is taken from the Regional Transmission System at times of low demand, usually overnight, and put into storage to be used at times of higher demand such as the breakfast and tea-time periods.
This gas is held in regional storage facilities in both high pressure storage vessels, in high pressure pipelines and in the more familiar gas holders such as those seen in the majority of large towns throughout the South West.
THE Grid Control Centre
At the heart of this complex network lies the Grid Control Centre.
Its task is to ensure that the national and regional offtakes are all operating within defined quality limits to provide an uninterrupted flow of clean, natural gas to all our customers around the region.
The grid Control Centre operates 24 hours a day, 365 days a year.
Twelve staff, working in six shifts are supported by a team of engineers and administrative personnel.
In addition engineers and technicians are on-call day and night throughout the region to respond to any problems out on the network should they occur.
Grid Control is equipped with some of the most modern computer systems in the world.
Using eight display screens the team on duty can monitor and control the pressures and flows of gas coming into the region through the national and regional offtakes, maintaining safe operating limits and ensuring demand is met.
It can also control the use of stored gas throughout the region.
Linked by computer-driven remote controls to the major outstations, gas flow and pressure can be increased or decreased by operating a keyboard.
The computer systems at the Grid Control Centre are supported by standby facilities on site and at a remote location.
A highly advanced radio communications system makes this possible.
Using computerised telemetry equipment information concerning the transmission of gas is passed between the Grid Control Centre and the outstations — up to 500 different pressures, flows and alarms are scanned each minute.
Third party suppliers of gas use the same regional transmission and distribution systems.
With more than half of the contract market in the industrial and commercial sectors already, these suppliers are now extending into the markets of over 73,267 kilowatt hours [2,500 therms]per annum.
As the numbers of suppliers and their customers increase the demand and supply balance facing Grid Control will become more and more complex.
Controlling gas is a matter of balance
The basis for successful gas distribution is one of balance between supply and demand.
At four o'clock each evening the team at the Grid Control Centre has to assess how much gas the entire region will use the following day.
Listening to the weather forecast is a vital part of the job.
At British Gas South Western we monitor national weather forecasts and receive four reports each day from the Bristol Weather Centre, and two from Plymouth.
The expectation of a spell of cold weather will indicate that customers will need more gas.
The Grid control Centre forecasts the amount of gas required and then notifies the National Control Centre who can then nominate the volume of gas to be fed into the system at the coastal terminals.
As the day progresses there is an hourly reappraisal of the quantity of gas needed so that input and use of stored gas can be adjusted.
SAFE and secure
Of course, supplying gas around the region needs to be both safe and secure.
The sophisticated telemetry system, supported by the microwave radio network, scans every item of information within the system every four minutes.
The Grid Control computers will then continuously check this data to ensure that the system is maintained within set limits.
Any variation will generate both an audio and visual alarm at Grid Control.
This will enable the Shift Engineer to identify the problem.
KEEPING the gas moving
British Gas South Western's Control Centre is the heart of all gas operations in the South West, both for British Gas and other gas suppliers.
The Company's major investment in the latest technology means that gas is available whenever it is wanted.
Safer, cleaner and with no damage to the visual environment gas is brought to the nation's customers quietly and efficiently.
British Gas South Western is committed to playing its part in the integrated national control network of gas supplies.
2A
CUSTOMERS breathe life into business — without them…we die!
Without more of them…we stagnate !
British Gas is no exception to that rule.
2B
Customer growth is the name of the game — and we want to increase customer numbers as cheaply as possible.
Not only is this common-sense, but a section of THE gas act 1986 actually says we're obliged to do it!
The most effective way is by filling gaps in the gas supply area.
Anything within 100 yds of a suitable gas main or, better still, where the main is right by the property — is fair game.
2C
THERE'S a lot of potential in these locations and we always need to be trying to get people to ‘get connected’.
Our own research has shown that OVER two million four hundred thousand properties are waiting for us!
3A
In addition, there is a similar figure outside the gas supply area, and some Regions have  better prospects than others to increase their growth rate.
For reference analyses of these figures are feathered as appendices to my paper.
3B
These Regions have had a declared policy to extend their supply area with SCHEMES identified as Gas Gathering, Rural Gasification or Village Infill, but until recent years most infill work has tended to be carried out close to the gas supply area, with only occasional forays outside these localities.
3C
Often this has been because THE new housing market has been buoyant and it has been acknowledged that this market cannot be missed as, at best, it is lost for a CONSIDERABLE time.
4A
The easier areas of supply are beginning to become saturated and over the last few years more effort has tended to be put into SUPPLYING gas to outlying villages  which, because of the application of modern pipelaying techniques, and the subsequent reduction in unit costs, have become more attractive.
4C
THIS presentation is not intended to cover too much of this detail, but aims more to providing a considered judgement on the way in which this momentum can be retained or, if appropriate, increased as the constraints become more pronounced.
5A
FAR too frequently in the past, infill projects have been ‘customer led’.
They have come to us .
We respond by saying that we will see how much local INTEREST there is, and if it looks an economic viability we'll come and talk to you.
5C
WHILE this approach undoubtedly has advantages in that effort is directed to areas where a known interest exists — TO my way of thinking it fails to stimulate growth sufficiently quickly to satisfy what I consider SHOULD be a  market led approach, nor does it satisfactorily communicate our case to the potential customers.
6C
HARDLY surprising that some members of the public are increasingly frustrated with our apparent unwillingness to make our product more available and complain through the various channels open to them.
7A
WHILST our attitudes have now changed, and certainly some Regions are extremely pro-active in their approach to ‘infill’, there remains a potential growth area available to the company.
7B
LET us look at the process and, where appropriate, what I consider our approach should be.
Once a potential infill has been identified, by whatever means, preferably a Regional initiative, the first thing householders wantto KNOW is ‘what'll it cost?’
7C
At this stage we don't want to do a detailed study as the project may not be viable.
8A
SOUTH Western Region has developed a statistical model which will calculate the probability of an infill project's success or failure.
8B
It is based around a standard statistical technique called discriminant analysis, and runs on part of an AWESOME piece of software from the American SAS Institute, said to be the most advanced in the world.
8C
The database comprises information from infills that have succeeded, and others that have failed.
9A
NINETEEN variables [including; size and type of building; social grouping — Local Authority property], gathered by research, arefed into the MACHINE, which then produces an analysis.
9B
This facility has the objective of feeding details from all potential infills within each district which ENABLES a quick order of priority to be determined — allowing a more detailed analysis and marketing strategy to be completed.
9C
And, while on the subject of computing power.
We have an enormous amount of data stored on computers nationwide.
Let's consider CREATING a National Think Tank on infills.
This team will collate all current methods, techniques and ideas for improvements from every department involved on a project.
10A
We might, in the process, find that there is no need for in depth designing and costing on each scheme.
10B
FOR example: Do 100 house-estate infills vary that much from district TO district?
10C
I'm sure we must have enough information and expertise stored on DISC to allow the estimating procedure to become an automatic process.
11A
An additional benefit would be close scrutiny of the DISTRICT, costing process which is urgently needed to identify and justify considerable variations across the country.
llB
Even if we progress with the preparation of a scheme, THE success rate of a fully costed project only averages around 30%.
llC
There may be occasions when our guesstimate is high enough to give concern that the potential customer would be unable to pay.
12A
SO we go back, do some quick market research, and then decide whether more DETAILED studies are worthwile.
There might be a case, on a very big projects, where we don't get the minimum response, for GOING ahead anyway.
12B
This would be based on the argument that, due to the large number of premises, we will recover our costs, albeit not so quickly.
12C
IN each case the company needs to assess the risk before making a decision.
13A
IF we do go ahead with the study, we get hold of the latest available plans which are then
MARKED with a provisional mains layout.
13B
The location is thoroughly surveyed by Marketing and Engineering staff.
In this exercise the Marketing Department
13C
RESPONSIBILITIES are to:—
Make sure the plans are up to date and include all buildings.
14A
IDENTIFY the different building types.
This will determine how much gas is needed to feed the area and therefore the capacity of the supply mains.
14B
THE extent of the infill: We need to be very sure of the geographical area covered by the infill.
There has been at least one occasion where we've caught a cold because this was not done.
A householder received a positive  response from a salesman to a request for a gas supply, and, it was discovered that the property lay outside the scope of the project.
14C
MARKETING will also speak to the Local Authority and find details of anticipated development.
They will gauge the likelihood of Local Authority property being candidates for a gas supply.
15A
ENGINEERING will look at:—
The likely route of feeder and supply mains; taking into account ground conditions; anticipating, searching for and dealing with any problems that may hamper the mainlaying work.
It should never be forgotten that the shortest distance between two points is a straight line .
Shortest route for maximum potential — this must always be first choice.
I ought to qualify this by saying that going direct from A to B can result in lost opportunities: The missed chances to connect households or businesses that adjoin the road.
Or unforeseen problems: perhaps over wayleaves that at first glance appeared to be straight forward.
If research shows that the straight line cross country option is a non-starter, the second choice must be: keep to the verges wherever possible, when following roads.
When we get to the village — remember it's much cheaper to lay the services when we lay the mains.
the more people we get on the first pass the better, so we don't have to re]excavate to make a connection at a later date.
Also, if a contractor is to carry out the work the more information we can supply to them the easier it is for them to  provide an accurate tender.
15B
ENGINEERING will also check out possible governor locations [if needed]and determine service lengths.
15C
ARE we missing anything by just looking at the obvious?
Are there communities in the vicinity who could be ‘captured’ with a bit
16A
more ingenuity by our planners?
A stunning example of this in practice is an infill just
16B
south of Shrewsbury, WHERE a fledgeling,
16C
rather ordinary infill GREW to encompass 24 villages, 2416 dwellings and three contract loads!
The answers to these questions allow us to design and cost a detailed mains layout, which results in an accurate sum for the customer's
17A
CONTRIBUTION.
There is no substitute for good planning even at this early stage.
17B
If the contribution seems REASONABLE a postal survey takes place.
If the response is high enough an application for capital
17C
expenditure is made.
When we get the go AHEAD A firm quotation is sent to every likely customer.
This is when the true marketing should
18A
start as we should AIM TO visit/contact every customer who has not responded or has responded negatively to ascertain the reasons why and endeavour to
18B
OBTAIN a firm sale which would assist Engineering to lay the service before permanent reinstatement is completed.
18C
PROJECTS need to be financed, and British Gas has rules which determine how much we spend when taking on new customers [Maximum permitted outlay or MPO].
MPO is related to potential profit from predicted gas sales.
Each project must be treated separately, and if the cost exceeds the MPO then we recover the balance from the customer.
19A
Another important factor will be the increase in the number of FUEL efficient or ‘low energy’, houses — which by their very nature will attract a lower MPO because they'll use less gas.
19B
THERE seems little doubt that for projects involving large distances between villages and existing mains — the current allowance structure must be reviewed if we are to achieve a high penetration into these outlying areas in the future.
Some consideration could
19C
be given to the FOLLOWING: why don't we transfer an unused allowance from one project to another?
20A
It may be worth looking at Customer acquisition as a whole.
CREATE a central fund into which all unused allowances from new developments can be fed, to be drawn upon as a way of reducing customer contributions on infill projects.
20B
MIGHT we perhaps offer discount vouchers [appliances or gas]to people who say ‘yes’ before the main gets laid in their street?
20C
MIGHT we consider [having done our costings]ignoring the minimum take-up level!
Just go ahead and do the job.
We'll let them know the date we're going to start, and offer incentives if they sign up before that deadline.
We have to make sure that we don't miss a trick in exploiting 21a the potential of an infill — which brings ME TO…
TEAMWORK.
Teamwork is paramount in any sphere of operation but something which has not always been evident in the past.
It stems from the top — every Manager needs to be prepared to wholeheartedly embrace this team spirit.
It is essential for departments to pull together,talk to each other and be in no doubt as to the others' requirements.
21B
IN short, Marketing and Engineering must have their act together.
21C
Now then, how many teams are INVOLVED on any project?
Well, let's consider a few…
Marketing; Engineering; Distribution; Contractors; Manufacturers — how many manufacturers do we use on any particular project?
From suppliers of the largest heavy plant, to those who sell us the smallest washer!
Finance; Public Relations; Service
22A
and Supplies;…the list goes on.
ALTHOUGH it is bound to be a finite group, each of those I've mentioned can be broken down into sub
22B
groups within the department — TEAMS within teams, if you like.
and all these teams have to be aware of the others' needs.
As an example — when an infill mailshot is taking place that may generate hundreds of responses by phone, or post do we
22C
ALWAYS bother to let the telephonists or the mail room
23A
PEOPLE  know, in advance, that their already high workload might be increased during a particular period, so they can plan accordingly?
They are part of the team, albeit a step or so removed from direct involvement.
think about it.
23B
LONGMAN'S dictionary defines team spirit as:—
‘Willingness to subordinate personal aims to group objective’.
I want to dwell on this subject a little while, to look at a few areas which are important and necessary and have their foundations in team spirit.
firstly there is,
23C
among direct and indirect LABOUR, an apparent fear or unwillingness to perform functions that fall outside their immediate job parameters.
This probably has its roots established over many years and very often built on myth.
In consequence we have developed restrictive practices and engineering, at best, are only partially aware of the business objectives.
I believe we have to work hard to change these attitudes and develop the culture effectively
24A
prescribed UNDER the Regional Organisational Review.
We should all be expected to be
24B
responsible and accountable for our ACTIONS which should be corporate in nature and mindful of the market-place.
24C
Engineering is no different to any other function of British Gas in HAVING rules, methods and practices which are sometimes outdated and hamper the needs of the business.
These must be identified and scrapped, updated or at least, reviewed.
They can't be changed if they are not identified.
25A
WE must be prepared to be flexible; grasp opportunity; recognise that we all have customers [internal and external]; give everyone the service that we'd expect every time; ask for what we need to get the job done quickly and effectively well in advance of the start date.
We are the experts in our field and as such manufacturers look to us to lead, to tell them what we need.
We must continue to work together and learn to appreciate each other 's problems and constraints.
25B
OUTSTANDING examples which highlight the way things can work, if British Gas tell manufacturers what it wants, lie in the
25C
current thinking behind POLYETHYLENE Pipe production.
Our ability to supply gas in outlying areas has been considerably improved in joint
26A
co-operation with our P.E.
manufacturers.
AS a result of development work at the Engineering Research Station, P.E.
pipe is now
26B
AVAILABLE for use up to 7 bar — around 100 psi.
We can now supply places that were economic non-starters.
26C
ANOTHER example of how we will save money by appropriate use of P.E.
pipes that can stand higher pressure, is seen on this chart, where a feeder main was designed, on a particular project, for three different pressures.
PAUSE
27A
WE can now get PE pipe 400m long on
27B
DRUMS [depending on the diameter of course]and
27C
50 to 200 metres supplied in coils — all of which can be delivered to site from the factory,
28A
which ELIMINATES ‘double-handling’, and reduces costs.
We should exploit this position to reduce our overheads.
28B
LARGER diameter pipe must be bought in straight lengths [now up to 24 metres].
Bigger lengths — new joints — more productivity.
28C
AND, now that I've mentioned joints, continuing progress in developing
29A
electrofusion techniques and AUTOMATIC butt fusion machines, has also led to increased output.
29B
Trying to use bulky machines WITHIN the narrow confines of a trench was never easy.
The latest equipment can be placed on the road
29C
SURFACE, and only the wires need travel into the working area.
These improvements, and others, have occurred because of gas industry requests, directed internally and externally, and the ability and willingness of our suppliers to respond, and often add , to development ideas.
30A
THERE'S that important point again, which is true right across the board and worth repeating.
We , British Gas, are the end users.
We are the so-called experts.
So we should be looking to take the initiative and, in a controlled manner, working as a team with our suppliers and ensuring they know exactly what we want.
Experience has shown that they are happiest when we take the lead, providing this is positive.
It leaves them in no doubt as to what's required.
If we wish to be a passive industry, instead of pushing for advancements, then little will change.
We are not, of course, and we must ensure that we do not become one.
30B
TO complement the changes in pipe technology, a whole range of excavators and trenching equipment is available to us.
30C
THE choice is a difficult one.
Some regions have chosen to
31A
buy this heavy plant outright.
OTHERS have preferred to select the right machine for the duty and ground conditions and hired in for the job.
31B
THE aim of the game is get pipes in the ground and get them covered as cheaply and efficiently as possible, with due regard to high standards.
31C
ADVANCED trenching equipment has speeded up this aspect of a project to such an extent,
32A
that BACKFILL and reinstatement can be the controlling factor on productivity.
The practice of temporary and then
32B
PERMANENT reinstatement is not only costly in time and money — it can give us severe public relations
32C
PROBLEMS.
With the prospect of the Horne report being approved by Parliament —
33A
THINGS are looking up, and mainlaying, especially
33B
feeder mains, can start to be REGARDED as a  production line.
Excavation, mainlaying
33C
backfill and permanent REINSTATEMENT must be part of a continuous process.
We should never enter into a project without trying to get a
34A
permanent REINSTATEMENT agreement with the Local Authority.
34B
We must get in, do the job and get out as quickly as POSSIBLE — leaving the place as the public have a right to find it.
This must always be our attitude now .
34C
THE Banishing Gripes campaign highlighted the public's annoyance with British Gas for the inconvenience caused by digging up roads.
The alternative to digging up a road is to go underneath it, where circumstances permit.
A range of equipment is now available to reduce this disruption, and falls into three main categories.
35A
DIRECTIONAL Moling: A fine example of this method of operation is the Rotamole.
Recently developed by British Gas, it can prepare the
35B
way for pipes up to 125mm.
THE equipment can be electronically monitored and maintained at the correct line and level between the launch area and the receive pit.
35C
DIRECTIONAL rod pushing: This equipment generally requires a launch and receive pit.
The pushing is usually done
36A
mechanically, with LENGTHS of rod being added as the device travels towards its target.
An American Company, Ditchwitch, have
36B
DEVELOPED a machine which uses a liquid sprayed from the pilot bore's head.
and finally:—
36C
IMPACT Moling: These machines have been used for some years to lay services and pipes up to 125mm in diameter.
37A
THE main drawback is an inability to keep tabs on the device during operation.
A problem graphically illustrated in Swindon a few years
37B
ago, WHEN a teenage-mutant-ninja-mole went berserk, offline, and destroyed some poor lady's rockery in the next street!
The press had a field day!
For the future, and with Banishing gripes much in mind, I feel we should be looking for improvements in moling/boring techniques to a degree that, in suitable areas, over 100 metres of main can be laid from a single launch site.
37C
WE can lay pipe cheaper than we could 15 years ago, I agree, but are we still making the best use of new technology.
We must always be on the lookout for
38A
NEW methods and machinery which will help reduce costs.
But, remember, the more sophisticated we become, the greater the need for improving overall management of a project.
38B
WE, are the ‘specialists’, the market leaders.
We must take charge.
38C
Talking of people taking charge — they are the GOVERNORS of this world!
An awful Terry Wogan — type link that lets me mention…
Chris Whittaker who will be on stage this afternoon to talk in detail about governors so I won't dwell too long on the subject.
However most schemes of this nature require governors of some sort or another.
39A
THESE are costly pieces of equipment and we can again highlight the way in which suppliers and departments in
39B
BRITISH Gas have co-operated to produce products to suit the need, and reduced the overall cost of a project.
39C
THE units, prefabricated by the various manufacturers, have dramatically reduced the cost of on-site assembly.
40A
The GOVERNOR manufacturers have always moved with us, and, for example, the cost of providing a supply from a Transmission main has been  substantially reduced in the last few years, by use of skid mounted governor units using small diameter connections from the pipeline.
40B
COSTS now range from £25, OOO to £60, OOO depending on the capacity and compares with £100, OOO not so long ago.
40C
I believe there is still the need for further reductions in this area, since the COST can be the equivalent of £200/customer.
If smaller communities, close to a transmission main are to be supplied at a price they can afford, the design of these installations must be re-examined, to see if they can be modified to
41A
MAKE them cheaper.
Are we over-engineering?
For the more environmentally sensitive areas which are assuming more importance, the
41B
ENGINEERING Research Station have developed a below ground module.
This means we can use governors in areas where the above
41C
GROUND version could have been considered
42A
UNACCEPTABLE, and planning permission would 
42B
have been difficult to obtain.
THE industry is now looking to reduce the cost of these units by competitive sourcing.
42C
Planning again is a key word here.
43A
WHENEVER we deal with Local Authorities on sensitive issues, especially those concerning the environment we must HAVE considered these aspects and have the answers before we get the questions.
43B
A well thought out case is always the more convincing.
the problem of blending essential plant into the surrounding AREA will always be with us and we must be inventive and thoughtful in this respect.
43C
As another example in our liaison with the suppliers — Until recently, we've had to put service governors at the boundary of properties.
44A
It's now possible to place a governor AND meter in an Atplas meter box — eliminating the safety problem inherent with the old method.
44B
A governor and meter in a semi-concealed meter box is also being developed.
44C
As I've touched ON meter boxes…
45A
We need meters on the outside of houses for ease of reading, but meter boxes are ugly.
45B
WE now offer a semi concealed version as a RESPONSE to this problem,
45C
which IS proving a popular choice with our customers.
46A
EARLIER, when I discussed MPO, I offered several options that might be pursued to make a project more attractive to potential customers.
The less they have to pay, the better chance we have of selling the scheme.
46B
In this context, reduced unit costs and higher productivity can be the difference between the success or failure of an infill, and cannot be achieved without first RATE project management.
Project Management is of paramount importance.
Day to day work is carried out by contractors' own labour or British Gas' industrial staff under control of our supervisors and engineers.
Contractors must get their act  together and take more responsibility.
Some aren't bad — but most have a long way to go!
I am interested to hear Derek Brown's opinions on this subject as I know from discussions we have had that he shares this view, but probably has a different remedy for the problem.
46C
We must expect contractors to take care of all operations ON A project including:—
Copmpleting all work within the agreed timetable.
47A
CUSTOMER liaison — letting people know what's going on.
47B
LIAISING with Parish Councils.
47C
ARRANGING for pipes to be delivered to site from manufacturers.
48A
ORDERING materials from our stores via V.D.U.
at District depots.
48B
DESPITE this responsibility, British gas must attend regular site meetings to monitor progress.
48C
WE must also insist that contractors adopt the same high degree of professionalism that British Gas expects of its employees.
Contractors should look at their training programmes and the quality of the people they employ.
We ought to offer management training where it is needed.
49A
If our own labour are involved the same rules APPLY.
In other words:—
Keep the job running on time.
Order materials so they arrive when you need them.
Make full use of machinery available.
Keep everyone informed.
49B
IN addition, management must ensure that engineers can take advantage of any selling
49C
OPPORTUNITIES that may occur while involved on infill sites and make sure they are suitably rewarded for producing those sales leads.
Our industrial staff are always on site and automatically have to become the ambassadors of the company and procure sales leads.
50A
THE question of whether to use our own labour or contractors' is a tricky one.
when we do use our staff, we have the advantage that they are not restricted to a fixed location, but are mobile within districts and organise themselves with minimum supervision and are already capable of using high productivity equipment.
Frankly, we have a problem with absence from work due to out of hours emergency work and sickness, which can put us off using our own people!
We only want the best teams on a project, if it is to stay on  schedule.
This, again, is a culture that has to be changed.
You may care to consider the best way of achieving this, as it can't be allowed to continue.
50B
PRODUCTIVITY can be enhanced by additional payments related to performance.
The bonus scheme is one example, but based around standard measured times.
It is an outdated and inefficient system, which is not appropriate for this type of work.
The use of highly productive equipment means that bonus cut-off can be achieved with ease.
Where's the incentive to work like hell on Friday, when you reached cut-off the day before?
A number of ways are open to us and have been tried throughout the company but a possible answer to this teasing question of motivation
50C
and man-management is being EXPLORED in the shape of Critical Path Analysis.
Critical Path Analysis is a computer programme into which variables relating to a particular project are fed.
51A
FOR example, machine types, manpower, distance, ground conditions — the list can be very long.
New machinery is assessed before use on a project and realistic productivity targets agreed.
From this information, a job completion date is produced: The target is achievable, but only by hard work.
The crew is guaranteed top bonus and involved in all stages of planning [and, at the end, the ‘post mortem’].
51B
THEIR opinions are sought as to what went well and, perhaps could be improved; what went wrong, and should be changed.
The experiment is working well and feedback is very positive.
51C
THE crew enjoy working the system, and have developed an excellent team spirit — And there's the incentive: If they don't meet their targets their pride
52A
SUFFERS.
Trust and accountability are powerful motivators!
There are added benefits, for example— engineers can have an actual cost per metre figure for mainlaying.
52B
IF an unforeseen problem occurs, extreme weather conditions say, this data can be fed into the computer and a revised target date instantly given.
52C
DURING my introduction I said that some Regions are better placed than others to increase their growth rate.
We can easily identify districts throughout the country which will be more involved with infill projects than others.
Should we use these areas to pilot the creation of specialist infill engineering teams and as a test bed for new forms of contract?
Let's now look at establishing a contract for a project.
The most common type of contract in use is the Bill of Quantities which involves pricing the various items of work that the contractors
53A
could be expected to carry OUT.
‘Quantities’ is a good word — the amount of paper and  clerical effort involved in administering a project, during execution of the contract is enormous.
An individual bill gets raised for almost every single item of work carried out, and everything must be checked and costed against the tender.
Over the years there have been many modifications in an attempt to simplify the tendering procedure and improve the difficulties of administration.
Because of these problems there is a gradual move away from‘Bill of Quantities’ to contracts
53B
BASED on a Fixed Price or Lump sum.
All have been tried before to varying degrees — we now favour the fixed price tender again.
In the context of an infill project the competing contractors will be supplied with all the information they need to tender for the job but on a fixed price basis, including the total management of the contract and
53C
ITEMISED as follows: total cost of the feeder main; total cost of low pressure main in individual villages, including installing governors; and the total cost of services to be laid.
We need to try to remove as much  ‘risk’ from the project as possible by defining the conditions and allowing additional charges outside the pre-stated terms.
54A
EXPERIENCE shows that contractors will build a contingency into their tender which caters for problems that might occur during the project.
In other words British Gas may end up paying more than it would if more help was offered at tender stage.
For example, we might suggest a route for the mains, and specify carriageway, verge or footpath, based on the results of our own surveys.
Trusting our judgement and taking responsibility [or the risk]could save us a lot of money.
To assist at the pre-tendering stage all contractors invited, need to be aware and able to question any aspect on the contract.
54B
IN some cases a mini-bus will be hired and used at a pretender meeting.
The contractors representatives will be driven around the  whole route, but with no clues as to how we think the job should be done.
Minutes are produced from the meeting and the project is let on least cost.
Once a project is underway, the contract is much easier to administer because one monthly payment is made, based on work carried out.
Extra payments are only made for items not detailed in the original spec.
54C
I would like to see contractors' charging policy completely reviewed, so we can be sure that we are not locked into ‘historic costing methods’ that fail to recognise the considerable advances in main and service laying technology.
55A
EARLIER I mentioned that there is no substitute for good planning.
It goes hand in hand with good management and is essential for any job!
It is becoming apparent, especially on large projects, that a joint Marketing/Engineering task force is beneficial to ensure all phases run smoothly.
Since company reorganisation, perhaps the most effective method would be a combination of Regional and District input.
The Headquarters team doing all the planning and Districts taking over once a project
55B
GETS the green light.
However, there must be a district involvement in the task force to ensure a continuity, and occasional Regional representation from the other departments.
55C
ONCE the planning is done we must meet with Parish and County Councils and give them a complete briefing — BEFORE we approach residents.
After this meeting, and having made sure that any problems have been
56A
RESOLVED, Marketing can get into the area with exhibitions — mobile
56B
AND static — backed up by sales staff.
the displays will show the
56C
latest ENGINEERING technology; maps detailing the extent of the work;
57A
appliance DETAILS, running costs and more.
Public Relations is a key part of an infill project.
We have to make sure that we know what the customer wants;they know what we can do for them, at what cost; where; when; how and
57B
BY WHOM.
Effective communication is essential.
Press releases are sent to all local media in advance, and can be very successful in generating local interest before the sales team
57C
arrives.
RELEASES are also sent out before work starts to warn of any inconvenience that might be caused by mainlaying.
58A
THE same idea lies behind letters sent to householders just before the crews get on site.
Public Relations is, ultimately, everyone's responsibility.
everybody involved — especially those in day to day contact with
58B
potential customers — must be AWARE of the  effect their appearance,[and that of the site], their manner and behaviour has on these very important people.
Some are born ambassadors — others need tuition.
58C
WHEN the work is complete, some Regions take the trouble to invite local dignitaries to come and cut the proverbial tape.
This is a great idea — why don't we do it more often.
Every project must have a high profile.
59A
WELL, we've just about come full circle.
From planning to cutting the tape.
Earlier I said we mustn't miss a trick, and I would like to offer for consideration a possible strategy for the future.
I feel we should look at all towns and villages that have a gas supply, and create a detailed register of estates and streets that do not have gas pipes running through them.
These areas must be assessed to determine the potential load and analysed to develop a priority
59B
HIT-LIST on the basis of:
Distance from the nearest main
59C
HOW much work is involved.
60A
PREDICTED load.
60B
THE capacity of the network to absorb new load.
60C
A similar register of all villages and other groups of buildings should be compiled and examined using the same criteria, with the same objective.
On the basis of this information, and on the assumption that all loads will come in time, might we speculate to accumulate and design a cost effective new IP/MP infrastructure in an area that might become a blueprint for future mains extensions?
A moment ago I said we must make sure we know what the customer wants.
All customers — internal and external — want QUALITY.
So what are we doing about it?
61A
West Midlands have taken the initiative WITH ‘TOTAL QUALITY’: a development strategy which has a number of objectives:
61B
GET quality into every aspect of business activity.
61C
ENSURE the Company is held in high regard by customers and employees!
62A
MAKE employees understand that everyone [internal and external]needs top quality service.
62B
ENCOURAGE employees to take the initiative in improving quality.
62C
ACCEPT that keeping the customer satisfied means getting it right first time,every time.
63A
RECOGNISE that keeping the customer satisfied will keep their custom, and keep us in jobs.
63B
To breath life into this quality message, West Midlands insist that all British Gas AND  contractors' employees involved in Period Contracts attend a two day workshop — which covers: History and background of Total Quality; Competition; Internal/External customers; Management style; Personal Quality; Measuring progress; Penalties for poor quality; Problem solving; Issues and an action plan.
A similar, one day, version is attended by contractors' staff not subject to a period Contract.
63C
THE, bottom line of these Seminars is this:Ownership and Accountability — both individual and collective.
If you're given a job — Grasp it!
Get it right!
But, be prepared to pay the penalty if you're sloppy and get it wrong!
The difference in attitude before and after the workshops was quite startling.
In addition to the messages of ownership an
64A
ACCOUNTABILITY, we promoted BUSINESS AWARENESS.
64B
In many cases it was the first time anyone had explained to the man in the trench that there is more to his job than laying pipes!
HE must be a P.R.
man, a salesman and an Ambassador for his firm, as well as British Gas.
Conversion takes many forms and different amounts of time.
But the converted ‘Die-Hard’ cynic often becomes the best ambassador for the company.
64C
LADIES and Gentlemen, in summary, I'd like to offer you five Ts as ingredients for a successful future in infill.
65A
TEAM Spirit and accountability — work together — take responsibility.
65B
TECHNIQUES and Technology — look at what we do, what we use — and continue to improve it.
65C
TOTAL Quality —on time,first time,every time.
66A
TENACITY — go get ‘em!
Never wait for the customer to come to us.
66B
IN conclusion, I leave you these questions:
Our adverts say we're the professionals, the experts, the specialists.
Well, are we?
And if not, why not?
And what are we going to do about it?
66C
After 3–4 seconds.
BAYS — 14 FEBRUARY 1991
Draft closing remarks
Audience: largely 13–17 year olds [plus some teachers]from eight secondary schools in the Plymouth, Torquay area.
One/two sentence preamble — at your discretion — as you arrive on stage after being introduced by [probably]the question master [possibly a brief word to thank the people who put the night together?]
Then, I suggest the following:—
…
British Gas is the Western World's largest integrated gas concern.
That is to say: we explore; we produce; we pipe gas to homes and factories; we sell appliances to burn gas; and we do installation and repair work as well .
We have ambitions to become the world's first Global gas company and already operate in 20 countries.
With the billions of pounds worth of equipment — above and below the ground — not to mention gas and oil reserves which we own, it may surprise you to find that we consider our most valuable asset to be people …rather than plant.
During the last decade, British Gas has spent over £700m on Research.
the fruits of this labour, by our scientists and engineers, are being used by 50 countries worldwide.
We are acknowledged leaders in many aspects of gas exploration, production and supply.
People — to-day's employees, yesterday's students — have places us in this enviable position.
But, what of tomorrow?
Well you are our tomorrow!
Small wonder, then that British Gas has always recognised the need to maintain close links between industry and schools.
Recent surveys have shown a rapid decline in the UK adult population's interest in, and understanding of, science and technology.
Teachers and students alike will be familiar with the changes made to the national curriculum in response to this problem.
As always, the pressure is on the teachers to ‘do the business’— rarely an easy task.
British Gas welcomes the opportunity to play its part and our contribution has frequently been in the form of resources.
Teachers in tonight's audience will almost certainly know about our free catalogue, listing over a hundred different resource materials [including several award winners].
Last year, the British Gas education service sent out a million items to schools!
This represents a fraction of the material despatched from, for example, twelve Regional public relations departments; enquiries handled locally by district offices throughout the country; plus the thousands of school visits and presentations made nationally by members of the British Gas Home Service team.
team.
British Gas produce information packs and videos for school leavers seeking employment, and our personnel department is always willing to discuss career opportunities.
We welcome and encourage people who want to have a look at us — not only to understand ‘what we're about,’ but, perhaps, to check us out as prospective employers.
And, as I've touched on that subject, as an engineer, I am glad to have seen so many ladies in the teams tonight!
They may be interested to learn more about the equal opportunities campaign, WISE: Women Into Science and Engineering — which British Gas has long supported.
This is the fifth year of British Gas' involvement with BAYS Masterminds, and just one example of our interest in helping young people to develop and realise their potential.
I've a feeling that the enthusiasm and knowledge displayed here tonight reflects the talent available nationwide.
If we can tap it successfully — our future is in safe hands.
END.
One or two sentences at your discretion to introduce the first prize winners who will go on to compete in the national finals in London on 16 March 1991 at the Natural History Museum.
14th Feb 1991 1st Prize — Clock Radio x 3 2nd Prize — Sports Bag x 3 3rd Prize — Selection of goodies [Parker pen, mug, penknife, keyring]x 3.
THE MAGNIFICENT SEVEN
Few of us can be unaware of, or unmoved by, the plight of the Romanian orphans.
Fewer still have the chance, or the courage, to go to Romania and help.
But at the end of September, seven of the Region's employees, based at Glenfrome House, will do just that!
These men are going to spend two weeks installing desperately needed cooking facilities within several orphanges and the Region is pleased to give them its full support.
YOU can be part of the team.
HOW?
By donating…
Disinfectant — Buckets — Soap — Metal cups — tins — plates — Washing up liquid These are examples from a longer list of practical items.
You may prefer to donate money, which will only be used to buy goods for use in the orphanages.
Help us to help our boys help the orphans.
ROMANIAN APPEAL
At the end of September, seven British Gas South Western employees will spend two weeks in Romania installing cooking facilities within several orphanages.
The company is pleased to give them its full support, which includes supplying a 38 ton lorry.
The team want to load this vehicle with medical, food and other essential supplies.
PLEASE HELP US TO HELP OUR BOYS HELP THE ORPHANS
Being seen to be Green
This hefty tome makes interesting reading.
Great chunks of it may require changes in Company policy and I assume that those are being investigated in the same way as we have been asked to comment.
There are a number of ways that Public Relations [regional/national]can follow up suggestions made in the report; or that suggestions, if implemented, could offer good public relations.
1
By drawing General Managers' attention to the British Gas environment publications; ensuring they have an adequate supply along with display holders [similar to that outside the Public relations office]and letting them know how and from whom to obtain additional information.
[Incidentally, I sent district managers copies of all our brochures several years ago with the same intent and there was no take-up.
Perhaps this is an idea whose time has come.]
2
Sou'wester articles covering: * Energy efficiency: 15% reduction in 3 years — How will this happen; progress; why?
Who's involved?
How can employees help? * Examples of good housekeeping: Low energy bulbs; cistern misers etc. * BS7750 Environmental Quality Standard: What is it and how does it affect employees and the Company?
Running in tandem a series of environment ‘Did you Know?’ cards/posters.
4
Gas News — Regular environmental features [PRC agenda item?]
5
Concise ‘Statement of Purpose’ card for the environment.
This will have to be a London job similar to the one produced for the Company's aims and objectives.
6
External correspondence, publications wherever possible, accounts etc on recycled paper and clearly marked as such.
[National implications but could we be a leader?]
7
Sou'wester News printed on recycled paper?
This thought was missed by the group but should be something we're seen to investigate.
8
The report mentions that between April 1990 and March 1991 7690 kms main and 690, OOO services were laid displacing 12 million tons of material — more than the channel tunnel.
If this is true, it's an astounding ‘Did you Know?’
It is possible, even likely, that many of the ‘Seen to be Green’ proposals are either in being or [at worst]being discussed.
This is suggested by page 27 of the British Gas environmental review 1992 — Purchasing and Contracting:
‘British Gas will ensure as far as reasonably practicable that the goods and services which it procures are not inherently damaging to the environment during their use or disposal.
British Gas will endeavour to procure such goods and services from suppliers whose operations are controlled in an environmentally acceptable manner.
British Gas will ensure that its contractors are aware of the Company's environmental policy and that their practices and procedures when working for British Gas are compatible with it.’
This statement goes some way to addressing the recommendations in section 9 [9.1.2]
The fact that the group's thorough investigation failed to reveal the existence of this mini ‘statement of purpose’ either in print or [more likely]in preparation could speak volumes for their assertion, repeated at regular intervals, that British Gas do not do enough internally to publicise environmental efforts.
Natural Gas Vehicles were also covered in some detail but as our public relations efforts seem to be hampered by these vehicles' technical problems it's difficult to be more positive than we have been.
Other items of interest within that section included: forecourt agreements with oil companies; links with [and support to]the Department of Transport.
I suspect internal publicity may be at fault again or, perhaps, commercial sensitivity.
NEWS
BRITISH GAS SOUTH WESTERN
BRITISH GAS SPONSORS JAPANESE V GLOUCESTERSHIRE SCHOOLS RUGBY MATCH
British Gas Bristol North District is sponsoring a special schools rugby match on 24 March at 7pm at the Memorial Ground in Bristol, between a team of the leading Japanese players under 19 team and Gloucestershire Schools rugby union 18 group.
The match official will be World Cup referee Ed Morrison.
The Japanese team will also attend a lunch reception at the British Gas Bristol North offices in Eastgate Road on 23 March, where they will meet the Lord Mayor and be given a tour of this operational control centre.
Peter Rees, Bristol North District General Manager, will present the team with a rugby ball, autographed by the Bath TFC team and given by British Gas marketing coordinator and rugby star Jeremy Guscott.
The Japanese team are only playing four teams around the country, in Leeds, London, Exmouth and Bristol, and their final game will be against England A at the new rugby centre at Castle Croft in Wolverhampton.
Notes to News/Sports Editor
You are invited to send a representative to meet the Japanese team at 12.15am on 23 March at British Gas Bristol North District offices.
For further information about the rugby match, please contact Eric Blackman of the England Rugby football Schools' Union.
LATEST GAS TECHNOLOGY HELPS HISTORIC DUNSTER CASTLE
After half a century, gas power has returned to The National Trust's Dunster Castle, near Minehead — but this time carbide gas and coal gas have been replaced by natural gas and a sophisticated energy efficient system, which creates the perfect balance of warmth and humidity to preserve both the fabric and the valuable contents of the castle.
‘Our oil-fired central heating system was showing signs of age, so the National Trust's adviser on Conservation Heating looked for a new system which would be efficient, cost effective and environmentally sound.
We considered gas, electricity and oil, and natural gas offered us the best benefits,’ said Mike MacCormack, Administrator at Dunster Castle.
British Gas Somerset District engineers had quite a challenge to install the new gas supply, as the castle is up a 60° gradient hill and then 300 metres of pipe had to ‘scale’ ramparts and battlements to the new meter.
Inside the 13th century castle, there is a new condensing boiler — the highest efficiency system available — with a back up boiler in case of extremely cold weather.
The result is an economical, efficient and reliable environmental control system, which provides constant conservation humidity levels for the interior and the treasures of Dunster Castle — these include generations of fine family portraits, an elm-carved 17th century staircase and some of the most intricate plasterwork in the west country.
‘It is very reassuring to have control over the interior environment,’ said Mr MacCormack.
‘Using natural gas has given us the flexibility to run domestic heating from the same boilers, plus leaving the opportunity to heat other outlying areas of the castle at a later stage.’
‘The castle can now benefit from efficient and economic use of gas for many years, without the problems of delivery, storage and emissions that oil created,’ added Malcolm Blackmore, British Gas Somerset District Industrial and Commercial sales engineer.
Visitors will have their first opportunity to experience the new system when the castle opens on 3 April.
The National Trust, the UK's most active conservation charity, is one of many organisations in Somerset to use the expertise of British Gas South Western's Technical Consultancy Service to make the most of natural gas.
NEWS
British Gas South Western
BRITISH GAS ESSENTIAL ROAD WORKS IN WESTBURY
British Gas South Western is starting mains renewal work in Warminster road in Westbury from 13 April.
A 300 metre section of main between the junctions of Bratton Road and Leigh Road will be replaced by corrosion resistant polyethylene pipe.
Wiltshire County Council Highways department have been involved in the planning of this project and will be putting up advanced warning signs, highlighting alternative routes for light traffic.
Temporary traffic lights will be in operation during the main laying, to ensure the working area is safe for road users, pedestrians and gas engineers.
The temporary traffic lights may be needed after the main laying, while engineers transfer services to local homes and businesses.
There will be weekend working, to help complete this project as quickly as possible.
The main laying is expected to last approximately eight weeks, then the connection of services to properties will take about four weeks to complete.
There will be some disruption to traffic while the work is in progress and British Gas South Western apologises for any inconvenience which may be caused by this essential work.
QUIET!— BRITISH GAS AT WORK
A team of volunteers from British Gas Plymouth & Cornwall District will be rolling up their sleeves to build a ‘quiet area’ for the pupils at Bere Alston County Primary School on the weekend of 24 and 25 April.
Local pupils have taken a great interest in the British Gas work, which is bringing gas supplies for the first time to the Bere Alston and Bere Ferrers communities, where more than a third of the 1042 homes in the area have taken up the offer of gas.
Some pupils, doing a project on Bere Alston, wrote to British Gas about the noise created by machines used to lay some of the 15 kilometres of gas pipes, including the news that pet rabbit, Midnight, wanted her peace and quiet back again!
The Company has responded by offering to create a quiet area in the playground, with benches, stone tables, a garden and hanging baskets.
‘Many pupils have long wanted a quiet, peaceful area in the school so they can talk, read and think during playtimes and lunch breaks,’ said Mrs andrea Bradshaw, the Deputy Head.
‘There was little possibility of the school being able to provide such an area until British Gas stepped in with their generous offer.
the children would also like to include a plaque in memory of Jamie Bulger, as part of this area.’
Materials for the project have been kindly donated by Travis Perkins, T.M.T. Landscaping Services, Avonmead [Engineering]and Beazer Homes.
The completion of the quiet area will be celebrated by a British Gas tea party for the pupils on 30 April.
Notes to News Editor
You are invited to send a representative to cover the quiet area construction between 9am and 5pm on 23 and 24 April.
The tea party will be at 2pm, at Bere Alston County Primary.
BRITISH GAS ON THE BALL WITH GIRLS' SOCCER
Soccer coaching for girls in Bristol has been given a boost from British Gas South Western.
The company is donating £500 from the British Gas South Western Community Relations Fund for the provision of girls soccer skills tuition at Hartcliffe School.
This new coaching scheme has only started this season.
On Tuesday 27 April, at 3.30pm, Nick Scadding, British Gas Bristol South District General Manager, is presenting the donation to Hartcliffe Leisure Ltd, the organisation which promotes and develops the community use of Hartcliffe School's facilities.
Mr. Scadding will also meet some of the young footballers on the playing field.
‘There has been an enthusiastic response to the introduction of soccer coaching for girls.
A team has been formed and is playing regularly.
It would not have been possible without this generous sponsorship by British Gas and we are very grateful to them,’ said Dick Pringle of Hartcliffe Leisure Ltd.
Note to News Editor
You are welcome to cover the donation event at 3.30pm on 27 April, at the playing field of Hartcliffe School, Teyfant Road, Hartcliffe.
For more information about the soccer coaching, please contact Vic Ecclestone at Hartcliffe School.
GREEN MACHINE FOR BRISTOL ENERGY CENTRE
A ‘Green machine’— a British Gas South Western sponsored Escort van, which runs on natural gas — has been presented to the Bristol Energy Centre.
The only Esocrt van of its kind in the south west, the 1.4 litre vehicle operates either on natural gas or petrol, which can be chosen at the flick of a switch.
The environmental benefits of natural gas include cutting carbon monoxide emissions by approximately 70%, reducing carbon dioxide by up to 30% and eliminating virtually all of the lead which contributes to air pollution at street level.
NGVs also bring reduced operating and maintenance costs and extend engine life.
‘We're delighted to be able to use this van — a clear example of our commitment to an improved environment,’ said Bob Maggs, General Manager of Bristol Energy Centre.
‘We will be mainly using the NGV for visiting householders in the Bristol and Avon area who qualify for home improvement grants under the government's Home Efficiency Energy Scheme.’
Reg Dixon, British Gas South Western Operations Director said: ‘British Gas is a well known supporter of energy efficiency and of protection of the environment.
We're pleased to help the Centre with this very appropriate addition to their activities.’
British Gas South Western, which currently operates a natural gas Transit van in the Bath and Somerset area, will be developing its fleet of NGVs, with 18 NGVs planned to be in operation in and around Bristol before the end of the year.
GOLD FLAME SUCCESS FOR BRITISH GAS PLYMOUTH & CORNWALL DISTRICT
The hard working team from British Gas South Western's Plymouth & Cornwall District has won a special industry award.
the District has come second, out of 90 in the country, in the ‘Most Improved’ category of the British Gas Gold Flame awards.
‘It's all thanks to team work’, said District General Manager Andrew Lugg.
‘The commitment is there from every individual and working as a team, with that level of dedication, makes all the difference.
We're building on this success to provide customers with the highest standards we can offer.
I am extremely proud and my thanks and appreciation go to all the staff.’
British Gas South Western has five out of the country's top 10 most improved Districts in the Gold Flame awards and the news comes as the level of Gas Consumers Council complaints in the south west show the greatest improvement in the whole country — a fall of 34% — making the number of complaints one of the lowest in Britain.
Natural gas is a safe fuel, but did you know your gas appliances can give off a poisonous gas which can kill?
The poisonous gas is called carbon monoxide and gas appliances can produce it if they're not regularly serviced.
By law, the only people who can work on, or fit, gas appliances must be registered with CORGI, the Council for Registered Gas Installers.
British Gas is a member, so getting an appliance seen-to isn't difficult becuase a British gas engineer is only a phone call away.
Carbon monoxide has no smell and if your appliance hasn't been services for some time you may now be in danger.
Here are some signs to look for: soot deposits; discoloration; yellow or orange flame; heat stains; scorch marks…
Any of these and you've got real trouble.
Stop using the appliance and get it seen to.
Other clues aren't quite so obvious: unexplained headaches; sickness; tiredness; feeling weak; cold or flu-like symptoms.
If you or others get these problems after being in a room with a gas appliance burning, see a doctor, stop using the appliance and get somebody to see to it.
A hefty dose of common sense and a few golden rules can greatly reduce the risk of carbon monoxide in your home.
*
Only buy appliances which meet British standards.
Everything sold by British Gas is guaranteed to be safe.
*
If you go elsewhere especially if its secondhand tread carefully and, if in doubt, don't buy.
*
The new appliance should have one of these [KITE MARK OR BSI SAFETY MARK FROM P17 COMMITMENT TO SAFETY].
*
Only use British Gas or other CORGI registered installers.
You're breaking the law if you don't.
*
Follow the makers instructions.
[MAKE SURE VISUAL EMPHASISES ITS APPLIANCE INSTRUCTIONS.]
*
Don't use a water heater or cooker to warm a room.
*
Don't block ventilators or air bricks.
Gas appliances must breath fresh air, just like us.
*
Keep flues and chimneys clear.
[MAKE SURE VISUAL EMPHASISES BLOCKED FLUES CAUSE SPILLAGE INTO ROOM.]
*
Old fashioned water heaters can be a problem.
If you're using one like these…get in touch with British Gas, we'll be pleased to give advice on using it safely.
Better still change it for a modern one: we're to replace all open flued water heaters, and because of this, British Gas are giving terrific trade-in allowances, so check them out!
*
Have your appliances regularly serviced.
As a guide, gas central heating, water heaters and fires hould be services once a year.
Other appliances every two years.
British Gas has a range of regular service schemes which are well worth checking out.
Get yourself on ServiceCare and part of the deal means you don't have to remember when the service is due.
British Gas do that and drop you a line when the engineer's coming.
With a ServiceCare agreement, you get priority attention every day of the year.
So, if your boiler, fire or cooker goes down on Christmas day, we'll be there to sort things out.
From time to time there are special offers on gas fires.
There's one on now: for less than a tenner anyone can have a four point safety check.
Also, if you/re older or disabled you may qualify for a free British Gas safety check.
Unless you're a tenant, it's down to you to make sure gas appliances receive the regular expert servicing they need.
If you're paying rent, then it's the landlord's responsibility — make sure he has appliances serviced.
In either case, British Gas will be pleased to give you peace of mind.
Do get in touch, we're in the telephone directory under GAS — or pop into one of our showrooms.
Call soon — before it's too late.
DRAFT LETTER
Devon & Cornwall
On the 26 August, we will be holding the promised follow-up to our Emergency Services open day.
It will only involve representatives from the Police and British Gas South Western.
This ‘closed-door’ session is intended to be a meeting of minds involving a free and frank exchange of concerns, ideas and information with which to reduce, as far as is practicable, the possibility of terrorist acts against British Gas installations.
It must also ensure a mutual understanding of each others needs should such an incident, or similar occur.
Sadly, operational commitments prevented you from coming to the ‘Open Day’ and I will be pleased if you and Superintendent Pakes can attend this meeting, which will be held at our Riverside Headquarters in Keynsham, starting at 10.15.
A preliminary programme and agenda is enclosed and perhaps in your response, you will let me have other items you wish to have included.
DRAFT LETTER
Wiltshire Gloucestershire
On the afternoon of 26 August we will be holding the promised follow-up to our Emergency Services open day; it will only involve representatives from the Police and British Gas South Western and I will be pleased if you or other senior colleagues can take part.
This ‘closed-door’ session is intended to be a meeting of minds involving a free and frank exchange of concerns, ideas and information with which to reduce, as far as is practicable, the possibility of terrorist acts against British Gas installations.
It must also ensure a mutual understanding of each others needs should such an act, or similar, occur.
The meeting will, again, take place in our Riverside Headquarters in Keynsham and be preceded by drinks at 12.45 and lunch at 13.
OO.
A preliminary agenda is enclosed and perhaps, in your response, you will let me have any other items you wish to have included.
DRAFT LETTER
Avon & Somerset
On the 26 August, we will be holding the promised follow-up to our emergency Services open day.
It will only involve representatives from the Police and British Gas South Western.
This ‘closed-door’ session is intended to be a meeting of minds involving a free and frank exchange of concerns, ideas and information with which to reduce, as far as is practicable, the possibility of terrorist acts against British Gas installations.
It must also ensure a mutual understanding of each others needs should such an incident, or similar occur.
I will be pleased if you can attend this meeting, which will be held at our Riverside Headquarters in Keynsham, starting at 10.15.
A preliminary programme and agenda is enclosed and perhaps in your response, you will let me have other items you wish to have included.
QUALITY TRAINING
British Gas South Western training for success
MANAGEMENT
*
Do your managers have strong interpersonal skills?
*
Do you have a qualified managerial team?
*
Do you have a clearly defined training programme for your managers?
PERSONAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
This course builds confidence and develops interpersonal skills, using a variety of indoor and outdoor activities to encourage problem solving and teamwork.
INTERPERSONAL SKILLS
Courses in: Interviewing; delegation; assertiveness; time management and others can be tailored to meet your needs.
CERTIFICATED MANAGEMENT TRAINING
British Gas South Western training is accredited by both the Institute of Supervisory Management and the Business and Technology Education Council to deliver the following programmes:
*
Introduction to Supervision —[ISM]
*
Institute of Supervisory Management
*
certificate in Management Studies
GAS ENGINEERING
*
Do you install gas pipework in non-domestic premises?
*
Are you aware of the Health and Safety Executive's stringent safety requirements?
*
Do you comply with British Gas Standards I.M.2, I.M.5 and I.M.16?
Corgi registration requires that you do.
GAS SAFETY [ACOP 16]
British Gas South Western training offers:
*
Managers' Appreciation — know your responsibilities.
*
Gas Safety, Testing and Purging — an intensive theory and practical course including competence assessment.
*
Gas Catering Equipment Programme — ask us for details of our combined qualification.
HIGHWAY ENGINEERING — NEW ROADS AND STREET WORKS ACT 1991
We will train your supervisors and operators ready for accreditation.
Skills covered include: finding underground plant; signing; lighting and guarding; excavation and reinstatement.
HIAB
Your employees will learn how to safely position lorries and cranes, how to load, unload and sling loads safely.
MECHANICAL PLANT
Learn how to safely operate dumper trucks, skid-steer-loaders and mini diggers.
BUTT FUSION/ELECTROFUSION
Polyethylene pipe — jointing procedures, compatibility and cleanliness.
ABRASIVE WHEELS
Use the right machine, the right way, for the right job — a practical course.
CLERICAL/SALES/I.T
*
Do you have a staff development programmer?
*
Are meetings a pain or a pleasure?
*
Is computer illiteracy a problem?
COMMUNICATION
…is the main weakness in any organisation.
Training is available in telephone skills, letter writing, handling meetings or presentations, to help you meet your business objectives.
TRAINING
Can you identify your training needs; design, deliver and evaluate the solution?
If not, our Train the Trainer course can help.
SELLING
Our basic programme covers: Psychology of selling; questioning and listening skills; steps to a successful sale.
An advanced course develops existing expertise — exploring factors that influence the customer, business, produce and sales-person.
CUSTOMER CARE
Your employees have internal as well as external customers.
Our programme may help improve your standards of service.
BASIC COMPUTER SKILLS
New and potential users can grasp the basics of microcomputing — system components, function keys, Dosmate, general housekeeping and an overview of common application packages.
LOTUS 1-2-3
This practical course helps you grasp the concepts and capabilities of the spreadsheet package.
A more advanced course handles macros, strings, plus advanced mathematical and financial functions.
To meet the needs of over one million customers, British Gas South Western offers employee training which is second to none.
Now your Company can benefit from our trained trainers.
There is an exciting variety of instruction packages available — from gas engineering to basic computing skills; we will produce programmes tailor-made for your specific requirements.
Tuition can take place on your premises, or at one of our three fully-equipped training centres; each has restaurant facilities, plus free parking.
Residential courses are available.
Ideally, a ‘class’ will be six to fifteen people, but this is not a rigid condition; perhaps a ‘one to one’may be needed to cover particular points.
Flexibility of approach is a prerequisite to successful learning, and a willingness to adapt to your needs, and those of your workforce, is an important part of our business philosophy.
No two courses will be the same, as each is client ‘led’.
So, you supply the problem, we supply the training solution.
In short, British Gas South Western offers: Quality; Professionalism; Flexibility and Competitive Costs.
Natural gas Vehicles The Way Ahead…
Naturally
The Fleet Fuel Of The Future
The move towards natural gas as the vehicle fuel of the future is gathering momentum.
Backed by sophisticated research programmes throughout the world, endorsed by legislators seeking to meet clean air targets, and proven by more than 1 million drivers worldwide, natural gas vehicles [NGVs]are emerging as one of the most promising solutions to the problems of fleet managers.
Environmental Benefits
Many fleet managers are already looking at alternative fuels to meet EC emissions legislation.
Carbon dioxide emissions with natural gas are reduced by up to 30% compared to gasoline, and exhaust carbon monoxide by over 70%.
Natural gas is also virtually free of the lead, sulphur, particulates and aromatic hydrocarbons that cause pollution at street level.
NGVs are also popular with drivers, who comment that they are smoother and quieter than petrol or diesel powered vehicles.
Cost Benefits
The cost advantages are equally attractive.
Gas is slower-burning, resulting in reduced wear on principal engine components and reduced running costs.
The fuelling methods are simple, but totally secure.
Fleet managers in the US, Canada, and Australia report major cost reductions due to the elimination of fuel pilferage, lower maintenance and longer engine life.
And if the UK follows other countries and introduces tax incentives for NGVs, fuel cost savings will be even greater.
UK Development
To date, the UK has lagged behind other countries in terms of NGV technology.
Since its acquisition two years ago of Consumers Gas of Canada, a company with nearly ten years experience in NGV development, British Gas has been in the forefront of NGV research — in which it invests over £1 million a year in the UK.
Three British Gas research stations are working on improving and refining existing technology, and trials are underway in five British Gas regions.
Fleet Testing
Currently, 20 gas powered Maestro, Escort, Transit and Leyland Daf vans are operated by British Gas in the South East region, while in the North West 100 vans, mostly Escorts and Transits, are being converted.
In Scotland, dual fuel technology will be studied with vans running on a combination of fuels.
In the Midlands a Vauxhall midi van and an electronic fuel injection transit have been converted to run on gas for testing and as demonstration vehicles.
Initially, while the UK catches up with countries such as Canada [there are 30 filling stations in Toronto alone]it is likely to be the depot-based high mileage fleets that will be the first to benefit from NGV technology.
Engine Technology
Both spark ignition petrol engines and compression ignition diesel engines can be converted to operate with compressed natural gas [CNG].
Petrol engine vehicles simply need a CNG cylinder, valves, a regulator, a gas mixer, electronic controls, fuel guage and selector switch to enable the vehicle to operate either on gas or petrol.
Diesel engines can be converted to run on a gas/diesel mixture [dual fuel]or modified for spark ignition.
Meanwhile, vehicle manufacturers around the world are starting to produce dedicated natural gas engines, which optimise fuel consumption, increase power output and reduce fuel emissions even further.
Fuelling
Fuelling stations incorporate ‘fast fill’ techniques, where fuelling can be accomplished in a few minutes.
These can be petrol stations with gas facilities added or gas only operations.
The CNG is dispensed to a vehicle through a hose and filling stops automatically when a preset pressure is reached.
Slow fill refuelling at overnight refuelling points is also used by many fleets, and there is now the possibility of filling your vehicle at home overnight from your domestic gas supply.
Gas Storage
CNG is pressurised to 200 bar; a typical storage cylinder would have a capacity of approximately 50 litres.
Current research is being directed into reducing the weight of the cylinders and into storage in adsorbed form [ANG].
In this form of storage, adsorbents ‘condense’ methane molecules giving greater storage capacity at much lower pressures.
Cylinders can be stored underneath or on top of larger vehicles.
Safety
Safety issues have been paramount throughout modern NGV development — and CNG has several safety advantages over liquid fuels.
Firstly, gas is lighter than air and leakages dissipate in the atmosphere rather than forming a local hazard.
Secondly, as the ignition temperature for gas is approximately 700°C;, some 250°C; higher than that of petrol, the risk of fire is much reduced.
Finally, the gas cylinder, designed to withstand extreme pressure, is much stronger and less likely to be ruptured in an accident than conventional fuel tanks.
NGV Fleets Worldwide
Internationally, there has been a rapid growth in the use of NGVs. from Argentina, with 100, OOO vehicles, to Italy with 250, OOO.
10% of all vehicles in New Zealand are NGVs, while US legislation enforcing the adoption of cleaner alternative fuels has resulted in many government departments converting their fleets to run on natural gas.
The Australian government has just ordered a tranche of buses, and a further 900 could follow.
There are now over 1 million NGVs worldwide.
In the UK, the opportunities for NGV conversions and dedicated NGV vehicles are just beginning.
British depot-based fleets are in the enviable position of being able to take advantage of the technology now.
With a projected increase in gas filling stations in the next few years, the private vehicle market will follow.
Less pollution at street level.
Lower running costs.
Over £1 million a year investment in the UK.
Depot based fleets will benefit.
Bi-fuel, dual fuel or dedicated engines.
Fast, slow or home fuelling.
Compressed natural gas at 200 bar.
Less flammable.
1 million vehicles worldwide.