

PREFACE
This survey was designed and supervised by the Library's Research Officer,, in collaboration with , Planning and Services Officer, whose responsibilities at the time of the Survey included matters relating to conservation.
Thanks are also due to and , fieldwork students from the College of Librarianship Wales, whose invaluable assistance with its implementation made the Survey possible; to , Clerical Assistant, for her help in analysing the results; and to members of the Issue Hall and Book Fetching Staff for their co-operation throughout the exercise.
Keeper, Readers' Services
November 1982 
INTRODUCTION
In 1981 the Readers' Services Division of the National Library of Scotland conducted a Call-slip analysis and book condition survey.
The object of the exercise was to obtain information about
(1) the operation of the Library's book provision system,
(2) the types of material consulted by readers, and
(3) the physical condition of material issued to readers.
The Survey was based on an examination of the book application forms (commonly referred to as ‘call-slips’) submitted by readers over a period of a fortnight.
These call-slips, as submitted, already contained much of the information required, but for the purposes of the Survey additional information was added to them both by the members of staff to whom they were submitted, and by fieldwork students from the College of Librarianship Wales who physically examined the requested items before their delivery to readers.
A more detailed account of the methods used to implement the Survey is given in the Appendix.
The results of the Survey are presented in three sections, each of which begins with a summary of its major findings.
A fourth section outlines conclusions and recommendations.
It should be noted that the rounding of figures to the nearest whole number (or, occasionally, to one decimal place) can result in percentages totalling slightly more — or less — than 100%.
1 BOOK PROVISION
Summary
Of the 4173 requests for publications monitored, 195 (5%) could not be satisfied.
Of the items which were not supplied, almost half (48%) were already in use, just over a fifth (21%) were being bound, one in ten (10%) could not be located, and a further one in ten (10%) did not in fact form part of the Library's holdings.
Of the 3978 items supplied to readers, 89% were housed in the Main Building, 8% in the Annexe, and 3% in the Advocates' Library.
The delivery of more than nine out of every ten items (95%) was straightforward, but in the remaining cases delivery was, for a number of reasons, less than straightforward.
The most common reasons were: the return of the call-slip for verification; the initial provision of the wrong book; and the need to transfer the requested item from the reserve shelf of a previous (undergraduate) reader.
Straightforward deliveries direct to readers took comparatively little time for ‘ordinary’ books housed in the Main Building: more than half (52%) were delivered within ten minutes, and more than nine out of ten (92%) had been delivered within twenty minutes.
Early and rare books for consultation in the South Reading Room took longer, with nearly half (47%) taking more than thirty-five minutes.
Legal items from the Advocates' Library showed a similar pattern of delivery times, with just over half (51%) taking more than thirty-five minutes to reach the Reading Room.
The demand for ‘ordinary’ books fluctuated throughout the day, reaching peaks  shortly after the Library opened, and, on weekdays, just before lunchtime, and again in the early afternoon.
However, the average time taken to make straightforward deliveries to readers of ‘ordinary’ books remained remarkably stable throughout the day, never exceeding 17 minutes on weekdays and 19 minutes on Saturdays.
Any slight increase in delivery time occurred not necessarily when demand was greatest, but at periods of reduced staffing.
1.1 REQUESTS SATISFIED
During the fortnight of the Survey, 4173 requests for library material were monitored, and, of these, 95% were satisfied.
The 5% of requests which remained unsatisfied were investigated, and the reasons noted.
Table 1, below, shows the reasons which were identified.
As Table 1 shows, the fact that a requested item was already in use (that is, being read by, or reserved for, another reader) was the most important reason identified, accounting for almost half (48%) of all unsatisfied requests.
The binding of items emerged as the second most important reason for their non-availability, accounting for around one in five (21%) of unsatisfied requests, while the Library's inability to locate items when they were requested (10%), and a tendency for some readers to submit requests for items not appearing in the Library's catalogues (10%) were additional reasons which occurred with some frequency.
Together, these four principal reasons accounted for 89% of all unsatisfied requests.
1.2 LOCATION OF ITEMS ISSUED
Items issued to readers may come from the Library's Main Building, from its Annexe (located some distance from its Main Building), or, in the case of legal material, from the adjacent Advocates' Library.
Figure 2, below, shows the proportion of items issued which came from each of these three locations.
1.3 STRAIGHTFORWARDNESS OF DELIVERY
There are four main types of book delivery which can result from a reader submitting a call-slip, namely,
(a) a straightforward delivery to the reader, in which case the requested item is sent direct from the appropriate stack area to the reader's seat,
(b) a straightforward delivery to the reader's reserve shelf (if this has been requested by the reader),
(c) a delivery after initial failure, in which case either the wrong book is first sent, or delivery is made only after the call-slip has been returned for checking to the Issue Hall and has then been re-submitted, and
(d) a delivery after transfer, where the requested item proves to be already on the reserve shelf of another reader, but can be supplied after it has been transferred from that reader to the more recent applicant.
Of these four types of delivery, the first two (a-b) may be considered to constitute ‘straightforward’ deliveries, and the last two ‘non-straightforward’deliveries.
Investigation showed that, as illustrated by Figure 3, below, 95% of all deliveries made in the course of the Survey could be classed as straightforward.
Further investigations were carried out to determine whether or not the proportion of straightforward deliveries varied with the location of the items requested, to examine the proportion of deliveries from each location which were placed on reserve for readers, and to record the relative numbers of non-straightforward deliveries from each location which were attributable either to ‘initial failure’ or to the need to transfer items from another reader.
The reasons for initial failure were also examined.
In Figures 4–6, below, the shaded segments represent non-straightforward deliveries.
1.3.1 Straightforward deliveries: variation with location of material
As Figures 4–6, above, show, the percentage of straightforward deliveries was uniformly high, irrespective of the location of the requested items, and ranged only from 95% of deliveries in the case of books from the Main Building and the Annexe, to 97% in the case of material from the Advocates' Library.
1.3.2 Straightforward deliveries: proportion of items reserved
If the proportion of straightforward deliveries showed little variation with the location of the items requested, the proportion of deliveries to readers' reserve shelves showed considerable variation depending on the origin of the items issued.
Figures 4–6, above, show that whereas only 5% of items from the Main Building were placed on reserve, this figure rose to 23% in the case of material from the Advocates' Library, and 45% in the case of books outhoused in the Annexe.
These figures suggest that where items are available at all times (as in the case of items housed in the Main Building, which are accessible whenever the Library is open to the public) and can be delivered relatively quickly (as is again the case with items from the Main Building) readers will tend not to make advance reservations, but where access is restricted (as in the case of material from the Annexe and from the Advocates' Library, both of which have restricted hours of service) or where delivery may take some time (as is particularly the case with Annexe materials) advance orders will more frequently be placed.
1.3.3 Non-straightforward deliveries: transfers
In all cases, a small number of items were supplied to readers after having been removed from another reader's reserve shelf.
As Figures 4–6, above, show, the proportion of deliveries in this category ranged from 1% for items housed in the Main Building and the Annexe, to 3% for material from the Advocates' Library.
1.3.4 Non-straightforward deliveries: initial failures
Although, as shown in Figures 4–6, above, the proportion of ‘initial failures’ was relatively small, with none recorded in the case of material issued from  the Advocates' Library, and with only 4% and 3% of all deliveries from the Main Building and the Annexe falling into this category, they nevertheless merit close attention, since delays in the provision of items which are in fact available on the shelves can be a considerable source of irritation for both readers and members of staff.
The reasons for the delay in provision of such items were, therefore, investigated, and these are set out in Table 2, below.
As Table 2, above, shows, the failure of readers to provide adequate pressmark information (72 cases) and adequate title information (12 cases) together accounted for over half (54%) of all initial failures.
Reasons not attributable to readers were the querying of pressmarks which proved, on examination, to be correct (15%), and the sending of the wrong book against a correctly-completed call-slip (8%).
Problems (again not attributable to readers) were also caused by items which are not adequately identified by the pressmark supplied in their catalogue entry (9%), and by serials, of which the location of a particular issue may not be evident from information available in the Issue Hall (6%), while the sending of call-slips to an inappropriate part of the Library also caused some delay (4%).
1.4 DELIVERY TIME
By time-stamping a call-slip on its submission, and by recording on its second copy the time of its arrival, accompanied by the relevant book, in the Reading Room, it was possible to determine the time taken for a reader's request to be satisfied.
Since, however, there are legitimate reasons for certain categories of material taking longer than others to be delivered, it would be pointless simply to calculate the mean delivery time for all requests.
The delivery times for different categories of material are, therefore, discussed separately in the sections which follow.
Moreover, since the inclusion of items whose delivery was not straightforward, and of items delivered to reserve (the latter being given lower priority than direct deliveries to readers) would distort the results, in all categories the delivery times only of straightforward deliveries to readers are discussed.
1.4.1 'Ordinary' printed books and serials from the Main Building: delivery time
The great majority of requests were for ‘ordinary’— that is, neither early nor rare — printed books and serials from the stack areas of the Main Building.
From this category of material, 3122 straightforward deliveries to readers were made, and in the case of 3081 of these (99%) it was possible to calculate a delivery time.
As Figure 7, below, illustrates, over 90% of deliveries in this category were made within 20 minutes, and, indeed, over 50% were made within 10 minutes.
1.4.2 Early and rare printed books and serials from the Main Building: delivery time
Of the straightforward deliveries to readers, 62 were of items housed in the Main Building which were either early (pre-1700) or rare, and which, in accordance with Library practice, had to be consulted in the South Reading Room.
In the case of 55 of these items (89%), it was possible to calculate a delivery time.
As Figure 8, below, shows, the pattern of delivery times for this group of material was markedly different from that of ‘ordinary’ books probably because 48 of the items (87%) had to be fetched not from the Library's main areas of stackage, but from locked rooms and cases.
Thus, whereas more than half of the straightforward deliveries of ‘ordinary’ books were made within 10 minutes, in the case of early or rare books only 45% of straightforward deliveries from the Main Building took under 20 minutes, and nearly half (47%) took more than 35 minutes.
1.4.3 Legal material from the Advocates' Library: delivery time
Of the straightforward deliveries to readers, 92 were of legal material from the Advocates' Library, and in the case of 88 of these (96%) it was possible to calculate a delivery time.
Figure 9, below, shows the pattern of delivery times calculated.
As the figure shows, deliveries from the Advocates' Library (which are largely outwith the control of the National Library) tended to take longer even than deliveries of rare or early material, with more than half (51%) of all timed deliveries taking longer than 35 minutes, and with only 16% — around one in five — taking twenty minutes or less.
1.4.4 Material from the Annexe: delivery time
Since a van service, operating at fixed times, transports call-slips to the Annexe in batches, and brings the items requested back to the Main Building in batches, the time taken for straightforward deliveries of outhoused publications depends entirely on the time at which the request is submitted.
No attempt was made, therefore, to calculate the delivery times of individual items from the Annexe, since it is known that delivery times range from an minimum of just over three-quarters of an hour, for requests submitted immediately before the majority of the van's departures from the Main Building, to a maximum of around sixty-six hours, for requests submitted immediately after the van's final departure on Fridays (and longer at holiday periods).
It should be noted, however, that because of the extended turn-around period for outhoused items, ‘initial failure’ involving such material — that is, cases where the wrong book is initially sent, or where  the call-slip is returned to the Main Building for checking — are particularly serious, causing a minimum delay (over the normal delivery time) of two hours.
1.5 FLUCTUATIONS IN DEMAND AND CORRESPONDING MEAN DELIVERY TIMES
Fluctuations in the level of demand for books were identified by dividing the time during which the Library is open to the public each day into periods of fifteen minutes, and by noting the number of requests submitted within each period.
All requests for ‘ordinary’ books, where the time of submission had been recorded — a total of 3966 applications — were treated in this way.
Since it was intended to examine the ability of the normal book-provision system to cope with varying levels of demand by noting the relationship, if any, between the number of requests submitted in any one period and the average time for straightforward deliveries of ‘ordinary’ books from the Main Building within that period, requests for early or rare items, most of which are not supplied through the normal book-fetching channels, were excluded.
However, requests for ‘ordinary’ publications which could not be supplied, or whose delivery proved not to be straightforward, were included, since the submission of such a request is likely to be as time-consuming for book-fetchers — if not moreso — than requests which can easily be satisfied.
In Figures 10 and 11, below, the number of items requested within each fifteen-minute period on weekdays and on Saturdays is plotted against a scale on the left, while the mean delivery time for items supplied direct to readers within the same periods is plotted against a scale on the right.
As Figures 10 and 11 show, the demand for items from the stacks reached peaks at particular periods of the day.
In the morning, both on weekdays and Saturdays, peak demand came between 10.00 and 10.30, with a further surge in demand between 11.00 and 11.15.
On weekdays, a further peak occurred in the half hour before noon, but demand then dropped over the lunchtime period until 13.00, when it started to climb once more, reaching a peak at 14.15–14.30, after which it declined gradually until the end of the day.
However, although the level of demand for books fluctuated to a quite considerable extent throughout the day, Figures 10 and 11 also show that the mean delivery time for straightforward deliveries to readers of ‘ordinary’ items from the Main Building remained reasonably constant (never rising above 17 minutes on weekdays, or 19 minutes on Saturdays), and that those variations which did occur bore no direct relationship to the level of demand, for some of the better mean delivery times were achieved a periods of high demand, and vice versa.
It would appear, rather, that a number of the variations in delivery time which did occur were attributable, in part, to reduced staffing levels at certain periods.
Most notable was the small but marked increase in delivery time between 13.15 and 14.00 which can probably be accounted for by the gradual build-up of demand at a time when lunchtime rosters have effectively halved the number of bookfetching staff on duty, while a similar increase in delivery times for books requested between 16.45 and 17.00 (when demand is falling) is probably attributable to the change in shift and reduction in bookfetching staff which occurs at 17.00.
After 17.00 on weekdays, and on Saturday mornings, mean delivery times show a greater degree of fluctuation than at other periods, and while this may partly be explained in terms of the smallness of the samples from which these mean delivery times were calculated, it seems likely that a major factor was again reduced staffing levels at these periods.
It should be noted that the delivery times recorded were achieved  despite the fact that, owing to illness and vacation, the Book Fetching Unit was operating with less than its normal complement of staff throughout the periods of the Survey.
As has already been noted, requests for early or rare publications were excluded from the figures discussed above, which relate to the main book delivery service.
No attempt was made to treat early or rare books in a similar way to ‘ordinary’ material since the number of requests for such items was felt to be insufficiently great to produce meaningful results.
Nevertheless, it was noted that the mean delivery time for all early and rare items supplied was, at forty minutes, more than three times the overall average of twelve minutes recorded for ‘ordinary’ books.
It was also observed that eight individual delivery times for early and rare books exceeded one-and-a-half hours, and that three-quarters of these occurred between 12.00 and 13.00, which suggests that the increase in delivery times at lunch-time may be even greater for such material than for ‘ordinary’ books.
A more extended study of early and rare book deliveries would, however, be required to confirm this.
2 MATERIAL CONSULTED BY READERS
Summary
Neither the proportion of issues in languages other than English (4%), nor the relative popularity of particular foreign languages had changed radically since these features were last examined, between 1969 and 1972.
Modern publications were consulted by readers much more frequently than older material: 85% of all issues were twentieth-century publications, and 42% had been published only since 1970.
Overall, more than nine out of ten (93%) of the very recent (post-1976) publications issued to readers had come to the Library under copyright deposit legislation, the remainder having been acquired by purchase (6%) or donation (2%).
Of the few very recent publications in languages other than English, most (93%) had been acquired by purchase.
Of the recent English titles issued, most (94%) had been acquired by copyright deposit, but although the proportion of English titles which had been purchased was small (4%), in numerical terms they were three times as numerous as non-English purchases.
Three-quarters (76%) of all items issued were monographs, a fifth (19%) were serials, and the remainder (5%) were newspapers.
Of the newspapers consulted, two-thirds (66%) were national, a quarter (25%) were local, and the remainder were either foreign (2%) or belonged to a miscellaneous group of newspaper-type publications, such as trade newspapers (7%).
2.1 FOREIGN-LANGUAGE PUBLICATIONS
Over a period of three consecutive years, between 1 April 1969 and 31 March 1972, the Library measured the number of foreign-language titles consulted by readers, and recorded the relative frequency with which particular overseas languages were read.
It was felt that information of this kind could be helpful in the assessment of the Library's policy of purchasing major overseas publications to complement its holdings of UK material in the humanities and social sciences.
The results of these early surveys showed that the use made of foreign-language publications was low, and that the demand for them showed little, if any, variation from one year to the next.
In 1972 it was decided, therefore, to discontinue the monitoring of foreign-language issues.
With the implementation of the present Call-slip analysis exercise it became possible to review the situation after an interval of almost ten years, and in the tables which follow, those findings of the present Survey which relate to foreign-language material are set alongside the broadly comparable findings of the earlier periods.
2.1.1 Foreign-language publications: proportion of all issues
Table 3, below, shows that although the limited duration of the present Call-slip analysis exercise meant that fewer issues were monitored in 1981 than in earlier years, the proportion of all issues which were in foreign languages remained remarkably constant, at around 4%.
2.1.2 Relative popularity of particular languages
Table 4, below, shows the frequency with which particular foreign languages or groupings of such languages occurred among the non-English items read.
The results demonstrate that the relative popularity of the languages noted shows little variation over the periods surveyed.
2.2 DATE OF PUBLICATION
Over the two consecutive years between 1 April 1969 and 31 March 1971, a record was also kept of the date of publication of items issued to readers, where this had been entered on their call-slips.
In the tables which follow, and which illustrate the distribution of dated items first by century, and then by decade within the twentieth century, the findings of the 1969–70 and 1970–71 surveys are set alongside those of the present Call-slip analysis exercise.
As Tables 5 and 6, above, demonstrate, each period surveyed shows a broadly similar pattern of usage, with modern material forming a high proportion of all items of known date issued, and with material published in the decade prior to each survey accounting for a particularly high proportion of all dated issues supplied.
It should be noted, moreover, that the ability of the present Call-slip analysis exercise to determine the date of publication of a much greater proportion of items issued (97% as opposed to 65% on each of the two earlier occasions) means that its results are much more accurate, and that the higher incidence of pre-1900 publications recorded by the earlier surveys probably can, therefore, be attributed, in large measure, not to any radically different pattern of reading at these times, but to the fact that the numerous undated call-slips occurring then almost certainly contained a high proportion which related to more modern publications.
2.3 TYPE OF ACQUISITION
Material is acquired by the Library in a number of ways.
In broad terms, current UK and Irish publications are acquired under copyright deposit legislation, while other items are acquired by purchase or donation.
In order to discover how recently-acquired items being consulted by readers had been obtained by the Library, all post-1976 imprints issued (that is, all issues published in the five years preceding the Call-slip analysis exercise) were identified, and their method of acquisition determined by examining the Library's stamp on the verso of their titlepages.
In all, 838 post-1976 imprints were identified, and in 814 instances (97%) the method of acquisition was determined; in the remaining cases, which principally concerned newspapers and serials — types of publication which are stamped in a different way from monographs — the method of acquisition could not be established in the time available.
Figure 12, below, shows that of the post-1976 items issued, whose method of acquisition was know, 93% had come to the Library under copyright deposit legislation, with purchases and donations making up only 6% and 2 % of the total.
In order to test the assumption that the majority of the recent foreign-language publications consulted by readers had been acquired as part of the Library's purchasing programme, the 814 post-1976 imprints whose method of acquisition was known were divided into two groups: those in foreign languages, and those in English.
As Table 7, below, shows, although the sample of foreign titles was small, it did, as expected, contain a clear preponderance of purchased items.
On the other hand, it is worth noting that although the proportion of English-language material which had been obtained by purchase was small (4%, as opposed to 93% in the case of foreign-language material), because the number of items involved was substantially higher, in numerical terms these items — many of them probably North American publications — outnumbered non-English-language purchases by a factor of three to one.
2.4 MONOGRAPHS, SERIALS, AND NEWSPAPERS
All 3978 issued were categorised as monographs, serials, or newspapers.
Table 8, below, details the results obtained, and shows that although monographs accounted for the majority of issues, the demand for serials and newspapers was substantial, with one serial or newspaper being issued for every three monographs.
In addition, the nature of the newspapers issued was investigated by a visiting fieldwork student from Robert Gordon's Institute of Technology.
Details of his findings are given in Table 9, below.
As the table shows, two-thirds of all newspapers consulted over the fortnight of the Survey were national newspapers (including The Scotsman and The Glasgow Herald), a quarter were local (all Scottish), and the remainder were either overseas newspapers or ‘other’ types of newspaper, including trade newspapers.
3 PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MATERIAL ISSUED
Summary
Of the 3978 items issued to readers, 3729 (94%) showed no need of repair, but the remaining 249 (6%) appeared to require some attention.
Nineteenth Century publications contained a higher proportion of items needing treatment (27%) than publications from either earlier or later periods.
Overall, 20th Century publications showed a lower-than-average need for repair (3%), but items published in the early decades of the century came close to matching the figure for 19th Century publications, with, for example, 19% of all items published between 1900 and 1909 requiring treatment.
Moreover, although the overall proportion of 20th Century publications requiring repair was low, because so many modern publications were issued to readers, the total number of 20th Century publications requiring repair was high (accounting for 42% of all defective issues), and almost matched the number of defective 19th Century items recorded (50% of all defective issues).
When items requiring repair were categorised in order of increasing deterioration, 78% were found to be ‘Poor’, 18% ‘Bad’, and 4% ‘Fragile’.
There was no evidence, however, that older material was necessarily in a greater state of disrepair than more modern publications.
Just over one in every five newspapers issued (21%) needed repair, whereas only about one in every twenty monographs and serials (6% and 5% respectively) needed treatment.
Moreover, newspapers were in a greater state of disrepair than other publications, with 18% being classified as ‘Fragile’(as opposed to 2% for monographs and 0% for serials).
Although, overall, 6% of monographs were defective, monographs in original  (unrepaired) leather bindings showed an above-average need for repair, with 25% of such items being recorded as defective.
On the other hand, paperback monographs showed a lower-than-average need for repair: only 2% of them were classified as defective.
The most common specific defects exhibited by items requiring repair were: detached, or almost detached, boards (59%); loose, or almost loose, pages (27%); heavy soiling (20%); and brittle (apparently acidic) paper (18%).
Most items suffered from general wear and tear, but only one appeared to have been the victim of malicious damage.
3.1 OVERALL CONDITION
Before each item was issued, it was rapidly examined, and a specially-devised coding system was used to record, on its call-slip, its physical nature and condition.
The major element of the code was a single digit which indicated the overall condition of the item.
The categories to which an item could be assigned by the use of this digit are detailed in Table 10, below.
It should be noted that the five categories fall into two distinct groups: those where no repair is required in the foreseeable future (Categories 1–2), and those where repair — varying in extent and urgency — is required (Categories 3–5).
Table 11, below, shows how 3978 items issued in the course of the exercise were distributed among the various categories.
It shows that 94% of all items issued fell into the first two categories, and required no repair (although 24% were in a well-used condition and might eventually require some attention), while only 6% fell into the last three categories and were in need of repair.
3.2 PHYSICAL CONDITION AND AGE OF PUBLICATION
3.2.1 Proportion of items of different ages requiring repair
All items issued to readers were divided into groups on the basis of their date of publication, and the proportion of each group requiring repair (that is, falling into Categories 3–5) was calculated.
As Table 12, above, shows, a number of chronological groups contained a markedly higher proportion of items in need of repair than the overall figure of 6% already calculated.
Particularly noteworthy was the case of 19th Century publications, of which more than one in four (27%) were in need of attention — a higher proportion than for any other group, including those of earlier date (although it is acknowledged that the figures for earlier publications were in some cases based on comparatively small samples).
This would appear to confirm the frequently-expressed view that it is the books of the last century which are in greatest danger of deterioration.
On the other hand, however, although 20th Century publications, taken as a whole, showed a lower-than-average proportion of items in need of repair (3%), it would be wrong to conclude that such material is in no danger.
On the contrary, not only were some publications from each decade of the present century in need of attention, but a significant proportion of items from its first three decades proved defective, with 19% of items published between 1900 and 1909 showing the need for repair — a higher proportion than for any group other than 19th Century publications.
3.2.2 Number of items of different ages requiring repair
It must not be forgotten, however, that although a particular period may contain a low proportion of defective items, if publications from that period are in great demand, a larger number of defective items from that period may be issued (and may suffer further damage) than from a less popular period, even if the latter contains a higher proportion of items in need of repair.
This point is illustrated by Table 13, below.
As Table 13 shows, although 20th Century publications, taken as a whole, are known to contain a low proportion of defective items (3%), they make up significantly more than a third (41.6%) of all defective items issued, simply because more than eight out of every ten issues (82.6%) are 20th Century publications.
Indeed, the number of defective 20th Century items comes close to matching that of the largest single chronological grouping of defective items, composed of 19th Century publications.
The latter, although they accounted for only one in ten (11.5%) of all issues, accounted for half (49.8%) of all items in need of repair.
3.2.3 Extent of deterioration of items of different ages
Although consideration has already been given both to the proportion and number of items of different ages requiring repair, there is one further possibly  age-related factor which must be taken into account, and that is the degree of deterioration exhibited by the defective items identified.
In order, therefore, to establish the extent of the deterioration evident in defective items of different ages issued to readers, an examination was made of how, within each chronological group, items in need of repair were distributed among Categories 3–5 (‘Poor', ‘Bad’, and ‘Fragile’).
Its findings are set out in Table 14, below.
As Table 14 shows, the overall distribution of material in need of repair was such that more than three-quarters (78%) of all defective items issued were classified only as ‘Poor’ since they did not show major deterioration, while just under a fifth (18%) were classified as ‘Bad’.
Only one in twenty-five (4%) showed sufficiently serious deterioration to qualify as ‘Fragile’.
The table also makes it clear that older publications were not necessarily in a significantly greater state of disrepair than more recent items.
Thus although items from the second half of the 20th Century did appear to suffer from less serious deterioration than those from its first half (with no post-1950 material being considered ‘Fragile’), of all defective 20th Century publications noted, 7% were ‘Fragile’, whereas the comparable figure for 19th Century publications was only 2%, and even if the proportion of defective items placed in the  category of least deterioration —‘Poor’— was smaller for 19th Century items than for those of the 20th Century (76% as opposed to 80%), the difference was extremely slight.
Similarly, although the smallness of the samples of 16th, 17th, and 18th Century publications in need of repair means that conclusions about them must be treated with some caution, it is worth noting that if all pre-1800 items are treated as a group and the proportion of them allocated to each of Categories 3–5 calculated, their pattern of distribution (‘Poor' 78%; ‘Bad’ 18%; ‘Fragile’7%) comes close to matching that already established for all defective items.
3.3 PHYSICAL CONDITION AND TYPE OF PUBLICATION
3.3.1 Proportion of different types of publication requiring repair
In order to determine whether or not some types of publication were more likely to need repair than others, the proportions of monographs, serials, and newspapers in need of attention (that is, falling into Categories 3–5) were calculated.
Table 15, below, outlines the results obtained.
As Table 15 shows, while respectively 6% and 5% of monographs and serials (around one in twenty) needed attention, a substantially greater proportion of newspapers (21% — more than one in five) was defective.
3.3.2 Extent of deterioration of different types of publication
Not only did newspapers contain a disproportionately high number of items needing repair, but further investigation showed that those newspapers which were in need of attention tended to be in a much poorer condition than defective monographs or serials.
As Table 16, below, shows, whereas not one serial and  only 2% of defective monographs were categorised as ‘Fragile’, 18% of defective newspapers fell into this category, and while around eight out of ten defective monographs and serials (81% and 78% respectively) showed sufficiently little deterioration to be categorised as ‘Poor’, only six out of ten newspapers (62%) could be so described.
3.4 PHYSICAL CONDITION AND TYPE OF BINDING
The coding system used to record the physical nature and condition of items included an element which denoted the type of binding in which they were currently contained.
It was possible, therefore, to divide the items issued to readers into groups on the basis of their type of binding, and to calculate the proportion of each group which required repair.
The results of this part of the investigation, which was restricted to monographs only, are given in Table 17, below.
As Table 17 shows, although the number of items falling into each group varied considerably — with items in their publishers' hardback (cloth) bindings making up the largest single group — most of the groups contained a percentage of defective items which was broad comparable to the figure of 6% already recorded  (above, 3.3.2) as the overall percentage for all monographs.
There were, however, two exceptions.
The first was the group of monographs in original (unrepaired) leather bindings, which showed a substantially higher than average need for repair, with 25% of them proving defective, and the second was the group of monographs in paperback bindings, which contained a lower proportion of items needing repair (2%) than monographs in any other type of binding.
3.5 TYPES OF DAMAGE
The coding system used to record the physical nature and condition of items issued to readers also contained an element which enabled the presence of specific types of damage to be noted where these were very evident.
Some items suffered from more than one specific defect, while others suffered from none, showing merely general wear and tear.
Table 18, below, shows the percentages of all defective items which suffered from the specific types of damage noted.
As the table shows, detached, or almost detached, boards were the most common specific defect, affecting more than half (59%) of all items in need of repair, while loose, or almost loose, pages (27%), heavy soiling (20%), and apparently acidic paper (18%) were the only other specific defects which occurred to any significant extent.
Only one case of obvious malicious damage was noted.
It is worth recording, however, that further investigation showed that both acidic paper and detached pages appeared to be significant factors in the assignment of items to Categories 4 and 5 (the two ‘worst’ categories of overall condition), since although only 27% of all items requiring repair had loose pages, 43% of those in Category 4, and 60% in Category 5 were so affected, and although only 18% of all items suffered from apparently acidic paper, 30% of those in Category 4 and 60% in Category 5 suffered from this defect.
CONCLUSIONS
4.1 BOOK PROVISION
The picture painted by the Survey is one of a book provision system which is capable of coping remarkably well with the complexities of a Library whose collections have been built up over three centuries: a high proportion of requests are satisfied; the great majority of items are delivered to readers without difficulty; and the time taken for most items to be delivered is not only comparatively short, but, despite the fluctuating level of demand for printed books, shows little variation.
There are, however, a number of points, identified by the Survey, which may merit further examination with a view to the possible modification of existing practice.
4.1.1 Binding programme
More than one in five of the requested items which could not be supplied had been sent for binding.
Binding was the second most frequent reason for the non-availability of material, and — since the most frequent reason was simply that a requested item was already in use — it was the main reason which could be considered as in some measure attributable to the Library's own procedures.
More than three-quarters of the requested items which were at binding were serial parts being bound into volumes for the first time.
The problem is one which affects all libraries which follow a responsible programme of binding, since, for reasons both of conservation and security, serial parts must be bound as early as possible, with the result that they tend to become unavailable for consultation at a time when demand for them is relatively high.
The inconvenience which this causes can normally be reduced only by delaying the binding of serial parts until they can be considered to  be no longer‘current’, or by ensuring that the time which they spend off the shelves ‘at binding’ exceeds by as small a margin as possible the time required physically to bind them.
Since the first of these measures runs counter to the purposes of binding, it cannot be considered acceptable; it is suggested, therefore, that, wherever possible, current procedures for channelling material to and through the bindery be investigated, with a view to reducing to a minimum the time which such items spend off the shelf.
It must be recognised, however, that as long as the binding of most serial parts is — as at present— contracted out to a commercial bindery, delays incurred in the processing of such items between their leaving the Library and subsequently returning to it, will remain outwith the Library's control.
4.1.2 Serials
The Survey shows that many of the difficulties associated with book provision were caused by serial publications.
In addition to those caused by serial parts being bound (discussed above), difficulties were created (a) by applications for serials or serial parts which consultation of the catalogues would have shown did not form part of the Library's holdings,(b) by the Library's non-receipt of ‘current’ serial parts (sometimes up to two years after their nominal date of publication), and (c) by lack of information in the Issue Hall concerning the precise location of particular serial parts.
The first of these three problems, which is the most important in numerical terms — accounting for just under 10% of all unsatisfied requests — is also the most easily solved, and could very largely be eliminated simply by encouraging readers to consult the Library's catalogues before submitting a call-slip, and by making available to them printed instructions on the location and interpretation of catalogue entries for serial publications.
The second problem — which will increase in importance with the opening of  the Scottish Science Reference Library in 1986 — is more difficult to solve, as a certain amount of delay is inevitable since most serials are acquired indirectly, through the Library's Copyright Agent in London.
However, the prompter investigation of obvious delays in the receipt of current serial parts might go some way towards improving the situation.
Most difficult of all is the third problem, since the present manual system of serial control makes it impossible for up-to-date information about periodicals to be made available either in the Issue Hall or at other service points.
The introduction of a computerised system of serial control would, however, solve this problem and might also help to overcome the second problem by automatically alerting staff to inordinate delays in the receipt of particular serial parts.
4.1.3 Delivery time
Delivery times for most items were generally satisfactory, but there appears to be a possibility that readers consulting early or rare books in the South Reading Room have to wait a considerable time for items ordered over the lunchtime period.
An investigation to assess the accuracy of this impression (which is based on only a small sample of requests) should, however, be conducted before any steps are taken to reorganise the delivery of such items at lunchtime.
Books outhoused in the Annexe inevitably take longer to deliver than items stored in the Main Building.
However, the observation that the delivery time of a particular item from the Annexe depends very largely on how well the request for it fits in with the schedule of the van running between the Library and the Annexe, suggests that it might be helpful to readers if the van's times of operation and the main pressmarks of outhoused material were advertised.
This would enable readers to identify outhoused books, and to submit requests for them at times which tie in with the scheduled delivery service.
4.2 MATERIAL CONSULTED BY READERS
It is very clear from the findings of the Survey that little or no change has occurred in the patterns of demand for the major categories of material studied on earlier occasions: the overwhelming majority of items requested are still modern publications, and the demand for foreign-language publications (and, indeed, for publications in particular foreign languages) has remained constant.
As has already been noted, the number of foreign-language publications read cannot be taken as a direct measure of the success or otherwise of the Library's foreign purchasing programme; however, in 1973 the then level of demand for such items was described as ‘disappointingly low’, and the hope that the external circulation of lists of foreign accessions would have increased it was recognised to have been vain.
The present Survey makes it clear that the continued circulation of such lists has again failed to stimulate the use of foreign-language publications.
PHYSICAL CONDITION OF MATERIAL ISSUED
The value of the Survey's findings on book condition is that they relate to material actually issued to readers, and do not simply describe books stored on the shelves.
The distinction is an important one: books on a shelf may be in poor condition, and may indeed deteriorate in their locations (particularly when they are made up of self-destructive acidic paper), but their deterioration will be very much slower than if they are transported to a reading room for consultation by a reader.
Consequently, even although a high proportion of particular categories of material may be in poor condition in the stacks, if not many of them are issued to readers, they may be in less danger than other items which are more frequently issued.
The Survey makes this point very clearly by showing that not far short of half of all defective items issued (42%) were modern, 20th Century publications, a fact which underlines the danger of assuming that priority should automatically be given to the treatment of older material.
In addition to showing that the number of defective modern items issued is perhaps greater than might have been expected, the findings of the Survey also suggest that a number of items may be consulted with considerable frequency, for 94  requests remained unsatisfied because the desired item was already in use, and a further 59 items were supplied only after transfer from a previous reader's reserve shelf.
This fact, linked to the evidence that a high proportion of defective issues are suffering from use-related types of damage — such as detached boards and loose pages — points very strongly to the conclusion that the routine vetting of material supplied to readers should have a major role to play in the selection of items for repair and refurbishment.
APPENDIX: IMPLEMENTATION PROCEDURES
Any reader who wishes to consult a publication must normally enter details of it — including its title, date of publication, and pressmark — on a call-slip, and must submit the latter to the Library's Book Issue Counter.
The call-slip, which is in duplicate, is then transmitted to the shelf where the item is located, and its top copy is left on the shelf, while its second copy accompanies the requested item to the Reading (or to the South Reading Room via the Reading Room).
During the period of the Call-slip analysis and book condition survey — that is, between 12 and 24 January 1981 — the second copy of each call-slip submitted to the Issue Counter was stamped by a member of staff with the time and date of its submission, and when it ultimately arrived in the Reading Room, accompanied by the book to which it related, the time and date of its arrival was recorded on it by one of two fieldwork students from the College of Librarianship Wales who assisted in the implementation of the Survey.
The same fieldwork student would also rapidly examine the publication in question, and, using a code, would record on the call-slip the type of publication issued, as well as details of its method of acquisition and physical condition.
If the item's date of publication had not already been entered, this too would be recorded before the book was released for distribution to the reader.
In the evening and on Saturday mornings, when most publications are not delivered to the Reading Room but have to be collected from the Issue Hall, all publications were examined by the Library's Research Officer at the Issue Counter.
Normally, when a reader no longer requires a book, it is returned to its location in the stacks, and the second copy of its call-slip, which would have been filed while it was being consulted, is cancelled and stored.
During the period of the Call-slip analysis and book condition survey, and for a fortnight afterwards — that is, until 7 February 1981 — all cancelled call-slips were  examined, and those relating to items issued during the fortnight of the Survey were set aside.
Relevant items of information were then transferred from these annotated call-slips to data sheets.
Call-slips for books which the Library was unable to supply were also collected and information transferred from them to data sheets.
Finally, using only manual procedures, all data sheets were analysed to obtain the results discussed in the Report.
It is worth noting that although, during the Survey, untrained personnel were expected to assess the condition of books — an activity usually carried out by experts — considerable efforts were made to ensure the accuracy and consistency of the records which they maintained.
Those involved were given a basic introduction to the causes of deterioration in books and to the terminology used in their description.
In addition, the coding system used to describe the condition of items was designed to be as simple and unambiguous as possible.
The experience gained in the use of this code (which contained three elements respectively describing overall condition, type of binding, and type of damage) suggested that it was largely satisfactory, and could, with only minor modifications, be used in subsequent surveys of book condition both within the National Library of Scotland and elsewhere.