

‘Lord of the Flies’ PIGGY 3E
Piggy was one of the main characters in ‘Lord of the Flies’, a book by William Golding about a group of public school boys, who get stranded on an island while being evicted during a war.
There were no adults, so the boys elected a leader, but there was always one boy who disagreed with everything, and that was Piggy.
Piggy was shown from three different angles in the book, firstly from how the writer described him, then there was how the other boys saw him and lastly how he saw himself.
The first person that we meet in the book is Ralph, a fair haired, good looking athletic boy, then in pure contrast we meet Piggy.
‘He was shorter than the fair boy and very fat.
He came forward, searching out safe lodgements for his feet, and then looked up thick spectacles.’
Before we learned the  boys' names they were referred to as the fair boy; a positive attribute, and the fat boy; a physical defect.
We were later told about Piggy's asthma which stopped him from doing many physical things like swimming and running.
Piggy unfortunately had also got diarrhoea caused by the fruit.
This introduction to Piggy makes you immediately either sympathise with him or think that he was a pathetic little boy.
My first reaction was to sympathise with him as he was making an effort to speak to Ralph, it was just Ralph who was making life hard for him.
It is also very difficult not to feel sorry for someone who has so many negative characteristics.
Piggy was the first of the two boys to talk about the others on the island.
‘I expect we'll want to know all their names,’ said the fat boy, ‘and make a list.
We ought to have a meeting.’
This is the first hint that we get that perhaps Piggy is a more mature and sensible boy than Ralph.
Amongst all the negative characteristics that Piggy was given the four which were stressed the most were his asthma, glasses, physical appearance and most of all the loss of his parents.
‘My dad's dead, and my mum —.
I used to live with my auntie.
She kept a sweet-shop.
I used to get ever so many sweets.
As many as I liked.’
He often thought of what his auntie had warned him about, and often said things like
‘My auntie told me not to run,’ he explained, ‘on account of my asthma.’
The loss of his parents was very important in helping you understand the character of Piggy.
The positive attributes of Piggy stressed were his mature attitude, good scientific understanding, which helped him to dismiss the beast quickly, and clear head (which became very important towards the end of the book).
In general Golding built up Piggy's character by only stressing his bad points, so that Piggy could get full  sympathy from the reader.
Ralph, the first boy to come into contact with Piggy did not try to be friendly towards him.
He simply made fun of Piggy's looks and his ‘ass-mar’.
When Piggy told Ralph his nick-name, Ralph laughed very insensitively.
The other boys mainly showed a very condemning attitude towards Piggy.
To begin with the little-uns looked on Piggy as their parental figure because he always acted like an adult in their eyes and tried to make them laugh.
‘Piggy moved among the crowd, asking names and frowning to remember them.
The children gave the same simple obedience as they had given to the men with the megaphones.’
The older boys immediately saw Piggy for what he looked like.
Piggy had been asking everybody's names —
‘You're talking too much,’ said Jack Merridew.
‘Shut up, Fatty.’
Laughter arose.
‘He's not Fatty,’ cried Ralph, ‘his real name's Piggy!’
A storm of laughter arose and even the tiniest child joined in.’
And so Piggy lost all respect from the ‘little-uns’ which was never to be  regained .
Jack always saw Piggy as a burden and if it had not been for Piggy's spectacles Piggy would have been even more hated by Jack.
Most of the older boys agreed with Jack and believed that Piggy was a  middle-aged wet blanket because he always thought he knew best about everything.
‘I don't believe in no ghosts — ever!’
Jack was up too, unaccountably angry.
‘Who cares what you believe — Fatty!’
The only exceptions were Simon, Ralph and later the twins.
Simon the saint figure kept up his Christian idea of loving the un-lovely and treated Piggy like in the story of the ‘Good Samaritan’.
Jack had refused to give any meat to Piggy —
‘Simon sitting between the twins and Piggy, wiped  his mouth and shoved his piece of meat over the rocks to Piggy who grabbed it.
The twins giggled and Simon lowered his face in shame.’
Half of the way through the book when things started to go wrong Ralph realised that Piggy did have some valuable points.
He said into himself when he was losing power
‘I can't think — not like Piggy.’
The twins also began to see towards the end of the book that Piggy was very clever and started to show him some respect.
Piggy believed that he had overcome his disabilities and looked at himself in a very different way from the other boys.
He thought that it was good to be  down-to-earth and scientific.
He thought of himself as a responsible and dependable person.
He volunteered to go on the expedition to explore the island with Ralph and Jack, but they did not like him, so did not allow him to go.
He knew that he was clever and always wanted to say his piece in meetings.
Piggy felt that he had good leadership qualities, and during the voting, he held back to see if anybody was left to vote for him.
Piggy believed that he was perfectly innocent and after  Simon's murder he refused to believe that he had taken part in the killing.
Piggy felt that everybody else had held onto their civilised upbringing like himself and he was always very surprised when nobody tried to steal the conch, right to speak, from him, but everyone else knew that democracy and civilisation on the island had ended, and the conch had lost all of  its power and worth.
Overall I believe that Simon's view of Piggy was the most accurate.
he saw from the start that Piggy was a clever boy with many qualities, and he did not care about what Piggy looked like, but he knew as well that Piggy was evil like the rest of them.
Piggy had a very important role to play in the book.
He was a kind of punch-bag for Jack, as all Jack's anger was taken out on Piggy.
Together with Simon, Piggy had always got different solutions for problems because he looked at the world scientifically.
There was a lot of symbolism connected with Piggy in the book: his glasses were a symbol for sight and wisdom; as when Piggy took them off he could neither think nor see properly.
 They were also a symbol of hope as  they lit the fire, the signal sent out to get rescue.
His asthma was a symbol of weakness and impracticability as he was not able to do any of the physical jobs on the island.
The conch, right to speak, which Piggy always carried, was the symbol for democracy and Piggy's death and at the same time the smashing of the conch signalled the end of democracy and civilisation for the boys.
I believe that if Piggy had not had so many physical defects he would have been allowed to make himself heard.
He would, perhaps, not have been so pushy and annoying to the other boys; as that was the result of not being allowed to say what he felt in the past.
Piggy might have been able to save the boys; as with his sensible, mature attitude resulting from the trauma caused by his  parents' death, he could have made a great impact on the boys.
Why do so many governments, rich and poor, spend so much money on military equipment and weapons which rapidly become obsolete and which ordinary people throughout the world hope will never be used?
There are enough nuclear weapons in the world today to kill every man, woman and child at least twenty times over.
I find it very difficult to understand why governments spend so much money on military equipment.
But every country gives a different for their military spending.
Many governments round the world say that they spend a lot of money on military equipment because they need to defend themselves against other countries that might try to take over their territory.
In some cases this is justified, as in Israel.
Israel is surrounded by countries which are very hostile to her and do not accept her existence.
In 1948 the United Nations gave Israel to the Jews in Israel.
Everybody else was told to move to the neighbouring countries of Jordan, Syria, Egypt and Lebanon.
The Jews were given Galilee and Nager, and Judea and the Rift Valley (West Bank) were given to Jordan.
Israel's neighbours attacked her and eventually after lots of fighting Israel gained control of the West Bank.
Israel is still under pressure from her surrounding countries who often threaten her.
Other countries are not so justified in saying they spend so much on military equipment because they need to protect themselves, like Iraq.
Saddam Hussein says that he needs to protect himself from Iran.
Iraq would be much more justified to say that she spent lots of money on military equipment so that she could invade other countries like Iran to gain more land.
Another country which has weapons for the same reason as Iraq is the Arab state of Libya.
Libya has been accused of international terrorism and was accused of supplying weapons to the IRA to help them with their terrorist campaigns here in the UK.
Libya also allegedly planted the bomb on the PAN AM flight which crashed over Lockerbie.
Some governments say that in order to keep the rebellious  minorities down within their own countries they must have a large military strength.
In some countries rebels make up their own military force and rise up against the government.
This is usually triggered by disagreements over their rights.
A country which has problems with rebel minorities is Iraq with its Kurds and Shi'ites.
The Kurds regard themselves as a separate race of people from the rest of Iraq and wish to join with the Kurds of Turkey and make a new Kurdish state.
Saddam Hussein disagrees with what the Kurds would like and has been trying to  eradicate them from Iraq by killing them with his  powerful army.
Some of the more developed countries make lots of arms to sell abroad.
The firms which sell the weapons, driven by profit, become very sly and can trick their governments into allowing export of goods which are illegal.
Witness the Iraq supergun.
The Soviet Union wanted Cuba to be its ally so gave Cuba many weapons including nuclear missiles.
Cuba pointed these missiles towards America and threatened to use them, unless the USA removed missiles from Turkey.
Kennedy, the President of USA, and Khruschev of USSR went into conference and eventually Khruschev backed down and removed the missiles.
This was called the ‘Cuban Crisis’ and could have meant the start of World War Three.
Many countries say that they have to make arms to give the population jobs.
Making arms does create jobs because new factories need to be built and run.
There is a controversy going on in America at the moment  because President Bush has decided to cut his military arsenal which means that many people working would lose their jobs, and  because of the recession there is not much chance of them getting other jobs.
When a naval base or arms factory is closed down, people move away to find jobs.
This means that nobody is around to use the local amenities including shops, taxi services, libraries and the like.
A few governments say that they own weapons to provide a part of a United Nations peace-keeping force.
If no countries had armaments they would not be able to provide for a UN peace-keeping force.
But this is not a good enough reason to have a large military arsenal since peace-keeping forces in the past have only consisted of soldiers and personal defence weapons.
I initially thought that all countries would be affected by the statement that you need to  build military arsenals to keep the populations employed.
After my research I found that only the rich countries make weapons and the poor countries simply buy the finished goods.
I was sure when I started my research that I would be able to say that governments were greedy and liked to sell lots of arms to countries who were very poor and who only needed basic things like food and shelter.
Instead, I found that military firms are to blame for selling all the arms to these poor countries and most of the sales go on without the governments knowing.
I thought that controlling rebellious minorities was a step that all countries would have to take, but I found that if people discuss and compromise then most disagreements can be solved quite easily.
With democracy the keeping down of rebels is not usually needed.
Witness that Great Britain's last civil was in the 17th century.
Many countries do spend a lot of money on military arsenals  so that they can invade and terrorise other countries.
But now that there is the United Nations there should be no need for these barbaric acts to take place.
The excuse of self-defence should also no longer apply now that there is the United Nations.
I have shown that with the help of the United Nations, military spending should not be necessary.
GRADE1 ‘LORD OF THE FLIES’ Tutorial Paper PIGGY
Piggy was one of the main characters in ‘Lord of the Flies’.
William Golding described Piggy in a way which made us feel sorry for him.
Ralph and Piggy were the first characters to be mentioned in the book therefore you knew that they were either going to be friends or enemies.
Piggy was described as a fat boy with glasses and asthma.
His glasses were the main symbol for sight and intelligence as when Piggy took them off he could neither think nor see properly.
His asthma was a symbol of weakness and impracticability as he was not able to do any physical activities on the island.
He was always down to earth and had very little imagination.
When they first arrived on the island Ralph said that his dad would come and get them, but Piggy said
‘Not them, Didn't you hear what the pilot said.
About the atom bomb?
They're all dead.’
This was not a very positive thing to say because Ralph lost some morale which could have been very dangerous at such an early stage.
He was quite mature and the boys did not like it.
They thought he was a middle aged wet blanket.
When the boys were rioting Piggy said in disgust
‘Like a crowd of kids’.
The little-uns thought he was strange because he did not want to play.
He was quite insecure about being away from adults and at the beginning of the book he repeatedly asked Ralph if there were any adults on the island even though Ralph did not know.
Piggy had no sense of humour and often got very angry when other boys found things he did amusing.
Piggy was seen as a responsible and dependable person and was left to look after the little-uns and to begin with was their parental figure.
Piggy first started democracy by giving a small boy the conch or right to speak.
He knew that if the rules were broken early on they would be broken later too.
Piggy felt that he had good leadership qualities and during the voting he held back to see if anyone would vote for him.
He had a good scientific understanding and quickly dismissed the beast.
Unfortunately Piggy had been demoted to an object of ridicule by this point in the book so nobody listened to him.
Piggy did not seem to understand human nature and naively told Ralph about his nickname and expected Ralph not to tell anyone.
Piggy wanted a sign from the adult world as he thought they were civilised even though they were at war.
Piggy had ruled out the beast scientifically and when he said
‘Unless we get frightened of people’
he was saying that he was frightened of Jack Meridew, who treated him like a punch bag.
When later on in the chapter Simon said similarly
‘What I mean is…maybe it's only us’
, Piggy became offended and said
‘Nuts’
.
This was because he refused to believe that he was a bully.
Later on in the book when the boys killed Simon, he refused to believe and accept that they were murderers.
Piggy's glasses became the only part of him that the boys were glad to have — as they lit the fire.
When Piggy's glasses were smashed he became worthless.
Piggy had a short temper and when he was not allowed to speak he very quickly became angry.
When Jack went away Piggy became more self confident and practical.
He even helped to light the fire.
This made Ralph and the twins respect him more.
Piggy always kept clear minded and never got confused like Ralph did.
Piggy always had to remind Ralph about being rescued.
The description of Piggy's death was very scientific and had no feeling.
It was almost like the death of a pig rather than a human.
It was either as if Roger, his murderer, was describing it or even Piggy himself.
It was very detached and clinical.
His death would have been diagnosed as extreme negligence as although Roger did drop a huge stone on him, he did not mean to kill him.
After his death Ralph especially realised what Piggy could have done if only he had been listened to.
I feel that Piggy's lack of the understanding of human nature ruined the chance of democracy for the boys.
If Piggy had not told Ralph his nickname in the beginning he would not have been made a ridicule of before the vote.
Very small children are not bothered about appearance and Piggy was popular with the little-uns.
I think that given the chance the little-uns would have voted Piggy in as their leader.
Piggy would almost  definitely have saved the boys as he could have held on to their love for civilisation by telling them his stories about his auntie, as both his parents were dead.
He showed he like democracy and civilisation by carrying the conch everywhere.
We know that the boys still cared for civilisation as they were glad to be rescued and cried in shame at the end of the book.
Comparative Essay WILLIAM GOLDING ‘Lord of the Flies’(pg 34,35) v R. M. BALLANTYNE ‘Coral Island’(Chapter 10)
The episodes in both books are the same, or very similar.
In each the boys find a tree which looks as though  its buds are candles.
Then the boys try to kill a pig.
When Ballantyne's boys found the tree they look at the wonder of the wildlife.
Ballantyne's boys simply stare while one of Golding's boys is not appreciative and very destructive towards the tree.
Jack is not bothered what the tree looks like because it is not good enough to eat.
I feel that Golding's description of the attitudes of the boys is much more realistic than that of ‘Coral Island’ because boys are violent and are not always good.
Ballantyne's boys were very soft when they first saw the pig because they did not want to disturb it when it was sleeping.
They did try to kill the piglet, but as  they were quite frightened and obviously not from the right background, they were not very practical about it.
Golding's boys knew exactly how to go about killing the pig, but did not have enough courage to go about it.
The Ballantyne boys spoke about their mistakes and then nothing else was said.
Golding's boys kept into themselves that they were ashamed about having enough courage to kill the pig.
I think that the way in which Golding described the act was much more realistic than Ballantyne's.
The atmosphere in Ballantyne's book was very relaxed and optimistic, but in Golding's it was very tense because the boys were very angry at themselves and each other.
The description of the island in Ballantyne's book was much ‘nicer’ and was described as if the boys were in paradise or in heaven.
On Golding's island there was mounting tension because although the island was almost paradise it did have  its problems.
The terrain seemed much harder to cross in Golding's island.
I feel that this is a symbol of all the problems on the island.
But there are other difficulties on Golding's island which are never spoken of on Ballantyne's like the need for food.
Ballantyne's book was originally written for children and so the boys are often being described as perfect and everything seems to go right.
Golding's boys are never without problems and are certainly not described as perfect little darlings.
Ballantyne's boys are about twenty five years old and the oldest boy in Golding's book is only just twelve.
Ballantyne's style is old fashioned and Golding's is more modern and up to date.
Analysis of Speech ‘Julius Caesar’ Act II Scene I Lines 10–34
Brutus
‘It must be by his death; and for my part,
I know no personal cause to spurn at him,
But for the general: he would be crown'd.
How that might change his nature, there's the question.’
Brutus says that the conspirators must kill Caesar to protect the general reason for killing Caesar, but the general public wanted to crown Caesar and the public didn't realise what Caesar was like.
Brutus is though apprehensive that Caesar could change his personality when he got total power.
‘It is the bright day which brings forth the adder,
And that craves weary walking.’
Brutus compares Caesar to a snake and says that as it is bright day which brings forth the adder it will be  Caesar's crowning that would bring out his bad personality.
Brutus says that it would be the public who would see the effects of this sudden change of personality.
‘Crown him — that,
And then, I grant, we put a sting in him
That as his will he may do danger with.’
Brutus says that if Caesar is crowned he will not only turn into a dangerous animal, but it will allow him to harm the public.
‘Th' abuse of greatness is, when it disjoins
Remorse from power; and to…’
Brutus again talks of Caesar's authority becoming corrupt because of using it without really thinking about the consequences.
‘…and to speak the truth of Caesar,
I have not known when his affections sway'd
More than his reason.’
Brutus says that Caesar's feelings have never moved him so much that he had lost his sense of reason.
‘But 'tis a common proof
That lowliness is young ambition's ladder,
Whereto the climber-upward turns his face;
But when he once attains the upmost round,
He then unto the ladder turns his back,
Looks in the clouds, scorning the base degrees
By which he did ascend.
So Caesar may.’
Brutus says that an ambitious man often puts on a humble act to gain popularity and then stops the act when he gains power.
He also says that  Caesar started off in the lower classes and  built himself up to where he stood and could only look down on the lower classes by turning his back on his friends and former colleagues.
‘Then, lest he may prevent.’
We must stop this from happening before it does.
‘And since the quarrel
Will bear no colour for the thing he is,
Fashion it thus — that what he is, augmented,
Would run to these and these extremities;’
Brutus says that he has no real reason to believe that Caesar would change his nature like this but because they had no proof either was it would be too much of a presumption to say that he would not change at all.
‘And therefore think him as a serpent's egg,
Which hatch'd would as his kind grow mischievous,
And kill him in the shell.’
Brutus again compares Caesar with a reptile.
The speech by Brutus tells you a lot about his character.
It shows that Brutus is a very thoughtful person who cares a lot about his fellow humans and will risk a lot to help them when he feels that they are in need ie. he will risk his position in the rule to make sure that Caesar will not bring any harm to the general public.
Brutus also begins to show his fear of Caesar by repeatedly speaking of Caesar as being a venomous reptile.
I do not feel that Brutus’ motives for killing Caesar were strong; they were feeble.
You can't say that your reason for taking someone's life is because they might change if they become emperor.
There are too many imponderables.
Brutus has no reason for thinking that Caesar would change his nature.
He says his only reason for deciding to kill Caesar was that he had committed himself to help the general public.
(Brutus' family records show that there was a strong tradition of dedicated republicans.)
I feel that it is much more likely that Brutus was strongly influenced by the anonymous letters which Cassius had sent him.
These letter flattered Brutus and begged him to do something about Rome.
The letters convinced Brutus that many more people opposed Brutus than actually did!
The arguments which Cassius made before this speech probably also helped to swing Brutus' ides.
Because Brutus was such an idealistic character he felt that he would have to take important steps towards saving Rome from the evil grasp of Caesar.
This speech although, shows Brutus to be very sincere and made him gain great admiration from the other conspirators.
It also shows that Brutus was quite naive towards the reasons  which the other conspirators had for killing Caesar.
This was a very important speech in developing the plot of the play because it tells you much more about the slightly muddled character of Brutus and his reason for killing Caesar (to help the public).
Whether this was a feeble reason or not, this was the only one admitted to by the character, so we must respect it; as Brutus was a dedicated republican.
Children's Story
Boris Is Best
Hi, my name is Amy, something very strange happened to me last night.
Would you like to hear about it?
Well, Here it is, but before we start you may be surprised by the things that happened, but I promise all my tale is true.
It started when I was having tea…
‘Pass the salt please, Amy,’
‘No!’
‘Now dear,’ said Mum ‘Your brother asked for the salt and I suggest that it might be polite if you were to do what he asked.’
‘No!’
‘Amy, what seems to be the problem?’ asked Dad.
‘It's not fair.
You don't care about me anymore.
Fraser got a new pair of trainers, Neil got a leggo set and Mark got books.
I got nothing.
I want a Game Boy.
All my friends have got them and I'm left out.
It's not fair.
I always knew you liked them better.
I never get anything I want!’
‘Now Amy,’ said Mum ‘Fraser needed those trainers for school and Mark got his books to help him with his maths.
It was  Neils’birthday when he got his Leggo.’
‘I didn't get anything for birthday!’
‘You got Boris the bear!’
‘His ear came off!’
I shouted ‘And he's really babyish and boring.’
‘I'll handle this,’ said Dad ‘Look Amy, you mother and I do not have much money.
We try to keep you all happy.
We feed you, keep you warm and give you a roof over your head.
We can't afford more than food at the moment.
It took us ages to save up for those trainers.
You don't need a Game Boy.
You don't use your imagination any more.
You used to be so good at that.
you could sit and play with your teddies for ages and you never complained.’
‘I hate you.
You just don't care!’
My Mum looked down at me and I could tell she was just about to cry.
My Dad shouted, ‘Go up to your room and don't come back until you have forgotten about Game Boys and can talk to us more like a seven year old.’
I stamped up the stairs, ran along the corridor, slammed my door and then jumped on my bed.
‘Who needs all these babyish dolls and teddybears, I never liked them anyway.’
I sank down into my bed and cried.
It was just then that I heard it; a small knocking sound coming from the direction of the cupboard.
I got up from my bed and walked slowly towards the cupboard, I turned the handle and stepped back.
No noise came so I peeked round the door.
Lying on the floor was my one legged soldier, Sam, who had fallen from the shelf.
I reached down to pick him up but as I bent down I felt tingling in my feet.
I started to shrink…smaller…and smaller…until I was only just bigger than Sam, my soldier.
I sat on the floor  and looked up.
The shelves towered above me and from where I sat on the floor it looked as though all of my toys were staring straight at me.
I turned to look at Sam but to my surprise he was not there.
I stood up and gazed at a small pile of my toys which had been thrown to one side of my cupboard.
As I looked I was sure that I saw Boris, my bear, wink at me.
I started to walk across to the pile and as I did, all my toys came to life and stood in a line facing me.
In the middle was Boris my bear.
‘So, you've come at last,’ he said.
‘You knew that I was coming’
‘Oh yes,’ said Boris ‘You had to come to be taught a lesson.’
‘A lesson,’ I said ‘But I don't go to school on Sundays.’
‘Not that kind of lesson,’ said a one eyed rabbit.
‘No,’ said Boris ‘You think that toys are babyish and you want a computer!’
‘Yes, that's right,’ I said.
‘Well we've got to teach you that you're wrong,’ said Boris.
‘You've not been playing with us so we have had to learn to play for ourselves.’
We landed on the first shelf.
‘Now don't talk, just look,’ said Boris.
On this shelf I found the rest of my soldiers.
They were in a straight line but when Boris clapped his paws they began to march.
Round and round they went, making figures of eight and sometimes stopping to salute their leader, the one legged soldier, Sam.
‘It's time to go,’ said Boris.
The next shelf we stopped on was filled with farm animals.
When Boris clapped his paws, like magic the farm came alive.
A dog started to round up sheep.
Pigs started to snuffle in the barn and cows began to eat their grass and flick their tails.
‘It's time to go,’ said Boris.
On my third shelf, I had put all my puppets and they put on a small puppet show for me.
On the fourth shelf my dolls danced for me.
On the fifth, and top shelf, my books told me stories about a girl with long hair, a strange little man with a funny name and two children and a witch.
I found that I had become very tired and once again Boris said ‘It's time to go.’
We flew down to the floor again.
‘You see,’ said Boris ‘Everybody needs to play.
With Game  Boys and other computers you don't need to use your imagination.
Play is the best thing you will ever learn to do.’
‘I understand,’ I said ‘I promise I'll always play with you from now on.’
‘It's time to go,’ said Boris.
As everybody waved goodbye I found myself growing back to my normal size.
As I grew my toys stopped moving.
I slowly closed the cupboard door and then settled down in my bed.
I woke up early in the morning and remembered about Boris and the cupboard.
Had it just been a dream or had I really shrunk?
I felt a sharp stab in my head so I reached up and found a piece of hay stuck in my hair, it must have come from the farm.
I ran over to my cupboard door and jerked it open.
Nothing moved inside except out of the corner of my eye I was sure that I saw Boris winking.
‘Of Mice and Men’ POEM
LENNIE
An awkward figure,
The massive bulk a mountain of strength —
Not even to be controlled
By  its simple owner.
His power so great.
His innocence; that of a child.
His first reaction; to panic
Makes him do ‘bad things’.
Locked in his own world,
His fairy tale like imagination
Builds up a picture
Of his own special Heaven.
His dream only to be fulfilled
As a result of death.
Critical Essay ‘Of Mice and Men’ GEORGE
George is one of the main characters in the book along with Lennie, a mentally retarded man with great strength which neither can control.
George begins to look after  Lennie when Lennie's Aunt Clara died.
George and Lennie have a dream about their own piece of land which they will be able to buy when they get enough money.
The book is set in America, in a small area of the countryside near Solidad.
George was a small man compared with Lennie's massive bulk.
George had strong hands, slim arms and Lennie was strong and muscular with wide sloping shoulders.
George was quite hard on Lennie.
He shouted and swore when Lennie carried a dead mouse in his pocket pet and he gave Lennie a very hard time when Lennie said that he like ketchup on his beans.
I think that this was very uncalled for and very unkind.
George always felt bad after shouting at Lennie.
He always had to spend ages reassuring Lennie he did want to travel with him and George had to keep on reminding Lennie of their dream, of alfalfa and rabbits, to comfort him.
He also bribed Lennie to stay with him, when George said that if Lennie was good he would get a little puppy to pet.
George had every right to be a bit angry with Lennie because Lennie had caused George to loose his job and Lennie had ‘adopted’ George as his family and George knew that it was going to be a long hard task keeping Lennie out of trouble and looking after him.
George's freedom had disappeared when Lennie's Aunt Clara had died.
Lennie knew about George's craving for freedom and often threatened to leave, but George felt obliged to look after Lennie as Lennie could not fend for himself in a cave and Lennie could not cope with going to jail or a home to be treated like an animal.
George took Lennie for what he was; a mentally retarded man, but with great strength.
George was Lennie's guardian angel.
He tried to do his best for Lennie by only stressing his good points.
George was a quick thinker so always did the introducing and all of the talking, but George did not talk about himself — he told of how Lennie was as strong as a bull and how he could buck barley all day.
George knew that if he left Lennie to speak he would mess up everything and that would be the end of their job.
George was a friendly person who was easy to get on with.
He found it easy to speak to, and make friends, with complete strangers.
George was very protective towards Lennie.
 Whenever anybody started to make fun of Lennie, calling him cuckoo or crazy, George jumped straight to Lennie's defence and said that Lennie had been kicked in the head when he was a little boy.
George often told Lennie what was best for him.
He warned Lennie about drinking too much water and drinking water that  was not running.
He often told Lennie to stay away from Curley and his wife.
George did not like being firm with Lennie but he knew that he had to be cruel to be kind.
He also knew that shouting at Lennie was the only way to make him understand.
When George saw that Curley was attacking Lennie, George allowed Lennie to fight back because he knew that he could not do everything for Lennie.
He also knew that this was Lennie's chance to gain some respect from the other men, especially Curley.
George understood that being over-protective towards Lennie would not be any good for him.
This makes him a good friend.
 There are  two possible conclusions to the story.
The first is that George shot Lennie to stop him from getting in to more trouble.
His reason for looking after Lennie would have been to get more money from collecting all of  Lennie's .
George then shot Lennie because he was angry at Lennie for getting in the way of his dreams coming true.
This was because Lennie did ‘bad things’ and he was making it very difficult for George to see his dreams becoming reality.
The other is that George shot Lennie because Lennie would have either gone to jail where Lennie could not have coped, or been shot by Curley and never reached heaven with his dreams fulfilled.
I believe that George killed Lennie as the ultimate act of friendship.
My reason is that George spent a few minutes with Lennie, comforting and making him a happy man by reminding him of his dreams, before sending him off to find his final dream in heaven.
George did not find it easy shooting Lennie and he hesitated to think before pulling the trigger, when the ranchmen emerged out of the bush.
George took the law in to his own hands when he shot Lennie.
He did it to protect Lennie from being killed a frightened man, by someone like Curley.
George made a great sacrifice by killing Lennie as the people chasing him were very angry and could easily have killed George through their anger.
They might have believed that because George and Lennie were such good friends, who went everywhere together, they should leave together too.
I think that George was a good, honest character who was possibly the best friend that Lennie could ever have the good fortune to be acquainted with.
Traveller M Donaldson
Derek was a traveller, a ‘gypsy’ according to the people in the towns he had passed through.
True enough, he lived in a caravan and travelled from town to town with the others in his travelling group but it wasn't a garishly painted van like the ones old time  gypsies occupied, just a normal common-or-garden caravan, the type people stay in on holiday, but that didn't make him a gypsy.
Derek had chosen to become a traveller when he was 28.
His father was a doctor and his mother was a social climber, a member of the W.I. and other such societies.
He had, once he left school, gone to university and lived up to his  parents' expectations by gaining a law degree with honours.
That was where his problems had started.
He felt  suppressed by the expectations his parents placed on him and  desperately wanted to break away and lead his own life.
He thought about it though and decided that he could not live on willpower alone so he went on with his degree then joined a very mundane law practice with poor promotion prospects and a history of doing more ‘legal aid’ cases than ones where the client actually paid.
19/1/93 Great Expectations by Charles Dickens Jillian McGrail 4H2
Charles Dickens was born in 1812 at Portsmouth and became a great success and was established as a very popular novelist, when his first novel, ‘The Pickwick Papers’, was published as a book in 1837.
‘Great Expectations’ was one of his last three novels and was published in 1861, and is often considered to be his greatest novel.
His health then decreased rapidly and whilst writing ‘The Mystery of Edwin Drood’, which was never completed, he collapsed and died in his own home in Kent in 1870.
He was then buried amongst many other great writers of the past in Westminster Abbey.
He was very much a social novelist and to appreciate the moral significance of his novels you have to relate it to the actual society that it reflects and often criticises.
Pip is an orphan and lives with his mean sister and kind, good-natured husband, Joe, the blacksmith with whom Pip has a very solid, loving relationship with.
One winter evening, near to Christmas, Pip is frightened by Magwitch, an escaped convict from the ‘Hulks’ into stealing a file and some food from the forge.
Shortly afterwards, while fighting on the marshes with another convict, Magwitch is recaptured.
A while later Pip is invited to ‘play’ at Miss  Havisham's .
This is a  privilege as she was a wealthy woman who lived in seclusion there since she was abandoned on her wedding day.
This is where he meets the beautiful Estella for the first time.
She treats him with contempt and when Miss Havisham tells her to play cards with him she says
‘With this boy!
Why, he is a common labouring-boy!’
and later she says to him, during the same game of cards,
‘He calls the knaves, Jacks, this boy!’ said Estella with disdain, before our first game was out.
‘And what coarse hands he has!
And what thick boots!’
Pip has never really thought about his features until this point and from then on wants to be a gentleman because he has instantly fallen in love with Estella and wants to impress her, and make her love him.
He  doesn't actually realise that, at this point, the beautiful Estella is Miss Havisham's tool.
She has brought her up to make men fall at  her feet in love with her and then to treat them roughly and to break their hearts.
It is Miss Havisham's way of getting her revenge on the male sex as it was a man who broke her heart, all those years ago, when she was abandoned on the day of her wedding.
The visits to Miss  Havisham's cease when she pays for Pip to become Joe's apprentice.
Then Pip's friend Biddy comes to the forge as housekeeper, but Pip has no romantic interest in her as he is still in love with Estella and not satisfied with himself and his way of life.
His life is changed when a London lawyer, Jaggers, tells Pip that a mysterious benefactor has provided money to make him a gentleman with ‘great expectations’.
He assumes it is Miss Havisham and begins to act like a snob.
When he goes to London he makes friends with Wemmick, Jaggers's  clerk , and also with Herbert Pocket with whom he becomes very close to.
When Joe visits London, it is a failure because Pip is embarrassed by Joe's manners and begins to think of him as common, he then begins to neglect his background and the people who used to mean a lot to him.
Estella then comes to London and annoys Pip as she flirts with Bentley Drummle.
Pip then arranges, secretly, to buy his greatest friend, Herbert a partnership in a shipping firm but Pip's wealthy lifestyle is upset when the convict, Magwitch, returns from Australia where he had been transported to.
Magwitch reveals himself as Pip's benefactor and says every penny he has earned has gone to Pip.
When Pip finds out that Estella is to marry Drummle he is shocked but at this moment he is more devoted to Magwitch who will be hanged if he is caught.
Pip does not want to accept the convict because he  doesn't feel like a gentleman anymore because of the origins of his wealth.
He hopes to save the convicts life by sending him abroad.
Matters are complicated by Compeyson, an enemy of Magwitch (he was the convict Magwitch was fighting with on the marshes many years ago), he was also the lover of Miss Havisham.
Pip then visits Miss Havisham and she promises to help Herbert, financially, to become a partner and asks Pip to forgive her.
Later, that evening, she gets badly burnt when her wedding dress catches fire, which is ironic, and she dies shortly afterwards.
Compeyson plots against Pip and Magwitch but Pip and his friends eventually try to get Magwitch on a ship which will take him abroad.
Unfortunately he is stopped by a police boat with Compeyson on board.
In a struggle Compeyson is drowned and Magwitch is seriously injured.
He is sentenced to death but dies in prison.
As Pip has realised that Magwitch is Estella's father and he comforts him by telling him that his daughter is still alive and that he is in love with her.
It is then Pip falls ill and is nursed back to good health by the good-natured health.
He now recognises Joe as a ‘gentle Christian man’.
Joe returns to the village without Pip and he follows shortly afterwards, to his old home.
Dickens's original ending to ‘Great Expectations’ was changed after his friend, Edward Buliver Lytton, persuaded him that it was too pessimistic.
The original ending was for Pip to return to the village on the wedding day of Joe and Biddy, he actually intended on going back to ask for Biddy's hand in marriage, but receives forgiveness, from both of them.
He then moves to the East to Herbert and Clara's and works for Clarriher, as a clerk, and eventually does quite well for himself.
It also  doesn't actually really mention Estella, so it is basically a rather bleak ending for Pip as he  doesn't get what he really wanted.
In the second, more  optimistic ending, Pip returns to the forge after working abroad for eleven years and goes to Hoe and Biddy and finds they have a son, also called Pip.
He visits Satis House for Estella's sake, and knows that Drummle has been killed, and in the evening mist he sees her (she has also come to say farewell to the building).
He still finds her extremely beautiful and she practically  apologises to Pip for all the suffering that she put him through and tells him that she hopes they will still be friends ‘apart’.
But Pip takes her hand, and in the very last line of this much more  optimistic ending he says,
‘I saw no shadow of another parting for her.’
‘Great Expectations’ is a novel about growth and personal development, contentment, human relationships and how money corrupts.
The whole novel centralises round one character, Pip.
we witness his growth and personal development, times when he is content and in a lot of cases not content, he relationships with friends and people around him (and how they get along together), but also we  see how money and wealth can affect a little  boy's life so suddenly and drastically.
All the themes are interlinked and condensed into one person's life and his surroundings.
Throughout the novel we watch and observe Pip's progress in life, as he grows up, and we see how it affects him.
So, as he grows up, into a mature adult, we see how human relationships and the corruption of money affects and almost controls his state of contentment.
Dickens has been very clever to intertwine all these aspects and ideas, and to make them all relate to each other, in the one central character, Pip, and the other central characters around Pip are basically just extra ingredients to make the plot work.
From the very first time Pip goes to visit, to play, at Miss Havisham's Satis House, he was not content with what he had and he wanted much more.
It was Estella that started off his obsession with wanting more.
Her beauty and glamour and downlooking to him made him feel worthless and common.
He wanted to be a gentleman for Estella's sake but he needed money.
At this point he is certainly not content.
He looks down on hi life.
He is deeply in love with Estella but she just  doesn't want to know him.
she feels he is common, poor boy and he  doesn't even realise that Miss Havisham is actually only using Estella as a tool, a beautiful tool, to break  men's hearts and to get her revenge on the male sex.
Pip's relationship with Estella, or the relationship that  doesn't actually exist yet between them, is really the point where Pip begins to feel unsatisfied with what  he's got.
He is humiliated at Satis House but also feels slightly guilty about wanting more than what he is lucky to have.
A while later Pip is told he has a mysterious benefactor and is going to be very well off, by a London Lawyer, Jaggers.
As soon as he is told Pip immediately begins to act like a snob, as if he was better than everyone else.
At this point, he finally seems to be content.
But as he becomes more and m ore content with his new life, he becomes embarrassed of his family and background.
For example, before Pip became a ‘gentleman’, he had a very trusting, caring, and open relationship with Joe.
Joe is a very kind man and always was Pip's friend and stood up for him, but after he wants more, he is embarrassed.
At Miss Havisham's with Joe, one day, he says,
‘I am afraid I was ashamed of the dear good fellow — I know I was ashamed of him —‘
and on  Joe's visit to London he realises that he is not really appreciated and leaves as he has too much dignity.
Pip realises this and talks about his ‘simple dignity’.
Joe and Pip's relationship suffers dramatically because as Pip becomes more accustomed to his new lifestyle he puts Joe and his old life further and further behind him.
but at the end Joe forgives Pip and their relationship seems very strong.
It begins to improve when Joe nurses Pip back to good health, which is very powerful and moving and Pip once again begin to see Joe as that ‘gentle Christian man’.
Pip's relationship with Magwitch somewhat develops in the opposite direction.
As Pip begins to know him better they become much closer and Pip even wants to save him by smuggling him abroad.
Once Pip has found out that Magwitch is actually his benefactor he  doesn't want to accept any more money as he feels it isn't right.
Their relationship is strengthened or reinforced by the fact that Pip is in love with his daughter, Estella, and as Magwitch dies Pip tells him this,
‘She lived and found powerful friends.
She is living now.
She is a lady and very beautiful.
And I love her!’
Pip's relationship with Estella at the beginning is weak because of her attitude towards him and the reason why.
Pip falls instantly in love with her and remains this way for quite some time.
the ending may seem quite unconvincing, with the prospect of their marriage, but there are a few clues from Pip's first meeting with her till then that may suggest some development.
At the start she is only so cruel as she is only Miss Havisham's tool for revenge, and later she seems to have a little pity for Pip when she warns him that she has no heart.
I think it has to be your own personal opinion in the case of Estella's final redemption being unconvincing.
‘I saw no shadow of another parting from her.’
Dicken's style is certainly something to be desired.
He writes so fluently, naturally, precisely and  subtly and presents to us such visual detail.
He  doesn't just provide us with a general description, he puts forward more significant details and makes us visualise clearly and lets us see for ourselves what it was like.
One small example of his clean-cut precision is in Chapter 10,
‘two fat sweltering one-pound notes.’
He uses many adjectives, to render these images so clearly and precisely in our minds and throughout the novel everything seems so real to us and he makes us visualise what he can actually see.
He also uses personification rather a lot throughout the novel to give us more of an idea of what he was experiencing.
In chapter 45, when he is staying in the hotel, for example.
‘The closet whispered, the fireplace sighed, the little washing-stand ticked, and one guitar string played  occasionally in the chest of drawers.’
In ‘Great Expectations’ all the character speak differently and the way that Dickens portrays them to speak all fits in with the character.
For example Jaggers, a very dominating, lawyer is always speaking in that fashion by using ‘Now’ or ‘Well’or ‘Very Well’.
Whereas Joe the common, lower class, blacksmith speaks in that way.
For example,
‘If you can cough any trifle on it up, Pip, I'd recommend you do it,’ said Joe, all aghast.
‘Manners is manners, but still you elth's your elth!’
Also throughout the novel, Dickens succeeds in retaining suspense and tension, and wanting you to continue reading to find out what will happen.
At the end of every chapter there is always still a mystery to solve.
But ‘Great Expectations’ has a special quality, a great stylistic achievement, which his other books don't contain.
the novel actually seems to be written at two different times.
At one point we read Pip's story and what actually happens to him that day and then the older Pip reflects on the younger Pip's actions.
We see an experienced, clear-sighted man, looking back to see and understand the meaning of this young, immature boy's actions.
The  narrator is basically reflecting  on what happened to him during childhood, adolescence and into adulthood.
Another great aspect of Dickens's style is the way he is able to  manipulate your feelings towards characters.
If we take Pip, as an example.
At the beginning of the novel we are reasonably sympathetic towards Pip but as the novel progresses we become less sympathetic towards him, as he becomes a snob, embarrassed of his family in Joe, and we feel that he  doesn't deserve sympathy as he brought it on himself.
But after this our sympathy is beginning to be restored as things start to go wrong for him and he practically redeems.
He  manipulates our feelings and views towards characters throughout the book, successfully, which also shows and convinces us that he is a very competent writer and very real.
Another great aspect of ‘Great Expectations’ is Dickens' characterisation.
His characters are all vivid and memorable.
Many of his characters actually represent a single idea or quality which is revealed by the way they dress or talk, for example, but some of his characters are just exaggerated deliberately, and an example of this would be pompous, insensitive, fat, Pumblechook.
Dickens is realistic because the way he present his characters is in the way that we see and know people.
Some of his characters develop, and change and we follow their progress but others such as Pumblechook don't change and our first impressions of them will not change.
Dickens can render images of characters quickly, yet precisely.
We can tell a lot about all the characters in ‘Great Expectations’ from their first appearances in the novel.
He is very clever in the manner in which he links all the characters together, and although we don't know at first how relationships and meetings will turn out, it does soon become apparent.
Humour is very subtle in ‘Great Expectations’ as more often than not Dickens will just use parts of the language wittily rather than the obvious physical humour surrounding Pumblechook.
One example of this is the dinner at the forge, when there are guests, and they all talk about Pip as if he were inferior and Joe almost trying to comfort him, adds more and more gravy to his plate every time they say something  negative about him, which is rather a lot.
‘There being plenty of gravy to-day, Joe spooned into my plate, at this point, about half a pint.’
Dickens's humour in ‘Great Expectations’ is rather limited, but in saying that, where it is used, it is appreciated and works well.
‘Great Expectations’ is a marvellous novel, and  thoroughly enjoyable and inspiring to read.
the comprehensive, mysterious plot, the precise, fluent and stylistic charms of Dickens, the vivid and memorable characters and the subtlety of the humour present all combine to form an almost perfect novel.
It is very much a ‘real’ novel ie Dickens writes about society at his time and reflects and comments on it.
Many critics claim the ‘Great Expectations’ is the greatest novel ever written in English and after reading and studying the book, I would have to agree with them.
’ Good Zoos are Good News’Carol Aitken
The term ‘zoo’ has long since shed the label of ‘consumers’of wildlife and is now certainly one of the ‘producers’of animals, or is it?
This is a well contested and discussed argument and to make a fair judgement, one must first hear a non-biased account of the facts and following that, hear both sides of the argument.
The first zoological park or garden we know about was founded in China around 1100 B.C. and was called the ‘Intelligence Park’.
Many kings in the past have kept collections of animals and in the 12th Century A.D. King Henry I founded the first British zoo.
There are now approximately eighty zoos in the British Isles.
There are four main aims of a zoo.
These are: recreation, conservation, education and research.
Firstly let us take conservation.
Zoos contribute substantially to the captive banks of many endangered species and those that are less rare.
Fairly recently zoos have taken on vital roles as places of refuge for species.
They are living genetic banks, so that when the world comes to its sense we may be able to repopulate areas with descendants of the original animals.
Education was begun in zoos about twenty years ago.
Since then the Edinburgh Zoo has seen upwards of 50 000 people using it for this purpose in a year.
Children and adults come to learn and face up to the facts of caring and sharing on the principal that we cannot survive alone on Earth — we must share it with all the other animals and plants.
Lots of children visit with their school or other organisation and they can get talks and information on specific topics, also being able to handle some of the smaller animals.
This is especially useful for those who live in cities or  industrial areas where many have only come into contact with pets such as hamsters, goldfish, cats and dogs.
Non-intrusive research is also an important part of the zoos' purposes.
This  involves examining, observing, studying and collecting data on the specific animal.
This data helps the zoo provide the best environment possible for the animal and to accommodate all of its specific needs.
Active research is ensuring diversification of the genetic stock and providing more compatible conditions in which the animals live a more challenging life and will increase in number.
For instance in use at Edinburgh Zoo there is a cement ant hill for chimpanzees which was developed to enrich their environment.
It works by having a drawer full of such things as syrup, yoghurt and mustard, and tunnels reaching the drawer, simulating the real ant hills.
Recreation is less important for the welfare of animals than the other three as this part is basically for enjoyment of visitors only.
It is, however, a way of providing children with a fun day out whilst incorporating learning of the world and its inhabitants.
A group called ‘Advocates for Animals’ holds a different view.
It believes that the keeping of animals in zoos which would, in the wild, travel great distances and follow long migratory paths, goes against Mother Nature's intentions.
It is true that however much research is carried out, zoos will never be able to duplicate the wild environment of the particular animal.
This brings us on to the conditions in which the animals are kept.
Only 100 years ago a zoo meant a series of caged animals set up exclusively for recreation.
Even in the 1980's bears lived in a heavily barred concrete box which did not allow any of its usual activities like swimming, climbing, scratching or exploring.
Fortunately, modern enclosures are slowly replacing these cages which are cramped and provide nothing for the animal.
The animal's enclosure has to be suited for the specific species.
Those from tropical countries could suffer from the cold  in winter unless their shelters provide a draughtproof, warm and dry habitat for them.
Some animals such as primates which are closely related with humans are apt to catch human types of diseases, for instance colds or the flu, and for this reason humans should not be allowed to get too close.
Similarly, getting too close could frighten the animal, although once they are used to the crowds they can regard the bars or the cage or the walls of the enclosure as protection.
The animal's diet has to be similar, if not exactly the same as, its diet would be if it were in the wild.
There are exceptions to this rule, for example large fish can be fed on chopped horse's heart and the okapi (similar to the giraffe) could be fed on evergreen oak leaves when in the wild it would eat vegetation from the hot Congo forests.
Koalas are kept very seldom outside Australia because they only eat certain kinds of eucalyptus trees which do not grow elsewhere.
Also, there has to be strict rules for visitors' feeding of the animals and most of the time no feeding of this kind is allowed.
One example was at London Zoo when a polar bear called Brumas died at the age of nine because he ate something which had been thrown into his enclosure.
Again, about 100 years ago chimpanzees were fed on beer and sausages and more recently made to have tea parties to amuse the visitors.
How do the animals end up in the zoos?
Some animals are still caught in African game reserves and also those in South America and Asia.
A special licence needs to be obtained before animals can be brought into the United Kingdom, this helps to prevent illegal entry.
Some people buy rare or difficult to keep animals as pets and donate them to zoos.
The majority of animals are bred in the zoo as a part of a captive breeding programme or are exchanged amongst the zoos.
This amounts to about eighty per cent of zoo animals in Britain.
Edinburgh ensures me that no wild animals are caught to  replace dead animals.
Nevertheless, every zoo needs to be part of a federation.
‘Zoo Check’ was set up for a number of reasons, here are its six aims:
1.
To check and prevent all types of abuse to captive animals and wild life.
2.
To phase out zoos and, where appropriate, support conservation centres.
3.
To promote international support for the conservation of animals in their natural habitat.
4.
To end the taking of animals from the wild.
5.
To encourage respect for the natural world and an understanding of its interrelationships.
6.
To peacefully persuade zoos and national and local governments to accept and promote our aims.
If the zoos were performing their own four aims properly, federations like these would not be necessary.
Personally, I believe that zoos are a good thing.
By way of illustration, the Siberian tiger is becoming rare.
There are only 200 in the wild at the most, yet 1000 are registered in zoos around the world.
these would soon be extinct if zoos could not offer protection to animals in the same situation.
I do understand that many people think wild animals roam over very large spaces and therefore feel cramped if they are kept in restricted areas but most have territories, areas which they mark out for themselves in various ways, and spend all their time inside these territories anyway and consequently they can consider their enclosure as being their own territory.
Hopefully, sometime zoos will become unnecessary as a nature reserve but this is an unrealistic aim while the hunting and destruction of habitat continues.
Gluttony at the Applecross Café Jennie Irvine
The door opened and the familiar bell rang.
A group of, let's say larger, teenagers manoeuvred themselves through and fell onto the hard, plastic seats on the right-side of the café.
Next a couple of thinner, much thinner, girls advanced in, carefully keeping to the left.
This was the only segregated café in Xenly, but it couldn't help lying on the line of separation.
On the right-side of Xenly it was fashionable to be fat, the fatter you were the higher you stood in society.
Triple chins and ‘pinch five inches’ were ‘in’, wobbling bums and flapping tums were the most wanted things and fat fingers, toes or ears were prized achievements.
The left was slightly different; by about nine inches wide.
The people here thought that if your wrists weren't tennis racket handle-width on your sixth birthday then you were called a ‘fat’ and transferred into the ‘right’.
It was skinnyness that was popular, the more you resembled a telegraph pole the bigger your chance was of winning the annual ‘narrow cup’.
The whistling and clicking of fingers roused Joy's attention, so collecting her pad then pen she wandered over to the table on the right.
‘May I take your order, today's special is beef, liver and kidney casserole with scalloped potatoes and the soup of the day is leek and cauliflower served with a crusty roll,’ said Joy automatically without pauses.
A rosy cheeked, double chinned girl answered, with such confidence that Joy almost fell back onto the shiny, checked floor.
‘I'll have the larger piece of that cake over there, with extra cream and a large plateful of your extra special greasy chips,’ said the girl.
‘And a small coffee.’
‘Would you prefer one ‘fat in five seconds’ or two in your coffee?’asked Joy.
‘Oh, just one; I have swimming tomorrow,’ answered the girl.
After reciting back to the girl her choice, Joy went back to the counter.
The television above was on and she watched casually an advert.
‘Are you sick of all your food not turning into what you want or have you lost your appetite?’ introduced the presenter, ‘Well, why don't you try ‘fat in five seconds’.
It gives you the pounds you want, when you want.
Ask for it  at your local café, put it in your tea or sprinkle it on your ice-cream any way it's great!’
On her feet again, Joy walked over to the table with two slim girls seated there.
They were arguing about whose fingernails were longest, thinnest and sharpest and thought that the only way to see would be by testing them on  each other 's bony arms.
They stopped when one say Joy waiting an order at the side of the table.
‘We don't want anything thank you, fatty,’ said one girl to Joy, who did look slightly obese in her pink striped apron and cream tights.
‘If  you're not ordering anything, refrain from fighting an leave this café please,’ replied Joy, who was used to the unkind remarks made by the ‘left-side people’.
‘I'll have a cup of tea with one of those new thin pills, whatever you call them,’ asked the other girl.
‘'I can't believe how thin they can make me’?’ replied Joy.
‘Yeh, those things,’ said the girl.
Joy quickly moved back to the counter, she did not enjoy serving ‘skinnys’ that was usually Hal's job.
Hal was thin, his long black tie didn't help him look any plumper but he didn't want to.
He worked at the Applecross Cafe as chef yet was called sometimes to serve the most pernickety ‘skinnys’ who reused to be served by Joy.
She wasn't that fat, compared to others  anywany.
Hal and Joy had been working at Applecross Cafe for over 10 years.
Xenly had only recently been segregated with the invention of the new ‘control how you look’ pills.
Applecross just happened to be central when Xenly was divided and so became the only building to be shared by each community.
As the months passed the hate grew between the societies and the café also became sectioned.
It didn't work at first because people forgot and then there were the tourists who came in and didn't know the seating arrangements.
This was solved by installation of two large signs.
The one on the right read ‘These seats are only for use by those who can be classified as obese’ and the one on the left read ‘These seats are for those of very slim build only’.
Joy was now standing, reading the two signs over and over.
The fact that the way you looked told you where to sit annoyed her as well as the way  she was treated by thinner people.
It was also beginning to vex Hal, who was  treated badly by those wider than him.
Together they decided to resolve this prejudice.
The next customer was a thin elderly man, he placed himself on a seat and wanted to be served.
Joy attended him and, with a look of disgust, he ordered a small bowl of soup with a ‘I can't believe how thin they can make me’.
Joy's strawberry blonde hair did give her the look of a shop window dummy but under all her rouge and lipstick she could be decisive.
She was in a decisive mood at the moment and waltzed over the ‘pill’ vendor.
Purposely pressing the button implying ‘fat in five seconds’ pills, she held out the bowl of soup and let a small, white pill drop in.
A faint smile grew across her face an while the old man sipped at the soup she gradually became the proud owner of a huge, cunning grin.
Hal, while he was flipping over some burgers, ‘turned a blind eye’ and pretended not to notice her ‘mistake’.
The pill swapping continued for the next couple of weeks, showing no difference in the population of Xenly.
It was only around the fifth week of changing pills that Hal noticed changes in some of the regular customers.
Some were growing beards and going bald which may not seem like drastic changes, but in the women there must have been side effects from changing your course of pills.
Side-effects were good, but not what Hal and Joy really wanted.
They wanted the ‘skinnys’ to become fat and the ‘fattys’to become skinny.
After two months, Joy's enjoyment of tricking the customers was decreasing, there was still no difference and the customers were just as rude or getting even worse, for more ‘skinnys’ were arriving and ordering more food.
Maybe the big swap was working.
Joy walked over to a ‘right-side table’ and casually overheard a conversation.
‘Well Moe, I don't know what's happening, I was once champion botty wobbler, and now look at me!’ said one lady.
‘There's hardly a couple of inches of fat left on me.’
‘Pat, I know just how you feel.
I've cut down on all the exercise I felt necessary to do and always have fourth helpings but nothing can  bring back my third chin, I don't know what to do,’ said the man.
‘Oh, waitress,’ said the lady in a distressed tone, ‘Just who I wanted, could I have three of today's specials, two strawberry milkshakes and one prawn cocktail with extra mayonnaise.
Actually, you had better make that two prawn things.’
‘Certainly,’ answered Joy, ‘Anything else?’
‘I'll also have honey, walnut and caramel ice-cream with a double sprinkling of ‘fat in five seconds’, please.’
‘No problem,’ said Joy in a voice which had a joyful tone to it.
She knew their plan was working, at least for the more obese.
Meanwhile, Hal was being called to serve some of the left's most prominent people.
They had seldom before entered Applecross café but on the few occasions before had been given, purely accidentally of course, some ‘fat in five seconds’.
Now they were feeling the need to order quite a large amount of food for ‘skinnys’, especially ones  whom possessed at some point in time the ‘narrow cup’.
The  thinnest person, a  woman of some height, ordered for the group.
‘We'll have small, or maybe even normal portions of the clam chowder, and the chicken kiev,’ said the woman.
‘Would ma'am like some ‘I can't believe how thin they can make me’? questioned Hal.
‘Yes, extra helpings actually, maybe on some low fat yoghurt or mousse,’ answered the woman.
‘Now hurry waiter, make it snappy for my party are feeling rather peckish.’
Hal hurried back to the kitchen and chatted to Joy on the odd encounter he had with his customers just then.
She was overjoyed to hear that their plan was working.
As the days passed difference were definitely beginning to show, the Applecross café was doing great business.
The fattys were all trying their best to eat more and more but they didn't realise that the pills they were eating were actually eating all the food for them.
The ‘skinnys’ were beginning to become hungrier and hungrier, their stomach capacity gaining size every ‘fat in five seconds’eaten.
Each day the Applecross café was completely full, each person whether fat or thin, ordered a three course meal, breakfast, lunch or tea, and each  pill swallowed was another cake sold.
Xenly was becoming greedy for food.
Hal's cooking was becoming more and more rushed, the fatty's felt that they were going to become thin in a matter of seconds and the ‘skinnys’ were very hungry.
Hal was not putting much care into the preparation of the food, only the kind of pill.
It got to the point that some of the burgers were served straight from the freezer, raw!
The customers didn't mind, they were so desperate for food, anything would of done.
Changes in how you look can drastically affect your life, many ‘skinnys’ were so distressed about being able to ‘pinch-an-inch’they felt it was time to place their heads in nooses.
The ‘fattys’ were feeling so thin that many let themselves drink their way through a bottle of drain cleaner.
Xenly was in a state of turmoil.
Those who weren't constantly eating or in front of a mirror, were trying to commit suicide.
Xenly now looks the same, everybody has no hair on top and big full beards, everybody is able to pinch two inches, no more and no less and every person is in hospital with dire cases of food poisoning.
‘Hal, you had to do something, it wasn't your fault, the people were ravenous.’ consolidated Joy, ‘Anyway, I didn't enjoy having lots of pets around the house.’
‘Yeh Joy, you're right, but I shouldn't have used poor Barney in the soup, I knew he hated the water,’ said Hal.
28.9.1992 Argumentative Essay.
Abortion should be a  woman's right to choose.
Jennie Irvine 4G2
In various countries and within certain religions the deliberate termination of pregnancy is disallowed, no matter what the circumstances.
Should it not be the  woman's right to choose what she does with her body?
(It is medically thought that only after the 28th week of pregnancy that the foetus has a  separate  existence from that of its mother).
Abortions can be accidental, usually called a ‘miscarriage’ or induced.
The type of abortion I am referring to is induced and I believe that the woman should be given the right to be able to choose whether she needs one, rather than certain religious leaders or laws.
Unwanted pregnancies can arise from any different situations either by accident or in the event o rape.
Rape itself is extremely traumatic and can lead to family problems but imagine the horror of being told that you must have a stranger's child and the complications with a jealous boyfriend or husband.
There is also the chance of a schoolgirl falling pregnant during vital examinations which can lead to missing out on getting  qualifications and eventually jobs.
Pregnancy puts people in very difficult situations and abortions must seem essential in some and an obvious ‘cop out’ in others.
Never-the-less, in many cases abortions are necessary for the mother's well-being.
During the pregnancy certain problems may arise such as the decrease in income due to the loss of work or interference of exams, how difficult could it become, raising a child with little  financial support?
Money problems are not the only difficulties facing women whose pregnancy was unexpected and unwanted; the nausea of morning sickness and later on their appearance can prove traumatising to women, especially schoolgoers who have to put up with constant  rumours and whispering.
These cases may seem slightly trivial to go an, in some people's view, murder another being but there are other cases.
For example, to many women pregnancy can prove fatal (those women whose mothers have a history of death during labour) and diabetics and even in today's society where medicine is very advanced, as a precaution, many doctors advise abortions.
Abortions are also recommended by doctors when the child may be  born afflicted with a severe mental or physical handicap (e.g. ‘Down's syndrome’) which may affect the mother or existing children.
In these cases abortions are legal if the mother or child is diagnosed by two doctors (usually the G.P. and the gynaecologist performing the operation).
But, though legal and advised, many women refuse to have abortions because it would be going against their beliefs.
The Catholic Church is one religion which condemns all induced abortion, whatever the circumstances, and those women who become pregnant have no option.
Even the victims of rape, those endangering their lives, young and old and all other people in difficult situations are unable to look after themselves and maybe stop a potentially disturbing child's life because of the decisions made by higher authorities.
Letting the woman have responsibility to decide what to do with herself should be allowed because she is the person who knows most about the situation she is in — many of the Catholic Church's leaders are male and have not experienced the disturbing and difficult situations many women face.
If the pregnancy has to be gone through and does continue and the mother does not want to or cannot keep the child there is the option of adoption.
This can be an ordeal for both the mother and eventually also very distressing for the child.
The mother sometimes finds it very difficult to give away an almost impossible to keep child and the child, when grown up, may think about why their mother gave them away.
Also, adoption cannot always prove successful for many people specifically want a boy or a girl or if the child has a deformity or abnormality it is often very hard to find a home for.
These children would be put into orphanages or into care and have a greater possibility of leading an unhappy childhood which may afflict them with mental disorders.
Abortions in today's world are very real and practised readily mainly due to the ‘British Abortion Act’.
This was introduced in 1967 to prevent many women in unavoidable situations having ‘back-street abortions’ which commonly resulted in injury, disfiguration and great anguish.
The ‘Act’ allows pregnancy to be terminated before the 28th  week and has helped many women avoid inevitable problems.
In the previous paragraphs I have dealt with predicaments where abortions would be acceptable.
I feel it is wholly wrong that abortion could be seen as a means of contraception because it not only wastes the money of the N.H.S. but I think that abortions should only be considered in certain cases.
I think that the ‘British Abortion Act’ could be changed with more guidelines added.
These guidelines could be influenced by certain religious ideas towards abortion.
Hindu teachings allow abortion only where a pregnancy constitutes a danger to the mother's life, Islamic law allows abortion up to as late as 120 days and under Jewish law the foetus is regarded as a subsidiary of the mother and abortion is permitted as long as a number of doctors recommend it.
I think that a possible abortion should be consulted with a Family Planning Officer and doctors before a decision is reached but it should be the woman's final choice because she is the person responsible for herself and child.
English: Lord of the Flies Jennie Irvine
Ballantyne wrote ‘Coral Island’ during the Empire and this influences Ballantyne's view of what life alone on an island could be like experienced by children.
Golding wrote ‘Lord of the Flies’, which I am comparing to ‘Coral Island’, just after the Second World War and after the Hiroshima Bomb, this gives Golding's book a more up to date feel and makes it an easier to believe microcosm.
Ballantyne writes ‘Coral Island’ as one of the characters, Ralph, whereas Golding has written ‘Lord of the Flies’with the view of an author/narrator.
Because Ballantyne is one of the characters it somewhat restricts his actions and makes the character more adult whereas in ‘Lord of the Flies’ the characters are their own people with their own personalities.
At the beginning of Extract 4 we are described the island's vegetation and fruits.
This is written in paragraphs explaining in the past tense what has been seen.
The children in the Extract deal with their findings with more maturity as they appreciate the different species and new findings.
In ‘Lord of the Flies’ the children have a more pragmatic view, only taking in consideration what will work, as when they find  the ‘candle buds’they destroy some and leave them.
Ballantyne deals with the issue of killing an animal with almost an ignorant approach.
He does not take into consideration the fact that they are killing, or trying to kill an living being.
Ballantyne approaches the hunt/death by actually finding the hogs, they are going to kill, asleep under a tree.
This cuts down on the suspense and Ballantyne sees it as being comic.
The children immediately try to kill the animals without thinking of the consequences or the morality of it.
Ballantyne's character, Ralph, even  tries to wake them up to make it more sportsmanlike but Jack does not let him.
When the children miss, Jack goes afterwards with an ‘uplifted axe’ showing no mercy yet also showing control.
In Golding's ‘Lord of the Flies’ the issue of killing an animal  is dealt with in a way that is more mature and real than Ballantyne's yet more ‘bloodthirsty’.
The suspense in ‘Lord of the Flies’ is made by building up to seeing the pig from the squealing and trotting hoofs.
The children in ‘Lord of the Flies’ have no time to think and Jack drew his knife as if it was from habit.
He then, after missing, goes on to say how he could of killed it but it was too big a step to be taking.
I prefer Ballantyne's approach to killing the animal because, even though the children are easy about killing the animal, he still leaves the character's with a childlike, ‘nice’ feel.
Golding makes his character, Jack, out to be someone who wants to kill an animal to release his anger and violence.
14.6.92 The Last Chapter or Ending of Lord of the Flies.
Jennie Irvine 3G2
The ending of this novel begins with William Golding looking down on Ralph, as he lies in hiding after his confrontation with Jack and the death of his friend Piggy.
Up until now Piggy has kept Ralph steady, reminding him of his responsibilities and priorities.
Piggy is now gone, as well as Sam 'n' Eric, Ralph's only other allies, who were captured by Jack's savages.
Ralph is now all alone against Jack's hunters, who tower above upon Castle Rock.
Jack, to the savages, is known as ‘Chief’ and now has almost total control over the boys.
Since the beginning he has changed in appearance, now covered by war-paint he has lost his identification as head chorister and is now head hunter.
His new personality had a great dislike of Ralph and Jack ordered a hunt to be started out after him.
The hunters failed to find Ralph and they returned back to their fort.
Jack then ordered large rocks to be pushed of the cliff in order to squash Ralph.
The rocks missed him, yet Jack did not give up and set alight the forest.
the crackling flames and choking smoke filled the sky which, ironically, led to rescue by a naval officer.
The naval officer was based on an ancient Greek actor Euripedes, because he became a god at the end of his plays and settled all the disasters which had taken place.
The naval officer did not manage to settle everything as he found out when he asked
‘Nobody killed I hope?
Any bodies?’
, there were of course two deaths, Piggy and Simon, the bodies of whom were carried out to sea by the current.
The book ended with the naval officer, then the description in the last line
He turned away to give them time to pull themselves together; and walked, allowing his eyes to rest on the trim cruiser in the distance.
This shows a clear image of war which the children are being returned to.
this explains why Golding's choice of ending, rescue, is not anti-climatic as the choristers and schoolboys are returning to the same situation back in the outside world.
Like the outside world, the island (before, a paradise) has been  destroyed by the evil of man which Golding believes is in everyone.
The island is seen as a microcosm of the world and this is part of Golding's style that has remained the same throughout the book.
His style of narration changes in the last chapter, as his narration of Ralph changes from Ralph's point of view near the beginning, back to Golding's extensive view of the whole island.
Golding's use of short sentences lets the reader realise Ralph's thoughts and confusion, when he writes
Break the line.
A tree.
Hide and let them pass
during the hunt.
Ralph, without the wise word of Piggy, does not realise until near the end that ‘sharpening his stick at both ends’ means that Jack's hunters are out to kill him as he believes that they are not capable of murder.
The ‘sharpening his stick at both ends’ refers to Roger, another character to have changed considerably since the beginning.
Roger's violent personality has emerged from beyond his ‘superego’ which once held back his conditioned arm from throwing stones, which now is demonstrated by the dropping of a rock on Piggy, the beating up of Sam 'n' Eric and the sharpening of his stick at both ends.
As Golding based this story on real boys he feels that even the youngest child has some evil in them and are capable of great wrongs.
At the end even the naval officer, all dressed in white, is murderous due to the  war, which Golding felt very strongly against due to his participation.
This book ends on a heavy tone of the thought of returning to the evil civilised world.
Lord of the Flies — imaginative essay about Ralph 20 or so years on
A fair haired man with tanned complexion which was hidden under his heavy  helmet and dirty face steadied himself down the steps.
Taking deep breaths he was patted on the back by a man beside him who in a shallow voice said,
‘Another job well done, Ralph, let's pack up and head back to the station.’
The  shifts were changing, Ralph changed out of his uniform and made his way home.
On arriving he was greeted by a young family and made his way through the clean, tastefully  decorated hallway into the lounge.
There he sat until a child switched on the widescreen t.v. showing a news broadcast.
‘Today, 20 years exactly since the 3rd WW ended’, began the presenter, peace talks between Britain and Iran begin, The Prime minister has been in conference for well over 5 hours discussing the issue of…’
Click!
The remote control changes over to adverts.
‘Now there is no need for wasting time with plastic surgery as Elizabeth Arden has designed a new cream for conquering those  misshapen noses.’
said the model off TV.
Again, a click!
This time the TV was off.
Ralph his son and now his wife all began to climb the stairs to bed.
The alarm clock overhead read 5.28, time for a quick cup of tea before his new shift began.
Without any goodbyes he left his house and took his small car to the station.
The station was quite, everybody was sleeping apart from Ralph.
While waiting he brought out a penknife and began whittling away a table-top.
A loud alarm bell rang out soundly and he awoke from a trance.
Immediately he joined the others, slid down the pole onto the ground floor where from a peg he grabbed  his coat and helmet and put on his overalls and boots.
With sirens wailing and blue lights flashing the red fire engine sped through the city.
Beside Ralph sat a coloured man, Joseph and next to him, Carter.
The two were in Ralph's team and were never to split up.
On reaching the fire, Joseph jumped out and began wheeling off the thick long hose pipe from the engine.
Carter  dealt out the oxygen cylinders while Ralph stood and stared at the smoke billowing out of the third floor of McKay's department store.
‘Ralph,’ said the captain ‘we are unsure whether there is anybody left in the building, it is up to you Carter and Jo to find out.
Your main priority is to find any people as we are placing the main hose in team 2's hands.
The fire is slowly spreading from the 3rd floor in both directions.
You will be entering with team 1 + 2 by the front entrance.
Team 1 is concentrating on the basement and ground floor, so I want you to go up to the 4th level as team 2 will be putting out the flames on floors 2 + 3.
Now be careful and get out when the going gets too hot!’
With Team 1 first Team 2 second and Ralph, Carter and Joseph in third the glass doors were smashed open.
Clouds of smoke billowed out so the teams crouched down to avoid inhaling the poisonous fumes.
Then 1 by 1 they entered.
The teams split off and Ralph led team 3 to the escalator.
Above him the smoke blackened the air so as he was unable to see the top.
Then from behind him Carter called, beneath his mask,
‘Take the side stairs, I know McKay's like the back of my hand, they lead straight up to 4.’
Ralph listened and drew away from the escalator.
He turned and motioned Carter to take the lead.
Carter lead them through a doorway onto a staircase.
They were smoke-free, due to the fire doors, and allowed the team to carry on straight up to the 4th floor.
On opening the door the heat penetrated the heavy black coats but they managed to withstand it, knowing they must carry out their job.
Joseph took from his back an axe and begin chopping the displays of plates and furniture away.
Then, from behind the sound of his axe, he heard screaming.
Ralph also heard and both of them rushed over to rows and rows of clothes rails, all knocked down.
From underneath them was heard a faint sobbing which allowed their well trained ears to pinpoint the position.
Underneath piles of jeans, jackets and jumpers lay a half crippled woman.
In the stampede to get out of the building she had been caught under the flow of people, pushed to the ground and trapped, with a broken ankle, under heaps of clothes and stands.
Carter bowed down and lifted her effortlessly over his broad shoulder.
‘Right, we found one, let's get going, the ground is getting hot and you can almost hear the flames,’ ordered Carter.
‘There may be more, and I'm in charge, let's continue,’ replied Ralph.
‘It's ridiculous to carry on and endanger the lives of your team and  the civilian,’ said Carter, ‘Joseph what do you think?’
‘There is likely to be more, I say continue, but let's not keep here talking about it,’ said Joseph and with that he brought down his axe on a dummy beside him.
Making  their way through the extensive 4th floor they were stopped when a massive explosive caused them to hit the floor.
Beside them, only 20 metres from Ralph, part of the swimwear section was sucked leaving a hole through which orange, red-hot flames  leapt up.
Ralph stood up and controlled the flames around and beckoned for the team to run quickly to the staircase.
They did so, followed soon by Ralph who left the burning clothes for team 2 to put out.
They had not stopped working as from the stairs Ralph could hear the monotonous sound of gushing water working away the flames which were becoming hotter and higher, burning everything in sight.
Opening the exit to the 5th and top floor, out came great wafts of grey choking smoke.
The lady was being offered a gas mask by Carter and gladly took it, just before she fainted as they entered the smoke filled floor.
On one side lay the children's toy section or the other the lighting stereo and t.v. part.
Joseph lead the team towards the children's section and as they were passing through a second explosion was felt.
The ground trembled and over-head many bikes, toy tractors, etc. strung above the ceiling for display purposes, came crashing down upon the team.
Ralph, Carter and the lady were untouched, they were still too far back, only Joseph, in the lead was injured.
A Mattel Kriss-Kross mountain bike with stabilisers had caught his neck, when he looked up, and brought him to the ground yet it was the red and yellow tractor which applied the pressure that made  his neck give way with an awful crack.
His eyes, wide, were  blank and his mouth open, the team had been split.
Ralph was not sure what to do, Carter felt they should get out.
Then, from a plastic ‘wendy-house’ came a quiet voice,
‘Dad, dad, help, I'm ever so scared.’
Ralph quickly moved towards the house and round the door peered a small, pale face.
A child, no  more than three motioned to Ralph and said,
‘Bell, then me stay here and ev'one gone!’
His red, blotchy face turned to Joseph who lay on the ground nearby, then to Carter and finally to Ralph again.
He then broke into tears.
Ralph quickly picked the child up and said, ‘Let's get out of her’.
When they reached the stairway the flights of stairs were almost  obscured by the thick clouds of smoke.
Oxygen masks were necessary and Carter had picked off Joseph's face before leaving for the stair.
The boy could not breathe in the choking air and began coughing and panicking.
Ralph gave his up but realised he could not continue.
There were not enough masks and it was Ralph left without one.
‘I will go up to the roof, just remember though to tell them to send a ladder up there’ said Ralph ‘Take the child with you and hurry’And with that Carter ran as fast as he could through the dark air with the lady and child and before long  he was out Ralph's sight.
The exit to the roof was on the other side of floor 5 so Ralph went back through the door into the large room.
The area had heated up considerably, without heavy boots the floor would burn.
The smoke began  seeping through the now closed door so Ralph hurried towards the  other exit.
The pace was slow as much of the lighting, chandeliers, etc, had fallen to the ground in the previous explosion and was difficult to avoid and run through.
Before he had reached halfway the floor in front of him fell him.
A huge chasm had appeared with flames creeping through and billowing smoke filling the air.
The exit was impossible to reach as this abyss stretched the length of the floor.
He was unable to go forward or backward.
The smoke was swirling around him, affecting his unprotected eyes and making him choke.
It was obscuring his vision and made him feel faint.
Then as he began whispering,
‘Break the line.
A tree.
Hide and let them pass,’ it all came flooding back to him as the flames  leapt around him.
In front of his sleepy eyes was a man dressed in white.
He peered down at Ralph and said,
‘I'll help you put this jacket on, mate, you had one of your turns again.
I'm sorry, but  it's padded walls again for you son.’
Throughout the last 230 years opinions between  professionals and parents have differed about the techniques used to educate deaf children.
the basis of these arguments have been whether methods such as sign language and finger spelling — hand actions allowing written English to be communicated within the understanding population — are as useful and effective as the technique known as ‘total oralism’— the stressing of speech and lip reading rather than communication with signs.
The founder of Edinburgh's school for the deaf  originally believed in ‘total oralism’ yet later used the ‘combined system’— a teaching of both speech and signs, which was also to be taught in the ensuing schools for deaf around Europe.
As the century's changed from 19th to 20th the use of sign language was deteriorating in the training of deaf teachers and non-deaf parents were advised to  emphasise speech and lip-reading rather than learn signing — another term for sign language.
By the time the children, taught  solely lipreading and speech, were 5 or 6 years old there was a certain  inadequacy in the levels of communication they could reach compared by a quotation in one book to be of a level ‘scarcely above the signals we use to our pets’.
This was seen to be a problem and in the 1960's a change was made to a method known as ‘total communication’.
At present the arguments for various methods of communication are between the techniques ‘total communication’ and the fairly recent ‘natural  aurlism’.
‘Total Communication’ is a technique as the name suggests, one which tries developing every possible method of communicating including gestures, speech, lipreading, formal signing and the future uses of the best possible electronic hearing aids.
This is the technique  favoured by the British Deaf Association as it is thought to give the child the greatest chance of expression and understanding.
‘Natural  Aurilism ’ on the other hand is the technique used to develop a child's remaining hearing by use of powerful, high quality hearing aids.
The children taught by ‘Natural  Aurilism ’ need to be trained from a very early age and seem to need to be of above average intelligence, have involved parents and trained staff.
The evidence of a child who was taught by the ‘Natural  Aurilism ’ method is that at the age of 5 she is able to talk and play with normal children at a normal school and although she may not be as far ahead, the results of this method seem astounding.
Yet, was this child lucky that she was able to cope with the technique known as ‘Natural  Aurilism ‘?
As I weigh together the advantages and disadvantages of either of the present methods of deaf education I have to also take into account the high possibility of failure in the ‘Natural  Aurilism ’ technique and the ‘unattractiveness’of ‘total communication’.
‘Natural Aurilism’ has produced certain children who may begin to lead normal lives there are a high percentage of children to whom this technique is not available or suitable and this is why in my mind continuation of ‘total communication’should be preferable.
It is a technique which may also be developed further to incorporate ‘Natural  Aurilism ’ yet does not ignore traditional and worthwhile methods.
29.9.92 English
Religion is a force for the good Alison White 4H1
Religion is the belief in a higher unseen controlling power or powers.
Throughout the world there are many different beliefs, the most popular of which is Islam.
Islam is also the most recent as it only began in 612 A.D. Even though this religion is different from others it still has the common belief in good that all religions have.
According to the Christian faith God gave the ten commandments to Moses on Mount Sinai and Jesus gave the Sermon on the Mount.
By combing these two ideas we have the basic guidelines for today's society.
British laws evolved from these  principles as have the laws of other countries and these are the laws accepted for society.
Religion was the base for the  principles of society and they are all for the good and well being of society.
Religion has given structure to what is acceptable and what is not acceptable in our  lives and even those who claim that they do not believe in God, abide by these rules.
Without this control the world would be in madness and we would end up with the laws of the jungle, where the strongest wins.
Not only does religion give the  principles of society but also the  principles of  one's lifestyle.
Your religious background shapes the way you live your life and gives the ideals of your life and what you aim to achieve.
It gives many people a purpose to life and hope for the future.
Religion also gives answers to questions that science can not account for, such as the beginning of the world.
It makes things which seem difficult, much easier to understand.
And to those dying it brings peace and assurance of eternal life.
Many people find great strength in religion and find that in the most difficult moments, a good can come out of what has happened.
There are readings throughout the Christian Bible which give help to people who are tense, lonely, bereaved, concerned for others or have a weakness in faith and about hundreds of other things and from these readings many people begin to see a way out of their problem.
There are many people in  today's society who have devoted their lives to doing good through their individual faith.
The most famous of which is probably Mother Theresa and her Sisters of Charity of Calcutta.
Mother Theresa has spent her whole life looking after the poor and sick children and babies on the streets of Calcutta.
She  allows herself to have no possessions, only two sets of clothing and anything else she gets from charities goes straight into making homes and clinics which provide free health care to poor mothers for their children.
When Mother Theresa received the Nobel Peace Prize she amazed the world by giving every penny to the poor of Calcutta.
She does this because she feels it to be her duty to God and it makes her happy helping these people.
Cliff Richard has met Mother Theresa and after which he said that he would never be the same again.
When Cliff went to Bangladesh he was already a member of Tear Fund but when he saw the suffering he felt that he had to do more and was ready to give up his singing career and follow his religious instincts to help these people.
It took a long talk from one of the Sisters of Charity to make him realise that God had given him the gift of his voice and he was to use his gift with religion to help these people.
However it is not only the famous who give up their time as there are hundreds of missionaries all around the world trying to help people of the same and different religions through worship to God.
It is these people and the religious helpers who go round the streets of our own town preaching their faith to help others, who are the real heroes.
So religion helps us also to be tolerant of other  people's beliefs.
If this is so, and the missionaries can do it, then why are there so many religious disputes.
The unfortunate side of religion is when people become fanatical about their faith and they believe so strongly in something that they feel the need to prove it to others.
It is at times like this when people begin to  lose the true  principles of religion as they become too involved and so wars begin.
A religious war is often said to be very bitter because the two sides are fighting for something that they both feel is very important.
They feel the fighting is justified because their religion is something worth supporting and fighting for because if everybody just accepted what the other said then  no-one would have the right to choose and end up with a dictatorship where one person is saying what they believe in and nobody fights back so everybody would end up having to agree.
However a war like the one going on in Northern Ireland at the present is different because religion is being used as an excuse to fight and so it is being used as a negative force and not a force for the good.
But because it is not being used for the good, no good can come from it.
Religion is something solid for people to lean on.
It has the power to reform and transform lives ad through it countless people have been given new strength.
In my opinion religion will always be here and I feel that there is a place for it in  tomorrows society as it is all around us and in everything we do.
In the future religion will be changed slightly and the Bible (or any other religious texts) will be translated into more modern meaning but the main themes will still carry on.
Religion is timeless in my opinion and it will always have a meaning.
But I do feel that the popularity of religion is decreasing but only slightly.
With the availability of different types of religion increasing, there is more choice and people can find what is right for them.
In my opinion the true themes of religion are being lost in all the disputes surrounding it and the fact the religion is a force for the good needs to promoted.
The philosophy of life can be found in religion and religion gives life a meaning.
If life is not to be pointless, there must be an ultimate reason for it.
11.10.92 English
Futility by Wilfred Owen Alison White 4H1
Wilfred Owen was a poet during the first world war and all his poems contain a strong message about war which is usually expressed through a personal experience.
His poem entitled ‘Futility’ is no different.
Futility consists of fourteen lines arranged in two stanzas which makes it a  sonnet .
It also has a slight rhyme scheme of ABABCDC which is repeated in the second stanza.
This poem has a strong anti-war message warning of the pointlessness of war and this is reflected in the title ‘Futility’ which means uselessness.
This poem is about the death of one of Wilfred Owen's fellow soldiers and this is focused on in the first stanza.
It begins with the dead body being moved into the sun as the sun used to awaken him both at home and in the trenches, in France.
He sued to love the sun and it seemed to give him life but now as they drag his limp body into the sun they realise that nothing will wake him, not even the sun.
As Wilfred Owen moves into the second stanza he takes on the bigger issue of what he is really trying to say.
He starts with the idea of a hard, cold seed being woken by the sun and given life by the sun.
It can bring life to a whole planet and creak a world but his fellow soldier's body has been carefully constructed and is in one piece, and still warm but the sun can not give it life as his body is now stiff.
The poem ends by asking if humans and the world were evolved so that they could be destroyed in war then why did the sun bother to give life to things in the first place as it all seems silly and pointless.
The anti-war message, I feel, comes through very effectively in this poem.
This effect is achieved by giving a small, focused example of a very emotional and personal experience and then moving out onto a much larger scale and asking more general questions about humanity.
The use of words also helps to bring across the message of the poem with words such as‘futility’ and ‘fatuous’giving the distinct impression that Wilfred Owen has almost given up everything that he once believed in because he feels that everyone is going to kill each other anyway.
There is also the repeated use of the word ‘day’ in the  ninth and  twelfth line.
In the first use it is a lifeless, dull word but the second time it is used it is as if the day has been given life to grow and expand.
I feel that this is a difficult poem to understand but when it has been read a few times the meaning becomes clear.
It is very effective and almost shocking when you realise that what he is saying makes complete sense and the uselessness of war is so true as it really achieves very little good if any at all.
Wilfred Owen has written many different types of poems and the only other well-known sonet that he has written is ‘Anthem for Doomed Youth’.
This is similar to ‘Futility’ in the sense that Owen uses personal experience to get his message across but his is not so much about the pointlessness of war in general but is more focused on the individual soldier and the difference between death on the battlefield and death in your own town.
The poem  expresses a lot more anger in it than in ‘Futility’ where you get the impression that Owen has given up.
Another popular poem is ‘The Sentry’ which is a narrative poem about a sentry who has lost his sight.
It is a poem which uses plain, simple language and he holds it together using  onomatopoeia and effective rhyme but you do not feel as if there is one definite clear-cut image or message in it.
But still it is very carefully structured with a setting verse, a narrative verse and finishing off with a reflective verse and 10  syllables in each line and Futility has the same feeling of careful planning and construction.
The final poem that I am going to compare ‘Futility’ with is ‘The Send Off’.
This is again another type of poem called a lyrical poem.
In this poem you get the feeling that Owen is not actually taking part in this but he has seen it happening before and so, unlike all the rest, it is not completely based on his own experience.
I find this poem not as effective as ‘Futility’ in getting its message across as there does not seem to be much emotion in it and it is very difficult to understand and that takes away much of the effect.
These four poems all have things in common such as the careful planning and structure of them which does not always seem obvious.
Most of them also use personal experience as Owen uses traumatic experiences of his during the war, to act as a base to what he is trying to say and to help to get his message across.
The basic message that he is trying to get across is an anti-war message which is present in all of his poems but the more precise message varies slightly with each poem.
Owen also does not confine himself to writing only one type of poem but uses many different kinds so to appeal to more people.
His language in the poems also differs with the simple language of ‘The Sentry’ to the much more complicated ideas of ‘Futility’.
I also feel that in ‘Futility’ Owen uses emotion very well and gives a very good impression of his feeling which I feel is slightly lacking in a couple of his other poems.
I enjoyed ‘Futility’ very much as it is poem with a message for all people and like most of Wilfred Owen's poems it is timeless and has a meaning not only for the first World War but for wars to come.
‘Great Expectations’
‘Great Expectations’ is thought of by some critics as the greatest novel written in English.
I began ‘Great Expectations’ with a very negative view towards it but as I read on I began to really enjoy it.
It is a story by an older Pip reflecting back on his life story.
This book follows young Pip through his life and into his mid thirties and shows his highs and lows.
It also follows Pip's intensely painful and burning love for Estella who does not return his love but merely plays with his feelings under the guidance of her guardian Miss Havisham.
Dickens chooses his characters and their names very carefully as is clearly shown with the character of Pip.
Pip's name gives the image of a growing seed and this gives us our first idea of the plot.
In the first stage of his expectations Pip is a young imaginative orphan with no expectations but to become Joe's apprentice in the forge.
Pip is very self-critical at this point in his life mainly due to the criticism by Estella, about his course hands and thick boots.
This causes the reader to feel very sorry for him but this pity soon fades as Pip starts to blame Joe for his common ways and he slowly begins to turn into a snob.
The  reader's sympathy towards Pip continues to fall during the second part of his expectations due to his rejection and embarrassment of his past life.
By the time he meets his benefactor Pip has none of the sympathy of the reader as he is snobby, condescending and harsh towards Magwitch as is shown in this quote from Pip
‘I am glad that, thinking I deserved to be thanked, you have come to thank me.
But our ways are different ways, none the less.’
But in the third and final part of his expectations, Pip redeems himself by his loyalty towards Magwitch and his attempt to make things up to Joe and Biddy and his pursuit of the truth.
He also regains the  reader's admiration by the way in which he seems to have been humbled by his many ordeals.
Joe is Pip's brother-in-law and he suffers with Pip at the start as Pip regards him as a youthful counterpart and describes him as
‘a mild, good-natured, sweet-tempered, easy going, foolish, dear fellow.’
But Joe's main purpose in the novel is to be the moral standard and to show what Pip could have been and how he could have lived his life without the money.
The other important character is that of Mr Herbert Pocket whose purpose in the book is to give a continuous comparison to Pip and to show Pip's development.
He is a role model of a gentleman and of how contentment can be found in being a gentleman.
He is also a very good judge of character as he describes Estella as
‘hard, haughty and capricious to the last degree, having been brought-up…to wreak vengeance on all the male sex’
.
Estella and Miss Havisham reduce the  reader's sympathy towards Pip by turning him into a snob at the beginning and Magwitch helps to redeem Pip at the end by bringing out his loyalty.
Nearly all of Dickens' characters are fully developed and are all there to show Pip's development.
All of the characters are strong and stay basically in the same tone except for Estella who  undergoes a very sudden character change in the revised ending.
This form of characterisation greatly contributes to the enjoyment of this novel.
There are many continuing themes in this novel and in my opinion the main theme is that of contentment.
When Pip meets Miss Havisham and Estella he is no longer happy with himself or the way in which he lives and becomes very self-critical, he then tries to find contentment with money and becoming a gentleman but this fails.
Nearing  the end, Pip realises that he could find contentment with Biddy but he soon learns that he is too late as she has already found happiness with Joe.
He finally finds contentment in living a basic life and repaying Joe what he owes him and he soon realises that he could have been happy staying with Joe in the forge.
This brings in the other theme of how money can corrupt which is obviously shown by the ways in which Pip's attitude changes towards those around him by becoming condescending towards them and showing little respect and compassion.
But personal growth is also shown here as the character of Pip begins to change even before he was given the money and it  continues to change after all the money is gone.
All of these themes come across very strongly throughout the novel and all have implications on life today.
These are not themes which will become out of date but they are timeless which means that this novel will still be ready and still have relevance in the future.
‘Great Expectations’ is written in the style of first person narrative with a middle aged Pip telling the principal events, characters and motives which changed and shaped his life.
At the beginning Dickens piles up adjectives in order to set the scene and build atmosphere as is shown when he writes in the first chapter
The marshes were just a long black horizontal line.
After setting the scene this use of description slightly declines unless he is introducing a new character or scene.
Dickens employs the use of imagery through out the novel especially when describing characters.
Joe, who is a moral character, is associated with images of white, light and warmth, while the old Miss Havisham is associated with yellow, decay and crying or wailing sounds.
All of his characters are associated with images in this way.
He uses a lot of contrast between black and white, goodness and evil.
There is also a contrast between the forge and Satis House as the house is barricaded and the inside is all dark so Pip has to be led by candlelight to Miss Havisham and when he first sees her all in white she looks like a fairy godmother but as he looks closer he sees her decay and yellowness.
While the forge is always warm and inside is the loving, childlike Joe who has goodness all around him and this is particularly shown when he looks after Pip when he has a fever and the power of that scene.
But I feel that the weak point in the imagery is in the use of ‘pathetic fallacy and this is clearly shown when Pip is about to meet his benefactor and there is a raging storm outside to show change
Violent blasts of rain had accompanied these rages of wind, and the day just closed as I sat down to read had been the worst day of all.
Dickens also makes good use of symbolism and the most obvious example of this occurs at the end of the first chapter with the convict walking towards the gibbet and the beacon which are symbols of death and life.
Nearing the end Dickens uses the fire as a redemptive power to change Miss Havisham from her former harsh self to a woman wanting forgiveness as is shown in the following quotation
she said innumerable times in a low solemn voice, ‘What have I done!’
And then, ‘When she first cam, I meant to save her from misery like mine.’
And then, ‘Take the pencil and write under my name, ‘I forgive her!’’
Many things are told to the reader throughout the novel through conversation or through reading something such as the reading of the tombstone which tells us of the death of Pip's parents.
‘Great Expectations’ is also a very humorous book with many little funny episodes throughout it such as the time when Joe offers comfort to Pip at the dinner table by giving him gravy
There being plenty of gravy to-day, Joe spooned into my plate, at this point, about half a pint.
All of this gives Dickens a very individual and interesting style and gives you the feeling that every episode is useful and  vital in some way to the plot.
This gives the novel great feeling and makes you ask many questions about how everything will link in together in the end.
But it also makes everything quite difficult to fully understand as it can take a long time to see what is really being said.
‘Great Expectations’ has two endings which are now both included in the book.
In my personal opinion I prefer the original ending because it keeps up the style and tone of the rest of the novel and also keeps the characters the same.
It gives a more realistic view and even though you want Pip to finally get Estella as you feel that he deserves that after all his hardship you know that it must be impossible because of Estella's character.
It gives a better ending to the novel as it brings everything together but still leaves you thinking as it ends
for, in her face and in her voice, and in her touch, she gave the assurance that suffering had been stronger than Miss Havisham's teachings, and had given her a heart to understand what his heart used to be.
The second revised ending though gives Estella a complete character change and seems to leave everything a bit too perfect and predictable as it ends more like a ‘Mills and Boon’ love story with
and in all the broad expanse of tranquil light they showed to me, I saw no shadow of another parting from her.
By the end of ‘Great Expectations’ I found that I had enjoyed the book and had found it thought provoking and interesting.
I do view this as one of the ‘great classics but I do not know if I would say it is the greatest book ever written in English as I have not yet read widely enough but I would definitely say that for all the above reasons that it is a great book.
English My Worst Moment 4H1
One of the most frightening times in my life  occurred about three years ago during the October break.
I was one of a group of army cadets taken on an adventurous training camp, at Newtonmore, to learn new skills.
I had been on one of these camps before so I thought that I knew what to expect.
The week began with great success as everybody was getting on well, the weather was good and all activities were running according to plan.
But soon the rain set in and things began to go wrong.
It was all just like a pathetic fallacy.
The first problem  arose when we were orienteering on bicycles one morning.
It had been raining that night so the roads were slippy and our group was half way round the course when a friend, Catriona, suffered a puncture in her rear wheel.
We decided to stay where we were while Johnny and Gavin, who were both experienced cyclists, set off in search of the minibus.
They had not been gone long when we sighted Gavin coming towards us.
Johnny had been going too fast and had slipped, badly cutting his knee.
The mini-bus had already collected him and we were told to return to the start to meet the mini-bus and return to the lodge.
Johnny returned after lunch with his knee bandaged up but the hospital said that it was not really too serious but this meant that he was unable to take part in the  afternoon's activities.
The choice was rock-climbing or canoeing.
As I had already been rock-climbing I decided it was time to take part in the activity which I had been looking forward to, canoeing!
Although it was raining and freezing cold outside, we all got ready and pulled ourselves into our wet suits and set off for the river.
When we arrived half an hour later, all the canoes were unloaded from the trailer and we were all kitted-out with a helmet and life-jacket and given our canoe for the day.
Once we had all got into our canoes we were given a quick talk on safety  procedure , capsize drill and what to do if you get into trouble.
I listened in  even though I had heard most of it before and then we were told that anybody who had never been in a canoe before had to carry out capsize drills.
I was so relieved to hear this as I had been canoeing many times before and so could remain warm and dry while watching many of the younger cadets freeze to death.
The practices did not last for long and soon we were off.
The river was amazing as there was a lot of white water rapids and due to the rain it was quite deep.
But unfortunately this did not last for long as we came to a narrow, shallow strip of the river.
As we paddled on down this part of the river I became aware of a huge commotion behind me.
I turned to find that somebody had capsized in the shallowest part of the river.
The young boy was extremely  embarrassed but soon swallowed his pride and climbed back into his canoe while we all fell about with laughter around him and it was then that I heard the bang.
My canoe had turned side on to the river and against the flow and as I turned to see what the noise was I realised that I had hit a log sticking out of the water.
I desperately tried to paddle away but the canoe move and I was wedged in.
The current was starting to tip the canoe over and I began to panic as the boat was filling up rapidly and I tried my best to bail it out with my hands but had little success.
The, finally remembering all that I had been told, I capsized myself and grabbed onto the canoe and paddle and headed for the nearest bank.
It was about then that I noticed I could not touch the bottom and I felt myself going faster downstream than I was going across.
I was caught in a current and no matter how much and how hard I swam I just could not get out of it.
By this time I had released both canoe and paddle as I was much more concerned about my own safety than anything else.
I soon noticed myself rapidly approaching a fallen tree over the surface of the river and as I rushed towards it I clung on to it for dear life.
I had not before realised that my canoe had been following me but I soon felt it as the point hit my back and then went down underneath me, dragging me down and sandwiching me between the canoe and the tree.
Meanwhile I noticed my friends paddling by  smiling, laughing and waving at me as they obviously did not realise why I was screaming as loud as I possibly could.
I tried to pull myself out but my foot was caught in some branches and the current squashed the canoe hard up against me, allowing me no movement.
I began to feel myself being pulled further and further under the water, I screamed and swore but nobody seemed to hear or believe me and then my head went under and all I remember is a feeling of despair as I squeezed the tree trunk only to find that it simply crumbled in my hands.
It was then that my saviour arrived.
The instructor must have heard my screams as I felt myself being dragged out as I gasped for air.
It had taken two of them to free me from the current and I was so relieved.
One instructor paddled off while the other stayed to help me get the canoe out and empty it.
After quite a lot of  persuasion and promises of chocolate bars, I finally got back into my canoe and headed off down the river to find my paddle and the rest of the group.
We found them and my paddle with the other instructor getting a lecture on what to do if you see your friend drowning and not ignoring sos calls.
All the way back I stayed directly behind my instructor at all times and kept well away from the banks and any fallen trees.
Looking back on it I could not figure out what went wrong as I had done exactly as instructed but nobody had  ever really said much about fallen trees or currents and especially not in such a small part of the river.
It was a lot stronger than I had imagined and so I did not treat it with the necessary respect.
I think that I was also over-confident when going into that river as if I'd done it all before and was some sort of expert.
But now I see that you can never know too much about safety and that every river is different.
But even this has not stopped my love for canoeing as I have been out many times since and this summer, when I was at camp, I was going down a weir, when I got caught in a stopper at the bottom and nearly drowned myself again.
This made me remember what had happened before and ever since I have been treating both water and canoes with a good degree of caution and respect.
10.9.92 TALKING My worst moment
When I was younger, I was always terrified whenever I thought of people breaking into our house.
My father has always had a passion for sailing.
I remember the days when, as a small child, I was taken around boatyards, harbours and rivers to admire boat after boat, while he built castles in the air about owning one.
There was always a ‘dream boat’— the one he  raved about and admired most often.
‘Look at this, Sal’, he would say, ‘this one can't sink, even if it's broken in half!’
And he would show me a picture of a large white vessel sailing through a beautifully blue sea on a sunny day, with a glamorous crew smiling happily as they lay gracefully about the deck.
But I didn't discover the reality about sailing for myself until my parents decided that, at the age of 9 or 10, I was ready to try it.
My brother and I were booked for a 5 day course on Harperig Reservoir, with one instructor and a group of about 10 children.
I think I was the youngest.
Actually, I was quite looking forward to having the mysteries of all the ropes and bits of wood being revealed so I arrived, on a sunny day with fairly high hopes (along with 3 sweater, 2 pairs of socks, waterproof gear and a large life jacket).
My disillusionment began with the lecture.
I still remember the feeling of hopelessness as I sat and looked at a board covered with arrows and lines, the words ‘tacking’, ‘rigging’, ‘wind direction’ and ‘points of sailing’floating around in my head.
And the worst part was, everyone else seemed to understand it and strode out to the quay full of knowledgeable confidence.
The first assignment was simple.
The boats (called optimists — very small and faintly resembling bathtubs) were tied up in a line, with one end attached to the floating quay and the other tied to the side of the reservoir some distance away.
The idea, said the instructor, was to climb from the quay, over all the boats and onto the stone wall.
This would help us to get to know the boats and, after all, what could be simpler?
What he didn't tell us was that the boats were tied very loosely and had a disturbing tendency to drift apart as you were in the process of climbing from one to another.
I was the last to cross, and I watched more and more people getting wet with a sinking feeling in my stomach.
But all seemed to go well for me as I climbed from boat to boat successfully, and then all I had to do was get to the wall from the last boat.
I put my hands out to the wall and, as I did so, the optimist still containing my legs, drifted away slowly, leaving my stomach sagging gracefully into the water.
I can still remember the humiliation I felt as I heard everyone laughing at me, and my brother laughing the loudest of all.
But this was only the tip of the iceberg.
Our second assignment was to paddle the boats around with the daggerboard — basically just a large, flat piece of wood.
I think that everyone had to be rescued by a motor boat as we drifted helplessly around, vainly splashing at the water with these pieces of wood.
But after that, things improved.
We actually got the rigging up and sailed around for a while in twos — I was with my brother and I thought we managed quite well.
So we felt quite smug as we manoeuvred the boats ashore for our next instructions.
‘Very good,’ said the instructor, ‘now we'll all change boats and sail with someone else — that way you'll get to know each other.’
I knew, as I watched the miserable small boy with large shadowed eyes clamber into the boat, that it would be a long afternoon.
Actually, it was shorter than I anticipated.
We got about half-way across the reservoir before neatly capsizing, in a slow and deliberate way into the ice-cold water.
We clung helplessly to  the upturned optimist until rescued by the instructor with a motor boat.
I didn't go out again that day.
But that alone didn't daunt my spirit, so I set off on the second day with a little more trepidation but just as much determination to learn to sail.
We didn't hang around for as long that day — we must rigged the boats (with a little help) and prepared to set off.
I had more luck with partners this time — I was paired off with an older girl who I got along with fine, and we readied ourselves to go out.
The wind was only slightly stronger and the reservoir a little choppier, but most of the others were out already and managing fine, so I saw no reason why we couldn't do the same.
We were told what to do and then left, as the instructor went to the other end of the loch to shout instructions at a few stranded boats.
I sat on the quay with my hands down beside me and my fingers over the edge as I put my feet in the boat, ready to get in.
I forget what it was that distracted me for a moment, but as I delayed, the water bounced the boat up and down and then straight against the quay, with my finger in between.
Ouch, I thought, that really hurt, and I clenched it tight for a moment to stop the pain, before looking to see the damage.
It was rather spectacular really — there was blood all over the place and covering my hand.
I just screamed as loudly as I could — more from the shock than anything else, and I didn't stop crying for several hours afterwards.
The only enjoyable memory that I have is that of the instructor, a tall man with dark hair and a  quiet nature vault a large gate in one bound and coming sprinting towards me to see what was the matter.
I felt quite proud at having caused that, although I was more pre-occupied with my mangled finger.
Some sympathetic mothers covered it with bandages and bulging dressings and I was driven to the doctors' where I was given a more impressive bandage, leaving my finger looking the size of a small banana.
I became very proud of my wounds as the pain grew less, and I enjoyed flashing the bandage around to gain sympathy, until one night, after a couple of months, the nail fell off without warning.
There are no visible scars left from that experience, but I have found that to my mind the word ‘optimistic’ has taken on a whole new meaning.
16.10.92 View From the Bridge — Issues
In Miller's play ‘A View From the Bridge’, many moral and social issues are addressed which affect the lives of all of us.
It is difficult sometimes to ascertain Miller's views on an issue, but by looking at he consequences of people's actions in this play, we can see something of the way he feels regarding the issues addressed.
One issue is that of loyalty — this is a very important theme to the play, especially with regard to the actions of Eddie Carboni.
Families in Eddie's society were very important and to betray a member of your family was unthinkable.
This is made clear from the start by the tale which Beatrice tells Catherine of a boy who betrayed his uncle — illegally hidden in his family's house — and who was dragged by his feet down flights of stairs and spat on in the street by his father and brothers as a result.
It is important to note that Eddie says on page 22, when asked if the boy was seen again:
‘Him?
You'll never see him no more, a guy do a thing like that?
How's he gonna show his face?
Just remember, kid, you can quicker get back a million dollars that was stole than a word you gave away.’
Of course, the terrible irony of this is shown later, when Eddie betrays his cousins and the truth of his own words is applied as he ruins his life and finally loses it as a result of being disloyal.
It can therefore be assumed that Miller's message from this is that betrayal is wrong — it is the act of betrayal which finally destroys Eddie's happiness forever.
Another issue is revenge; there are two types of revenge in this play.
The first is disguised as justice — Alfieri mentions in his opening speech:
‘Justice is very important here’
, and this is very true  The justice of Eddie's society was the ‘eye for an eye’ concept — you give as good as you get.
Or vice-versa, in Eddie's case, as he gets no more than he gives from Marco.
As Eddie shelters and protects Marco, Marco respects him.
As Eddie threatens Marco's brother, Marco threatens him.
And as Eddie betrays Marco, Marco kills him.
and Miller does not appear to be against this type of revenge.
At least, in the circumstances of this play, things certainly wouldn't have been any better had Marco not acted in this way, and they may have been worse.
Indeed, sometimes killing can end a deadlock or cut short suffering, and I think that this happened in Eddie' case — he would have lived an isolated and miserable life had he not been killed, so Marco almost did him a favour.
Also, it cannot be ignored that Marco didn't have many options, since Eddie was about to kill him, and Marco's actions were in self-defence: I think that Marco may only have beaten Eddie up had he not drawn the knife, but not killed him.
However, this is not the only type of revenge.
Eddie's betrayal of his cousins is also revenge — he was doing it to prevent Rodolpho marrying Catherine primarily, but at the same time he was getting revenge for all the problems that his cousins had caused him, especially regarding Catherine.
This sort of revenge, without real (or rational) cause is condemned by Miller and brings only unhappiness, as it is based on imaginary and childish grievances and is therefore spiteful and unjust.
The issues of repentance and forgiveness feature here also — Rodolpho, even at the last moment, is prepared to accept the blame for what Eddie has done and offers to kiss his hand, and Beatrice also offers him an earlier chance of redemption by asking him and Catherine to make friends and Catherine agrees — but Eddie refuses.
This idea establishes ‘goodies’ and ‘baddies’in the play — Eddie is forgiven by Rodolpho and B. and to a certain extent Catherine, thus establishing them as ‘goodies’, while by refusing to repent he  establishes himself as a ‘baddie’and loses the respect of his audience.
Another issue brought into question by Miller is that of priorities.
Eddie, Catherine and B. (but especially Eddie) must all decide where their priorities lie and what is most important to them — Family?
Friends?
Society?
Personal happiness?
These are only a few of the choices before them, but even these are very difficult to prioritize and at times some of them must be  sacrificed at the expense of others in this play.
To B., the happiness of her family comes first and she is, in the eyes of Miller, clearly in the right all along.
To Eddie, the well-being of his ward is his priority at first, but this grows out of proportion until he is blindly obsessed and destroys his relationship with her.
Catherine recognizes also that her happiness is more important than pleasing Eddie, but her choice is the hardest because at the beginning of the play Eddie wanted what was best, but by the end his wishes would have made her miserable.
She therefore decides to marry Rodolpho, endangering her relationship with Eddie, but Miler doesn't condemn her for this — she wants what's best for everyone.
So, I think that in the opinion of Miller the family was the most important thing for B. and should have been for Eddie and all parents, but the priority for Catherine was her own life and I think that as far as Miller is concerned she is right, because she has a whole future ahead of her while B. and Eddie have settled down.
But you notice, once the family has split up, nothing falls into place.
This naturally leads to another issue — that of the independence of children within their families.
In this play, Miller shows the danger of over-protection and illustrates how this can do more harm than good to a young adult.
Eddie's over-protection rapidly becomes a blind obsession until he has lost sight of the fact that he really wants to make Catherine happy.
Through this over-anxiety  for her and consequent blindness to her real needs, the whole relationship between them is destroyed.
Look at the start of the play — Catherine is devoted to Eddie and Eddie is kind and even jokes about her independence — this is seen on page 21, when Eddie says that Catherine will move away when she gets a job (but this is said without resentment) and Catherine denies it.
Eddie says:
‘Why not?
That's life.
And you'll come visit on Sundays, then once a month, then Christmas and New Year, finally.’
What is important is that he is grinning as he says this, denoting playfulness, and Catherine is distressed by the idea.
But look at the contrast on p81, after Eddie has messed things up and made Catherine miserable — she says that he is a rat.
She weeps as she says these words about him:
‘He bites people when they sleep!
He comes when nobody's lookin' and poisons decent people.
In the garbage he belongs!’
This clearly shows how Eddie's actions, beginning by a natural desire for Catherine's well-being, eventually destroyed their relationship and brought misery to both of them.
But probably the overriding issue of this play is compromise.
This is what Alfieri is talking about when he says
‘Most of the time now we settle for half and I like it better’.
He is referring to the fact that people are prepared to compromise and will accept half-measures.
It was Eddie's refusal to do this and his blind obsession and one-track mind which caused him to lose his family, his friends, his respect, his happiness and finally his life.
8.10.92 English Essay — Critical Appreciation of Wilfred Owen Futility
The poem ‘Futility’ by Wilfred Owen seems at first glance to be simple and relatively straightforward, but, as with many of Owen's poems, it is well structured and very clever.
The first half reflects on one incident: a soldier who has died or lost consciousness has been found by his friends and they try to awaken him, finding out if he is dead.
In the second part, the poem moves away from this incident to consider the point of life if all we do is destroy one another.
The title ‘Futility’ has a double meaning: at first, the futility of the attempts to rouse the soldier and in the latter half, the futility of all the complexity of the earth and the effort put into achieving this when it is just destroyed.
The first line is the voice of one man talking either to himself or to his friends —
‘Move him into the sun’
.
The poem then outlines the reasons for doing this, describing how the dead soldier always used to wake with the sun.
The tone of this is very sad and tender; the idea portrayed is that of the soldiers finding their friend dead and taking care of him.
The tone is also very  reverent — the sun (an important symbol in this poem) seems to be a good force and the words
if anything might rouse him now
the kind old sun will know
also imply, by the use of the word ‘old’, that it is wise.
The sadness of the stanza is emphasized by the lines remembering the soldier at home before he came to war;
Gently  its [the sun's]touch awoke him once
at home, whispering of fields unsown.
This word ‘gently’ enhances the tenderness of the lines, while ‘fields unsown’tells us that the man had to go and work in the fields, suggesting a strength and a vigour which he must have had and thereby making his death harder to accept.
However, although the first part is quiet, the quietness is deadly — it is the still of a battlefield after a battle — the sort of picture you have is one of a film of war where the previous scene has been fast, tense and confusing with loud, dramatic music and scenes of battle and suddenly everything becomes quiet as the camera moves slowly over a battle field strewn with bodies — this is the sort of stillness of these lines — the stillness of death.
This point is shown by the lines:
Always it woke him, even in France, until this morning and this snow
.
By saying this, Owen emphasizes the bleakness and coldness of the scene, in contrast to the touching gentleness of the men and the memories of sunlit days.
But the second stanza changes the tone dramatically.
It is as if the soldier writing the poem is reflecting on his friend's death, and the sadness and tenderness become anger and bitterness.
The first two lines
Think how it wakes the seeds,— woke, once, the days of a cold star
are less bitter and more as if he is reasoning with the sun or with fate, saying ‘If the sun can make a whole plant grown from a little seed, or even create life on a dead planet, why can it not arouse my friend?’
Now it becomes angry.
The man's thoughts are falling in fragments: ‘Are limbs, so dear achieved, are sides, full-nerved — still warm — too hard to stir?’
This is angry and bitter and claims that nature is unjust.
Was it for this the clay grew tall?
You can almost see the word ‘this’ underlined and highlighted with disgust —‘is this the reason for mankind and the millions of years of evolution necessary to produce it?’, says the soldier.
He then runs out of anger and the last lines are hopeless and show a broken mind:
O, what made fatuous sunbeams toil
to break earth's sleep at all?
This is an excellent contrast between stanzas.
It is as if , while in  the presence of a dead man, the poet is  reverent and sad, but once out of his presence he vents his anger for his dead friend on nature.
The sun is a very good symbol and can be used to show the contrast in the tone between the stanzas.
In the first, it is ‘gentle’ and the poet describes the ‘kind old sun’as wise, while at the end he says ‘fatuous sunbeams’— fatuous being ‘silly’or ‘imbecile’.
This shows a completely different frame of mind and lends much effect to the poem.
Although there is no rhyme in the poem, the last words in every second line sound very like each other so that, while the poem can be simple enough to be a man's thoughts, it also holds together well and sounds good.
Words such as‘unsown’ and ‘snow’or ‘star’and ‘stir’, along with many others like each other in this way make this a poem without the reader being aware of any rhyme which would take out a lot of the emotion.
This is the best poem by Owen that I have ever read.
This is different from Owen's other poems in that they are more dramatic and gruesome, with descriptions of warfare and death.
there is less suspense and fear in ‘Futility’— it describes emotions more than events.
(It is a lyric).
Having said this, there is emotion in Owen's other poems, but the emotion is created in the reader by the description of war, while in this, the grief and bitterness of the poet is more openly expressed.
However, there are also many similarities.
The idea of a friend dying in battle is featured here as in all the narratives and the hopeless and despairing feeling also can be felt throughout Owen's poetry.
All of his poems are filled with a quiet irony; a message to those patriotic leaders and potential soldiers, removing the glory and honour from war — they strip everything but the bare facts from the issue of war and show  it as it is, from first-hand experience.
I greatly admire Owen's work for different reasons — the cleverness and subtle uses of words and rhyme schemes to create tone and emotion and the genuine quality of what he says.
Having been a soldier in the First World War, he really knows what he is writing about and is a great contrast to some of the pretentious poets who preach about war while they have never seen any violence in their entire lives.
This poetry, by contrast, evokes a sympathy in me which is not often brought out by poetry, and I hope and believe that the works of Owen will become great classics and last for a long time.
Lord of The Flies Critical Essay: Would it have been different had girls been on the island?
The subject of whether or not the situation in Golding's ‘Lord of the Flies’ would have been different had girls been on the island is very difficult to reach a decision on and depends on many things.
In this case, I am going to assume that there were only girls on the island, and also that they were the same ages and from the same middle-class English background as the boys.
I think that, had the girls been from today's society the situation may have been different but I will assume they are from the same background as the boys were.
Initially, I think that girls would have been more afraid and bewildered when first landing on the island and would have accepted their situation less easily than the boys as girls are usually more attached to their backgrounds and less willing for change (of this sort) than boys.
Initially girls would waste a lot of time being polite to one another rather than getting things done: too polite to choose a chief and get down to work.
I do not think that the conch would have been thought of or used, at least to start, but the girls would have probably got together into one large group as the boys did, although with sub-divisions of especial friends.
Much of the way things would happen depends on the sort of girls there were; if some were more robust and tom-boyish they would probably have explored the island, but would be unlikely to cause damage  unnecessarily while exploring, as the boys did.
I think that a chief, or perhaps a leading group would after a while be decided on and priorities set in a way more mature than the boys, but girls would be less imaginative when it came to building shelters and lighting fires, and also less physically able to lift heavy objects and build things.
The sort of girls who would quickly come to the fore are the sort of Malory-Towers-Swallows-and-Amazons type; practical down to earth and capable, but there would probably be many unlike that who would be perfectly handless when it came to organisation and practicalities.
Eventually some girls may have hunted, but without the same enthusiasm or  hysteria as the boys.
I think that few girls would  enjoy hunting and those who did hunt would not revel in the thrill of it,(as the boys did) at least for along time.
Arguments amongst the girls would break out but they would be of a trivial nature to begin with.
Linking girls in with the characters of Lord of the Flies, I am sure that there would be many Ralphs, a Jack of a different nature but leading to the same results, and eventually one or two Rogers.
To expand on that; many girls would retain the values of civilisation and would want democracy and order and all that, as Ralph did, and eventually I am sure that a girl or girls would break away, causing a rift in the group, I think that the causes of the rift would be more trivial and the arguments more verbal and less brutally physical than the boys, but girls are capable of a great deal of spite and bitter unforgiveness and if more than one leader-figure emerges, they may later argue.
In the same way, several girls would be likely to follow an outlaw to become Rogers.
I view parallels to Piggy and Simon in a different light.
If one girl was fat or physically inferior they would probably be kind to that girl initially, yet eventually leave her, perhaps  unconsciously , out of things.
They would not cruelly ridicule the child but I think she would feel left out by the time the girls were ‘settling in’, as she would not fit in; girls have more subtle yet often more hurtful ways of rejecting one another and this would be felt by the outsider before long.
With regard to Simon, I do not think he would have a parallel.
Indeed: if even boys were really to be left on an island I do not think that Simon would have been amongst them; he is very much a symbol rather than a character, and represents the force of good in Golding's book.
He is there to make a point and symbolise perfection and, in a real group of children, would not exist.
Another question which could be asked is: Would the beast have existed amongst the girls?
There are two ways of answering this question.
The first is to take the beast as an object the girls would be frightened of: in this perspective it may well have existed.
The girls would have fears on the island, especially at night, and these may or may not have  been made manifest in a tangible object such as the beast.
However, had the existence of such a beast been discussed, it would have been firmly suppressed by the elder girls and not discussed again, but they would all have had their won fears nevertheless, although these would be of a more ‘normal’ manner — the fear would be rational — in  its causes at least, although perhaps irrational in  its proportions.
But there is another light in which to view the beast: that of it being the evil within the girls.
And that leads the main question of this issue: would the girls have been as evil at the end?
And are girls basically evil — does the concept of original sin apply to them also?
Although Golding uses boys to illustrate the fact that man is evil, his point is about mankind, or in other words, human beings.
It is ridiculous to say that all males are basically evil while females aren't, and in view of that, girls would also have degenerated on the island into cruelty.
However, I think that the evil would not have appeared through violent fighting and killing, but through spiteful arguments and petty fights.
Perhaps, if left for long enough girls may kill one another also, but it would have taken a far longer time to happen.
This all assumes that Golding's idea of original sin is true and is therefore it is from his perspective, but I do agree with the point he makes and therefore feel that in real life the girls would degenerate into some kind of ‘sin’.
In conclusion, I feel that the basic things which happen to the boys on the island would apply to girls also but would come about in a way both more slow and less physically violent, yet I have an idea that the scars left on the minds of girls who have been on an island together in Lord of the Flies circumstances may well be deeper and longer-lasting than those of boys in the same situation.
Lord of The Flies Creative Essay: Ralph in Later Life
Ralph sat in the driving seat of his car, inching slowly forward with the snaking traffic jam stretching along the road.
His hands were automatically driving, but his mind was drifting elsewhere.
He was remembering again the time when he returned to England fifteen years ago from the tropical island on which he had been left.
The memories were vague and dream-like, not associated with the world in which he now lived, but he was well aware that the relatively brief time he spent on the island had changed his life irreversibly.
He recalled with a shudder his futile attempts to pull together the shreds of his old life as if nothing had happened, his tangled emotions, the trouble at school.
He hadn't wanted to try for many months after his return and rarely smiled or laughed.
His occasional outbursts of anger shocked those around him, but he felt an uncontrollable flame of fury whenever he saw a child being bullied or mistreated which blinded him to all else.
But gradually he formed a new life for himself — his one burning ambition to help children who were hurt or in need, having experienced such horrifying treatment himself on the island.
Despite the time lost, he threw himself into his work and eventually, with a good brain and a determination to achieve, obtained qualification to become a surgeon in a children's hospital.
He had reason to be proud he thought, as he gazed through his car windscreen at the line of traffic ahead.
He entered the hospital ten minutes later and was warmly greeted by his colleagues.
As he began work, he talked in an open and friendly manner to staff and patients alike, forming friendships with newcomers and strengthening those already begun.
He was a favourite in the hospital; much respected and universally liked, and he had saved the lives of many children.
He went during the morning to see a young boy who was to have an operation later that day.
The boy smiled wanly as he entered, but Ralph read fear in his eyes.
Before long, through unobtrusive questioning, he had discovered the root of the boy's fear — simply that he did not know what was going to be done to him.
Ralph remembered his own fears and  quickly explained what would happen and reassured the boy — named David — that everything was fine.
For him this was as much a part of everyday routine as surgery and many children had been greatly helped by him when afraid or emotionally disturbed.
But Ralph neither wanted nor expected much praise for what he did — he did it mainly because he wanted to prevent other children from experiencing the pain which he himself had felt, and, in the back of his mind, he knew Piggy would have approved.
In light of this, he expected no reward but this day he knew he had  received one as he stood at the door of a ward of children on whom he had operated, now sleeping peacefully and painlessly.
Yet we can understand the bewilderment of a passing nurse as she caught the softly spoken words:
‘I knew you'd never get the better of me, Jack Merridew.’
Julius Caesar Essay
The first speech which I have chosen is the one which Cassius makes to Brutus in Act I scene II.
In this speech, Cassius reveals part of his reasoning for desiring to assassinate Caesar, and we begin to see his true character.
He begins by flattering Brutus, in efforts to manipulate him into seeing his point of view.
He says:
I know that virtue to be in you Brutus/As well as I do know your outward favour.
The virtue referred to is the love of honour in a man, and the ‘outward favor’ is the outward appearance of Brutus, so Cassius manages to weave sentences into his conversation which flatter and influence people, even if they are unaware of it.
He then states that he would rather not exist than live to have to serve and be in awe of a man no better than himself.
After that he is more specific, and begins to refer to Caesar in this context, saying that himself and Brutus were born equal to Caesar in health and intelligence, yet Caesar is now looked upon as a man of such importance.
He qualifies this using two examples of Caesar's ‘humanness’, the first of a day when it was cold and windy, an the river Tiber was rough and in flood, and Caesar and Cassius were at the shore, Caesar asked Cassius to swim across with him as a sort of dare, almost, and so Cassius did, followed by Caesar, and they battled across.
But before they reached the other side, Caesar cried out to Cassius for help, so Cassius had to carry him to safety.
The second example was of a time when Caesar was ill, and cried to Titinius to get him a drink, as feebly as a woman might (says Cassius), and he bore his illness in  a cowardly way.
And yet Cassius now has to obey him and go out of his way to please him, as he is almost a god.
As well as giving reasons against Caesar becoming  emperor , being no better, perhaps worse, than other men, Cassius also glorifies himself in this speech.
In the first tale, he adds phrases such as:
Accout'red as I was, I plunged in/And bade him follow
, meaning that although he was fully dressed and armed, he took up the challenge and led the way.
He also says:
I, as Aeneas, our great ancestor/Did from the flames of Troy upon his shoulder/The old Anchises bear, so from the waves of Tiber/Did I the tired Caesar
.
This again portrays Cassius as a hero, and Caesar as a feeble old man in comparison.
As this is the speech in which we see Cassius's motives for killing Caesar, the other one I am looking at is Brutus's soliloquy at the beginning of Act II scene I, giving his reasons for joining the conspiracy.
The first four lines say:
It must be by his death; and for my part/I know no personal cause to spurn at him/But for the general.
He would be crowned.
/How that might change his nature, there's the question
.
In these lines, Brutus is saying that the only way to stop Caesar becoming  emperor is to kill him, and although he has no personal grievances against Caesar (Caesar is kind to him and favours him), it would be bad for the people of Rome (‘the general’) if he were to be crowned.
The words ‘He would be crowned.
How that might change his nature, there's the question’ mean that he is determined to become  emperor , and if he did, he may well become a tyrant and abuse his power, although he seems very noble at the moment.
The next words:
It is the bright day that brings forth the adder/And that craves wary walking
, mean that when Caesar has actually been crowned, the dangerous side of his nature may come forth.
The next lines:
Crown him that/And then I grant we put a sting in him/That at his will he may do danger with
say basically the same thing; that, as  emperor , he has the power to do a lot of damage and that power can quickly corrupt men, however noble or good they seem to start off.
He then says:
Th'abuse of greatness is when it disjoins/Remorse from power; and, to speak truth of Caesar/I have not known when his affections swayed /More than his reason
.
This is saying that power becomes dangerous when it is not used with mercy — in other words, when a ruler becomes merciless.
He then says that Caesar doesn't seem to let his emotions speak more than his reason, but (this is the next six or seven lines) when ambitious young people are starting out, at the bottom of the heap, they are humble and look up with awe, but once they have made it to the top, they scorn all those below them, who have helped them to get there.
The words:
So Caesar may; /Then lest he may, prevent.
mean that Caesar may become scornful and heartless to those beneath him, so action must be taken to stop him.
The rest of the speech is saying that since the whole argument must have no excuse for what he is at the moment, it must be looked at like this: that when he becomes greater, he will become very dangerous to Rome: like a serpent still in the egg, which, when hatched, will become deadly.
Therefore, he must be killed before he gets the chance to become  emporer.
As this is a soliloquy, it reflects Brutus's true thoughts, which are all for the general good of Rome, and not for his own ends.
Therefore, these two speeches sum up the difference between Brutus and Cassius: Brutus works unselfishly and nobly for the good of the people of Rome, disregarding personal cost (for it did cost Brutus a lot to kill Caesar), while Cassius is jealous of Caesar's great power and begins the conspiracy with hopes of gaining more prestige and power for himself.
This is shown in the way that he keeps comparing himself to Caesar, saying how much better and more deserving he is than Caesar.
Brutus's character, shown here, is his downfall at the end of the play, as he is too idealistic: his idea was that Caesar would be killed, possibly some kind of a democracy set up, and Rome's problems would be solved.
I believe that Cassius, however, had personal hopes of filling Caesar's place as emporer.
Perhaps the differences between the men were what caused their plans to eventually fall apart, but I think it was a combination of Cassius's selfishness, Brutus's nobility, and extremely bad luck which finally finished off the conspirators.
Essay — Lord of The Flies vs.
Coral Island
In Chapter 10 of Ballantyne's ‘Coral Island’, and pages 33–34 of Golding's ‘Lord of the Flies’, scenes describing the hunting of pigs are written, but the authors have approached the episode from very different angles.
Ballantyne's description is the first one written, so I will look at it first.
Before the scene with the pigs begins, the boys are exploring the island.
An image is given here of maturity and knowledge: the  boys' education is enabling them to identify many of the trees and plants, and they are described for their usefulness; the boys seem to recognize them as things to be used or admired, and no thought of destruction is introduced.
Then suddenly, while describing a tree, a group of hogs are described.
There is no build-up or anything like it, they are just mentioned, almost as part of the tree.
This conveys no emotion, and the pigs are just there, fat and horrible, and obviously for hunting.
The boys show no surprise, hesitation, confusion — they merely laugh and confer as to how to attack them.
This  conferring is mature and quiet, and no disagreements occur: leadership is acknowledged and obeyed, and the attack is carried out as Jack wants it to be.
Their differing opinions are just a discussion, with no heated feelings at all, and Jack is obeyed without argument.
They take a realistic approach — Jack says:
‘Besides, we're not sure of killing them; so fire away.’
They do their best to get one or two, but are unsuccessful, and the episode is really over.
During it, the reader is put in a position with the boys — you want them to succeed, and no real sympathy is felt for the pigs.
This may be partly because there are many pigs, who are a match for the boys, and partly because the boys are acting out of reasonable necessity, and not  immature impulsiveness.
As I said, the episode seems to make no lasting impression on the boys, except to teach them to improve their techniques in later hunts.
Golding, however, portrays the episode in a completely different way.
This episode also begins with exploration, but it is destructive and not helpful — merely the immature reactions of three completely different boys to their surroundings.
Right from the beginning, emotions are introduced, and then Golding moves into a paragraph describing the pig.
This time there is more build-up and importance involved, and the episode is in a paragraph on  its own, as a  separate event, almost, from the exploration.
When the piglet is discovered, it is small, trapped, alone and helpless, and you immediately are on  its side.
Far more emotion is involved here too, as the
madness of extreme terror
surrounds the piglet.
Here, there is no  conferring , and Jack impulsively leaps forward with raised knife to kill it.
He hesitates, and again his immaturity is emphasized as he is unable to strike.
While he hesitates, the piglet escapes into the forest.
Again in contrast to Ballantyne, the episode is discussed afterwards amongst the boys, and has clearly made a lasting impression on them.
It is the first sign of incapability, while in Ballantyne you feel that the boys are really able to kill another time.
The afterwards discussion reveals very strong emotion in the boys, and Jack + Ralph contradict one another in a schoolboy-ish sort of way — each knowing what should have been done, and making excuses.
The next sentence introduces morality:
the enormity of the knife descending and cutting into living flesh: because of the unbearable blood.
This again suggests that the boys may have been in the wrong, which there is no question of in Ballantyne.
The shame and anger shown afterwards again reveal immaturity, while in Ballantyne everything is perfectly under control.
The whole mood of Ballantyne shows boys, perfectly  mature and capable, using their environment to survive, while Golding's characters are not mature, and are impulsive and destructive, making mistakes on the island.
Capability is not a feeling you get, and you rather feel, even from the beginning, an impending danger.
Safe + secure,
locked in a world of childhood
You can always run to someone
When you need help
Santa comes on Christmas Eve,
And Babies grow on trees
Life is simple,
And the world is one square mile.
Now Santa is just a story,
The world is big and colourful,
And full of adventure
Which you'll find some day.
People begin to talk
About this big thing,
Which no-one escapes from;
Adolescence.
You get the Book
Telling you it'll be difficult
You'll have problems.
But it won't be like that for me
It's all exaggeration.
The feelings they described
Were nothing like the real thing
You're never quite prepared
For the pain, the  embarrassment ,
The worries, the problems,
Of Adolescence.
It crept up on you quietly
You can't say when it started;
Maybe it's always been like this
They say you may not be happy
About yourself 
But you don't ever know
Who you are.
It's like looking at everything
Through a magnifying glass
If you don't fit in
It's the end of the world.
And everyone feels like this,
But you're the only one,
No-one else understands.
You feel depressed,
Bored, Listless,
You want something desperately,
but you don't even know what.
Suddenly, you want to cry
To run back to your childhood,
And be told that nothing is wrong.
But all you feel
Is the pain of rejection
The longing to be someone else.
Because everyone else
Is confident, popular,
You stick out a mile,
And no-one sees you.
One day it's all clear,
The next you're in a dark tunnel,
And nothing is what it seems
And at home
You want to be independent.
But no-one understands.
They haven't time for you
You're just self-centred,
And you'll grow out of it.
Everything is just A Phase
But that doesn't help,
Because you still feel the pain,
And the endless waiting,
To grow out of it,
Which is Adolescence.
‘George’ Essay
George is quite an interesting character in this book.
He looks after the mentally retarded man, Lennie, and their relationship is a strange one.
George answers for Lennie + tells him what to do, although the two men are totally different from one another.
George is clever and quick, and Lennie is large dumb and slow.
These men are different from most as they travel together, although George could settle down happily without Lennie.
Eventually, Lennie's strength becomes too much for him, and he breaks a woman's neck accidentally.
Because of this, he is shot by George.
This was very disturbing emotionally for George, but it really had to be done.
If George hadn't done it, other men would have.
I personally feel very drawn to the character of George, although he has his flaws.
Over the first nine pages of the book, George appears to be mean and irritable towards Lennie, and seems to treat him very heartlessly, but throughout the book we are shown that the two men depend on one another very much, and they have a very strong relationship.
However, first impressions of him are not good.
He says things to Lennie such as:
‘God, you're a lot of trouble, I could get along so easy and so nice if I didn't have you on my tail’, ‘You crazy fool…blubbering like a baby?
Jesus Christ!’
and
‘You crazy son-of-a-bitch.
You keep me in hot water all the time…
I  wisht I could put you in a cage with about a million mice and let you have fun.’
This all springs from an argument about a mouse which Lennie killed accidentally and wanted to keep.
George took the mouse and threw it away.
But after this seemingly cruel start, we read:
His anger left him suddenly.
He looked across the fire at Lennie's anguished face, and then he looked ashamedly at the flames.
After this, until the end of the passage, we see a kind and considerate George.
The occasional blow-ups he has at Lennie are understandable, as Lennie is very difficult to look after, and George could be popular, settle down with a woman and get a good job.
However, he needs Lennie in a strange way, and he rarely really means what he says.
George is very clever indeed, and is also a far more caring and soft-hearted man than most, who have been hardened by the rough life which they lead.
This is what I like about him.
In many ways he is very like Slim, a man respected and admired by all throughout the book.
At the end, Slim is the only one who understands how difficult it is for George to take the action that he did, and also why he did it.
George, although  fairly tough, also has a lot of tact, as is shown through the incident concerning Candy's dog + in his talking to Slim and all the other men before and after that event.
Although small, George is fairly tough, and is fiercely protective towards Lennie.
This is shown after the two men come across Curley's wife for the first time, and also Curley himself.
Curley is very belligerent towards Lennie, and after this, George says:
‘I hate that kinda bastard…
Look Lennie, you try to keep away from him, will you?’
Also, the two men meet Curley's wife, who is a flirt.
Lennie is fascinated by her, but George knows that his fascination will only get him into trouble, so he says:
‘Listen to me, you crazy bastard, don't you even take a look at that bitch.
I don't care what she says and what she does.’
This is not said to be mean, but to protect Lennie from getting into trouble because of his fascination for her.
Some of George's character is also shown when Curley does start to fight Lennie, and Lennie calls out for help from George.
Rather than George running to Lennie's aid, he shouts at Lennie to defend himself.
This he eventually does, crushing Curley's hand.
This shows that George is not only trying to protect Lennie, he is also trying to teach him to stand on his own feet, and learn things, although he knows Lennie will never really improve.
Another part of the book is the Dream.
This is an imagined life dreamt up by George, which he has told Lennie.
He tells him that together they can make a stake, get a place of their own, and settle down.
Lennie's ultimate paradise in this dream is to get to tend rabbits, and this is referred to all the time throughout the book, adding to the sense of impending tragedy which exists all the way through the book, until the tragedy actually occurs.
But George uses this dream to give Lennie hope, and a purpose to all that they do.
He relates it to Lennie so often that he almost begins to believe it himself, although underneath he knows that it can never happen.
I respect George for doing this, and find it very clever for him.
He  definitely rises in your estimation throughout the book, and by the end you can't help liking and respecting him very much.
I mentioned earlier that he was like Slim — more intelligent and caring than most, and very different.
This difference is summed up by the final sentence of the book, said by Carlson.
Lennie is dead, and George is comforted in a quiet + silent way by Slim.
As they walk away, Carlson turns and says to Curley:
‘Now what the hell ya suppose is eatin' them two guys?’
Children's Story — English Nutmeg the Cat
There was once a cat called Nutmeg.
Nutmeg was black, with white paws + a white chest.
He had long whiskers which he was very proud of.
Nutmeg thought himself very handsome.
He lived in a big house which had a bright red front door.
One morning  Nutmeg awoke in his basket, where he was curled up tightly.
He lifted his head, blinked his eyes + shook his whiskers.
He looked out of the window to see what sort of day it was.
It was very sunny, + the sky was blue.
‘Oh, Good,’ thought Nutmeg, ‘I'll go out today + visit all my friends.’
He then shook his head + stretched himself.
He jumped out of his basket + walked proudly over to his dish.
This had his name on it, + he ate his breakfast out of it each morning.
This morning he had fish.
Mmmm he loved fish!
He ate it quickly + then went out into the sunshine.
As he looked around the garden, he thought about who he would go + see that day.
He would see Scruffy, his friend who was also a cat.
He was called Scruffy because he loved to get dirty.
If there was any mud to be found, Scruffy would be sure to fall into it somehow.
Nutmeg also decided to visit two rabbits called Hop + jump, because they were always hopping + humping.
Lastly, he made up his mind to see Charlie the Pigeon, who could tell him all the things happening in the neighbourhood, because he could fly so high + see so much.
Nutmeg now strode off down the street towards Scruffy's house.
On the way he came to a ladder.
It was propped against the wall of a house, + a man was at the top of it, painting a wall with white paint.
Now, when Nutmeg was a very young kitten, his mother had said to him.
‘Don't walk under ladders, because it is dangerous.’
But Nutmeg decided to go under anyway, because he wanted to find out what would happen.
Well, he began to walk towards it, when two dogs began barking + running towards him.
Poor Nutmeg was very scared, he began to run as fast as he could.
But he didn't look where he was going, and ran into the ladder!
He heard a cry from the top + the sound of something falling, but he kept running as fast as he could, meowing loudly.
Eventually he got away from the dogs, + hid under a car, panting loudly.
He stayed there for a long time, until he was sure that the dogs had gone, then he came out.
He was now feeling more himself again, + he decided to go + see Scruffy.
He walked back to Scruffy's house, up his garden path + to the door.
He went inside, because the door was open (since it was such a hot day), + looked for Scruffy.
Oh, there he was, looking even scruffier than usual.
‘Hello, Scruffy,’ said Nutmeg.
Scruffy looked around, + said ‘Who are you?’.
Well, Nutmeg WAS surprised.
‘Why, I'm Nutmeg of course,’ he said.
‘Oh, no you're not,’ said Scruffy.
‘But I am, you know me!’ said Nutmeg, feeling very surprised still because Scruffy didn't know him.
‘You're NOT Nutmeg, and if you say you are again, I'll fight you, because you're trying to trick me.’
‘But I AM Nutmeg,’ said Nutmeg.
And at this, Scruffy threw himself at Nutmeg, + scratched his nose.
Nutmeg hit Scruffy with his paw + soon the two were fighting hard.
Scruffy was a good fighter, so Nutmeg soon ran away, with lots of cuts + bruises.
He discovered that his nose was bleeding where Scruffy had scratched it + when he put a paw up to stroke his whiskers, he found that they weren't there!
That really shocked him + he walked sadly away.
He just COULDN'T think why Scruffy had fought him.
Well, next he decided to go to Hop + Jump's house which was a burrow in the ground.
‘Maybe they can tell me why Scruffy didn't know me,’ he thought.
As he got there, they were playing Hide + Seek in the grass around their burrow.
‘Can I play too?’ he asked.
‘You?’ they said, in great surprise.
‘Yes, of course, I'm Nutmeg, I've played with you lots of times.’
But Hop + Jump started laughing at this, saying ‘You're not Nutmeg!’
By now Nutmeg was so bewildered that he didn't know what to do.
He ran away from the rabbits, thinking, ‘Maybe Charlie the Pigeon can help, he knows everything.’
So off he went to find Charlie Pigeon.
Ah, there he was, eating breadcrumbs a man had thrown him.
Nutmeg said ‘Charlie, could you…
‘. But he got no further, for Charlie squawked with fright + flew away.
Well, what did Nutmeg think?
Not one of his friends had known him, + he couldn't imagine why.
As he walked home, he was very sad, + a tear rolled out of his eye + onto the pavement.
He walked past a shop window, + peeped in, to see what was there because he liked shops.
But what a fright he got!
A cat completely white stared back at him.
This cat had no whiskers + he had scratch on his nose.
Nutmeg suddenly realised that he was looking at himself!
He could see his reflection in the mirror, + wondered why he was white.
No wonder none of his friends had recognized him: he had changed colour.
But how?
Then he remembered running into a ladder, + something falling.
Of course!
It was the pot of white paint that dropped + had fallen on Nutmeg but he had been too scared to notice.
Now he knew why no-one knew him + it was all his own fault.
Nutmeg washed himself in the park pond nearby + sat down + thought for a while.
It was really all his own fault, for not doing what he was told.
He was sorry now.
He also made up his mind never, never to go near a ladder again.
After this, he became a nicer cat, + wasn't so proud of himself all the time.
He had lost his whiskers + fought his own friend.
Later Nutmeg went back to all his friends (looking himself again) + they all told him about a strange white cat who called himself Nutmeg.
But Nutmeg never told them what had happened, he just smiled to himself.
And do you know, Scruffy, Hop, Jump + Charlie are STILL wondering where Nutmeg's whiskers have gone.
Essay — Friendship
The ‘systems of friendship’ found in various schools are very different, and very strange.
At Juniper Green (My primary school) it was fairly normal for a state school, with a catchment area.
This meant that everyone lived near to one another, and they copied each other exactly.
Everyone wore the same clothes, shoes and hairstyles, everyone listened to the same music, went the same places, lived in the same type of houses, and even read all the same books!
They also played the same games in the playground, and when a group had the same work in class, everybody would whisper or signal the answer to everyone else, + everyone put down the same things, whether right or wrong!
This explains why, when I cam along, I was very unpopular.
I lived in a different house, read different books, played different games and so on, and, despite various efforts, could not become popular.
From about primary 3 or 4 until primary 6, I had one good friend: her name was Fiona Taylor.
I don't know why I became her friend, but I do know that we got on very well, + rarely ‘fell out’.
I was almost definitely always the domineering one, as I was brighter at work, and had a more forward and  independent personality.
We got along well, + she had very few friends also, probably as a result of being friendly with me.
But I had one ‘misery’ in this friendship: she went home for lunch and I didn't!
I was left cruelly at the mercy of the ‘sames’: a different in the middle of identicals.
I drowned my sorrows on the school goalposts, as football was banned.
I performed daring feats of agility on this bar, + was considered very undignified by my ladylike peers.
When I was not swinging on the goalposts, I was  arguing with the rest of the girls (or playing ‘chasy’ games with the boys).
An example of the former was when one of the girls fell, and hurt her knee.
She was named Fiona Flynne.
As was normally done, she began to cry (it was only a scratch) and everyone crowded around her, uttering words of soul-lifting  encouragement, such as‘Are ya all right ?’.
There was a large group of girls around her, chorusing this, so I backed off, as I hated people to say that to me when I was hurt.
Consequently, I fell straight over a bench, + bruised my skin nastily.
My beloved playmates said ‘You didn't care about Fiona Flynn, so we don't care about you.’
Oh, dear.
As for the chasy games (also too undignified for the other girls to join in), it is to that that I owe the mark on my cheek.
I was sprinting full tilt across the playground, with the ‘bad boy’ of the year hot on my heels, as it was ‘boys after girls’.
It was wet on the ground, + I slipped, but unfortunately the same bench that I mentioned previously happened to be in my way again.
I banged my left cheek off it as I fell, + I now have a permanent dimple to tell the tale.
The school authorities were unsympathetic: the dinner ladies would only accept you into the school to see the nurse if you were on the point of death, + my teacher kindly informed me that I shouldn't have been running in the playground.
It probably didn't look bad, as no skin was broken.
My one consolation came next year (I had that same teacher again), when she asked me what was wrong with my cheek.
I told her + she said that she hadn't realised it was so bad.
I hoped that she would then develop a massive guilt complex, but unfortunately she didn't.
Still I had my moment of glory.
Now the ‘dent’ is mistaken for a dirty mark + people try to wipe it off!
Anyway: in that school I was an  independent young tomboyish ratbag + my peers were dignified ratbags.
They just managed to hide it better, under that costume of ‘sameness’.
My change to Heriot's came at the end of Primary 6, + I heaved a sigh of relief, + launched myself into more complex friendship systems, of which there were many!
At Heriot's, the ‘in’ crowd is a bit different.
There is still the old ‘sameness’ under the surface, but it is hidden more discreetly.
To be friends with the ‘in’ people, you must have a lot of money, go to  all the ‘in’films etc., + lead a very laid-back lifestyle.
Your parents must be prepared to let you do anything, + watch anything on T.V. etc., + you must go out all the time with your friends.
The problem comes when your parents have a slight concern for what you are doing,(as mine do), + it gives the impression that you are still tightly holding to the old apron-strings.
Anyway, I'll go back a bit + explain how I made friends with Sarah.
It was a bright, sunny morning, + mum + I were going to the school exchange for some uniform.
I knew my class for Primary 7, + had met no-one in it yet.
At this school exchange, however, my mother met another woman, who had a daughter there, who, miraculously, was going into the same class as me!
This child's name was Sarah Rimer.
Anyway, on coming into Heriot's, I stuck to Sarah, as I knew her, + a feud arose between me and the girl who was Sarah's best friend at the time.
Eventually, she became friends with someone else, + I became Sarah's best friends + still am.
I don't actually know if I would have been best friends with her had I not met her before, but we get along well now, + are well suited.
I still think I am the more domineering, but that is only because she is so polite + generally doesn't put up a fight!(or used not to!)
I also developed a friendship recently with two people: one a girl named Juliet, + the other a boy.
I became friends with Juliet,, because she understood me, + I could talk to her about my opinions quite openly: she is very understanding in that way.
She also has a good sense of humour.
I'm not really sure how I became friends with the boy, but he also has quite a good personality, + I can have a good laugh with him.
(We inevitably got the ‘you fancy each other’ spiel but I ignore people like that — I would like to hit them very hard!)
So I like friendship, and think it is necessary to keep a good character I know that my friends have improved my personality.
Book Report — Huckleberry Finn
This book is about a boy named Huckleberry Finn.
He is mentioned in ‘Tom Sawyer’, and by the end of that book has about six thousand dollars to his name.
This book picks up the story from there, although it is written by a different author.
Finn lives in a small place in America, and having been poor, still lives in the same way.
A man keeps his money for him, giving him a dollar each day.
Tom Sawyer's Aunt Polly tries to ’ sivilize’him, as his only relative is a drunken father who comes to town occasionally.
Finn's father turns up this time, takes him away, locks him up and beats him.
Eventually Finn escapes, meets a runaway nigger, and together they escape down the Mississippi in a raft.
They have a lot of adventures, + meet two other men, who are crooks.
After more adventures, the story ends up at another of Tom's aunts, with Jim (the nigger) recaptured, Finn mistaken for Tom, and Tom turning up pretending to be his own brother!
They get rid of the crooks, set Jim free, and eventually go back where they started but with Aunt Sally trying to ’ sivilize’Finn!
(Rather than Aunt Polly) I enjoyed this book, and found it very clever, as it was all from Finn's point of view.
The main characters were Finn, his father, Tom, Aunt Polly and Aunt Sally, and the two crooks known as ‘King’ and ‘duke’.
Happily these two cheated one town too many, and in our last glimpse of them they are tarred and feathered!
All these characters are described very well, but without actually saying much.
You learn about them from their words and actions, and there is no elaborate description.
Also, if Finn likes a character, you will like him also, and if he doesn't you won't!
The story is set in the South-west of America, around the Mississippi river.
It is probably about the turn of the century, late C19th, something like that, in typical homes at that time — fairly well off, but leading a simple lifestyle.
Despite Finn's hundreds of  dollars, he still likes to wear old, tatty clothes + lead the rough life he has been used to.
It is hard to say what the theme of the book is, but I would say that it was probably about the development of the relationship between Finn and Jim through their adventures.
Having said this, I will also quote a little‘notice’ from the author before the book begins:
Persons attempting to find a motive in this narrative will be prosecuted; persons attempting to find a moral in it will be banished; persons attempting to find a plot in it will be shot.
But what makes this book really good, is the style.
It is written in both the dialect and the vocabulary of the different people: Finn + Tom, Jim, the townspeople etc.
An example of Finn's sort of speech is (the whole book is in this style):
The Widow Douglas, she took me for her son, and allowed she would sivilize me; but it was rough living in the house all the time, considering how dismal regular and decent the widow was in all her ways; and so when I couldn't stand it no longer, I lit out.
If you add an American accent to this, it really brings the book to life, and makes you believe it.
As I have already said, there are other dialects too, all of which are equally effective.
But it is not only the speech, it is also the simplicity of the vocabulary, as it is seen through the eyes of Finn.
An example of this is the way that he makes big things seem really unimportant, and trivialities seem very important.
This is shown by the way that he remains relatively unmoved by dead people, brushes with death, people being shot/tarred + feathered etc., but is close to tears when Tom Sawyer says he can't be in his ‘gang of thieves’!
This last scene is obviously important to Finn, whereas the brushes with death etc. are almost put as ‘by the ways’!
Also, the beginnings of chapters (the titles) are strange; they are like summaries of the chapter, but without giving too much away.
For example, the title of Chapter 1 is:
Chapter 1: Civilizing Huck — Moses and the ‘Bulrushers’— Miss Watson — Tom Sawyer waits
.
I find this also very effective.
There is no straight humour in the book, but there are places which make you want to laugh.
This is not because of Finn making jokes (which he doesn't), it is from things which actually happen to him which are funny!
This makes the book again quite realistic, as the humour is quite subtle.
The ending also is unexpected, as you expect Finn + Jim to reach the state they were heading for + live happily ever after.
When this doesn't happen, the whole tone of the book is changed, and you see the adventures more as pranks, + take them less seriously, in a way.
The way the boys (Finn + Tom) also play around when setting Jim free, also adds to this effect.
Imagery is used up to point, as you realise when thinking about it that without much being described, you have actually pictured everything + everyone really clearly.
In conclusion I would say that the book itself is good and the style is brilliant, as you are able to see things so well through the eyes of Finn.
The occasional touch of the sentimental or the humorous just perfects it, + it is a book well worth reading.
Martian Sends A Postcard Home
All houses contain creatures with four arms.
They wear armour and coloured hats
They make no noise, yet sometimes are punished,
When humans spitefully wrench them
Causing them to weep
Until they are left alone again.
English Timed Essay.
Number 8.
Write a short story in which the weather plays an important part
As we left our cosy room in the Youth Hostel, we glanced quickly around to ensure we had not left any of our belongings behind.
The group of four of us were embarking on a camping trip in the mountains in Northern Scotland, and were all well aware that we could not afford to leave any of our equipment behind.
On deciding that we  definitely had all our food supplies, warm clothes, and most importantly, all the parts of our tent, we set off.
It was a warm and sunny day; perfect conditions for hillwalking and camping.
Our group consisted of Stephen, David, Laura and myself, and we were aged twenty-two.
We had been hillwalking together for several years, and by this time were well aware of the strengths and weaknesses of  each other 's paces.
After walking in the relative heat for two hours, we decided that it was time for a break, and this decision was reinforced when we spotted a river which looked perfect for a quick ‘dip’.
Refreshed, and filled once again with energy we set off for the second time that day.
As the hours wore on, the sun became increasing hot, and the wind died to little more than a murmur.
Paradise.
I had always been keen on hillwalking and loved nothing more than escaping to the peace of the hills with my three oldest and closest friends.
As the afternoon turned to dusk, we found the perfect campsite, some flat grassland sheltered by a belt of fir trees, with a river nearby.
While Stephen and David pitched the two tents side by side, Laura  and I went to gather the firewood, provided by the shelter belt of trees.
We lit our fire, and whilst it burned down ready to cook our meal on, we sat and talked happily.
When the meal was long finished and the fire had burnt itself out, we retreated to our tents, unaware of how our luck would have changed by the morning.
The following morning, I was rudely awakened by the loud downpour of rain bashing against the sides of our flimsy tent.
The tent seemed eerily dark, so I gingerly drawled towards the door and unzipped it slightly.
I could see no further than half a metre in front of my nose.
The fog had fallen overnight and did not seem to be showing any sign of becoming less thick.
If anything, its density seemed to be increasing.
The lack of wind, which had been a blessing the day before was now a curse.
If only the wind would have picked up, the fog would have been dispersed quickly.
I woke Laura, then shouted on the guys to waken them.
They seemed annoyed to have been woken in this manner, and Stephen demanded to know what the problem was.
I told him to look out of his tent.
I heard the short noise of a zip being opened, before a deathly silence set in.
After a good few minutes, I shattered this silence by asking what we should do.
Nobody had any good ideas, the best one being to stay in our tents until the fog cleared.
We were all hungry, so began to search our rucksacks for food which did not require to be cooked.
Between us, we found several bars of chocolate, some rolls, left from the previous day's lunch, and  two packets of biscuits.
We munched and slept for what seemed like hours, but was in reality only an hour and a half, becoming increasing uncomfortable.
Our tent began to allow the rain water in, as it was torrential rain outside, condensation began to form, and there were scores of insects, dead and alive, stuck to the tent walls.
This was the aspect of camping which I hated most.
I just wanted to leave the tent, but as this was not possible due to the weather outside, I snuggled down in my sleeping bag and tried to make myself comfortable on the hard, stony ground.
As we had managed to walk so far the previous day, we were fairly high up in the mountains, and knew that the fog could take as long as 48 hours to clear.
This fact was  disastrous to us, as we had only brought with us just enough food for a one night camping trip, with the minimum of emergency rations, and we had eaten most of this.
We began to feel cold, even though we were well wrapped up, and cocooned in our sleeping bags.
We had to do something to get ourselves out of the situation.
We knew that nobody would worry about us until much later that evening, as the fog was seldom noticeable as serious in the valley, even when it was very thick in the mountains.
A further problem was that it would be difficult for rescue services to locate us in these weather conditions.
The four of us drifted in and out of sleep for a further few hours, then, miraculously, at about 4 pm, the fog lifted and the rain ceased.
We saw our chance, and hastily we packed up and prepared for the long trek back the  way we had come, to the Youth Hostel.
In the damp haziness, the route seemed sinister, and not as pleasant as the previous  day's walk.
As time was short we walked briskly for 4 hours, before deciding that we would have to set up camp for the night.
Cold, wet and tired, we pitched the tents, and fervently hoped that Stephen's mother would have reported us missing, as she knew that we were usually good timekeepers and normally arrived when we said we would.
As we dozed off, we heard the sound of approaching footsteps and voices, which jerked us quickly back to life.
We scrambled out of our tents shouting excitedly, straight into the pools of torchlight coming from the mountain rescue team.
We had been found; tired, cold and hungry, but without any serious injuries.
Brutus' speech Act 3 scene II lines 12–63 Antony's speech Act 3 scene II lines 75–254
Be patient till the last
Brutus asks the crowd to listen to what he has to say, and not to move until he has finished his speech.
This is so that the crowd can give him a fair judgement.
He then goes on to say that he would like the  plebeians to believe him because he is an honourable man, they respect him and to remember his honourable reputation so that they are more ready to believe him.
These first few lines are very formal, perhaps too formal for the  plebeians .
They follow a pattern in which each sentence ends nearly exactly the same way as it begins:
Censure me in you wisdom and awake your senses, that you may the better judge
Brutus asks the crowd to judge him according to their own reasons and to use their powers of reason in order to judge him more accurately.
So far, Brutus' speech has sounded  impressive but has not meant very much.
He speaks in prose, probably because he is basing his argument on reason rather than emotion.
If there be any in this assembly, any dear friend of Caesar's, to him I say that Brutus' love to Caesar was no less than his
This is very clever of Brutus, saying that he loved Caesar more than anybody, and it was for this love that he killed him, to prevent him from the trouble brewing ahead for him.
If then that friend demand why Brutus rose against Caesar, this is my answer: Not that I lov'd Caesar less, but that I lov'd Rome more.
Now he is saying that he killed Caesar for his greater love of Rome than for Caesar ie he killed Caesar for the ‘general good’.
This is extremely manipulative as the crowds also want everything to be done to their advantage, for their country.
Had you rather Caesar were living, and die all slaves, than that Caesar were dead, to live all free men?
As Caesar lov'd me, I weep for him; as he was fortunate, I rejoice at it; as he was valiant, I honour him; but — as he was ambitious, I slew him.
There is tears for his love; joy for his future; honour for his valour; and death for his ambition.
Brutus starts off this passage with a rhetorical question, and then goes on to explain why he killed Caesar, including all Caesar's good aspects.
This would appeal greatly to the crowd as they are being given a reasonable, simple reason to why Caesar was killed, because he was out for himself.
The  plebeians then see the light and Brutus has very cleverly swayed the  plebeians into seeing the reasons why Caesar most  definitely had to be killed.
The words here are linked in pairs with one another for example, ‘lov'd…weep’, ‘fortunate…rejoice’ and then gradually up to the climax, the reason why Caesar was killed, ‘ambition…slew’.
‘Who is here so base that would be a bondsman?
If any, speak; for him have I offended.
Who is here so rude that would not be a Roman?
If any, speak; for him have I offended.
Who is here so vile that will not love his country?
If any, speak; for him have I offended.
I pause for a reply’
Next, Brutus asks lots of rhetorical questions, following one another, each time manipulating the crowd even more.
He then cleverly pauses, to see what the crowd thinks of his  speech so far.
The repeated phrase;
Who is here…have I offended
emphasizes the rigid formality of Brutus' speech which is very clever, but is contain hardly any emotional side to it.
It is like Brutus is trying to justify Caesar's death like a mathematic problem!
Brutus then brings on Caesar's body and introduces Mark Antony to the crowd, asking them to stay and listen to Mark Antony's speech, which is where Brutus' great tragedy begins.
Brutus also says that he will also kill himself with the same sword as he killed Caesar with, when the country wishes him to.
This shows the  plebeians that Brutus is the man they need to lead them as all his speech is honest and spoke  truths and did everything unselfishly, for other people — the crowd then go wild with enthusiasm for Brutus, and Brutus leaves them with Mark Antony, wrongly, asking the crowd to show respect for Caesar's body and for Antony's speech.
The crowd have been manipulated by Brutus, the honourable man, as he talked about their loyalty to their country, home, their love for freedom, and for the ‘general good.
He has successfully persuaded the crowd that justice has been done.
If the play were left at that, then, Brutus would have come out on top, but since Mark Antony was left to talk, his extremely clever speech then persuaded the crowd into thinking his way, as we shall see now.
This speech is magnificently done as Antony has to obey certain rules which he does, but still convinces them that the conspiracy was wrong.
Shakespeare emphasizes how strongly the  plebeians are in favour of Brutus when Antony begins to speak.
Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears;
I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him
Antony, noting the mood of the crowd starts his speech by declaring that he has no intention of praising Caesar.
He then following this on by adding that when people die, their evil deeds tend to be remembered and the virtues are forgotten, which indirectly is saying that Caesar did have some good in him.
The noble Brutus
Hath told you Caesar was ambitious.
If it were, so, it was a grievous fault;
And grievously hath Caesar answer'd it
Antony cleverly uses the word ‘If’ here , providing a faint hint that Caesar was not ambitious after all.
Antony  doesn't dare speak freely yet.
He says that Caesar certainly paid for his ambitiousness.
From then on, Antony starts becoming sarcastic, and the crowd gradually catch on.
He does this by saying things like, ‘But Brutus says he was ambitious, And Brutus is an honourable man’ He is saying very sarcastically that Brutus is always right because he is an honourable man.
Antony keeps on repeating the line:
And Brutus is an honourable man
, using the word ‘honourable’ with a hint of irony, but hurriedly appears to correct any impression that he is opposing Brutus in case he had gone too far.
It is used harshly + with a suggestion of violence.
He is his rights.
Mark  Antony has suddenly changed his personality ie he has become tough, perceptive.
He is out manipulating Brutus.
Antony then concludes the first part of his speech with an impressive display of emotion.
A good deal of this  is false but it is now clear that Antony has a much better ‘grip’ on the crowd than Brutus has, as his language is simpler, clearer and more direct, his ideas are coming over to the crowd with a much greater force.
He then, as Brutus did, cleverly stops for a pause, to see what the crowd think of his speech so far.
He is encouraged by them and begins to speak more freely.
The plebeians are a bit thick, as they didn't see through Caesar.
For example, they said,
He would not take the crown; therefore ‘tis certain he was not ambitious
whereas Caesar didn't take the crown because he was ambitious, he knew it was the right thing to do.
Antony says how, basically, that he is going to lie about the conspirators, and the crowd will know he is meaning the opposite.
Antony firstly  seeked the political side, he now appeals to their greed by producing Caesar's will and saying that he isn't going to read it.
The crowd then start yelling at him to read it, so he cleverly pretends that he has no alternative left but to read it.
Antony here is extremely clever and manipulative.
The crowd are now on Antony's side and are calling Brutus and the rest of the  conspirators traitors.
They have caught on to the right idea, by saying,
They were traitors.
Honourable men!
Brutus had said that he killed Caesar for the general good but Antony is now saying that he didn't know why they killed him, otherwise he saying that it wasn't for the general good.
After reading Caesar's will, every moment becoming more and more popular, Antony claims  that he is an ordinary man.
This appeals greatly to the crowd, as they want somebody to lead them, who is just like themselves.
For example;
I am no orator, as Brutus is,
But, as you know me all, a plain blunt man,
That loved my friend; and that they know full well
That gave me public leave to speak of him.
For I have neither wit, nor words, nor worth,
Action, nor utterance, nor the power of speech,
To stir men's blood; I only speak right on.
This appearance of humility and a claim to be no more than an ordinary man are almost certain to win popularity with the plebeians, and Antony knows it.
This is very important thing for politicians to do to win popularity, to say that they aren't fancy, just speaking the truth.
Antony says hypocritically that he  doesn't want to cause a riot, which is just what he does do, and he leaves the plebeians in a destructive state of min, who are out to kill and destroy everything.
This speech has now completely turned the play around and has begun to lead on to the tragedy at the end of it, Brutus, the nobleman's, death.
Antony has turned the tables completely and has now completely destroyed all hopes of the conspirators ever establishing themselves in Rome.
To compare the two speeches, it is immediately assumed that Antony's is the better because it has put a cover over everything Brutus had said.
This should not blind us, though, of the cleverness and skill of Brutus’ speech for he said everything perfectly fairly, honestly and reasonably whereas Antony is hypocritical, dishonest and highly emotional.
This shows us that often good  people come out worst.
The speeches were really like a competition to see, who could manipulate and how they used their power.
Both speakers are trying to establish their own power by appealing to the plebeians whose support they totally depend on.
Brutus was the only person in the play who wasn't working for himself and although he was idealistic, he stuck to his plans and carried them through.
More Antony's personality seemed to change quite a lot in the play, his true, selfish colours came out in this speech.
The two speeches which I have just analysed are probably the two greatest ones in the play as they both change the storyline dramatically, but Marc Antony's speech having the better effect on the plebeians which seems unfair, as he was dishonest and Brutus wasn't, yet he won the ‘word’ battle and lead on from there to become greater and greater in power.
Although, Antony's technique in speaking was much greater and he won his high position through his cunning ‘tactics’ in one speech.
Essay about George
My initial impressions of George was that he was quite harsh to Lennie but inside, I felt that he cared deeply for him.
I felt that George was tired of Lennie's stupidness but he knew that Lennie couldn't help it and that he had to withstand it.
He was small and ‘quick to the move’ and had distinguished features whereas Lennie was his complete opposite, with a simple mind and a large body.
Lennie couldn't control his own actions very well as he was always being haunted by his own strength which seemed to take over him.
George protected Lennie and according to Lennie, George's word was law!
Lennie admired George and tried to copy him.
Although Lennie forgot most things, he remembered every word that George said.
He relied on George.
Deep inside, I thought that George loved Lennie and vice versa because if it hadn't been for this love, they wouldn't have been able to survive happily together.
Lennie once complained to George,
‘I'd pet (the mice)‘em, and pretty soon they bit my fingers and I pinched their heads a little and then they were dead — because they were so little’
This caption proves that the strength Lennie had was enormous.
If it weren't for Lennie, George could have had a peaceful life and have married someone but it is this power of ‘deep-inside’ love which kept them together.
Throughout the novel, we were kept reminded of George (and Lennie's) dream.
This dream always seemed just around the corner as George almost  made it seem possible.
We are all set up for the perfect ending for George to live in peace while Lennie, tended the rabbits, but somehow the author still made it seem impossible as there was always trouble brewing for them.
George's part, throughout the novel, was always a major one and he seemed to have a ‘say’ in everything.
The reader feels sympathetic towards him as he always had the burden of Lennie on his back, Lennie, who always said,
‘I done another bad thing?’
George must have been a very kind and loyal friend to the mentally retarded Lennie.
Anyone else would have probably ‘disowned’ him as he was too much hassle.
Whereas George treated him as his brother and gave him everything he had.
Lennie spoilt everything for George but George never seemed to mind terribly much.
George acted as Lennie's father/brother and felt that he was committed to look after Lennie.
One thing which drew George close to Lennie was that he was lonely.
He teamed up with Lennie, who was lonely as well, and then this close relationship developed.
They were different form everyone else because, as they always reminded each other‘I got you an’ you got me.
We got each other’.
George was separated from most people on the ranch as he had an important ‘factor’ which hardly anyone else had.
This was that he cared.
As George was lonely, he was attracted to other people like himself.
For example Candy, who started off as a fairly minor part in the book, became part of George and Lennie's dream and they became a ‘threesome’.
Essay on George
Some people might ask, if George loved Lennie that much, why did he shoot him in the end.
This, was again, out of  careness for Lennie as George knew that everybody was out to shoot Lennie anyway, in more treacherous ways.
Therefore George prepared Lennie for heaven by describing their dream to Lennie for the last time.
This dream had at last come true, for Lennie anyway, perhaps not in the way he had expected though.
George was my favourite character in the book as I could feel what he felt inside me.
I really like him as a person because he cared and possessed other good qualities.
Anyone who survived with Lennie must have had a tough time.
I admired George for the care and attention he gave to Lennie.
I also deeply sympathized with George because Lennie had practically spoiled his life yet George never seemed to complain.
He just kept on giving everything to Lennie and giving him the love he needed.
As I said before, this was probably because he was so lonely.
George protected Lennie and ‘fathered’ him.
If it hadn't been for George, Lennie would have probably lived unhappily and I doubt that he would have never received the love and care from anyone else.
George had a very loyal nature towards Lennie.
He was a very tactful and clever person.
He is there to build up Lennie's character and to build up their dream.
He was like the ‘building blocks’ to Lennie's happy life, patient and like a brother to him.
I admire George, and his strength, and his wonderful personality.
He is a warm, caring person underneath as we hear in the last sentence, spoken by the uncaring Carlson,
‘Now what the hell ya suppose is eatin' them two guys?’
who is describing George and Slim after Lennie has been shot.
Randolph the White-Nosed Reindeer (Redraft)
‘Randolph the white-nosed reindeer?’
I can hear you say, don't you mean ‘Rudolph the red-nosed reindeer?’
No, I certainly do not, Randolph is Rudolph's son.
Now, Randolph lived in Snowdown Green cottage in the middle of Greenland.
It was Christmas Eve, therefore Santa Claus and his helpers were all very busy.
Randolph had a very strange problem as you might have guessed before, he had a white nose!
All the other reindeers had red noses just like Randolph's daddy, Rudolph.
Randolph was just no use to the reindeer team as his white nose wasn't any good.
Santa was very worried about Randolph, he just didn't seem to fit in.
One morning, Santa found him lying down on the snow, staring at a dead flower with tears dropping off his little cheeks.
‘What is the matter, Randolph?’ asked Santa.
Randolph replied, amidst his sobs, ‘It's j-just th-that the other re-reindeers tease m-me about my wh-white nose.’
‘Oh Randolph, what are we going to do with you?’ asked Santa, slightly worried.
As Santa left Randolph, all the other reindeers came to talk to Randolph.
‘Oh look, it's white nose.’
‘He looks a bit like a Christmas pudding!’
‘Randolph, has some snow fallen on your nose?’
The horrible reindeers laughed and laughed, they thought it was funny, but poor Randolph just lay on the ground, with large reindeer, tears dripping off his face.
That night, Randolph retired to  his bed in Snowdown Cottage.
As it was Christmas Eve, he hung up his red stocking on his chair and left out a letter, addressed to Santa, asking him for the thing he wanted most in the world, a red nose.
He lay down on his bed, dreaming of the wonderful time the reindeers would be having, delivering all the presents to the good boys and girls.
He soon drifted off to sleep.
Later on that evening, Randolph woke suddenly, hearing a banging noise on his door.
He walked over and opened it, to find a very impatient, red Santa there.
‘Randolph, you must help us quickly’ he gasped, ‘Rudolph, you dad has caught a bad cold and will not be able to pull the sleigh tonight.
Could you possibly help us out.
Would you help us to pull the sleigh?’
Randolph's dream had just come true, how could he possibly say no to a request like that?
‘Of course I will!’
Randolph replied excitedly, jumping up and down.
‘Meet us outside the toy factory in ten minutes then,’ said Santa happily.
‘And don't forget to wrap up warmly,’ he added.
Randolph, smiling from ear to ear, quickly dressed into warm clothes and set out towards the toy factory.
There, he was given a plate of magic fairy dust to eat and he ate it all up, feeling strong and happy.
All the other reindeers were whispering away, saying how astonished they were at the thought of Randolph helping the team.
But Randolph didn't mind one little bit as it was the best day of his life.
Santa summoned all the reindeers.
‘Boys, I hope you will all have noticed that tonight, we have a new member on our team.
We all have to make Randolph feel welcome and we have to work extra hard tonight as it is very dark and windy,’ he said.
All the reindeers looked at Randolph, disbelievingly.
Randolph, feeling very proud, was  attached to his reins at the front of the team and then, off they went.
Randolph worked his hardest, pulling away, while Santa delivered all the presents to the good boys and girls.
He felt wonderful.
As his nose was so white and shiny, like a light bulb, it shone through the dark sky, showing Santa the way to everybody's houses.
The reindeers just would not have managed without him on this dark Christmas Eve, they would have got lost.
When they had finished delivering all the presents, the reindeers returned to Greenland and Randolph went straight to bed, happily, because it was quite late for a reindeer.
The next morning, on Christmas Day, Randolph woke up very early, and very excitedly walked over his stocking.
He quickly tipped out the contents: an apple, a new scarf, an orange, reindeer money, a new game and…nothing else.
Randolph's heart sank, after all, he thought that he deserved a red nose after all the hard work he did last night, helping the other reindeers to deliver presents.
Just then he heard a knock at his door, Randolph wondered who it could be.
He opened it and there stood Santa in his doorway.
‘Hello Randolph, how are you feeling after last night?’ asked Santa.
‘Oh, not too bad thank you, I'm a bit tired,’ answered Randolph.
‘Randolph, I have decided not to give you a red nose for Christmas.
Do you know why?’
Randolph shook his head sullenly.
‘It is because we need your brilliant white nose to help us each year to deliver presents.
You were an asset to us last night, we couldn't have managed without you,’ said Santa, feeling very proud of Randolph.
Randolph began to see his point and began to feel happy again, proud with himself.
‘I would like you to become a member of our reindeer team.
Would you like to?’
Randolph shouted, very excitedly, ‘Yes of course!’
Just then all the other reindeers trooped into Randolph's house, smiling.
They all said that they were amazed with Randolph's performance last night and that they were very sorry for teasing him.
Randolph grinned at them all with delight.
‘Let's not just stand here then,’ said Santa, ‘Let's have a scrumptious Christmas lunch.’
And do you know what?
They did.
There were buns, cakes, everything a reindeer could possibly want to eat.
Everybody was very happy but no one more so than Randolph, the white-nosed reindeer.
Friendship Composition What is a friend?
Friendship is one of nature's most complicated relationships.
Everyone has a different view of friendship and what it means to them.
Over the next couple of pages, I will explain to you the different types of friendships, my experiences of it and generally my opinion of friendship.
Everyone looks for different types of friends at different ages.
At the youngest age, your friend may be the winner of a running race or someone who has beautiful hair!
Of course, everyone likes her!
It means devastation and despair if you are not invited to her party!
Boys, as well, are quite popular and if you like one especially, you might give him your painting!
Later on when you are approaching the dreaded teens, boys may fizzle out of your system!
By now most people have a special friend to whom you relate your secrets.
Early teens to adult age, you are maturing and pick your friends carefully and take into account their interests being compatible with your own interests.
People usually ‘get on’ best with those who have shared the same experiences.
For instance, if you were kept hostage in Iraq with someone whom you thought would never be your type of friend, you may end up being the best of friends all because you have shared the same problems and experiences.
This is why people who are the same age as one another usually end up being friends because they are going through the same experiences simultaneously.
My experiences of friendship is a very complicated story.
I have had many different types of friends.
My first real friend was probably a boy called Adam.
He referred to me as his ‘Princess’ and I referred to him as ‘the Prince’!
I picked him as my friend because he was a quiet, kind boy and we shared the same interest.
A girl called Jennie was my next friend probably because she was with the ‘in’ crowd.
We hardly shared any interests and as time went on, she started to boss me around and tell me what was right to buy and what was wrong.
Luckily she left the school!
My next girl friend was a friendly and kind girl and we liked the same things.
She was my friend for a long time because we got on really well together.
In Primary Three I fell in love with another boy because he lent me his ‘Lo-lo Ball’ and I thought this meant love!
Another boy wrote me a postcard saying that he wanted to marry me tomorrow!
It was at the end of Junior School when my problems choosing friends started.
A new girl whom I had met previously at the school exchange joined my class and because the girl who had been my original friend still wanted my friendship in particular, jealousy began as both people wanted me (oh, oh, so popular, eh?!!)
I was in a  terribly difficult position because the two girls wanted me to choose between them.
At one point, one of the girls was at one end of the classroom and the other at the opposite end.
I was in the middle of them both and passing on horrible messages from one to the other.
I didn't want to hurt either of them and I didn't see why we couldn't make a threesome.
But obviously I had to make a choice as neither of them wanted a threesome friendship.
This choice was helped to be made when one of them wrote me a nasty letter saying that it was clear that I wanted the other as my friend (which, if I may say, was a lot of nonsense)!
Therefore the new girl became my best friend and has been ever since (with a few eruptions!) because she is a very loyal, trustworthy, non-possessive, generous and kind girl.
She has a good sense of humour and also shares quite a few of my interests.
I like different kinds of people but I try very hard to be ‘nice’ to everybody.
Generally, I like people who are fun to be with, I can trust them and they are loyal to me and not possessive.
I also find I have more to say to people who share common interests with me.
If I start listing all the factors which I would like my friend to have, I would be  here until next year!
The advantages of friendship are that you have someone who can help you in any difficulties, you can have fun together and share the same experiences.
You can talk easily and freely to them without thinking, now, should I have said that?
The disadvantages of friendship are very few but they do exist.
These are such things as jealousy (like my experiences of it) and also if you are friendly with a popular person, they may not have enough time to get to know you as they are too absorbed in other friends.
I think that often the nicest people are not too popular but still fairly popular.
Those are the type of people I like best.
In my future, I would like to try to get to know lots of different types of people.
My best friend just now will not necessarily stay my friend for ever, although it is possible.
I will make new friends at university and hopefully have more experience in the knowledge of what friends really are.
As you become older you meet less and less new people therefore making less friends.
Your friends usually are the one you have known for a long period of time, for example at work or at university.
To end my composition I would like to say this: a friend is someone who knows all your faults but still likes you in spite of them.
Could this really happen?
All round him the long scar smashed into the jungle was a bath of heat.
Even in the first couple of lines in the book, we are given an image of a perfect island spoilt by humans and their actions.
The question, ‘Are all men evil?’ is directly related to my tutorial paper as this is the main theme which is ongoing throughout this book.
It was due to a war that the boys became stranded on the island and this alone suggests that man is a sinful creature.
There were no adults to ‘watch over them’ and therefore the boys were on their own, they were suddenly made responsible.
The character of Piggy is a very realistic one as we can all reflect his image into someone we know.
He is the typical wimpy boy who would be outcast at school.
Our first impressions of Piggy are that he is anxious to please and is a ‘wet-blankety’ adult, Ralph on the other hand is an attractive popular person whom Piggy idolises.
At the beginning of this book, the boys had clearly split into two different groups, the first group was uncontrolled, carefree and disorganised and the second group was the opposite, controlled, one unit and almost like an army.
The latter group was in fact Jack's choir who were from a religious boarding school.
These two groups shared no common thing except that they were all young boys.
So far in the book, everything is quite likely to happen as it did.
The boys are already splitting up and there is a very slight tension in the air.
Piggy is a typical unpopular person and Ralph the opposite whereas Jack seems arrogant, aggressive and he's used to having charge.
We know that Jack is full of himself as he shows off about the fact that he can sing the top C♯ in a scale, which is very impractical.
We find that Piggy is a very wise boy who has a scientific mind.
His glasses become important as they symbolise his wisdom and how he  comprehends things.
They help him to ‘see’ more clearly.
Ralph, after a democratic vote, is elected leader, much against Jack's wishes, and then the boys explore the island.
The very first thing which they do is to destroy something on the island, which shows their masculinity.
Golding is not judgemental here as he  doesn't call them ‘silly little boys’.
We find that they don't have self-control.
Now we have a clearer image of the  boys' war to  destruct things and the theme is emerging already.
We are introduced to Simon, a completely different type of boy.
He is a very religious figure, who is innocent and imaginative, he always remains calm and collective.
He is homesick and very much wants to return to the church.
At this point in the book, we feel a friction growing up between Piggy and the leaders because having established democracy using the shell, the leaders then destroy it again, denying Piggy a chance to speak.
There is also the beginnings of a friction between Jack and Ralph over their long and short term needs, hunting and building shelters respectively.
Those frictions suggest serious disagreement later on.
Eventually, the boys decide to start a fire going, this shows the amount of damage they are capable of but it also shows they can cooperate.
It also again symbolises the boys' power and masculinity and reminds us of their impulsiveness, rushing into thing.
When Jack and his hunters start to hunt things, killing for fun and becoming totally out of control, Ralph only then realises there is a crisis.
This is all realistic and is happening as I think it would if small boys were alone on an island.
We find that the children just want to have fun, they have neglected the idea of working or building shelters and there is basic chaos on the island.
The boys are all acting very immaturely and the only sign of any maturity is from Ralph and Piggy, but even then, no one will listen to them.
The boys are sinning by the second and the island is being  destructed .
This reminds us of Adam and Eve in the bible and the disobedience of  man when they ate the forbidden apple.
Ever since, man is seen as a disobedient creature, who is sinful.
This  definitely applies to the boys and the saying, ‘The Banality of Evil’ also describes the  boys' behaviour.
When a  meek voice is heard during the discussion about the beast saying,
‘Maybe it's only us’
nobody takes any notice of poor Simon, even though he is the only one admitting that they are only afraid of one another.
Although, Piggy said, quite analytically before
‘We musn't fear each other’
, he was only referring to his fear of Jack.
So when Simon says that they are all bad, they all fear each other, Piggy refuses to believe that he is part of ‘the beast’, therefore, he abruptly answers  Simon's thoughts by shouting
‘Nuts!’
.
From the video, we discovered that Golding believes in the concept of original sin, that mankind is sinful.
He portrays the boys' innocence and environment exactly like the bible's story of Adam and Eve as we see when Piggy interrupts Simon's thoughtful speech.
Simon became inarticulate in his effort to express mankind's essential illness.
Simon is portrayed as a Christ figure here, willing to give himself for other's sins.
I don't think that Simon's character is a very realistic one as I don't think that a boy his age could be as  philosophical and perfect as he is.
He himself does nothing wrong yet he still punishes himself for other's wrong doings.
I don't think a boy of about ten years of age would be capable of such martyrdom.
After an argument about the beast's form, Jack realises that he  doesn't need rules to be  aggressive towards people who break them, he can attack people when he wants now.
Ralph, unlike Jack, is becoming maturer and is starting to respect Piggy and his realistic views.
The latest argument is about the beast where three of the main characters each believe different things about he beast.
Jack says practically that there isn't a beast because they've not seen it and they've been everywhere on the island.
Ralph says basically that they don't exist, so how could there be one and Simon's view is that he would know if there was a beast and that they're just really frightened of each other.
These three completely different views build up more and more tension.
The boys are becoming more evil and corrupt as they divide the island into three units.
The first one being Jack, Maurice, Roger and the littleuns, the  hedonists , the second group being Ralph, Piggy, Sam and Eric who are influenced by Piggy, and lastly there is Simon, the spiritual boy on his own.
The beast is now everywhere on the island and Simon is punishing himself because of it.
He hides himself in an out of  penance , like Christ, to relieve everyone else's sins.
The beast is becoming almost like a God, Jack pretends to forget about it, Simon wants to confront it, whereas Piggy compromises by wanting just to stay away from it.
As Jack goes on hunting, the little ones look at him as an expert.
Jack is no longer a schoolboy, he is a native on the island.
When he killed a pig in Simon's special place, which is almost blasphemous, the actions are described like a sexual scene in a book, the boys are killing for pleasure.
Simon confronts the ‘Lord of the Flies’ on the pigs head and he battles with evil, he is now the only one who can save the boys from their evil doings.
I think that the book is still very realistic and the boys are acting like animals.
They are about to kill Simon who is their only sign of hope therefore when they do  accidentally kill him, the island is almost like hell with no good on it.
Although I say that this story could really happen, I doubt that there would be the character of Simon in reality as I think that a boy his age would realise the dangerous situation he was in, and join the other boys.
They are killing things due to the fact that mankind is sinful and man's want to kill and corrupt things.
As the fish formed a halo around Simon's head after his death we see that he is being sanctified by nature as he was trying to save nature from mankind.
As Ralph, Piggy, Sam 'n Eric want to be rescued, they confront the others with their ideas, which is where Piggy is then killed by the  psychopath Roger.
His death is described like a pig's death and very clinically.
Sam and Eric are captured by Jack and the whole thing turns out like a very gruesome game of Cowboys and Indians where Jack and his gang are painted like Indians losing their identity and are out to capture and kill Ralph.
This chase is described from Ralph's mind which is why some things are  incomprehensible .
The animals i.e. Jack and his hunters turn into cannibals now and Golding is increasingly achieving despair and suspense as he is well into Ralph's mind.
The ending of the book is not an anti-climax even though they are saved.
The fire which ironically had the purpose of killing Ralph and the island, saved them as a seaman spotted the smoke.
It is fighters which save them therefore the message is that they're not really rescued at all because the world is in the same situation as the island.
The naval officer is as wicked as the boys as he kills people as well and we se that Golding's point is that all ‘men are wicked’.
The ending reminds us that the boys are really just little boys who are childish, not the animals and cannibals we thought they were.
It is not an anti-climax because all the damage has already been done, they were rescued to late.
We leave the book with a clear image of war which was in the last line, we are just as bad as the boys on that island, that is what man is like.
I conclude that this book could most  definitely happen, in fact it is happening all the time in our  lives although we are protected by our parents who are conditioned to life.
Golding knows exactly what boys, man is like and how they disintegrate their civilisation and how we humpty-dumpty our world, never to be but back together again.
The island is a microcosm of the world therefore Golding only has to describe what mankind is like anyway.
The only thing which I don't think would happen in this book would be Simon's actions.
He was far too pure for a young boy and he wasn't very realistic.
Golding only has to describe young people without their layer of parent's laws, he  doesn't have to make up anything.
The book describes how we live and have always lived, with wars and destruction, therefore of course this book could happen, it is almost like a book of facts about mankind.
Futility
The futility of war is thought about by everyone, but none more so than Wilfred Owen.
He demonstrates his thoughts in many of his poems, but his poem ‘Futility’ is one of the most moving ones he has written.
 Its subtleness in so few words adds to the cleverness of it showing how perceptive he was.
My subject is War, and the pity of War
Owen wrote,
The Poetry is in the pity.
All a poet can do today is warn.
This piece of writing sums up Owen's feelings of war and his poems, we see, are somewhat warnings of things to come.
This poem describes the scene of a battlefront, and a soldier who waits by his dead comrade, who is beyond consolation.
The first stanza homes in on the particulars but then, in the second, there is a general perspective given, on the whole world, dealing with a big issue.
Move him into the sun —
Gently its touch awoke him once,
At home, whispering of fields unsown.
Always it woke him, even in France,
Until this morning and this snow.
A man who has recently died is described here, his body still warm with ‘life’.
Owen is making the point here that the sun once woke this man up, and every morning it has done the same thing, dutifully, as it had woken the rest of the world up too.
He is referring to France as this is where the poem is set as it combines the rest of the world in with this one man, the sun being the common factor, France, I think, represent the rest of the world and since it is a funny thought this single object waking up the whole population, Owen uses the words ‘even in’.
This is quite patriotic of the poet — Owen then goes on to say that it is quite  ironic how the sun woke up the world, started life yet it cannot wake up this lifeless man, who is still warmblooded and full-nerved as Owen tell us here:
Are limbs, so dear-achieved, are sides,
Full-nerved — still warm — too hard to stir?
Earlier on, Owen wrote
If anything might rouse him now
The kind old sun will know
referring here to the sun as an old relation by using the words ‘kind, old’.
Only the sun's power are great enough to rouse this man from the dead, yet are these powers great enough?
Think how it wakes the seeds,
Woke, once, the clays of a cold star.
Owen again refers to the sun's powers, how it causes seeds to grow from the warmth and ‘care’ it gives them, and also how it once woke up life at the beginning of the world by adding  its warmth to ‘the clays of a cold star’.
I think the ‘cold star’ is meant to be the world without life, like the rest of the planets, the star representing earth.
The word ‘clays’ here means the raw elements, which came out of the explosion from the sun or he ‘Big bang’which is a theory of how life began.
In the beginnings of this second stanza, the poet is describing all the wonderful things the sun can do but then goes on to say that all these great wonders are completely forgotten when the sun cannot even  rejuvenate a man whose body is still warm and almost living.
The poem is then brought to a very high climax in the end, when Owen asks the question,
Was it for this the clay grew tall?
the word ‘clay’ having a different meaning here.
It has a biblical reference, meaning the basic matter of what  woman and man are made of.
This line refers to man's growth, the population split in the .
The title of the poem is then justified to the reader in the last two lines:—
O what made fatuous sunbeams toil
To break earth's sleep at all?
The word ‘fatuous’ reminds us of the  title, meaning idiotic — Owen then asks the reader, why did the sun's rays labour over waking up earth?
Why did it bother at all?
He says this because it seems pointless for the sun to have done all this work, and then let war spoil everything and killing off the sun's children.
This brings the poem to a very moving close and the reader is left, doubting our  existence .
This poem is in two equal stanzas, each consisting of seven lines.
Consistently, Owen rhymes the last two words in the fifth and seventh lines of each stanza, which is very effective.
The first and last lines of each verse contain six syllables, with the numbers of syllables increasing to the middles of each stanza and then decreasing to the endings.
This perhaps represents Owen's line of thought with him becoming more and more emotional to the middles of the verse, reaching climaxes and then, as it is as if he questions this freely running thought process, and he limits himself to so much emotion by the end of each verse.
This is probably one of the main factors which creates his effects in the poem.
I really like this poem, I became more and more moved with it as I grew to understand it more and I think the poem  definitely works and Owen conquers it  subtly , approaching a big issue, but he wins in telling us his message.
Benjamin Britten, a composer, was so moved with Owen's war poetry that he created his ‘War Requiem’ based on his poems.
Owen was very young when he wrote his poetry yet his poems are profoundly disturbing unlike others.
He had the sensibility to see what war now really  meant, and he had to power to explain it.
In Britten's War Requiem, Owen's poems are sung by male soloists, in English, after choir interludes which are in Latin.
The soloists are only accompanied with  eerie sounding sounds from an orchestra.
The most explicit line in the piece, is a line from Owen's poem, ‘Strange Meeting’ which comes almost at the end of the baritone solo in the last section of the War Requiem, the quietly and simply sung,
I am the enemy you killed, my friend
This sums up all of Owen's thoughts on the futility of war.
I think the poem ‘The Send Off’ has distinct similarities to ‘Futility’apart from the fact that is also a lyrical poem.
It is again referring to the needless deaths of youths and Owen's emotional feelings for the subject having been through it all himself.
‘Anthem for Doomed Youth’ has a completely different angle of viewing as it is comparing two types of death, slaughtering and a ceremonial death.
Here, Owen is not questioning the actual moral points of death but the different ways in which people die.
Yet another typical piece of Owen's work is the poem, ‘The Sentry’ which is, again, a different kind of writing than ‘Futility’.
This is a narrative poem which, like ‘Futility’, firstly dealing with a particular person but then expands out to include the rest of the world.
Owen was the outstanding English poet of the First World War and I think that his poems will grow to be even more famous and appreciated.
His poetry will stand the test of time.
16/6/92 Creative Essay on Piggy who is now much older…
Mr Trotter sat by the roaring fire, reading his science magazine when suddenly, his peace was shattered by screaming coming from outside.
‘Shut up, I'm not fat!’ screamed a small boy hysterically.
‘Podgy, podgy,’ other boys shouted, taunting Mr Trotter's son.
A nearby door slammed and the pitter-patter of small feet were heard, running up the stairs.
Mr Trotter sighed and then engaged himself once more in his black and white mind, which would not acknowledge grey.
‘Hello dear, how was your day?’ asked a distant voice.
‘Fine thanks,’ muttered Mr Trotter under his breath.
‘What's the matter with our Tommy?’
‘Oh, those boys have been teasing him again,’ Mr Trotter said, wiping his glasses clean, then he was able to continue.
‘You know, when I was a young boy, I was just like Tommy: fat, unpopular, short, I had glasses, everything seemed wrong with me, but look at me now…’
‘Yes well…’
Mrs Trotter replied, ‘are you going to speak to him then?’
‘Of course I will, dear, I'll tell him how to cope with the situation, you know, when I was a boy, I…’
‘All right, all right , no more life-stories please, just go up and speak to Tommy then,’ Mrs Trotter said, sharply.
Mr Trotter breathed heavily as he brushed past his wife and stomped heavily up the stairs.
Later on that evening, when Mr Trotter was marking his schoolboy's essays, his son joined him.
‘What is it Tommy?’
Mr Trotter said, annoyed.
When Tommy didn't answer him, Mr Trotter looked up to see tear dripping off his rosy cheeks.
‘Daddy, I'm sc-scared,’ Tommy mumbled.
‘What are you scared of?
There's nothing to be scared of here  with daddy protecting you,’ Mr Trotter said in a kinder tone.
‘It's just all the gh-ghosts that scare me,’ said Tommy.
Mr Trotter as slightly taken aback by this stupid suggestion, as his scientific mind didn't include ghosts.
‘What on earth?
What do you think you're talking about?
You know that there are no ghosts, there is no such thing, now grow up,’ he said angrily.
Tommy ran out of the room to see his mother, who he hoped would be a little more comforting.
The following morning, Mr Trotter was reading the morning newspapers, nearly ready to go to work.
He noticed inside the newspaper that one of his old friends had become rich and famous.
The jealousy swept through Mr Trotter's head as he idolized this person for his looks, popularity, he had got everything just right, whereas he was living in a poky little cottage, with is protective wife and his asthma.
After his breakfast, he walked to his school, ready to start a new day.
As he entered the school gates, he was greeted with sniggers from the small boys.
‘What are you laughing at?’
Mr Trotter questioned.
‘Oh nothing sir,’ answered a popular young lad.
The boys burst into laughter as Mr Trotter plodded away into the distance.
‘What an old fat pig he is,’ commented and the boys shrieked with laughter.
In his classroom, Mr Trotter was taking the role.
‘Simon.’
‘Yes.’
‘Peter.’
‘Here sir.’
‘David.’
‘David,’ Mr Trotter repeated.
‘Here piggy,’ David answered.
‘Did you say what I thought you said?’
Mr Trotter fumed.
‘How dare you,’ he continued, ‘Get yourself into the headmasters office, now.’
‘Yes Sir,’ David calmly answered, rising from his seat and walking across the cold classroom.
When he had left the room, Mr Trotter sat down, trembling.
He cleaned his glasses thoroughly and then slowly stood up.
‘John’, he managed to pronounce.
‘Here.’.
G.E.
Essay
‘Great Expectations’ is thought of by some critics as the greatest novel written in English.
I will defend this, because, to me, the book seemed perfect in every  way , in its characterisation, plot themes and its style.
It is a  picaresque , following the growth of a typical young boy, who had a significant name, as we see here, in the 1st lines of the novel.
My father's family name being Pirrip, and my Christian name Philip, my infant tongue could make of both names nothing longer or more explicit than Pip.
So I called myself Pip, and came to be called Pip.
These first lines of ht book, don't hesitate to bring the reader right to the core of the situation of Pip's life, Charles Dickens puts the information he needs to give us right in front of our noses, there are no complications added.
The reader is urged to continue reading and so we find that Dickens has succeeded in one of the most difficult aspects of a novel — providing an exciting opening for it.
The plot of ‘Great Expectations’ is a very concentrated one, where everything and everyone are linked in the same plot.
I think Dickens heavily relies on coincidence though, and it is in fact an incredible coincidence that the main characters of the book mainly all turn out to be related to one another, although they don't know it.
This might be because Dickens is trying to tell us that society should be close-knit one and not isolated into different units.
The plot is divided into three distinct sections (or volumes).
The first deals with Pip's childhood life in Kent, the second with his life in London, and the third with his attempt to save Magwitch.
Each section contains Pip's different attitudes to life.
In the first one, he is content at the beginning, but then we begin to see, at the end of this part, that he is dissatisfied with his status, his loneliness and is cared by the criminal ‘underworld’.
In the second section, he cuts himself off from his humble family and is influenced greatly by class distinctions.
In the third section, social status and the criminal ‘underworld’ are brought together through the reunion of Pip and his benefactor, his family, Miss Haversham and Estella.
Each of these sections end with a couple of sentences which sum up the consequences of Pip's attitudes to life in that particular section.
For example, the first section ends with
We changed again, and yet again, and it was now too late and too far to go back, and I went on.
And the mists had all solemnly risen now, and the world lay spread before me
showing us that Pip is entering the cold, real world and has left the warmth of Joe's forge and his chance for contentment, trading it for social status.
In the second section, Dickens wrote
When I awoke, without having parted in my sleep with the perception of my wretchedness, the clocks of the Eastward churches were striking five, the candles were wasted out, the fire was dead, and the wind and rain intensified the thick black darkness.
Here, Pip has realised what a disaster he is and he has been hit by hard consequences as a result of his greediness.
We are given a picture of death, the death of Pip's real chance for ever finding contentment, and he sees that it is going to be a long, hard struggle back to finding happiness in life, it is a test of Pip's strength of character.
I took her hand in mine, and we went out of the ruined place; and, as the morning mists had risen long ago when I first left the forge, so, the evening mists were rising now, and in all the broad expanse of tranquil light they showed me, I saw no shadow of another parting from her.
In the ending of the last section, we are given the impression that Pip has slaved away day and night to revive himself, and others  and that this has paid off.
He has forgiven himself and others have forgiven him and he views life from a new angle, rebuilding it with a more solid base.
Notice that light is symbolic in the latter two endings of each section, darkness is seen as a kind of death, light, as a sign of hope.
So we find that the plot of G. E. is a very intense and extremely well planned out and written one.
It is almost like an inverted fairy tale, where Pip's dream has become true.
But Pip, as a gentleman, does not move into a sparkling world of pleasure where he lives ‘happily ever after’, instead he find himself in the corrupt, sordid London.
G.E.
is also a mystery story.
It is so cleverly written that it is impossible to put into my words, everything inside the plot seems to the reader to be perfect.
There are many themes to the novel but I think the main ones are: ‘What is a gentleman?’ and ‘How do you find contentment?’.
Dickens deals with each one tremendously well, making relating his points of view to us subtly but strongly leaving a strong impact on the reader.
Dealing with the first theme that I mentioned, Dickens uses the word ‘gentleman’ a lot in the novel — it is like a leitmotif.
In almost each case, this single word is used in a different context.
Pip first uses it when he confesses to Biddy that he wants to be a gentleman for Estella's sake.
At this stage, Pip sees a gentleman to be someone who romantically escapes from the humble world, into a more fairytale-like world.
Further on, the idea of being a gentleman takes on a very hard and unromantic shape.
Pip will simply be a gentleman because he can afford it.
Pip now falls into a snobbish habit of connecting high social status with moral superiority.
He assumes that becoming rich has made him a better man and that he deserves admiration for it.
Pip recognises Joe as ‘this gentle Christian man’ near the end of the novel.
Joe cannot be a ‘gentleman’ because the word has  social connections and we know that Joe will never be a gentleman of the social kind.
By breaking up the word ‘gentleman’ and inserting the word ‘Christian’, Dickens forces the reader to distinguish between the social and the moral ‘gentleman’.
He tells us that being a ‘gentleman’ is less important than being a ‘gentle man’.
The theme of ‘how to find contentment’ is also a very distinguishable one.
It is mainly shown to us through Pip, where he first found contentment in money, then love and in human relationships.
He eventually finds the contentment he needs through an admirable way, through Joe, when he is treating Pip on his sick bed, as we see here
the tenderness of Joe was so beautifully proportioned to my need, that I was like a child in his hands.
Pip has found contentment also by helping Herbert with is life by find and paying for him to start a job.
It is also a coincidence here that Pip's one unselfish use of his good fortune is the only source of future blessing to him, as he is employed too by this same company.
I think that this is one of the moral lessons which Dickens wants us to learn about from the tale.
Dickens' style of writing is amazing.
One of his most obvious gifts is his sense of fluency.
We never receive the impression that Dickens has to struggle with the English language to express his meaning.
In fact it is so fluent, precise and subtle that we often fail to notice it.
He also describes vivid pictures with extreme detail and .
He often picks out distinct things which he notices and writes them down to make us ‘see’ for ourselves.
For example when Pip meets Miss Haversham for the 1st time, Dickens describes her in immense detail.
I saw that the bride within the bridal dress had withered like the dress, and like the flowers, and had no brightness left but the brightness of her sunken dress.
Dickens also has this habit of making people out to be machines, or making objects become alive.
Therefore Wemmick has ‘a post-office of a mouth’, while the houses ‘twisted themselves to peep down at me’.
One very distinguishable talent of Dickens is the way how he can so easily move from a very serious solemn scene to an extremely comical one.
The way he moves freely from the Pip talking to Magwitch on his death bed,
‘I will never stir from your side, when I am suffered to be near you.
Please God, I will be as true to you, as you have been to me’
to Wemmick's ‘surprise wedding’,
‘Halloa.
Here's Miss Skiffins.
Let's have a wedding’
in less than five pages is amazing.
There are many other examples of Dickens' excellent style of writing in the novel, which add together to make this a perfect piece of writing of a rare quality.
‘Great Expectations’ is not a comic novel.
The tone is that of the narrator, ironic and sad — yet the novel does contain some successful humour.
As the novel moves on, the humour is modified but often the comedy scenes intensify the serious ones.
There are the comic characters like Wopsle, Mrs Pocket, Mr Pumblechook but a lot of the humour comes from Dickens' words on paper, not just his invention of characters.
An example of Dickens' humour is shown here
Joe always aided and comforted me when he could, in some way of his own, and he always did so at dinner-time by giving me gravy, if there were any.
There being plenty of gravy today, Joe spooned into my plate, at this point, about half a pint.
This subtle humour was used when Pip, Joe and Mrs Joe had  some very difficult guests for tea who kept putting Pip down.
Joe daren't argue with them as he was afraid to therefore he made sure to Pip that he was on his side by adding gravy to his plate.
The fact that Pip's food was swimming in gravy by the end of the meal is very amusing.
Once again, the reader is very impressed by Dickens' use of the language and we find he has a subtle comic gift which enables him to add witty scenes to this serious novel.
Symbolism also plays an important part of ‘Great Expectations’.
Specific characters represent things in human life, for example, Jaggers represents law.
There are however more complex examples in the book which Dickens subtly inserts into the tale.
At the beginning, for example, when Magwitch walks away from young Pip, he walks towards two distinct objects, one a beacon, the other a gibbet.
These two objects are symbolic of life and death.
Another example, is the recurrence of the ‘river’.
At first, the river is seen as a threat to Pip as Magwitch comes from it, but later when Magwitch returns to Pip in London, it is seen as a promising object, drowning the bad Compeyson, and uniting Pip and Magwitch.
As Magwitch says himself
‘We can no more see to the bottom of the next few hours, than we can see to the bottom of this river what I catches hold of.
Nor yet we can't no more hold their tide than I can hold this.
And it's run through my fingers and gone, you see!’
These examples of symbolism help to control and shape the plot and again, Dickens uses this gift of clever symbolic writing to add to the perfection of the novel.
Dickens' characters are very vivid and memorable.
Not one character speaks in the same way as another one.
Often, the character has a significant name, like  ‘Pip’ is significant of a seed that's going to grow, ‘Pumblechook’sounds like a pompous, fat, greedy name, which is indeed what Mr Pumblechook is.
‘Biddy’ sounds like biddable showing us that that is what Biddy is — content with her life.
‘Estella’ means a star, showing us that Pip sees her as a light in a dim world.
A few of the characters develop greatly throughout the novel, Pip being the best example, but also Magwitch too.
Joe, Biddy, Herbert and Jaggers' characters are revealed gradually and characters like Pumblechook and Orlick are introduced to us immediately, their characters aren't developed, they are obvious to us already.
Minor characters like Miss Skiffins, Wopsle, the Aged Parent and Clara Barley are mostly brought into the novel through light-hearted scenes and they aren't included in the actual story, only as comical characters — for light relief.
Having studied the different aspects of the novel in detail, I find that Dickens has created a great novel, perfect in every way.
The only weakness I could find while reading it was in fact, the ending.
This was not Dickens' fault that he changed the ending, he was practically forced to do it by a friend.
I think the original ending is much better and fits into the jigsaw of the novel much better than the second ending.
But apart from this small point, I don't think that anyone could fault it as it is so cleverly constructed and presented.
It will continue to provide pleasure to readers for centuries and centuries into the future, Charles Dickens was a genius.
I would definitely agree with the critics who say that ‘Great Expectations’ is the greatest novel written in English.