

Editorial
As a steadily growing and spreading Society we are constantly involving ourselves and attempting new and interesting projects.
This is all to the good but there are a few bare bones we should like you to ‘gnaw on’ just in case complacency sets in!
The structure of a Society could be described as being composed of four main bones:
The wish bones, who spend all their time wishing some one else would do the work.
The knuckle bones, who knock everything that everybody else tries to do.
The jaw bones, who do all the talking but little else!
Finally, the back bones, who tackle the problems and get on with the work of solving them.
As we wish you all a very happy, healthy and prosperous new year, could we all consider into which category we might place ourselves.
Perhaps we might all think about those who will not necessarily have that happy, healthy or prosperous time ahead and see if there is anything that we could do to help.
VOLUNTEERS — volunteers of one sort or another are constantly needed — today we are appealing for volunteers to assist those of our teachers who take specialised classes for the disabled, elderly, handicapped, deaf etc.
One more pair of hands for an hour or two a week can be a godsend for this very worthwhile and rewarding ‘back bone’ work.
If you know you can give this help please contact the office at Epsom and we will gladly put you in touch with the teacher or group nearest to you.
The stories printed below this editorial illustrate some recent achievements in this field.
WELL DONE ANNE!!
This is Anne Loye receiving the First Prize in a Fitness competition held at a Butlin's Holiday Camp.
Anne is a beautiful mover and enjoys her weekly Medau Class at Brentford Adult Training Centre (for the Handicapped) in Isleworth, taken by Ida Butler.
T.V. APPEAL FOR S.O.S.
A very successful appeal was made in September by actress Susannah York on behalf of the S.O.S. Society to support their work in caring for the elderly and disabled.
The film was made at Stobart House, a residential home for old people and included some shots of a class given by Margaret Charlwood.
It was evident that the old people were thoroughly enjoying themselves.
Margaret has been teaching in that particular home for five years.
EASTER COURSE
This year our Easter Course will take place from lunch time Tuesday 8th April until after tea on 12th April at Southlands College situated on the outskirts of Wimbledon; set in pleasant rural surroundings, participants will be accommodated in Queensmere pictured here.
The proximity of the College to London with its many places of interest offers the opportunity also for family parties as there will be a limited number of places available for this purpose.
We are most fortunate to have as our guest teacher Irene Schwarz a former Director of Training at the Medau College and presently a member of the staff of the Physical Education Department of Freiburg University.
She also frequently teaches on the holiday courses at Coburg.
Requests for application forms must be sent with a S.A.E.
BON VOYAGE!
Ann Langford, Surrey teacher and trainer, enjoys a farewell party with her Cranleigh class members and their new teacher Marion Grainger.
Ann is leaving her home in Haslemere this February for a new life in Caracas, Venezuela where her husband has been posted.
Ann has taught Medau for 14 years in both Essex and Surrey and has been a member of the National Display team and joint editor of the magazine.
She is also Surrey's newest trainer.
She will be greatly missed by the Society though her daughter Debbie will be staying on in England and will carry on the Langford teaching tradition.
We wish Ann every happiness in her new home.
As from January, the Cranleigh class will be taught by Marion Grainger, seen above at her new home — The Queen's Head, Bucks Green — which she and her husband have recently taken over.
INSIDE INFORMATION
A NEW TREASURER FOR 1980
Jean Parmiter writes:
‘Due to my teaching and training commitments and because I have become involved in the development of Medau in new areas of the country, I have decided to relinquish my position as Honorary Treasurer as from 1st January, 1980.
Janet Rogers will become the acting Treasurer until the Annual General Meeting in March 1980 when a new Treasurer will be elected.
Janet is a member of the Executive Committee.
She has been a member of the Finance Committee for the past two and a half years and has taken a great interest in the Society's financial affairs.
Nominations for the position, duly seconded and submitted with the approval of the proposed member, should be sent into the office by 14th February, 1980.
I would like to take this opportunity of thanking my fellow officers, committee members, teachers and all members of the Society for their support during my six years as Honorary Treasurer and I would ask you all to support the new Treasurer with the same loyalty and enthusiasm’.
Though Jean's resignation will be officially recognised at the next Annual General Meeting, we would like to be first in recording our grateful thanks for the tremendous amount of hard work and time which she has given to the Society during her years in office.
Taking over as she did at very short notice when our last Treasurer became ill, she has always managed to administer the Society's finances in an extremely capable way despite the fact that the last six years has been a period of considerable change and economic difficulty.
MEDAU IN PARIS
Anne Locke writes:
‘When leaving England in September to live in Paris I resolved to change my life style completely, which of course meant giving up Medau!
Now two months later I am teaching six classes a week, three movement and three breathing movement, and couldn't be happier.
Medau work has been popular in this part of Paris for the past eighteen years.
There is a Medau Society who organise the classes and the finances so the lucky teacher only has to teach — no worries about class numbers, equipment or halls.
Everything is provided.
M. and Mme. Wastiaux, whom many of you will remember from the Easter Course at Avery Hill, do much of the organising and besides looking after me very well attend all the movement classes.
My only rather weighty problem is the fact that I speak very little French though I am learning, both at French lessons and at my Medau classes.
Most of the time the class members understand me and sometimes I even understand myself!
Occasionally the whole class dissolves into hysterics for about five minutes and then refuses to tell me what I have said.
However I have always maintained that a happy class moves better!
One thing I have learned is that I should never tell class members to lift their ‘jambon’.’
A ROYAL VISIT
Having recently started a class in Poole, Audrey Archer discovered that a forthcoming tour of the Poole Arts Centre by H.M. Queen Elizabeth and H.R.H.
The Duke of Edinburgh would include a visit to her Medau group.
The problem of planning a display in a carpeted room with no piano presented many difficulties — however the visit itself proved to ben an occasion to remember.
Audrey writes:
‘The Arts Centre was be-decked with flowers and flags and anyone who had a uniform or robes of office was wearing them.
We had time for a couple of runs through and set up the tape recorders (I took two in case of trouble!) and by 10 a.m. we were all standing in our place s—white skirts dazzling and hearts beating fast — waiting for the signal to start.
By now it was obvious that this was in no way to be an ordinary class, but a performance.
As the Queen entered, the music started, we curtsied, smiled and began to move as we had never moved before.
Out of the corner of my eye I saw the Queen watching us and talking to the Director.
After a short pause to watch us, she passed on surrounded by the Lord Lieutenant of Dorset and other local dignitaries.
As the dance finished we curtsied again and the Duke of Edinburgh stopped to congratulate us.
The Royal party proceeded outside to the lawns where a silver band was playing the Cornish Floral Dance.
We followed on to the patio and spontaneously broke into an impromptu dance in our bare feet on the cold concrete, much to the delight of the crowd’.
VISIT TO COURBEVOIE
Members of the National Display team will spend the weekend of 24th/26th May in Courbevoie, a suburb of Paris.
This is part of a scheme organised by the London Borough of Southward Friendship League, whereby various groups of sportsmen and women enjoy the hospitality of the twinned towns and demonstrate their own particular sports and skills.
AU-PAIR
A young German student who finishes her school studies in June this year, is anxious to come to England as an au-pair for six months or a year.
She is a friend of Sabine Bahnemann who trained at Coburg.
Would anyone who is interested please contact:
MEMBERSHIP
A renewal form for 1980 membership is enclosed with this newsletter.
We sincerely hope you will continue to support the Society and encourage your family, friends and fellow class members to do likewise.
This year we are faced with considerable financial difficulty since the grant which we receive from the Sports Council towards our administration expenses has been cut.
With the inevitable increase in office rent, rates, postage, telephone and stationery etc. it is obvious that we shall all have to make a great effort to overcome this problem.
Since subscriptions for membership have not been increased this year, one way in which everyone could help would be to add a donation — no matter how small — when sending in their subscription fee.
In the past we have always proved that we can cope with difficult situations and with the help of our loyal band of teachers and members, we are sure that the present problem will be overcome.
Study Group Day
Over the past two years the number of class members attending Study Group days has fallen off considerably.
Unfortunately the October meeting had to be cancelled at the last minute through lack of support.
Before planning any future event we would like to know what both class members and teachers feel about the running of the day and any suggestions you may have on making the days more popular.
Do get together and discuss the problem and send in any ideas you may have to the office.
BIRTHDAY GREETINGS
Molly's uncle, Philip, Lord Noel-Baker, one of our Vice-Presidents recently celebrated his 90th birthday and it gives us great pleasure to add our greetings to the many he has received from all over the world.
Book Review
ISLAND QUEST By Prunella Stack.
Published 1979 by Collins and Harvill Press.
£6.50 (hard back).
Photographs by Mirella Ricciardi.
for anyone seeking a book that will leave them longing to visit the Hebrides, ISLAND QUEST is the answer.
Qualities of timelessness, and oneness with the people and surroundings are reflected in Prunella's book, and the beautiful black and white photographs are also enchanting.
For some this book may epitomise movement and dance — people in their natural surroundings and rhythm.
A deep understanding of the historical and cultural background is very well shown.
At the same time this is a very personal book about Prunella and her family.
NEWS FROM TONBRIDGE
Cicely Harris is to run a day of Medau at the Tunbridge Wells Adult Education Centre in March, hopefully with a view to a class being started there.
We are proud to have four members of the National Display Team from the Tonbridge area, Jean Allen, Marie Collacott, Joan French and Joy Kidd.
Elsie Cuming has extended her movement classes for the mentally handicapped and now has several classes for sub-normal patients at Princess Christian's Hospital, some of which are run in conjunction with the Tonbridge Adult Education Centre.
Joy Kidd produced a baby girl named Eleanor Mary on 16th October 1979, a sister for Louisa.
She is moving to the north in January and although sorry to be leaving Kent, is looking forward, with her husband, to living on the outskirts of Sheffield overlooking the Derbyshire dales.
SPOTLIGHT ON KENT
A KENTISH LIMERICK
There was a young lady from Kent
And to Medau Classes she went
It wasn't hoop, club or ball
That caused her downfall
But her sad lack of rhythmic movement
LONG LIVE MEDAU
I was first introduced to Medau in 1947 when I was sent by Dr. Anni Noll to a post natal class which was held in Days Lane School, Sidcup.
I trotted along one evening wondering what Medau was all about.
There I was welcomed by Molly Braithwaite who demonstrated Medau movement and I was soon joining in with the others present.
I enjoyed the swimming, feathering and stretching exercises.
Each week I continued and with Molly and Peggy Secord as my first Medau teachers, I was hooked on this form of rhythmic movement.
Over the years our class has had several teachers — Krista Haring and then two German students from the school at coburg.
Our own Nellie Button trained, qualified and took over the class.
When Nellie died we thought that the class would end but thanks to Elsie Simmonds with Kath Vigneux at the piano, we were able to carry on.
When Elsie had to retire for health reasons, we were once again without a teacher but Hilda Lodge and Eleanor Pitman helped out and then Joan Gatfield, a leader in training, decided to do some training with us.
After Joan qualified Pat Bell continued with us.
Now we are a fully established class with 26 members on our books with Bridget Ewing at the helm.
In the summer we enjoy holiday classes which are taken by a different teacher each week and to which many friends from other classes in the district come to join us.
After 32 years I continue to enjoy my Medau by doing three classes a week — with Myrtle Mott at Plumstead, with Elsie Streek at Alderwood School and with Bridget at Sidcup and I must say that this form of movement has given me a great deal of pleasure so LONG LIVE MEDAU.
Reflections on the Norfolk Festival
It had been a long day — the children safely delivered to Grandma, the freezer full of food (for a husband to cope on his own), leotards and tights packed along with all the other paraphernalia needed for a Medau display.
Now here I was, with the rest of the Kent Display Team, rumbling along in a coach, for the next five hours, on my way to Norwich.
What, I began to wonder, was I doing here?
I could be comfortably at home sitting in front of the fire watching television.
However, a good night's sleep and a hearty breakfast worked wonders and the whole team was soon ready for a full day of Medau at the Norfolk Festival of Movement.
Arriving at St. Andrew's Hall, laden with our luggage and looking like a bunch of bemused refugees, we were ushered to our dressing room.
As we all bundled in, the room seemed to get smaller, more like a cupboard really, and by the time the Hertfordshire team was packed in, it was standing room only and heaven help anyone who bent down to pull on their tights!
They would be unlikely to surface again for at least ten minutes!
With some pushing and shoving and much hilarity we changed and appeared in reasonably good order for our ten minute rehearsal time.
The rest of the morning flew by watching other teams rehearse, looking over our surroundings and renewing acquaintances with team members from other areas, not seen since the Festival of Movement at the Albert Hall in 1978.
The St. Andrew's Hall itself is a most beautiful building.
Once a church it has now been cleverly converted for recreational purposes.
As much of the original structure as possible has been retained, with the Crypt being used as a very pleasant snack bar, and the old Cloisters for exhibitions and displays.
The afternoon was soon upon us.
I'm sure that the dressing room had shrunk again!
Or was it just the effect of the refreshment so kindly brought round by the Norfolk team!
The lull between performances was filled with much chatter, hilarity and friendly comradeship which always seem to accompany Medau gatherings.
Seven o'clock and we were off again.
Another round of changing outfits, make-up, collecting equipment and displays.
The dressing room was getting smaller than ever.
All too soon it was finale time again and two very successful performances were over.
With a slight feeling of anti-climax we gathered our belongings and made our way back to the coach for the journey home.
We were hot, tired and feeling none too clean but had we enjoyed ourselves?
The answer must be Yes’
I would like to take this opportunity to thank all those connected with the organisation and staging of the Norfolk Festival of Movement.
Their hard work, efficiency and friendliness helped to produce a day which will be remembered for a long time by all those who took part.
CRYSTAL PALACE 1979
At 2.00 p.m. as the doors opened before the flood of Medau girls surging through, the 1979 reunion was once again set in motion; one thousand tickets sold and every one being used.
The wide variety of display items was a pleasure to see; the children had their own class and all three open classes were well filled.
The moving mass of mainly Medau and Navy blue clad figures was a very encouraging sight to the hard working girls of the Kent Committee who had spend a long time before the event and on the day itself making sure all went according to plan.
So it is thanks to you for coming to these events and thanks to all who contributed to the organisation for between you all it was a most successful day.
MEDAU TRAY-BAKE
8oz cooking chocolate; 4oz margarine; 4oz caster sugar; 2 eggs; 2oz S.R. flour; 2oz desiccated coconut; mixed dried fruit and cherries
Melt the cooking chocolate and spread over a tray approximately 8’ x 12’and leave to set.
Cream the margarine and sugar and beat in the eggs.
Stir in flour and coconut and mix in dried fruit and chopped cherries.
Spread the mixture over chocolate and bake in oven at 400F or Gas Mark 5 until golden brown and set.
Leave until cold then cut into desired size.
THREE MAIDS OF KENT
I should like to pay just a small tribute to three of my youngest class members.
So many detrimental things are written and said about our youth that for once let us give praise where it is due.
All three have been attending Medau classes regularly for over a year now an have taken part in rallies etc.
Sonia Bridger, 16, has recently passed 8 ‘O’ levels and is staying at school to take an ‘A’level course.
She attends an Adult Education Class in Larkfield.
Sarah Pope, 13, has the distinction of being my youngest class member.
She attends a privately run class at Wainscott where she mixes well with people twice her age (or more!)
Jill Thomas, 15, whose photograph appeared on the front of the last Medau News, is taking Medau as her Interest Subject for the Duke of Edinburgh Bronze Award.
She is the daughter of Medau June Thomas and attends the same class as Sarah.
Let us hope that all three continue to enjoy their Medau work.
Maybe there are many more like them in Kent and elsewhere.
Perhaps there is still hope for the Medau Display Team!
KENT'S NEWEST TRAINER
Myrtle Mott, producer of the ‘Reflections’ shown both at the Albert Hall and the Norwich Festival, is at present attached to the Teachers' Training Course at Balham.
Myrtle has always been interested in sport and gymnastics and first started Medau work eighteen years ago.
She became a teacher in 1973.