

BROLLIES, BUNNIES AND SPONSORED FUN AT CRYSTAL PALACE
A touching tribute to Beryl Smith formed the opening to the display programme at Crystal Palace reunion in November, using strong music, movements and shapes.
It brought the spectators to their feet in an act of remembrance for Beryl who did so much and gave so much to the Society.
Eight other items followed including an ‘oriental’ item from Kent, brollies as equipment (and how effectively) from Norfolk and four youngsters from Surrey managed to cover the vast floor area of the sports centre with a lively item using novel equipment — batons with rubber balls at each end.
A guest team from the Keep Fit Association demonstrated skills with skipping ropes and the Surrey Teachers and a large team from Essex included floor work in their items.
All the displays were bright and lively and the leotards were also a very colourful touch.
The National Display Team finished the session with a beautiful hoop item.
The reunion was not all watching though.
Members had plenty of opportunity to join in two open classes taken by Margaret Charlwood and Chris Markham.
Chris used scarves in her session and Margaret worked her class very hard towards a fast moving item with some quick footwork.
Margaret and Chris were accompanied by Joan Gatfield and Jean Parmiter.
A new event for this year's reunion was a sponsored movement session.
Organised by Pat Palmer and entered with great gusto by teams from classes, the event was great fun to watch and a great success for Age Concern, Action Research for the Crippled Child and the Medau Society who shared the proceeds.
The teams dressed up and we had teams such as charladies, bunnies, St. Trinians (and one brave man) and flappers.
The ‘Load of Old Rubbish’ team and ‘Medau Bunnies’won prizes, and all the teams completed the 20 minute hard-working session.
The weather may have been damp and foggy outside but those who attended the reunion had an action-packed bright and lively afternoon with plenty to watch and do.
This year we even took care of the children with Margaret Hickman running activities throughout the afternoon.
Over 900 attended the reunion and as usual our thanks to all who worked so hard to make it successful.
Make it an even larger attendance next time — bring your families and friends.
Macmillan Cancer Relief Fund
The Medau Society has opened a fund in memory of Beryl and a donation will be made every year to  Macmillan Cancer Relief.
The National Society for Cancer Relief was founded in 1911 by Douglas Macmillan M.B.E.
and this compassionate organisation offers help in many ways to cancer sufferers and to their families and friends.
The Macmillan Home Care Service was introduced in 1975 and Macmillan Nurses are specially trained to care for terminally ill patients in their own homes, on call at any hour of the day or night, seven days a week.
It costs £40,000 to train and keep in service one Nurse for three years.
Beryl Smith died at home, cared for by loving friends and family, but for those who find it difficult to cope Macmillan Nurses can help ease the burden.
Please send contributions direct to the office at Epsom, clearly stating that they are for this fund.
Dear Readers
The Editors thank you for your continued support as members of the Society and your interest in the ‘Medau News’.
We hope you find the current issue still of interest and we plan to keep up the good work during the coming year seeking out happenings/events/ stories to retell for you, but as it is your newspaper do contact us with your own ideas and suggestions at any time.
We now have two new people involved with bringing you the news — Anne Seaton, away up in Scotland, who is helping with page three's editing and Victoria Osborne, from Surrey, in a more general way, her first contribution is the report of our very successful Reunion held last November.
May we wish you all a very happy and prosperous 1986.
Sincerely The Editors 
Society Elections
Following amendments to update our Constitution approved at the last Annual General Meeting held on 27th April 1985, three members of the Executive Committee will retire annually, which of course means that it will be necessary in future to hold elections each year to fill these vacant places.
In March an amended version of the Constitution will be sent to each member together with the 1985 Annual Report and the Agenda for the 1986 A.G.M.
Press Officer
Our Press Officer, Lucy Jackson has worked tirelessly throughout 1985 promoting Medau in the Press and at public Exhibitions.
Many of you will have read complimentary articles which have appeared in top-selling magazines, and we have been well represented at the Physical ‘85 and Healthier Living Exhibitions held in central London.
Lucy has also worked on production of a promotional video illustrating aspects of Medau which can be enjoyed by all age groups.
This video is available for sale — details from the Office.
MEDAU DEVELOPMENT
Our National Development Officer, Pat Palmer, qualified as a Medau Teacher in 1974, since when she has been taking recreational classes in Kent and South london and teaching secondary school girls in Peckham.
Pat has been involved with sport all her life, is qualified to coach Lawn Tennis and Badminton and has experience of sports administration at competitive and recreational levels.
Although the current climate of education cut-backs and competition from a large variety of exercise classes presents a considerable challenge to the development of Medau, Pat is sure that the Grant Aid Programme, which she has been appointed to implement, has strengthened the foundations on which the Medau family can build.
The two most immediate priorities are to increase the number of Society members and to provide more classes, which, of course, means training more teachers.
(If any reader would like more details, please ask your teacher or the Medau Office for details.)
She hopes to visit rallies, training days, meetings and so on in all parts of the country to make personal contact with members and teachers, to transmit their opinions and suggestions to the relevant Committees, to instigate or give support to all promotional efforts, and to draw all Medau enthusiasts closer together.
Pat is also establishing good working relationships with the organising bodies of sport, particularly the CCPR, Regional and National Sports Councils, so that we may take advantage of all the contacts and expertise at their disposal.
ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING
Surrey will be the AGM's host this year on 19th April at the Merton Institute Main Centre, Whatley Avenue, SW20.
This whole day event will begin with open classes and those will be followed by the now firmly established ‘Ploughman's Lunch’ when we hope also to show the Festival tape of the two Medau items.
The afternoon will be devoted to the business meeting which is always very interesting.
Please do make a note of this date in your diary and come along.
There's more to Medau than just attending your local weekly class!
NEW MEDAU TEACHERS
The first three students from our new training course took the Medau Teachers' Examination on 23rd November 1985 and all three are to be congratulated for passing with ‘flying colours’.
They are:
Not only (Medau) but also…
What on earth are horologists?
Can I hear you asking yourself that question!
‘Horology is the study or measuring of time or making of clocks’— that's what our dictionary says and the latter is what we do; we make clocks for a large company called the London Clock Company, but we had very humble beginnings….
It all started sixteen years ago when our children went to school for the first time and we found we had a gap in our lives to fill.
With the help of my husband who is an importer of clocks, we came up with this idea.
We put a bench across the loo and the bidet and sat there in the bathroom, on kitchen stools, putting clocks together!
Our friend worked across the landing in the spare bedroom packing them ready for distribution.
Hardly anything so grand as horology I expect you're thinking.
After six months we had made such a success of our little business that we took on a fourth girl and moved into the garage, as we now needed more space.
On nice days we made the most of the sunshine and moved the bench into the garden where we assembled the clocks, sitting in our bikinis.
We particularly remember our friendly old tortoise who had a passion for toes, and we had to sit with our feet in cardboard boxes so we didn't have nibbled digits!
At the end of the day's work we layered the clocks between blankets in the wheelbarrow, and trundled them into the garage to be packed.
Poor reader, have we destroyed your picture of that clock-maker tap-tap-tapping away making your clock in his little hut half way up a mountain?
Anyway, to get back to our story; over the years we went from strength to strength, moving to a rented warehouse and then four years ago my husband bought an old cinema.
We now work with twenty girls in a purpose build assembly shop where, with the help of power tools, we can assembly and pack one thousand clocks a day.
Not so much fun as those early days perhaps, but still a lot of excitement, and surely now we can call ourselves ‘horologists’.
Val started Medau umpteen years ago after her third baby to ‘regain’ her figure and June joined later to ‘find’hers — now both agree it has a ‘timeless’quality and it ‘works’.
Recipe
6 lamp chops
14oz. tin of apricots
3 tablespoons of oil
1 tablespoon of red wine vinegar
syrup from tin of apricots
2 spring onions coarsely chopped
parsley sprigs, chopped
salt and pepper
Combine all the ingredients except the lamb and the apricots.
Place chops in a shallow dish and pour marinade over the chops.
Leave for about an hour basting frequently.
Place chops in grill pan on rack and surround with apricots.
Baste with marinade and grill under pre-heated grill.
cook for about 5 minutes each side; then reduce heat and cook for a further 5 minutes each side.
One of the many delicious recipes in the Medau Cook Book available from the Medau Office.
£1.00 + p&p.
NORTH EAST
North-East members send congratulations to one of their number, Rosaline Garton, on her success in the Teachers' Award exam.
She is in fact already a teacher of a few years' experience, with one class in her own village of Strathkinness in Fife, and two more in nearby St. Andrews; she has even more experience as a traveller, having for some time regularly made the journey to Edinburgh by bicycle and train to attend training Saturdays with Rita Quick and Monday recreational classes with Muriel Jessop, and during the last two years undertaken the long trip south to take part in Aston Clinton weekends.
So best wishes to Rosalind, the Society's most northerly teacher.
HERTFORDSHIRE AND CAMBRIDGESHIRE
Jean Moss got a pleasant surprise when, at the first class of the autumn session, her Melbourne class members presented her with a specially engraved glass candle-holder in celebration of her 25 years of Medau teaching.
Jean Porter has started two classes in the Welwyn area; postal enrolment is being encouraged in St. Albans and Harpenden and Medau was on the ‘classes full’ list even before the start of the term.
Gill Hill, who has been seeing to the social side of things, organised an outing to the Crystal Palace Reunion for members from Hatfield, Hemel Hempstead, St. Albans and Harpenden, and another to Sadlers Wells Theatre for the ballet enthusiasts.
SURREY
Leatherhead Sports Council has marked the tenth year of the Society's association with the Leatherhead Leisure Centre with an award in recognition of the work done by teachers there.
The presentation took place on 23rd October and the award was accepted by Jackie Palmer on the Society's behalf.
It will give members pleasure to hear that Ann McMillan's children's classes received particular mention (many of Ann's ‘children’ are now in the Teens Display Team or the National Display Team); her work with the triple-handicapped (those who are blind and deaf as well as being physically handicapped) was also specially acknowledged.
NORTH WALES
Wynne Norris reports on the intricacies of teaching in Ruthin, a market town of about 4,000 inhabitants (many of whom are farmers and Welsh-speaking), lying in a valley beneath the Clwydian Hills.
There the Welsh and English school timetables differ, so that when a morning of Medau was started at the town hall, English-speaking mothers came to the first session and Welsh-speaking ones to the second; she was therefore obliged to give the former in English and the latter in Welsh — surely a triumphant example of good public relations and adaptability — though Wynne claims that she is still having a struggle to master Welsh.
She and Elizabeth Machin attended the Coburg course last May and brought back good wishes from ‘Usch’, who looks forward to meeting the British participants at this year's Whitsun Course.
NOTTINGHAMSHIRE
In the Nottinghamshire village of Eastwood, birthplace of D.H.
Lawrence, Sibylle Zuckermann has been for the last six years teaching a Senior Citizens' class.
She has a hall in a community centre owned by Age Concern, and her class numbers 25 to 30.
Her members have to cope with varying degrees of immobility — one lady has an artificial — but they are enthusiastic and even ambitious, setting before themselves the movements of Torvill and Dean as an ideal to follow.
Some exercises they perform sitting on chairs or using them for support, but floor exercises have been out of the question.
Sibylle nevertheless demonstrates these in the hope that once members reach the privacy of the home and the comfort of a carpet, they may have a go at them.
BEDFORDSHIRE
Aldercine Hodson recently took up the challenge of organising a ‘Fun Sports Afternoon’ for the disabled that would cater especially for those handicapped people who have athletic inclinations but not necessarily the strength to cope with competition at County, Regional or National level.
On 19th October the whole of the ground floor at the Luton Regional Sports Centre was laid out to accommodate Carpet Bowls, Shuffle-board, Table Tennis, Badminton, Trampolining, Weight-Training and Pistol Shooting.
Anticipating an element of competitiveness, Aldercine had the central area marked out with sticky tape and traffic cones in readiness for a series of games.
Counting the helpers, at least 60 people turned up — some from the Sports Centre itself, some from Downlands Centre and Bramingham Centre, some from the MacIntyre Homes, and some deaf and blind people.
After a brief warm-up, participants dispersed to try out the various sports, and then the time came for the games, which involved the competitors in (among other things) rushing to get balls round traffic cones, and into baskets.
Rivalry was keen; judges timed the contestants and deducted marks from the maximum 16 marks per game.
Finally the Mayor presented the medals to the winners and runners-up.
Participants were so delighted with the success of the whole event that another such afternoon was called for even before this one was quite over.
CORNWALL
Members will want to know how Pat Keen has been getting on since she gave up her classes in the London area and moved to Newquay in Cornwall to look after her 94–year-old mother.
Very sadly, her mother died a bare two weeks after Pat's move.
Pat found herself wondering whether to return to Purley, but decided after all to establish herself in the South West and spread the Medau message by taking up teaching again after her rather brief retirement.
The only other Cornwall teacher is Joan Legg.
Joan has a thriving class in Camborne but she attends Pat's new class at the Truro Dance Centre when she can.
Two Medau class members from former days have also tracked down the Truro class.
Pat has got a second class going, for the elderly at the Newquay Day Centre (where she is up against a simultaneously running Bingo session), and would now like to introduce a recreational and/or breathing class to her locality.
Wish me luck, she says, but don't wave me goodbye!
NORFOLK
Norfolk has been concentrating on promoting Medau with a view to increasing class membership.
Ruth Rolph has give a countywide series of ten lecture-demonstrations to Women's Institutes with the help of a demonstration team composed of teachers and class members.
New recruits to Medau came forward after visiting the stand at the Royal Norfolk Show, and more joined after a Promotions Week in the Lowestoft area organised by Marlene McGee and Jane Fisk, with Come-and-Try sessions and demonstrations by Oulton Broad class members.
Mary Harrison has unfortunately had to give up her much-appreciated work in the Swarfham area; her husband's promotion means that they must move to Peterborough.
A member of the Drayton class who was attending ante-natal classes demonstrated to other participants the best way of standing up after floorwork, and greatly impressed the class tutor.
Finally, Lowestoft members are reminded to be particularly polite to Marlene McGee, as she has been appointed to the Lowestoft bench of the Magistrates' Court.
HAMPSHIRE
Sarah Smith has been giving a regular class to stroke victims at the Oak Park Stroke Club in Havant.
Earlier this year the club was visited by Ken Moss, the Mayor of Havant, who, with his wife, joined in the Medau exercise routine.
Other club activities include craftwork, and exercises in writing and memory recall.
The husband of one of the club members had his camera handy to record the occasion of the Mayor's visit.
The Society's Appeal Target 1986
£2000
We thank you all for the great success you have all made of the 1985 Appeal.
We are delighted and thrilled with the enthusiasm and ingenuity you have displayed while producing a grand total of over £2,500.
Fund raising, as we know, is here to stay and is now a way of life.
We would like to ask you to please — please go on ‘doing you own thing’ for the Society and keep the cash flowing in during 1986.