

Chairman's Letter
Since last April many people have given me their congratulations, followed by the question, ‘Does this involve you in any work?’
The short answer is ‘YES’; I had no idea that some of you were unaware of the commitment to the Society made by our Honorary Officers and Committee Members.
Where would we be without our dedicated Chairman of our Training, Publicity, Finance and Membership Services Sub-Committees, our hardworking Treasurer, our National Development Officer, who is employed part-time, and our full-time Secretary?
As Chairman, I chair the Executive Committee Meetings, attend sub-committee meetings and working parties and work closely with all those involved in the Development Steering Group, who liaise with the Sports Council.
Many hours are taken up with writing notes and minutes, with the loyal support of our Secretary, who still manages to ‘smile and sing under all difficulties’.
During my term of office I hope to introduce all of you to the ‘Team’ who are the driving force behind the Society — Friends without whom I could not manage!
Among my pleasurable duties is that of attending Society events; two recent ones were the November Reunion and the Festival at the Royal Albert Hall — bot very successful days, and I extend my congratulations to all concerned.
MEMBERSHIP A vital message and reminder
The message is loud and clear: RENEWAL of your membership, PLEASE, in 1988.
Three Cheers for all of your, and grateful thanks for your response to our call for new members during last year.
We reached our 1987 target and beyond, which delights us, because our Sports Council Grant depends partly on good membership numbers.
Appreciative of the loyalty you have given us in the past, we are once again asking for your support.
As important as renewal is, yet again, increased membership.
A fresh target still for 1988.
We mustn't stand still — looking forward is essential.
Don't just renew your own; please introduce a friend or two.
Make Medau Movement number one for fitness and health in your area.
We could all take up the role of publicity agent, advertising our own favourite recreation!
The enjoyment, fun, exhilaration, fitness and health we drive are all excellent reasons for sharing Medau with others.
DON'T keep it to yourself — spread the news.
If YOU have any suggestions for helping ut to help ourselves, send them into the Office at Epsom.
A happy, healthy New Year to you all.
EASTER COURSE 1988
The Easter Course will be held this year, for the first time, at Norwich College of Further and Higher Education.
Norfolk has been for many years one of our Medau strongholds and it is for this reason that the Society decided to select this prestigious location.
The course will be staffed by two of our most experienced and popular trainers, Margaret Charlwood and Jean Parmiter, who have visited Norfolk in the past to teach at training days and at rallies.
All that is needed now is for you all to take advantage of this week of Medau, either as a daily visitor, or residentially.
The course will run from 5 to 10 April.
A course form is enclosed with this issue.
ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING
The Annual General Meeting will take place on Saturday morning during the Easter Course at Norwich College, and will be followed by a buffet luncheon and afternoon classes.
Take a note of the day: SATURDAY 9 APRIL 1988.
Medau Accompaniment
‘Music — if it is the RIGHT music — is perhaps the most important of all the means used to help to teach the art of moving well.
These words of Molly Braithwaite, founder of the Medau Society in Great Britain, explain the emphasis we place on linking sight and sound and indicate the principle behind the intriguing variety of rhythmic accompaniment we use in our classes.
Medau teachers support and direct their classes in much the same way as a conductor does an orchestra — first they perform the movement to feel the accent, shape and dynamics, then begin to communicate with the class through voice, before developing the rhythmic possibilities with claps, clicks, drumbeats, other percussive sounds, improvised piano music or recorded music.
Improvisation of any kind typifies Medau accompaniment — it encourages class members to feel and appreciate for themselves the many-sidedness of movement, and learn through aural perception rather than mere visual mimicry.
Hinrich Medau evolved a simple method of teaching piano improvisation so that even students who have never played the piano before and have no previous knowledge of music almost all learn to play well for movement, even if only in a very simple way.
Our music has the same origin and function as any work song — it arises spontaneously out of a particular movement and is then used to lead, inspire and increase the rhythmical flow so that the movement is performed with minimum effort and maximum pleasure.
A change of pace is used to revitalise movement and balance the energy output.
The great range of taped music currently available adds today's modern sounds and brings another dimension to the class.
Beginners appreciate the help given by moving together with the teacher after technical movement coaching, while more advanced movers respond to the various nuances that give added pleasure to the performance of travelling movements, creative variations or structured patterns.
The words written by Hinrich Medau in 1933 continue to guide our work today: ‘The all-important inspiration of Medau work still remains the close connection between movement and music and we are constantly working at the deepening and widening of our knowledge in this as in other spheres’.
TRAINING AND THE FUTURE
A successful Potential Teachers' day took place in London on 14 November last year.
A new Training Course is due to begin this January, based in Kent, near the M25, on a weekly basis, with one residential weekend per term, to be held in Buckinghamshire.
AT the same time it is hoped to run a pilot scheme to introduce our work to those who already hold a dance teachers' certificate and wish to learn more about our work.
NEW TEACHERS
We are all pleased to announce the success of all three candidates at the Society's Examinations on 5 December.
They are: Glenda Cheshire (London), Audrey Robinson (Norwich) and Rosemary Smith (St Albans).
Elections
Our annual elections are once again due and we ask for nominations to fill the three places on the Executive Committee that will fall vacant at the Annual General Meeting in April.
If you are interested in helping to guide the society through committee-work or know someone else who is ‘good’ on committees, please let the Office have that nomination (with the nominee's permission, of course!) by 19 February 1988, so that if more than three candidates come forward, ballot forms can be sent out in good time.
COME AND TRY IT
Meet your Vice-Chairman
Josephine Williams, the Society's Vice-Chairman, is married, with two children, and comes from West Wickham in Kent.
She was introduced to Medau by Jean Parmiter, with whom she worked in the City.
She joined Jean's class in 1962 and went on to train as a teacher.
In 1966 she and her best friend, Sylvia Casserley, celebrated their newly acquired qualification as Medau teachers by attending the Medau Schule Summer Course at Coburg.
Much of her spare time is spent acting as secretary to her husband, who is Deputy President (Technical) of the B.A.G.A. The rare weekend not taken up with Medau or Gymnastics sees them both actively pursuing their other hobby — rambling!
Lilleshall
Once again Lilleshall provided an excellent weekend of Medau.
Those of us from the South who left behind tree-strewn roads and gardens after the devastation of the recent October storm, were delighted to be in such beautiful surroundings again and to meet with our Lilleshall friends from other parts of the country.
We have come to expect super classes on this course, and we were not disappointed!
We went home refreshed and look forward in great anticipation to next year.
Many thanks go to Margaret and Chris for all their hard work and enthusiasm.
The Back Pain Association and its work
(Based on an article by Anne Powell, Medau teacher, physiotherapist and supervisor of Back Pain Association classes).
The Back Pain Association was formed to encourage and support research into the causes and treatment of back pain and to help people to prevent damage to the spine by teaching them to use their bodies sensibly.
The Association has branches throughout the country that provide information and hold remedial classes.
Sufferers with bad backs know they must avoid certain movements, such as bending with stiff legs, twisting on a fixed base or lifting heavy weights.
When you are in pain, movement is generally inhibited by the body's reflex mechanism.
This works to protect the body from further strain and injury.
Before pain occurs, most people are unaware of what is likely to cause strain in the back and happily misuse their bodies constantly!
What is misuse?
It is the holding of the body in an awkward or unbalanced position for long periods.
This creates excessive tension in muscles and other soft tissues, which blocks the flow of blood and lymph to and from the muscles, so that they can become inelastic and stiff.
Exercise teachers should try to counteract misuse of the body by encouraging class members to work in a balanced position with the right base support, so that there is no unnecessary muscle tension and the muscles can work more efficiently.
Stretching, bending or rotating the body on stiff legs pulls soft tissues that have already become inelastic, and can damage discs and joints of the spine.
Use the legs and feet to initiate movement.
Before flexing, extending or rotating the back, lengthen the spine from the back of the neck, so as to list the discs and joints out of their state of compression.
Again, in running, jumping or leaping, lengthen the spine upwards to prevent wear and tear on discus and joints.
It is true that exercise should stretch every part of the body, but it is safe only if the body is in a stable, well-balanced position in the first place.
FESTIVAL OF MOVEMENT AT THE ROYAL ALBERT HALL
Our heartiest congratulates go to Jean Parmiter and her 55+ Display Team, who represented us at the Age Concern Festival Movement at the Royal Albert Hall in November last year.
Many society members attended the Festival to watch the team performing, and they really did us proud as they moved rhythmically and gracefully through the Medau hoop-item — aptly named ‘Whirlpools’— devised and produced by Jean, whose live piano music was enhanced by percussion from Margaret Charlwood.
Well done team!
Two days of movement in West London
Another happy collaboration between the Sports Council's Greater London and South East Region Movement and Dance Liaison Group and the Westminster City Council resulted in a superb participatory weekend of movement and dance held at the Seymour Leisure Centre, 24–25 October, at which the Medau Society provided a Teachers' Workshop and a Recreational Class, both taught by Margaret Charlwood.
Those who attended valued the experience that the two days gave them, and look forward to the next such occasion.
URGENT URGENT URGENT URGENT
HAVE YOU
(a) an interest in or a background knowledge of basic book-keeping
(b) a real desire to help the Medau Society?
(c) time to devote to attending meetings?
Please ring Joan Daniels: Medway 719276
We require a new trainee Honorary Treasurer to take over at the A.G.M. in April.
It is possible that the work could be shared between two people working closely together — one to do the book-keeping, and one to liaise with the committees.
If you feel this is something you could do, please contact Joan immediately.
THE SOCIETY NEEDS YOUR HELP
THE SOCIETY'S ANNUAL REUNION
Another year, another venue, but still you came to join once again in the Society's Annual Reunion.
The sun was shining as we left home to converge on Seymour Leisure Complex and enjoy the two stimulating open classes given by Toni Bergman and Rosemary Gould (there were classes too for the teenies given by Jean Moss and Lala Manners).
Then with energy to spare you proceeded to participate in the ‘Measured Medau Mile’ to raise funds not only for the Society but also, through the British Kidney Patient Association, for a Children's Renal Unit at Guy's Hospital.
A great deal of time and thought had gone into the varied and colourful array of costumes worn by the contestants, and into their entertainingly apposite choice of titles; everybody, however, agreed that ‘Worzel Gummidge and Aunt Sally’, who had travelled all the way from Norfolk, were the worthy winners.
The Day was rounded off with a programme of display items from a variety of teams, including class teams, the National Display Team and our special 55+ team — for them the day was a successful dress rehearsal for their performance at the Age Concern Festival at the Royal Albert Hall the following week.
All the producers of the items can be justly proud of their respective teams.
PHYLLIS'S STORY
Jenny Bailey has a remarkable Medau pupil — 81–year-old Phyllis Ballantyne of Leigh-on-Sea, Essex.
Jenny recently recorded her speaking about her life and sent the tape to Medau News.
Phyllis recalls that her school reports all ended on the same note: ‘If she put as much energy into her work as into her play, she would do much better’.
Sport was indeed her first love, and her ambition was to be a PT teacher.
She had already applied to a Physical Training College when a hip dislocation shattered her plans, and she found herself instead working for Prudential Assurance in Holborn for eight years.
Fortunately the firm had a gym club and sports facilities.
Phyllis specialised in gymnastics, won medals in local and national competitions and, at the approach of the 1932 Los Angeles Olympics, was in the running for a place in the PT team.
But her religious faith now took her in a new direction.
She trained as a missionary, and in 1935 went out to Beirut as treasurer to a mission — the Middle-Eastern Christian Outreach — where, naturally, she also seized the opportunity of teaching PT and games to the student teachers on the campus.
But her busiest years were those she spent in Tyre from 1947 to 1965.
Here she did refugee work among the 30,000 Palestinian refugees camped in the area, interpreting (as the only Arabic speaker among the Red Cross workers) for medical personnel as they registered, inoculated, fed and clothed the refugees.
She also taught PT and games at the local evangelical school, which has a special place in her affections; she watched its roll of pupils rise from 100 to 1,000, and marvelled at the harmony that prevailed among children from the different warring factions.
Retiring home to Essex with eye trouble in 1965, Phyllis took up Medau, which she loves.
She thanks Jenny and her previous Medau teachers for their leadership and is grateful that she has been blessed with an ability to keep up her sport.
But her heart, she admits, is still in Lebanon.
ECUMENICAL ACTIVITIES
Many a QT Day has featured a session with an exponent of a discipline other than Medau, and this spirit of ecumenism is reflected in members' own activities.
Many attend classes in, or actually teach, another type of movement; in Norfolk.
Medau teachers invited Patricia McCall to instruct them in the principles of Laban Movement at their September Training Day; in St Andrews, Rosalind Garton follows her evening Medau class immediately with a Yoga session, and is delighted by the enthusiasm shown for the idea.
Rosemary Gould's message to Medau News readers is, don't be scared to experiment; she teaches an Adult Education class called ‘Health for Life’, and asks: ‘How many of these have you tried?
Keep Fit, Yoga, League of Health and Beauty, Aerobics, Margaret Morris, Laban, Dancercise, Rhythmic Gymnastics, T'ai chi?
Or what about Classical Ballet, Jazz Dance, Contemporary Dance, Scottish and Irish Folk Dance, Indian, Balinese, Tribal or Belly Dancing?
And how about the following therapies?
Alexander Technique, Veronica Sherbourne Movement, Shiatsu, Reflexology, Aromatherapy, Massage?
All these have a bearing on good movement and/or relaxation and well-being.
Might you feel guilty about trying another discipline?
Would you feel you were being disloyal to Medau?
What if you enjoyed it more?
What if it offered more than Medau?
The only way to find out just how fantastic Medau is, is to try out as many of the other movement forms as you can.
You will probably find that much of what they offer is excellent, but that something is missing; certain aspects of movement are neglected — it is thought necessary to know about them or try to communicate them through teaching.
No wonder our training is so hard.’
Pat Keen says she was invited by the members of the Yoga class she attends to teach them Medau while the teacher was away.
So the enthusiasm for experimentation is not all one-way.
Membership Drive
The challenge to increase membership has been imaginatively taken up by some groups.
Bridget Ewing's Bromley class, with money left over from their ball-buying funds, sponsored pupils from her Mentally Handicapped class at Belvedere to become members.
Joan Gatfield's Bromley and Grove Park classes achieved a new-membership total of over 100 by saving one-and two-penny pieces and sponsoring five senior citizens' classes to join the Society.
Boosting membership was the main idea behind the Banstead Rally in early December, organised and sponsored by Margaret Charlwood and Surrey teachers.
Participants attended free, but had to have paid their Society membership; they were rewarded with an enjoyable day of open classes, display items and cheese-and-wine refreshments.
A First Class for Barbara
Congratulations to Medau teacher Barbara Griggs (see her with husband Bob and daughter Rebecca) who recently obtained a first-class degree in education at West Sussex Institute of Higher Education.
She scored top marks, and received the Lord Wolfenden prize for outstanding academic performance.
Barbara teachers the Cowplain class for stroke victims, started by her mother, Caroline Little.
Recent Deaths
Members will be very sad to hear of the following deaths:
Pauline Merchant of Norfolk, while on holiday in France;
Chris Sadler, husband of Daphne;
Ralph Thomas, husband of June.
Our love and sympathy to their families.
In Brief Medau MArdle (Norfolkese for ‘gossip’) is the title of a Medau newsheet launched last year for Norfolk members, edited by Janet Burns — so successful that readers were calling for a second edition a bare three weeks later.
Drayton class members raised £80 at a summer fete for alterations to their hall, by organising a bottle stall and raffling two dolls provided by Gladys Hart.
Elsie Streek raises money for the Brook Hospital Scanner Appeal by holding raffles at her classes.
She taught Medau, and the Kent team performed ‘Rhapsody in Blue’ at a Fun Evening Movement Session in Kidbrooke in November; at a Health and Fitness Day at Maidstone Adult Education Centre in October, participants enjoyed Keep Fit, Yoga, Medau (taught by Joan Daniels) and Jazz Dance.
Doreen Hunt and Rita Forde gave a Medau lecture demonstration on Ladies' Night at Prince Avenue Primary School, Southend-on-Sea.
Doreen Copas announces two new classes in Hertfordshire, taught by Jean Porter (QT) and Frances Judd (T-in-T) and she says that a coachload of HErts enthusiasts went to the Albert Hall to Celebrate Age; Pat Keen, Joan Legge and another cornwall member also enjoyed watching the 55+ Medau Team perform.
Pat now runs a popular new class for over–50s in Truro.
Surrey members congratulate Chris Jones on her display-item for the Reunion — this was her first production; fresh team auditions will be held 29 April.
Surrey trainers hope to hold an In-Depth Study Day on Medau in March, to encourage interest in the Training Scheme and in the Society's affairs in general.
Manja van Wynkoop was a welcome visitor from the Netherlands to the Lilleshall Weekend, and renewed Hertfordshire links as guest of Gill Hill's Hemel Hempstead class.
Hedi Pressel is reluctantly retiring from teaching Medau in Oxford.
Her first encounter with Medau at a rally given by Molly at Reigate in 1958 determined her to become a teacher.
After a training disrupted by a torn Achilles tendon, she set up five new Surrey classes, and several more when she moved to Oxford in 1981.
She retires secure in the knowledge that new Oxford QT Jeannine Kuffer will be building on her splendid pioneering work.
Aldercine Hodson in October welcomed a party of Japanese officials to watch her Luton Active Retirement Club in action.
Her annual Sports Afternoon for the Physically Disabled at Luton was a successful as ever, and was attended by the mayors of Dunstable and Luton.
Congratulations to two indomitable Edinburgh walkers.
Ruth Baird, in spite of having broken her leg in March, walked 100 miles in the Drakensberg Mountains in South Africa during September, and in July, Muriel Jessop, with her husband Bill, completed a 150–mile circuit of Mont Blanc in ten days.
Finally, good wishes for a quick return to health to Audrey Foster, Hilda Lodge and Doris Patten, who have all been in hospital.
Diary of Events
Medau Junior and Youth Awards
The Medau Junior Awards for 7– to 11–year-olds and Medau Youth Awards for the 12–18 age group can be gained at Bronze, Silver and Gold levels.
The first stage (Bronze) can be attained by any group of youngsters who are willing to work with enthusiasm, as assessment is on the basis of improvement on the standard of movement that the student starts from; this means that due allowance is made, where appropriate, for individual physical handicaps.
It should be possible to cover the syllabus within a one-term or two-week course, making the award an ideal scheme for introducing Medau to new groups in schools, youth clubs or private classes.
It may be taught and assessed by any qualified Medau teacher or school teacher who has had practical experience in a Medau class and is a member of the Medau Society.
Any member or interested group can obtain the syllabus and further details from Pat Palmer, 39 Newstead Avenue, Orpington, Kent BR6 9RJ (telephone 0689–225534).
The Silver and Gold levels require greater experience and commitment, but should prove an exciting challenge to those who already hold the Bronze Award and wish to progress.