

CHAIRMAN'S LETTER
I should first like to express again the Society's pleasure at having had the benefit of Bedu's teaching at the Easter Course.
Secondly, I want, on behalf of you all, to wish Jean Parmiter's 55+ team all the best for their appearance in the Celebrating Age Festival.
Good wishes also to the National Display Team and their training Margaret Charlwood.
We look forward to seeing both teams perform in November, the former at the Albert Hall and the latter at the Annual Reunion.
The good news this year — the year of our 35th birthday — is that we have an increase in students attending our Teacher Training Course; we must look to the future and ensure that we have not only more teachers, but a better distribution throughout the country.
Meanwhile, encourage everyone in your class to join and support us, emphasising the privileges that members enjoy — discount on tickets to annual events and regular copies of Medau News.
Best wishes for the year — I hope to meet many of you personally in the course of it.
MEMBERSHIP WELL DONE — BUT DON'T LET UP!
Congratulations, and thank you for responding so wonderfully.
You have obviously supported your teacher wholeheartedly by joining the Society.
Membership this year has increased to 3,062 — just 200 short of our target.
Do carry on the good work, in September with encouragement to all new people in your class, and in January with the renewal of your own membership.
We seek you here
We seek you there
We need more members everywhere —
The North — the South —
the East — the West;
Tell all your friends that Medau's best.
MEDAU BREATHING MOVEMENT
In the course of receiving treatment for a heart condition, Hinrich Medau became deeply interested in the work of Dr Ludwig Schmitt, who believed that a healthy state is more likely to be maintained where there is lively blood circulation and breathing to full capacity.
Thus, a new influence came into Medau work, and Senta Medau began a collaboration with Dr Schmitt's colleague, Dr Frederike Richter, that resulted in a way of working that they called Organgymnastik.
In this country we call it Medau Breathing Movement, and by ‘breathing movement’ we mean internal movement of the trunk, which starts with the rising and falling of the diaphragm and then communicates itself to the abdominal walls, pelvic floor, the whole back and as far as the collar bone.
We call this the breathing pressure wave.
Although the work has medical and therapeutic origins, it has been developed as a regular part of the Medau method of physical education and is intended for people of any age who are in normal health.
Our breathing work is based on selected Yoga positions, chosen for their particular relevance to the Medau system, and although this relationship is important, the positions are taught differently, the aim being to influence the breath in an indirect way, undisturbed by directions to breathe in or out at certain moments.
Good functioning of the chest and abdominal organs is dependent on an abundant and well-balanced flow of breathing.
Wrong degrees of tension and slackness can interfere with this harmony and we try through the pressure wave of the breathing to ensure that all parts are equally refreshed, invigorated and strengthened.
The postures and exercises compel one to break in certain ways — the flow of breath being influenced sometimes through exertion, or through stretching, or through carrying a movement to its ultimate limit.
In a breathing session exertion is always balanced by a resting time, allowing one to experience the deeper respiration that comes from stillness and repose.
Many teachers make a place in their classes for work of this nature, since once the benefits have been experienced, most class members enjoy it and want more.
In the right conditions — a warm secluded hall with a clean floor is ideal — and with sensitive encouragement in the realms of self-discover, ways are opened for our students to grow and develop.
These last aims are at the core of all Medau work and apply to all parts of a lesson, but the special atmosphere and rapport engendered in a breathing class are particularly conducive to striving for new levels of individual attainment.
More detailed and learned accounts of breathing work are to be found in Introduction to Organgymnastik by Jutta Holler-von der Trenck, translated by Hilary Weedon, and Medau Rhythmic Movement by Molly Braithwaite, both available from the Secretary.
EASTER COURSE 1987
In beautiful sunshine (was this summer?)
Medau enthusiasts descended on Aston Clinton's Green Park Centre (itself a lovely setting) from as far as France, Belgium, Holland and Germany, the course being fully booked long before the closing date.
The presence of Bedu may have been one reason for this — the marvellous rhythmical qualities of her movement and her simple ideas built up with many possibilities (!) ensured some wonderful sessions.
As mentioned in the May issue of Medau News Bedu celebrated her 50th birthday this year, and with it, 25 years of Medau teaching; to mark the occasion she was presented with a silver pendant in the form of a framed Medau logo in silver, along with a birthday cake iced in blue, with hoops, clubs and balls picked out in white.
Backing up Bedu admirably were Rita and Jean, who worked hard and paced us well, so that we could still walk after hours of exercise.
An extension to movement this year was Rosemary Gould's Reflexology therapy, carried on in her every spare minute, all her proceeds going to Medau.
Well done, Rosemary!
If that wasn't enough, the facilities of a swim in the pool, a pitch and putt or a quiet walk in the beautiful surroundings were all available.
With a tireless Pat Palmer rushing from A to B organising everything and trying to keep it all running smoothly, the course proved a great success.
The last night was its usual hilarious self, culminating in advice from the Norfolk folk that we would ‘arve to larn to tark praper’ for our trip to Norfolk next year.
We look forward to it.
TRAINING COURSE PLANS
Along with many aspects of Society organisation, the Teacher Training Course is always under review, Last year, to offset the Sports Council's view that our training takes too long, we embarked upon Course II, which has been following a more intensive schedule.
This, with the already established Course I, will continue to operate until it has reached due completion for students currently in training.
In order to counteract the difficulties inherent in having long gaps between training days, future plans are hinging on setting up a weekly evening course at a venue further out of London (yet to be found, but if possible easily accessible from the M25).
With the addition of a residential weekend each term, student-hours will be increased sufficiently to result in an overall time span shorter than when we last used a weekly format.
We hope that the new course will start early in 1988, and this has made it necessary to re-time the POTENTIAL TEACHERS' DAY for Saturday 14 November 1987; see back page for details.
The new venue and weekly format will unfortunately make the training far less practicable for students living great distances from South East England; the possibility of siting the course in other regions is, however, being kept in mind.
A WORD ABOUT OUR CHAIRMAN
Pauline Kenward, the Society's Chairman, who comes from Reigate first became interested in Medau in 1968 when she joined Margaret Charlwood's class; from there she went on to train and qualified as a teacher in 1974.
Today she teaches six classes a week, including two handicapped ones.
She is an active member of her local League of Friends and Trefoil Guild.
She and her husband Bob enjoy the company of their children and two grandchildren.
They spend much of their leisure time down in Dorset, walking or bird-watching; at home they enjoy gardening or relaxing — Pauline's favourite way is to sit down with her knitting in front of the television.
ANNUAL REUNION
This year we shall be holding our Reunion at the Seymour Leisure Centre, close to Edgware Road Underground Station.
The afternoon's programme will consist of Open Classes, a class for older children and one for mothers and Toddlers, all this followed by a full display programme.
In addition we shall have our special Fund-Raising Event, which will be designed for you all to participate in, physically or financially; we hope it will be a fun-thing to watch!
For Christmas ‘stocking-fillers’ don't forget to visit the Society Sales Table, and be sure to buy a ticket for our Grand Raffle.
Tickets are obtainable, from the Office, members £2.50, non-members £6.00 (to include membership).
VALE, MAGISTRA!
This year, with many regrets, Rita Quick gives up most of her Medau commitments — in particular her work as Co-ordinator of the Training Course.
It is appropriate that, through the medium of Medau News, we should thank Rita very warmly indeed for all the dedicated work she has done for the Society.
An enthusiast from the start, she had been attending Edith Harlow's Woodford Green Medau class for less than a year when she approached Edith with the bold question ‘What do I do to teach this?’
Training with Molly and Toxi followed, with piano tuition from Rita Horton; she qualified in 1960, only to move on and become a trainer in 1965.
Rita's teaching experience has been enormously full and varied, including recreational classes ranging from her first class of East-enders at Plaistow to her university class at Newcastle 20 years later, courses for schoolchildren, for Civil Defence trainees and for physiotherapy students (only this year, at the Sports Medicine exhibition, physiotherapists came up to the Medau stand to say that they had been taught Medau by Rita Quick), and work with the mentally ill and disabled.
Rita has also trained many KFA and League leaders in Medau, and she formed and trained the Medau National Display Team in 1974.
As co-founder of the Leeds Training Course, which ran from 1965 to 1975, and organiser of training in Hertfordshire and Edinburgh, as well as at the old HQ at Balham, she was the ideal person to design and launch the new training course in 1982–83, with its alternating days and weekends of instruction and its rolling programme involving all available trainers in the teaching rota.
Always an independent spirit, Rita nevertheless acknowledges certain strong influences in her movement career — Edith, Molly, Rita Horton, and in Coburg, Jutta Holler-von der Trenck; she believes that her feeling for the importance of expression in movement, and her interest in the choreographing of taped music derive from her contact with Christa Haring, whose classes in Contemporary Dramatic Dance she attended.
Rita has always stressed the importance of the piano as a coaching aid.
She has considerable musical talent herself (in 1981 she was co-author, with June Bascombe, of the Medau Society publication Piano Improvisation) and is an excellent exponent of the quintessentially Medau skill of influencing her class's movement from the piano, adjusting tempo and rhythm to produce a new emphasis.
She never arrives at a class with a set plan.
An appraising glance at the assembled company tells her how to begin, and the lesson advances spontaneously yet logically to a physically and artistically satisfying climax and conclusion.
We wish Rita happiness and success in her new life as skilled craftswoman.
She is already a lacemaker of great promise, and this autumn embarks on a City and Guilds course in lacemaking.
She is also making good progress at her spinning wheel.
We take this opportunity also to wish Margaret Charlwood and Ann Langford well, as they take over Rita's duties on the Training Course.
WHITSUNTIDE COURSE AT COBURG
The Medau Society was represented this year at the Whitsuntide special course for teachers, held biennially at the Medau College in Coburg, by Pauline Kenward, Hilary Weedon, Margaret Charlwood and Hilda Lodge.
Teachers came from various parts of Germany and the continent to what was obviously a happy meeting of colleagues and friends, old and young — a real Medau family gathering.
Everyone enjoyed the stimulating sessions of Elementary Dance, Music and Rhythmics and varied Medau work given by Alexa Hahn, Gisela Spiess-Jaenicke, Katarina Hutz-Medau and Annet Kramer respectively.
During the AGM of the Medau Ring (the association of Medau Teachers in Germany), which was very lively with much discussion, Dr Jochen Medau expressed a desire to make the close Medau links between Germany and Britain more official by appointment a Medau Society representative to serve on their Executive Committee.
The obvious and popular choice was Hilary Weedon, whom they have come to know so well through her numerous visits to the Medau College over the years.
We are delighted at the honour and thank Hilary for agreeing to represent us and ensure even closer communications between the Medau College and the Medau Society.
THE ALEXANDER TECHNIQUE
The story of the Alexander Technique begins towards the end of the last century.
Frederick Matthias Alexander was a young Australian actor with a problem: he kept losing his voice during performances.
A strange start to the development of a technique popularly associated with ‘good posture’— but the problem that threatened his career bore out exactly one of the central principles of Alexander teaching: ‘use promotes function’— or, more explicitly, misuse of the body in the everyday activities of walking, standing, sitting and talking, causes dysfunction, while good use promotes healthy function.
For Alexander found that the cause of his hoarseness was his habit of pulling his head back stiffly when he spoke, thus depressing the larynx.
Through observation of his own case, he became convinced that chronic muscle tension — a result of life's physical and emotional stresses — which overlays and destroys natural poise we have as tiny children, and manifests itself in hunched shoulders, clenched jaws, a slouched or twisted spine, with, as often as not, the head held to one side, could not but interfere with the efficient functioning of the body, restricting breathing, circulation and digestion.
Such habits must be broken by re-education.
We must learn to hold ourselves and move with an economy of effort, using no more than the appropriate amount of energy for any activity.
Alexander believed that the way our head and neck are held affects the hold body.
If we free our necks and allow our heads to go ‘forward and up’ and our backs to ‘lengthen and widen’, we begin to restore what he called ‘Primary Control’and gradually learn to perform any movement with a new naturalness, lightness and freedom.
Actors and dancers came to Alexander for advice; he became a therapist and in 1900 moved to England to set up a practice in London.
Nowadays methods vary from teacher to teacher, but in a typical lesson the pupil is likely to find himself lying, sitting or standing on a hard table while his teacher, using hands and voice, gently guides his head and gets him to release his neck and shoulders.
Work to improve co-ordination may also be done on the arms and legs.
The verbal instructions are important — they will act as reminders in the days following the lesson and help the pupil to inhibit his natural tendency to slip back into the old habits.
Lessons are individual and last 30 to 40 minutes, a full course consisting of 20 to 30 lessons spread over three to five months.
Among the many groups of people who have benefited from the technique, musicians in particular have found it helpful — and it has a special relevance in pregnancy and childbirth.
Compiled from material supplied by Ilana Machover, Medau teacher, teacher of the Alexander Technique and an instructor with the National Childbirth Trust.
THE ‘OLD QUARRIES’
Pictured setting out on their European tour are the Old Quarries five-a-side football squad and staff.
The team, formed last year, has participated enthusiastically in many matches with other organisations for the mentally handicapped, so the decision was made to venture abroad to play matches in Belgium, Holland, Germany and France.
Two members of the team, Tracey and Philip, are regular members of Moya Hood's class at the Home Farm Trust in Avening, Gloucestershire, along with residents from Frocester Manor.
This little band of Medau enthusiasts decided on a little fund-raising of their own for the team and on 18 May held a sponsored ball bounce.
The ‘Bouncers’, as they quickly became known, raised £70, and they would especially like to thank the participants of Horley Rally, who spontaneously and generously supported the Bouncers' efforts.
At the Home Farm Trust, run by the Workers' Educational Association, Medau classes for residents now go into their tenth year.
BOOKS
Kay Evans strongly recommends the following two books to Medau members: The World Walks By, by Sue Masham and Shirely du Benlay (Collins 1987, £2.95), and Face to Face, by Frances Young (Epworth 1985, £2.95).
The latter book is written ‘with assistance from Arthus’, a severely mentally handicapped boy.
Frances Young was a university lecturer who later went into the Methodist Ministry.
She has two other children.
MURIEL JESSOP
After more than 20 years of Medau teaching in Edinburgh, Muriel Jessop is taking the step of handing over her class — much to the sadness of her class members, some of whom have been with her for a larger number of those years.
Muriel, very much a Yorkshirewoman, was one of Anne Talintyre's pupils in Leeds, and in 1965, when the Leeds training was set up, found herself commuting at weekends from Edinburgh to Leeds to be trained by Rita, Beryl and Edith.
Muriel is a born teacher and is greatly appreciated by the staff and pupils of the schools in which she teaches PE.
Those who attend her Medau class love her style of teaching — it is light-hearted and spontaneous, yet characterised by serious determination to help pupils of all levels of ability to improve their performance.
Her class members thank her for the years of enjoyment she has given them; her fellow-teachers thank her for her constant support and friendship.
RALLIES
May 9 was certainly a day for rallying to the cause.
At the Herts and Cambs Rally Jane Fisk and Molly Scrutton from Norfolk showed in their respective classes how wide an interpretation Medau can have; Essex members were pleased to be able to welcome our Chairman and Vice-Chairman to their Rally.
Though the format has had to be changed because of rising costs, the event was nevertheless a great success.
Attendances were down at the North West Rally in Cheadle but it was an excellent day, and everyone enjoyed Jean Parmiter's teacher.
The Horley Rally followed on 16 May; again, numbers were down, but it was a happy atmosphere, with splendid classes — balls with Chris Ruffle, movement to tapes with Janice Hewitt and fast fitness with Janice Golding.
An entertaining feature of the display programme — which included items from the National Display Team, the Surrey Teens Team and the Kent Team — was the local Horley class's ‘strip-tease’ item.
In Guildford on 24 June an evening rally was held, with enjoyable classes, a cheese-and-wine super, and a display programme.
DANCE AROUND THE WORLD
From Audrey Archer come impressions of the styles of dance she saw while on her world tour.
In Nepal she watched groups of men and women in dances depicting the activities of the seasons, and also saw young men performing what seemed very like a Morris Dance, with long and short sticks and a drum-and-rattle accompaniment.
In Thailand she was struck with the contrast between the acrobatic and boisterous dances for men, and the women's gentle, elegant movement in which all the activity is in the hands and arms, the feet never leaving the ground.
In New Zealand, Maori women sang and danced using a poi — as a ball attached to a piece of string, which they dexterously whirled round themselves.
The Maoris also performed rhythmic game dances with sticks.
What seemed to impress Audrey most, however, was not a dance at all, but a wonderfully rhythmical performance by a Nepalese drummer using his hands and feet to beat his nine drums.
MOVEMENT DOWN UNDER
Ruth Donovan, a former Norfolk teacher and member of Molly Scrutton's class, is now teaching with the organisation ‘Libby's Fresh Start to Life’ in Australia.
Ruth, now Mrs McCluskey (she remarried this April), finds that there are many points of similarity between Libby's and Medau — especially the class structure, with its warm-up, including stretching and strengthening exercises and exercises to increase mobility and flexibility, developing into an aerobic sessions which is really our travelling section, and not to be confused with Aerobics.
Ruth's Medau training comes to the fore when she plans her class, and she has been commended for her ‘whole-body’ movement.
As with Medau, the classes are suitable for all age groups, with pupils working to their own individual potential.
Last year Ruth taught primary-school teachers undergoing a government-sponsored fitness programme.
All her pupils passed, and felt the better for her tuition.
CLASSES FOR THE ELDERLY AND HANDICAPPED
Moya Hood has for the last year been teaching weekly classes at Stroud Court in Gloucestershire, a sheltered community opened in 1983 for autistic adolescents and adults.
She takes the residents in small groups, or teaches one-to-one.
The sessions have encouraged care-staff to develop recreational facilities for members of the community.
The Autistic Society, incidentally, celebrates its 25th anniversary this year.
Caroline Little, soon to move with her husband to the West Country, has been teaching in the Sussex and Hampshire area for 20 years.
For many years the only Medau teacher in those parts, she has been particularly concerned, especially during the last few years, with classes for the elderly and handicapped, and has been a pioneer in getting Medau accepted as a suitable retraining system for stroke victims.
Her daughter Barbara (Griggs) will take over Caroline's stroke class at Cowplain.
After her Medau season in Dumfries and Galloway ended, Valerie Archibald took off for New York to visit her son's family.
From there she writes that she also is to be involved in classes for the elderly.
A new Day Centre has opened in Stranraer, and Valerie took her team along to demonstrate Medau and help with an open class for the patients.
The Superintendent was delighted and said their programme had been the best so far.
Valerie was asked to give regular classes and hopes to be able to start these in the autumn.
She hopes also to evolve a scheme for giving individual help to stroke victims and others for whom movement has become difficult.
Mary Shirley, a new teacher in the Kent area, is another trail-blazer who has been stirring interest with her special classes for the elderly and their carers.
HIP HIP HOORAY!
Cicely Harris had her second hip operation in October and was delighted, at Christmas-time to be able to throw away her stick; by February she was dancing again and in April was back on the bowling green; she participated in the May competitions at her club and managed to win a cup — which you see her holding here.
Another bowls award went to Joan Temple, a member of the Taverham Medau class in Norfolk — she won the ladies prize while on a dancing holiday at a holiday camp.
KEEPING IN THE PUBLIC EYE
The Medau stand in the Norwich Sports Council's tent at the Royal Norfolk Show (1–2 July) attracted the attention of ladies of all shapes and degrees of fitness.
It is to be hoped that some will find their way to Norfolk and Lowestoft classes this autumn.
Thanks go to Kay Baxter, Rosemary Frost, Marlene McGee, Lucy Jackson and Lynne Thomas, who designed, or produced material for, the stall.
Medau husband Noel Frost, with Sports Council helpers, blew up the festive-looking Medau balloons and mounted them on sticks.
All too popular with passing children at the show, the balloons were given away in return for a small donation to the Sports Council.
Members of the Kent Team, with Pat Palmer and Elsie Streek, demonstrated Medau at the Super X Home and Leisure Show at Detling, overcoming unmentionable difficulties.
The same group gave demonstrations at Tenterden in support of a ‘Come and Try It’ day organised by Jenny Whitaker, and the team again turned out to help Elsie Streek with her lecture-demonstration at Sidcup.
At an Open Evening in Stranraer, attended by various types of Keep-fit groups, the programme included a Medau demonstration and a class given by Valerie Archibald.
The Essex team had reason to be grateful to the weather when a down-pour at the Southend Spring Festival (16 May) brought crowds into the covered area just in time to watch them perform.
IN BRIEF The In-Depth Day of Movement ‘Focus on Medau’, held on 18 July at Sittingbourne, was a sell-out — and an immense success — with classes by Chris Ruffle, Stella Webb, Pat Palmer and Mary Shirley.
Overheard comments: ‘superb’, ‘terrific’.
Summer classes taught by Pauline Bishop and Jill Kelly at Sutton have been very popular, and there is a general call for a 1988 series.
Pauline and Jill also held a ‘Come and Try it’ day — attended by the Lady Mayoress, Mrs May Bishop — to promote the coming season's Medau classes in Sutton.
Elsie Streek's holiday classes in Sidcup saw the largest attendance ever, and were successful and rewarding.
In Paris recently, Ann Locke warmly welcomed the Society's Secretary, Hilda Hewitt, to her Medau class.
The Medau Barn Dance at Kirdford, hosted by Bill and Pat Shere, raised £550 for the Society.
The 220 guests enjoyed set-dancing, complete with caller, to ‘Rosie Lea and the Strainers’, and sank down on hay-bales to eat supper.
It is becoming an annual tradition for Hazel French, a loyal class member of Elsie Streek's and a Kent team member, to open her house and garden to Medau friends and give them the opportunity to chat, swim, walk, play tennis, do a Medau work-out, eat, drink and sunbathe (sun guaranteed, of course).
Those who enjoyed this year's ‘Summer Outing’ thank her for her hospitality.
Kent members send their good wishes to Elizabeth Barrell and her husband Jack, who recently moved from Petts Wood to Chestfield near Whitstable.
Elizabeth discovered Medau with Cicely Harris and has been an enthusiastic class member ever since.
She is also a singer and musician, and her talent as a pianist has often come in useful to teachers with specialist classes.
In April a year-old cutting from the West Briton Argus came into the hands of the Medau News editors.
It contains and excellent article about Pat Keen and her classes, a splendid photo of Pat herself and the observation — accurate indeed — that she looked years younger than her age.
BRONZE AWARD
The first successful candidates for the Medau Bronze Award were all pupils at Warwick Park School, Peckham, S.E. London.
Two of them, Thu Lam and Alison Ly are pictured above.
Diary of Events
APPEAL FUND
Even with all the other general fund-raising that goes on over the year, it is pleasing that you still run or participate in events that are specifically for the Society; we have again benefited from Raffles, Cake Sales, Bring and Buys, Good as New, Cheese-and-Wines, Coffee Mornings — AND — Sponsored Slims!
You will be pleases to know that altogether we have raised £1,314.53 during 1987 and we take great pleasure in thanking you all most sincerely.