

I was born in Gloucester, in the west of England, on 16 January, 1936.
My father was a bank clerk, the son of a dispensing chemist.
My mother was the daughter of a butler.
My parents had two children: an older brother , and myself.
My father became manager of a bank in the small country town of Tewkesbury, near Gloucester.
There I began my secondary education, at Tewkesbury Grammar School, a small school of c. 120 pupils which, nevertheless, was over 400 years old.
After two years of National Service (in the R.A.F.) I began my undergraduate studies at University College London in 1956.
It was by accident that I went there to study English.
I really wanted to study French at university, since I was interested in languages.
My father happened to know , who was Quain Professor of English at University College of London (U.C.L.), and who frequently visited his weekend cottage in a village near Tewkesbury.
gave me an unofficial interview at his cottage, but I offended him when I said I really wanted to study French!
I did not realise that he was head of the English Department.
However, he offered me a place (perhaps out of consideration for my father), and I duly began my undergraduate career.
I graduated, in an undistinguished way, with an Upper Second Class degree in English Language and Literature of the University of London in 1959.
During my undergraduate studies, I had become particularly interested in the linguistic parts of the syllabus, and I opted for what was then called ‘Syllabus B’— a set of courses which contained a large amount of language work, more historical than contemporary.
For example, in Syllabus B we had to study the whole of Beowulf , and not just part of it.
Among the courses I took were Old English, Middle English, Old Norse, English Philology, and Phonetics (this last course was taught by  and , who were among the senior teachers in the Phonetics Department of U.C.L. at that time).
I regarded it as a very happy accident that I went to U.C.L. to study English, not knowing at the time that I was going to a Department and to a College distinguished for English language studies.
One of my contemporaries in the English Department was , now Professor of Linguistics in the School of English and American Studies at the University of East Anglia.
His career and mine have followed a similar course: he and I both followed ‘Syllabus B’, and both ended up taking a deep interest in stylistics, the study of the use of language in literature.
My interest in scholarship grew in my third and last year as an undergraduate.
and I competed for the Quain Essay prize — a sum of 50 — to be written on the survival of the medieval conception of tragedy in post-medieval literature.
He won the prize, but I received (as a consolation, perhaps) another prize, the Elsie Hitchcock Prize.
I wanted to continue my studies as a postgraduate at U.C.L. I was now interested in modern linguistic research, but knew very little about it, since linguistics had so far made little impact in the U.K., and there was no teacher in the Department who could adequately supervise me in that area.
However, at that time (1959) there was an initiative a U.C.L. in the study of communication.
An interdisciplinary conference on communication was held, and a new Communication Research Centre was inaugurated.
However, there were two severe handicaps in the work of this Centre: first, the Centre had no funds or research staff; second, scholars could not agree on what ‘communication’ was, or how it should be studied.
Everyone generally agreed that ‘communication’ was important — but different disciplines had differing approaches to it.
As a modest beginning to the work of the Communication Research Centre, two or three students in the English Department at U.C.L. began to study the use of language in public communication.
One student took as his topic the study of public information documents issued by Ministries, for the benefit of ordinary citizens.
Another student began to study the language of press advertising: and a third — myself — began to study the language of television commercials, then a relatively new medium of advertising in the U.K.
I had been granted a State Studentship enabling  me to undertake postgraduate study for an M.A. (The London University M.A. was then a research degree.)
However, we made little progress, since none of us knew what techniques would be appropriate.
At this time, I grew disheartened with the work, and started teaching in secondary school.
I continued teaching for about 18 months, keeping up my studies for an M.A. in my spare time.
On 29 July, while I was teaching at a secondary school near London, I got married to .
Soon after that, I was fortunate enough to obtain a research studentship at U.C.L. which paid me a small salary of 750 per annum— this was slightly less than what I had been earning as a teacher, but it enabled me to return full-time to research at U.C.L. The money for the studentship had been provided by a television network, ATN.
I began my modest research post on 1st January, 1962.
At that time,, who had been a graduate of, and teacher in, my department at U.C.L., had accepted a chair at U.C.L., and was about to return to his old department once again, having spent a number of years at the University of Durham.
He suggested to our  supervisor that we should read the ‘new linguistics’ coming out of the U.S.A., in order to arrive at the best analytic categories and techniques for analysing the language of television.
‘New linguistics’, for us, included books on English by ,, and ; but at that time we had not caught up with the new developments associated with .
In the summer of 1962, I had another piece of good fortune.
A temporary assistant lecturer's post was available in my Department  at U.C.L. Apparently, my Head of Department,, was happy to appoint me, but before the decision was made, he offered his new professorial colleague,, an opportunity to interview me for the job.
This was the first time I met , and it seems that he was satisfied with my performance in the interview, for I was offered the post, much to my surprise and delight.
My most important task as a new university teacher was to plan and deliver a series of lectures on ‘Rhetoric’.
Previously, this lecture series had been on the history of rhetoric from classical times, but I decided to redesign the course, dealing with literary language (especially poetry) from a modern linguistic point of view.
In 1963, I finished my M.A. thesis on ‘The Language of Commercial Television Advertising’.
By that time, I had listened to so many commercials, and studied their language in such detail, that I was tired of the whole subject.
I ought to have been very grateful to ATV for sponsoring my work.
At least, I was grateful enough to send them a copy of the thesis, but there is no evidence that they read it or found it useful.
At this time I found  extremely helpful and encouraging.
he encouraged me to embark on a book, intended to be published in a new series he was editing with Longman Group Ltd. (then Longmans Green).
The book was to be based on my M.A. thesis, but was to be extended to a more general treatment of the language of advertising.
It was eventually published in 1966 under the title of English in Advertising: a Linguistic Study of Advertising in Great Britain .
Before that, in 1963, I had published my first article — also on an aspect of the language of advertising.
My other main interest at that time was in the language of literature, leading to two papers published in 1965 and 1966.
This was a time when, for the first time, modern linguistics was being applied to the study of literature in the U.K. Often, I felt, this approach led to misunderstanding and even animosity between literary and linguistic scholars.
However, I had been much influenced, as an undergraduate, by the lectures of the literary critic  (author of The Language Poets use ), who was now a senior colleague in my own Department.
I wanted to achieve a reconciliation of the two approaches of literary criticism and linguistics.
This thinking eventually became publicly manifest in my book A Linguistic Guide to English Poetry (1969), also written with the encouragement of , who was general editor of the Longmans English Language Series in which it, like English in Advertising , was published.
My period as a teacher in the English Department at University College London lasted from 1962 to 1969.
There were one or two other developments during that period I would now like to mention.
In 1963 (I believe) was appointed Director of the Communication research Centre, and soon after became the first  Professor of Linguistics at U.C.L.  (as I soon came to know him) was a charismatic teacher and delightfully friendly person, and I benefitted greatly from close contact with him in 1963–4, when he was Director of the Communication Research Centre, and I was Assistant Director.
I should explain that U.C.L. was reluctant to begin a Department of Linguistics, although Linguistics was then becoming a popular and ‘fashionable’ new subject.
Hence the Communication Research Centre, of which I was a sort of caretaker at that time, was conveniently regarded as an embryonic Linguistics Department.
After  had been at U.C.L. for a few months, the C.R.C.
faded into the background, and the Linguistics Department came into its own.
At that time I was greatly influenced, as were many in the U.K., by  linguistic theory, then called ‘scale and category grammar’, later renamed ‘systemic linguistics’.
I was interested in exploring the validity of  concepts of system and structure in new directions, and began to apply them to semantics.
However, my ideas on semantics were rather different from those of , for whom the notion of ‘context situation’(derived from his teacher ) was the basis for the study of meaning.
While I was trying to develop this approach to meaning, I was given the opportunity to spend a year in the U.S.A. as a Harkness fellow (1964–1965).
The Fellowship, by most standards, was generous: my wife and I travelled to the U.S.A. (with our baby son) on the liner The Queen Elizabeth , and travelled home to England on her sister ship The Queen Mary .
More importantly, the Fellowship gave me the opportunity to study a subject of my choice at a university of my choice: so (who would not at that time?)
I decided to study linguistics at M.I.T. Although I learned a great deal, particularly regarding rigorous methods in linguistics, I must confess that the M.I.T. approach to linguistics was too narrow for my taste, and I found the hothouse atmosphere there somewhat uncomfortable.
Nevertheless, I got to know many of the leading linguists of the subsequent generation:,,, all passed through the MIT graduate school at that time.
(later ) taught an excellent course on the mathematical and logical basis of linguistics — and I found that by far the most useful of my MIT courses.
Going to M.I.T. taught me a great deal about linguistics in many areas; but one of the things one easily learned at MIT at that time was a sense of conviction — the assumption that MIT led the world, and that other people's opinions need not in general be treated seriously.
Although I remained something of an outsider to the M.I.T. philosophy as it was at that time, I carried something of this arrogance back to England with me.
However, my sense of superiority was soon punctured when I gave a paper on semantics at the Philological Society, where my views met with scepticism and some hostility.
Later, I sent my work to , to see if he would publish in the newly founded Journal of Linguistics , but he was unimpressed.
It was evident that my ideas on semantics needed more careful exploration, so I developed my work further into a monograph.
Even then, I could not get it published.
At that point, it was accepted that I could use this  material as a contribution to a Ph.D.
thesis.
During 1965–1968, I rethought and redeveloped my work on semantics until it was accepted for a Ph.D.
The title of the thesis was:An Approach to the Semantics of Place, Time and Modality in Modern English .
Finally, I revised this material yet again, and it was published in the Longman Linguistics Library as a book entitled Towards a Semantic Description of English (1969).
This was a period when work in semantics as a component of linguistics was developing extremely quickly: it was the era of the dispute between generative semantics (,,, etc.) and interpretive semantics (,, etc.)
My thinking was in some way parallel to that of the generative semantics school, but at the same time I developed my own ideas independently of them.
Another important development in my academic career in 1962–1969 was a close association with the Survey of English Usage: a research centre for the study of present-day English founded by , and attached to my Department at U.C.L. The most important part of the Survey's work was the compilation of a large corpus of modern English texts, both spoken and written.
Two of  leading research workers were  and , who later collaborated with  and me as authors of A Grammar of Contemporary English ,(GCE ) published by Longman in 1972. , a swede, had been a research student of  at Durham, and followed him to London.
The writing of GCE was a large enterprise, based on the work of the survey of English Usage.
We felt, at the time, that there was a large gap between the type of grammar which was studied in the English language classroom, and the type of grammar which was studied in linguistic departments: there was a consequent need for the reconciliation of theory and practical pedagogy in the study of English grammar.
It was this reconciliation which the grammar tried to achieve.
Largely because of the leadership of , the collaboration was very successful (although not without arguments and disagreements).
The book, in spite of its faults, became well-known throughout the world as a source of information on English grammar.
In 1969, I applied for the post of Senior Lecturer at the new University of Lancaster, in the north of England (about 240 miles north west of London).
I was appointed to this post, and on my arrival at Lancaster was further promoted to reader (Associate Professor).
During my early years at Lancaster, much of my time was spent in the collaboration with ,, and  on GCE .
I also continued my work on semantics, with the publication of Meaning and the English Verb (Longman, 1971), and Semantics (Penguin, 1974).
(Both of these books have subsequently been published in a second, revised edition.)
After GCE was published, the four authors decided to write two grammars based on the approach of GCE .
One of them, written by   and , was a shorter version of GCE , entitled A University Grammar of English and published in 1973.
The other grammar, written by  and me, was A communicative Grammar of English , published in 1975.
In this book, we tried to develop a somewhat new approach to grammar, based on the idea that grammar, to be useful to the learner, should be ‘communicative’, i.e. should relate the forms and structures of the language to their meaning and use In terms of the number of copies sold, this has been the most successful book of which I have been an author.
During my first year at Lancaster, the new university (founded in 1964) grew very quickly, and we were able to develop the study of linguistics by appointing more staff.
I was the head of the ‘Linguistics Section’ of the Department, and in 1974 this became the ‘Department of Linguistics and Modern English Language’, of which I was the first head.
When the new Department was established, I was promoted to the post of Professor of Linguistics and Modern English Language.
As early as 1970, before linguistics became a separate department, the small group of linguistic teachers at Lancaster got together round a table, and discussed the idea of having a special research project which would be centred at Lancaster.
We decided it would be a good idea to develop a computer corpus of British English, intended to match the Brown University Corpus of American English which had recently become available, and which was the first computer corpus of modern English.
Like the Brown University Corpus, the ‘Lancaster Corpus’ would consist of more than a million words of various kinds of English.
I became the director of this project, which proved very difficult and time-consuming.
We received some financial help from Longman and from the British Academy, but the money was soon used up.
There were also great problems concerned with copyright.
In 1976 I was ready to abandon the whole project, but a former student of , also a Swede, named , offered to take the project to Norway (where he was then working), and complete the corpus there.
At last, in 1978, the corpus of British English was completed, through the combined efforts of Lancaster, Oslo, and Bergen Universities.
It was therefore called the Lancaster/Oslo-Bergen Corpus (or the LOB Corpus, for short), and has since become widely used throughout the world.
In the previous year, 1977, a group of linguistics including ,,(of Brown University),, and myself met in Oslo and founded the International Computer Archive of Modern English, an organization to develop and promote the use of computer corpora such as the LOB Corpus, the Brown Corpus, and the London-Lund Corpus (this last consisting of spoken texts of the Survey of English Usage).
This organization has continued to flourish, as the use and availability of computer corpora of English has grown.
In 1977 I finished my three-year term as Head of Department, and made an arrangement with the University of Lancaster whereby I worked half-time at the University, and worked half-time on my own  research and publications, as a ‘free-lance’.
This arrangement continued for eight years, and enabled me not only to work on several books, but also to continue with my computer research.
If I had continued full-time at the University, I would not have been able to develop all these research interests.
One new research interest had already been developing in the mid-seventies from my earlier work in semantics.
This was in the study of pragmatics, a fast-growing and popular new area of research in linguistics, which came out of the controversies about meaning which had dominated linguistics around 1970.
In 1976 and 1977 I published a number of papers in pragmatics, and these I eventually revised to make a book,Explorations in Semantics and Pragmatics , published by John Benjamins (Amsterdam) in 1980.
This book was inconclusive, and in a sense shows the evolution of a train of thought beginning in semantics and ending in pragmatics.
After this, I still found the problems of pragmatics a challenge, requiring the revision of the whole approach to language (and particularly meaning) which I had taken up to that time.
This new thinking eventually resulted in a further book,Principles of Pragmatics , published in the Longman Linguistic Library in 1983.
At the same time, I worked with my colleague  on a book dealing with literary stylistics:Style in Fiction: A Linguistic Introduction to English Fictional Prose (Longman English Language Series, 1981).
This was a return to an area similar to that of my A Linguistic Guide to English Poetry (1969), and in fact we thought of the two books as companion volumes, dealing respectively with poetry and prose.
Like the earlier book,Style in Fiction was intended as a course book for students, but it was also an attempt to develop a theory of prose style.
It grew out of the teaching of stylistics to undergraduates at Lancaster, which  and I have shared for several years.
Compared with other books, I found this book the most difficult to write , but also the most satisfying to have written .
Whereas other books (especially those on semantics and pragmatics) have often received unfavourable reviews,Style in Fiction has received the most favourable reviews of any book of which I have been an author.
In this sense, it is the most successful book, but not in terms of sales!
As with other books I have collaborated on, I was particularly fortunate in having a co-author with whom I could work closely and well, though not without disagreements.
In 1982, another collaborative book was published:English Grammar for Today by ,, and .
Like Style in Fiction , this was a coursebook which grew out of an experience of teaching shared with colleagues at the University of Lancaster.
The book was commissioned by the English Association, a national body which was concerned about a decline in the study of grammar in schools in the U.K. Although the book was designed specifically for schools, colleges, and universities in the U.K., it has sold much more widely in the rest of the world.
It seems that the book failed in its aim of  improving the popularity and knowledge of grammar among British students, although it has been quite successful in other parts of the world.
English Grammar for Today was the third book I had co-authored on English grammar.
Then, in 1985, followed yet another grammar book — much larger even than GCE .
From c. 1978, the ‘gang of four’(as we were sometimes called),,,, and , began work on a second edition of GCE .
We found that since GCE had been published in 1972, ideas on grammar, and knowledge of English grammar, had changed considerably.
Moreover,GCE had received many reviews, which detailed both its strengths and its weaknesses.
We felt already, then, that there was a need for an updated edition of GCE .
When we started work on it, however, we found ourselves rewriting the whole grammar, changing its organization, and introducing much additional material based on the Survey of English Usage.
The second edition of GCE evolved into a new grammar, which we named A Comprehensive Grammar of the English Language , published by Longman in 1985.
In the initial stages of working on this new grammar, three of the ‘gang of four’(,, and ) worked secretly on producing a Festschrift honouring the sixtieth birthday of the leading member,.
This book was published as Studies in English Linguistics: For  (Longman, 1980, and contained contributions from many eminent scholars in various parts of the world.
I have to confess that we failed to keep the secret until the day of publication: the sharp observation of  sensed that ‘something was going on’ among his co-authors a few months before the book was published!
I now return to the computational work in which I was engaged during these years.
Since 1977 the computational analysis of English has developed into my major research occupation.
We now have at Lancaster a team of researchers, working in the Unit for Computer Research on the English Language (UCREL), of which  (of the Computing Department) and I are joint founders and directors.
After the completion of the computer corpus of British English, the LOB Corpus, our first task was to undertake an automatic grammatical tagging of the corpus.
That is, every word in the million-word corpus was assigned a tag indicating its grammatical category, and complex computer programs had to be written for this purpose.
We completed this task in 1983 with the collaboration of  and a team based in Norway.
The tagged LOB corpus can now be obtained by academic researchers throughout the world.
It is distributed by our colleagues in Norway.
Next, we worked on the automatic parsing of the LOB Corpus, and on the improvement of the automatic tagging system.
The parsing proved to be a more difficult task than we had imagined, and in 1988 still less than 10% of the corpus is accurately parsed.
However, we produced a special lexicon of the corpus (the ‘Distributional Lexicon’) giving details of the word  co-occurrences and word-class  co-occurrences .
Recently we have been working on other corpora, including a 26-million word corpus, much larger than the LOB Corpus, but more restricted, in that it consists of newspaper reports.
We are developing probabilistic parsing, in collaboration with IBM teams in England and America.
I find this work very exciting because, little by little, we are teaching the computer more about the structure of English, and how to analyse English, using large corpora as a source of frequency data.
Probabilistic models of language, which have been neglected by theoretical linguists over the past thirty years, are basic to our work.
Our research has practical applications in such areas as speech recognition, text critiquing, and speech synthesis.
We have so far managed to keep our research team together through outside support of British research councils (e.g. the SSRC and the SERC) and of industry (IBM, ICL).
Through my work on natural language processing by computer, I have also become interested in Computer-Assisted Language Learning (CALL).
Two recent bi-products of this research are the following books: and  (eds.),
Computers in English Language Teaching and Research (Longman, 1986); and ,, and  (eds.),
The Computational Analysis of English: A Corpus-based Approach (Longman, 1987).
While these days I am deeply engaged in computer-based research, I hope to continue in the future my interests in English grammar, literary discourse analysis, semantics and pragmatics.
During my years at Lancaster I have been fortunate enough to visit many parts of the world as a lecturer.
Sometimes I have spent longer periods overseas, and I would like to mention those in particular: in 1972, I spent 6 months as a visiting professor at Brown University, Providence, R.I., U.S.A.; in 1977, I spent 3 months teaching in various centres in China; in 1984, I spent 3 months as a visiting professor at Kobe University, Japan; and in 1987, I spent 3 months as a visiting professor at the University of Paris IV (the Sorbonne).
Note 1993 ; I have continued in my post of professor at Lancaster University.
In April–May 1991 I spent 5 weeks in Japan, part of the time as a visiting teacher at Kyoto University.
In 1989 I was invited to become a member of Academia Europaea (European Academy).
In 1987 I was elected a Fellow of the British Academy