

CHRISTIAN AID at St. Andrew's & St. George's, Edinburgh — 1989.
‘Go to it!’(the Rev. Richard Baxter in Inspire).
‘I enjoyed helping on Saturday.
I was pleased to get The Chalet School Goes To It, as I needed it for my collection’(letter from Lucy Chapman, aged 9).
Well, like the Chalet School, Lucy and the other members of St. Andrew's and St. George's, together with many friends, went ‘to it’, to such good effect that £30,695 nett was raised for the cause this year.
This is half as much again as last year.
How was it done?
We started by sending the Minister to a Desert Island, with just 8 records and 2 books (come 19th May, we could have spared a few more).
It seems that he was soon rescued by Derek Jameson of Radio 2.
On Wednesdays the early shift stopped work to hear the Minister's nationwide broadcast.
Speaking of the aims of Christian Aid, he illustrated ways in which something could be done, by describing our Sale and saying ‘If I'm proud of anything, I'm proud of that’.
For all of us listening this was a spur to further ‘action with the world's poor’.
‘Some people are occupied the whole year round with preparing for Christian Aid Week’(Richard Baxter's Inspire letter again).
This is certainly true of Mrs Wood and Things Past & Present; of Scott Anderson and the stamps; of Arthur Crawford and the plants; and of those who help at the winter work-parties in the cellars where the books are stored.
One who had taken part wrote of ‘the power to aid’ she had seen there.
One day in February I found, in the vestibule of the church, a bag labelled ‘Christian Aid’.
It contained a Vanity Fair Album and a letter.
The writer had found this and 12 others in a cupboard, and would be glad, she wrote, if they could be ‘used to bring in some lolly’.
Ignorant at first of the monetary value of these, nine of us including the donor, spent two evenings lightheartedly preparing for sale the 500-odd prints, many by ‘Spy’, ‘Ape’, or ‘Max’.
Each issue of Vanity Fair, the society weekly first published in 1868, enclosed a coloured caricature of a notable figure of the day (‘Sovereigns, Statesmen, Judges’ and sportsmen).
These were collected each year and bound in green covers, or were sold singly for about six old pence.
Our thirteen volumes were those for 1900–12.
Thanks to the intervention and wise counsel of an Edinburgh specialist in prints, we learnt just in time that we had a very valuable collection which should be sold complete.
Our rule is that no book is ever sold before the Sale.
We decided that it would be wrong to make an exception even for such an exceptional benefaction.
Thus it came about that sealed bids were invited, to be opened by the treasurer at 1 pm. the first day of the Sale.
Christine Anderson, the Church Secretary, received over 100 telephoned offers of books and other gifts.
26 emissaries drove to collect these.
One donor, now almost housebound, had worked with Kinloch Anderson, opposite the church, for many years; remembered our very first Sale; had enjoyed that and all the others; and what's more, had involved the girls in the office by encouraging them to bring and buy books.
The human cost of raising large sums for Christian Aid is itself large, but perhaps is not generally known.
We impose heavy loads on those with both brain and brawn, and we expect saintliness from them as well.
Only a few of our members who have these qualifications are able to help, and we therefore rely heavily on ‘friends from other churches’, a poor phrase when applied to such friends as Gilbert Clark, Duncan Curr and David Wright; and the phrase also acquired a different meaning this year when it included the Rev. John Page, Minister of Dunlop, and his wife Janie, who daily travelled many Scriptural ‘second miles’ from their church to join us.
There was an immense contribution this year from other food friends as well.
There was Tom Duguid, our right-hand man; and there were Brian, Ronan, Bob, Singh, William and Steven–heroes all of them to those of us who needed their help so badly.
As we rushed to prepare to open the Sale there appeared in our midst an unknown young man.
He was there simply and solely because he had attended a service when help forms were given out.
Completely new to our Sale, he seemed to know instinctively what had to be done, and did it, swiftly, silently, strongly.
His name was Colin.
It seemed to me that hardly any left the building in those weeks of May without murmuring apologetically that they were only leaving in order to get some baking done at home!
Mrs. Peterson writes:-‘The BAKING STALL raised 1,000 for Christian Aid.
This superb sum was the result of members and friends keeping up a daily supply of super baking.
Some people handed in their baking before going to work, others came in their lunch hour, some not-so-young came carrying heavy loads.
The children did some excellent chocolate topping!
Many thanks to Miss Cameron, who came every day to take the cash, to Kirsty and Pippa who were a delight to have, and to all who helped to make it such a happy week and so worthwhile for Christian Aid’.
Individual returns are published for interest only and not because there is any competitive element.
We ‘pull well together’; and the whole secret of the enterprise is its variety, and that each part complements the other.
The best example of this is CATERING.
This is not primarily a find-raiser at all, but is, rather, the hospitality we like to give visitors and helpers, especially those from other churches.
The benefits to Christian Aid are obvious.
Mrs. Duff, Mrs. Taylor and company (including, of course, as ever, our loyal friends from St. Mary's R.C. Cathedral) served 870 mugs of soup, 72 lbs.
of cheese (24 lbs.
donated by generous local businesses), over 100 loaves (most donated), with the notable addition of delectable home-baking by Mrs. Keith.
The greatest treat for the overworked book-sorter is a preview of the Davidson Room, where the Wood family, the Hepburns, and all the others in the THINGS PAST & PRESENT team make such an artistic and witty display of their stock.
Mrs. Wood writes:-‘From the ‘Past and Present’ Team.
Do you know what a Clinometer is?
We didn't,–but we know now!
This  is part of the fun of the two weeks of sorting and pricing, prior to Christian Aid week–every package a surprise, and often an education.
Silver and Gold, Linen and Lace, Crystal and Brass–mirrors, pots, pans, cutlery, china–period costume, pictures and frames.
We had them all–and sold them–for £4,240.
Ah! well–next year–who knows?
(Oh!–a Clinometer is for measuring gradients and is used by the building trade, surveyors, and the Royal Artillery.)’
Now Scott Anderson's report:-It was a good year for STAMPS.
Firstly, donations of large quantities came in throughout the year enabling sorting, packeting, pricing, etc., to be put in hand in good time.
Also thanks are due to all who floated their stamps off paper before handing them in, which was a tremendous help.
Several albums were also received, with two above average, all making significant contributions to the takings.
Albums apart, there were 2 other notable items.
A first airmail flight cover from Australia to England of 1931 was soon snapped up, but an envelope with a pair of small ½d; Q.V.
stamps of Great Britain failed to attract a buyer, and is safely stored away for next year.
POSTCARDS These too were a success.
In addition to the usual interest in old postcards (pre 1914), good sales were also made of modern cards of which there seem to be a growing number of collectors.
Some albums were also received, and sold without difficulty.
By the end of the week, only a small residue was left for next year.
COINS Quite a large donation of coins was made this year, and all were sold.
The most interesting item was a Q.V double florin which was sold for many times more than its 20p face value, leading the purchaser to complain (with a smile) about being ‘ripped-off’.
RECORDS.
Of the RECORDS Laurie Bruce says that we had more than ever before, with some real treasures among the ‘78's, and more long-playing records in really mint condition.
He points out that many of those now collecting compact discs are donating their L.P.'s to us, and is even optimistic that compact discs will be coming our way.
His closing remark is ‘sounds right for ongoing Christian Aid?’.
‘BOOKS INTO BREAD’…
Initially there was a fear that the books would overwhelm us and our building this year, but murray Burns, the Church Treasurer, who had devoted his holiday Monday to helping us, assured us that we would overcome–and went back to his office.
Heartened by his confidence in us we ‘kept at it’.
Our human calculator estimated that we had over 30,000 books, not to mention huge stacks of magazines, periodicals, and encyclopaedias.
With the aid of many ‘outside’ advisers, both  professional and amateur, we scrutinised them all in the 2 weeks of sorting.
John St.Clair spent hours prospecting for gold, and was rewarded with some bright literary nuggets.
In an old Bible, we found a Stevengraph–that is, a mid-Victorian bookmark of embroidered silk, depicting the Mail Coach.
This was bought for the Scottish Postal Museum.
We wondered whether we could possibly sell Japanese lyrics translated into Swedish–and we did.
Miss Wallis was justifiably triumphant at finding, at the bottom of a most unpromising box, an old book of fairy tales with fine and rare illustrations.
Childrens's books, with the bonus of attractive new ones from our Dunblane friend, surpassed all records this year.
So too did religious books, with new books from our many friends at ‘121’ and good old ones from the libraries of several retired Ministers all contributing to this success.
Anyone dropping into the church any time, any day, during the sorting period would have been sure to find at least 10 people working (‘sustained solely by lemon barley water’).
Early one morning, however, I found myself alone there.
As I looked round in the pale dawn light, a piece of paper caught my eye.
It was lying beside the great old Bible that goes by the name of John Brown of Haddington.
Someone had thoughtfully photo-copied the words that David Hume, the sceptical philosopher, had spoken of Brown: ‘That's the man for me–he means what he says–he speaks as if Christ was at his elbow.’.
Exciting things, brought by kind people, arrive all the time, but the day before the Sale opens there is a very special arrival to which we all look forward.
No one would call our battered brown book boxes decorative but when the PLANTS appear as they always do that morning of the year, their beauty and colour irradiate all around them.
Moreover they demonstrate the art of growing things.
This makes them a particularly appropriate part of the whole.
The queue began to form at 7 a.m. on 13th May, and, after 3 stressful hours of preparation, it was inspiring to hear the peal of bells with which Nancy Robinson traditionally and imaginatively opens the Sale
That first day of the Sale had a special distinction in that the Andersons were both there in person to help at ‘the sharp end’, as Scott called it.
Scott presided over his own elegant display of stamps and postcards; while Christine probably had the most vital role of any that morning, for she had been asked to look after Vanity Fair, the visitors from London, and the sealed bids.
It was a tense morning, but at 1 p.m., Bill Flett, the Christian Aid Treasurer, murmured the happy outcome.
There was rejoicing for the cause; gratitude to a donor whose true generosity will go down to history; and some regret at saying farewell to these fascinating portraits.
The sun shone that day; the congregation turned out in force, to give all possible kinds of support: and many absent friends sent donations and messages of goodwill.
Finally all gathered round the tree for prayers.
Next day some of us could be heard on Radio Scotland's Sundayscope  answering the Rev. Johnston McKay's searching questions about Christian Aid as at St. Andrew's and St. George's.
Miss Donaldson, John Gibson, the Rev. Fred Levison and the Minister all spoke eloquently.
We should give special thanks to Mrs. Alison Campbell's House-to-House Collection team.
One volunteer was a school boy, who collected between sessions of revision for exams.
Another was a newcomer to our church and to our city, doing an Edinburgh house-to-house collection for the first time.
During the Week, all the normal things happened.
There was an abundance of help (‘both seen and unseen’ as one elder put it to me); there was constant anxiety about the weather; there was joy of meeting old friends and making new ones; there was the amazing efficiency, imperturbability and the reticence of the treasury; and the true pleasure of finding things for people.
Two examples of this last, stand out in my memory.
Int eh last minutes of the Sale, a friend from South Leith Church, kindly helping, managed by sheer persistence and cleverness to find in the music section (a rate slip-up!) a perfect RLS book for the new owner of Swanston Cottage.
Also, at the very end of the Sale, there came a visitor from Lockerbie.
She told us that her sister had lost her home and all that it contained in the December tragedy, and was still in hospital.
One thing she missed was her cherished ‘Burns’.
Another was found for her.
Everywhere the conversation was of children's books, because of Shona Innes' popular quiz, of course 550 copies were sold.
At the heart of things, in the Minister's room, were the sign-writers, working together throughout with the aim of achieving better communication with the public, and style and unity for the various parts of our effort.
Always there was George Hunt, keeping everything safe.
As our senior helper, he will present the cheque to Christian Aid on 18th June.
Then, finally, came the biggest task of all —‘coping with the aftermath’, as it is euphemistically described on the help form.
I shall say only that when we returned for worship next day the whole building was pristine.
Perhaps it had all been a dream.
Yet there was over £31,000 in the Bank.
Addressing the Boys' Brigade that very Sunday, the Rev. Johnston McKay told them of the lady who, surprised by the sum raised for the clock she had given to be sold for church funds, exclaimed that she did not know she had so much to give.
Many of us would echo her amazement from our own recent experience.
Neil Paterson was asked to record his impressions, and his ‘Reflections of a Newcomer’ will be published soon in Inspire-extra.
I shall quote only his conclusion, which is that ‘the intangible rewards of warmth, friendship, and purposefulness through working collectively for such a vital, shared cause, made the experience worthwhile’.
There is no doubt that it was exceptionally arduous this year, nut we did survive, whereas many of those we seek to help will not; and whereas we had bread and cheese to fortify us and homes to return to at the end of those long days, there are millions with none of these things.
One of our most faithful customers has written to say that she sees us a ‘a crusade gathering strength as time marches on’.
Can we gather enough strength to go on?
For the sake of those others we must.
CHRISTIAN AID at St. Andrew's & St. George's, Edinburgh — 1988.
Mary Davidson's story….
At 5.30 am on the Tuesday after the Sale, Gilbert Clark jnr., went straight from night shift to St. Andrew's & St. George's, where he and his father, Gilbert snr., of St. Columba's-by-the-castle, shifted several tons of waste paper for removal by the lorry due at 7.30am.
They were soon joined by Duncan Curr, member of Dublin Street Baptist Church and Chairman of Christian Aid/CEEC, who had bicycled in from Juniper Green–and eventually, ny me.
That is why our leaflets say ‘in company with people from other Churches’.
When the lorry finally drove away, loaded, we noticed that a book had ‘fallen off the back’.
It happened to be entitled ‘Jubilant Our Feet’.
I hope we may be forgiven for feeling a little jubilant, on that beautiful dawn, at the thought that together we had helped to raise over 20,000 for Christian Aid.
First, came that Sunday when members of the congregation, with the help of friends from all over the City and beyond, even via Tiberias, on Lake Galilee, set to work to prepare the whole church for Christian Aid.
The heavy chairs were moved to the gallery, and tons of tables (many lent willingly by friends from other churches) timber and tomes were carried in.
The Davidson Room was stacked from ceiling with Things Past and Present.
Writing in Inspire, Elizabeth Innes rightly says that the house-to-house collection is the least popular task of the Week, but she is also right when she tells how a word of thanks from a housebound person, grateful for the opportunity to give, compensates for previous rebuffs.
Her story reminds me of that old Christian Aid appeal for collectors, showing an elderly lady at a lace-curtained window, with the caption ‘Someone is waiting for you’.
All over the City, people were waiting for us, with books and many other ‘things past and present’.
So much Christian Aid is forthcoming if you go out to receive it, as our many volunteer drivers all unfailingly did.
People gave such varied and unexpected things.
One lady sent us two beautiful little bookcases with her books.
Another, a regular visitor to the Undercroft, presented a model of the King of Siam's Royal barge, which she had been given 40 years ago, after service in our Bangkok Embassy.
This can now be seen at Scotland's only Thai restaurant, Buntom's in Nelson Street, the proprietors having given most generously for it to the cause.
Another imaginative gesture was the gift of 6 pairs of sturdy, warm mittens, for those who had to work with rusty iron trestles or out in the cold.
How we blessed the thoughtful Elder who had knitted these for us.
Sorting went on in Church and Davidson Room from 10 am to 10 pm for a fortnight.
That round-the-clock open church door meant a succession of welcome visitors–the givers of goods, our learned advisers, chance visitors, and even a London actor, Roger Rees, of R.S.C.'s Nicholas Nickleby fame, who is to perform the Book of Revelation in St. A's &  St. G's Church in October.
For many years now we have had the same experts to evaluate the records, stamps, art, music and special books, and their names, and our gratitude to them are well-known.
During the sociable sorting period, some of us reflected that others were probably alone at the time, in their kitchens, baking for Christian Aid.
All the members and friends who kept that stall so amazingly and delectably stocked each day have our admiration and gratitude.
Glancing at a book in the Sale, I came across a piece by the famous chef Floris, about the secret of baking.
He said that the essential ingredient of that, or any creative activity, was love.
I thought this wholly apposite for all the people working in the Undercroft in Christian Aid Week.
The 2,000 cups and 1,700 plates used, testify to the multitude served, and how greatly appreciated was the excellent fare they provided.
It seemed to me that the warm and welcoming hospitality of the Undercroft was the ‘heart’ of the whole enterprise, while, of course, the prayers for a hungry world said every day in the Chapel, were its ‘soul’.
Perhaps it follows then that the ‘life’ was in the Davidson Room and Church?
Suddenly our somewhat spartan Davidson Room was an exotic place of jewels, furs, oriental objets d'art, velvet gowns, polished silver and glass, ropes of gorgeously-coloured beads, vivid silk scarves– suggesting the Arabian Nights, rather than Session Meetings!
No one who saw how brilliantly all this was displayed will be surprised by its outstanding success this year.
It was a record year, too, for the record stall.
Laurie Bruce, who was delighted, says he thinks they must have had something of everything ever recorded, from slimming exercises to the finest classical music, and jazz, and some very interesting ‘78's too.
The day before the Sale it was calculated that we had 640 of our ‘regulation’ boxes (given to us by the china shops) filled with about 26,000 books–all sorted and priced by then.
the most valuable single book we had was a late eighteenth-century volume with a rare and secret feature.
When Mrs.McNaughtan noticed a pencilled note inside the cover saying ‘fore-edge painting’, she knew that if she spread out the gilt edges of the book's pages, we would see a picture, as indeed we did to our delight.
The scene thus revealed, was of sailing ships in the Bosphorus.
Other fine books donated were a lovely set of Waverley novels, which delighted bibliophiles; and an illuminated version of he text of Wagner's Ring cycle.
It is right to say here, that equal care and flair were devoted, for example, to the magazines and old schoolbooks, and indeed to all the books given, however commonplace.
The figures show what considerable sums were made form these.
There was excitement the night before the Sale opened, when what was thought to be Winston Churchill's autograph was found on the flyleaf of an old maggot-eaten book, which had found its way to Edinburgh, from a North-West frontier War early this century.
Someone had earlier likened the whole sorting process to sifting sand for gold, so we hoped we had struck gold in the Afghan desert, but sadly, a scholar at the National Library eventually pronounced the signature to be that of another Churchill!
When Joan Oswald interviewed some of us for Radio Forth before the Sale, I claimed that no book, not a single paperback even, would be sold beforehand.
Now U have to confess that there were two that never went on sale.
One was a Nelson's story for girls, called ‘A coronet for Cathie’, which we presented to Miss Cathie Donaldson, Queen of the Paperbacks!
The other was ‘The man in the Manse’, by the Rev. Ronald Blakey, who is to succeed david Miller as Secretary to the Assembly Council, and who is one of several at ‘121’ who gives his help with Christian Aid.
When this book was donated I borrowed it ti read, and it was not until I came home from the final clearing-up, and found my ‘man of the house’ serenely reading it, that I remembered about it.
No matter–Christian Aid will not suffer, and it will be given to the Rev. John Page on the day of his Induction at Dunlop, as a little memento for John and Janie, of Christian Aid at St. A.'s & St. G's.
In this fascinating book, Ronald Blakey tells of the 19th-century ministers preoccupation with stocking his library.
One such advised his son to buy duplicates, saying ‘You are never really safe with one copy of a good book’.
Perhaps this is the Rev. Fred Levison's ‘line’ with his customers at the religious books' stall?
Anyway, he is surely to be congratulated on selling yards of Matthew Henry Bible commentaries to an earnest young Korean who knew little English!
In his ‘Thought for the day’, on Radio Scotland, on 29th April, our Minister told of his family's ‘drawer’, where cherished things were kept, such as‘old football programmes, an envelope postmarked on the first day of the Queen's reign, the autograph of Sir William Smith, founder of the B.B.’ He explained that such things, if given to us, could be sold to feed the world's hungry people.
The broadcast appealed to all sorts of listeners.
One gave us her family's football programmes and they fetched £50.
Another gave us his wartime petrol coupons, an early tram ticket, and–a most valuable piece of ephemera this year–some bound copies of a gorgeously-illustrated old magazine called ‘The Graphic’.
Alexia Lindsay says that most of the ephemera money just came from guide books and maps; illustrated theatre and concert programmes; and leaflets, all ephemeral things, apparently of no intrinsic value, but ‘printed collectibles’ as they are now called–and spelt!
Scott Anderson was particularly pleased with an album of stamps from all over the world, commemorating the Wedding of the Prince and Princess of Wales; and with his ‘find’ of the year, inside an ordinary catalogue, of something extraordinary–an envelope from the U.S. bearing a 1869 postmark.
He also told me that for some years, two unknown people, evidently strategically placed in big City offices, have been collecting for us all the first-day covers received there.
The many aspects of Christian Aid work at St. A.'s & St. G.'s are given style and unity by ‘Felicitous’ posters, and also those of two Elders and a Church Officer, with a gift for calligraphy and communication.
In the early mornings of Christian Aid Week, it was a stirring sight to watch all the people converging on St. A.'s & St. G.'s.
There were people bringing baking before going to work; people carrying in the food given by our friends in City Centre businesses; and ladies from St. Mary's R.C. Cathedral arriving for duty in the Undercroft; so many other helpers too, reminding me of Nan Munn's immortal lines, ‘each to their stations/We're ready for the off/Where is John Gibson/Where's my tin box’; people handing in contributions; Miss Cameron's chauffeur, with dog collar instead of peaked cap, delivering her, before his car took up its privileged position for the Week in the Standard Life car park; and last, and most important, the good friends in the community who came to support us.
For them, we might have quoted No. 14 on Shona's quiz–S.A.Y.S.F.–Seek and you shall find.
The only one I could do myself was Bo. 4–‘To flag.’
I heard it said recently that ‘Christian Aid is a channel of compassion which all may use’.
Isn't this what we have at St. A.'s & St. G.'s in the very centre of the capital of Scotland, each May?
I think of all those using this channel:–people who gave generously, of their good money; people who gave their physical strength; people who gave limitless time (even their annual leave from work); people who managed a little time after work; people who baked; people who prayed; the member who supplied the entire plant stall; people who counted; the little girl who devised an amusing quiz as her ‘channel’; people who served, and often withstood the cold winds of George Street; people who used their artistic talents for communication; people who lovingly restored the Church afterwards; our engineer, who invented a ‘chair-lift’ for us, and then, literally, put his shoulder to the wheel–and the bright spark who had fired him with the notion; and finally and uniquely, the couple in Trinity, part of whose house is always given over to storing books so that this channel may be kept open.
I was asked to give the number of those who helped, but how does one compute good will, or the grace of God?
Message from John Gibson:-Having looked after the help forms for two years now, I am beginning o look on this as an annual festival which engenders a great deal of love and friendship.
The main point is to raise money for Christian Aid, and although preparatory work goes on for many months, the 3 weeks during which the Church is used for sorting, and them selling, seem to bring out all the best feelings.
New faces appear on the scene each year, to help and encourage us–long may this continue.
Thank you all for the support you have given.
I look forward to meeting you again in 1989.
AN INVITATION FROM THE MINISTER OF ST.
ANDREW'S & ST.
GEORGE'S, THE REV.
ANDREW McLELLAN.
Please come to St. Andrew's & St. George's Church on SUNDAY 19th JUNE at 6.30 pm.
There will be a service of worship for all those who have helped during Christian Aid, when the money raised will be dedicated.
Thereafter, there will be a brief entertainment–coffee–and an opportunity to meet together in the Undercroft.
I do hope you will all be able to come.
Christian Aid at St. Andrew's & St. George's, Edinburgh in May 1987
This is the year in which there was personal tragedy and adversity, and when the only warmth was that of human companionship.
In spite of this we rejoice that we are so richly blessed with good an generous friends throughout this City and beyond that we can give £14,340 to Christian Aid.
The hard work of preparation was punctuated by various diversions.
First of these was our Himalayan hill-walk, albeit seen fro the comfort of Undercroft chairs, in the cheerful company of Bill Mitchell.
This was followed by a Potluck Supper in each other 's company.
(‘Company’, a work taken from our publicity leaflet, seems to be the theme of this year's report).
On Monday 4 May there was the BBC's Daily Service, broadcast live on Radio Four, from St. Andrew's & St. George's.
For those who did not hear this, I quote Father Willie McDade's words–
Welcome once again to the BBC's Parish Church in Edinburgh.
It's normally a place for quiet reflection in the midst of the commercial centre of Edinburgh, but this morning it's full of books–boxes and boxes of them wherever you look–and people sorting them for the annual Christian Aid Book Sale.
They've stopped  their work just now and they're joining us for our morning worship along with some children from James Gillespie's High School Choir.
No matter how important our tasks, no matter what we think necessary, our Lord said ‘Seek ye first the Kingdon of God and his righteousness, and all these things will be given us.’
This inspiring service gave us new heart.
Then on 7 May we had the visit of Mamie Magnusson, who kindly agreed at short notice to launch our Christian Aid Sale by coming to present us with an autographed copy of her enthralling history of the Woman's Guild's first century.
We were thrilled by her generous gesture in this the Guild's Centenary Year, not least because the story she tells so well shows that much of what we do for Christian Aid is in the best Guild tradition.
Our publicity leaflets and help-forms were meticulously drafted, and I think we can say they contained no ‘empty words’.
Anyone looking round in the weeks of Christian Aid could see this really was ‘the churches in action with the world's poor’, and that while this action was firmly based at St. Andrew's & St. George's it was done ‘in company with people form other churches’.
Working for Christian Aid alongside us were students from New College, and members of the following Churches among others:–St. Colomba's by the Castle; Augustine Congregational; Dublin Street Baptist; Broughton-McDonald; St. Mary's Catholic Cathedral: St. Stephen's, Comly Bank; Dean Parish; Canongate; Cramond; St. Giles; Greyfriars; and Charlotte Chapel.
In a delightful letter one of these helpers wrote afterwards, saying ‘…thank you all so much for the lovely welcome you gave me today…
I learned a lot about books, but what I will remember most is the happy way everyone seemed to be working together, and the obvious warmth of fellowship.’
We, for our part, would have put it the other way, by expressing appreciation to the people from other churches both for their ready and effective response to our request for help and for the way they enlivened our company.
That cursory mention of St. Columba's-by-the-Castle hardly reflects the incalculable contribution made by Gilbert Clark, ‘the embodiment of Christian Aid’, as he has been most aptly described.
At the outset we asked for more help from the congregation.
This, through John Gibson, we certainly received, and foremost among helpers were some of our newest members, whom it was a joy to have with us.
From his records John has reckoned that, altogether, we must have had approximately 180 volunteers.
Most dramatic help story concerns our Church Officer's wife, Mrs Moore.
When visiting us in the early stages of Christian Aid she listened with obvious  incredulity to our talk about the hours we would spend in Church on the books.
‘Doing what?’ she enquired.
In answer her husband threw open the little back door that opens on to the Church.
On seeing the mountain of jumbled books Mrs Moore registered shock, but did not hesitate.
‘I'll help you’, she said, and so she did.
We had practical help too from hotels, stores and businesses in our City Centre Parish, as well as from Scotsman Publications, and we now acknowledge our gratitude to those companies who answered our call for help.
Maybe it is on the warm welcome and good food provided in the Undercroft that the popularity of our Christian Aid Week ‘open house’ is founded.
I feel we need a poet to tell of the contribution made to our Christian Aid Week by those who stay at home and bake so that the baking stall can be kept so magnificently supplied every day.
Mrs Peterson and the others have told me of the delicacies baked and brought with love, from kitchens in Comely Bank, Trinity, the Inch and other even further-flung parts of the City.
To some of us Christian Aid Week means treats like home-made bread and ‘date chews’ for tea.
For those out in the cold, the wind and the rain, trying to sell books, that traditional Christian Aid Week lunch of soup, bread and cheese is ‘magic’.
So many of the customers speak appreciatively of all these things.
This year the catering team was led by Mrs Duff; it was composed as ever of Crofters and ‘Cathedral ladies’.
Together these two ‘arms’ of Christian Aid raised £1692.
What a lot of behind-scenes work and good fellowship — that represents.
Once again Things Past and Present made a colourful display in the Davidson Room.
Mrs Wood and her team had some lovely wares.
We all admired the beautiful old silver, the period clock and barometer, the gorgeous tapestry wools and Berlin work charts — and the stunning '60s Garden Party hat, which has gone, I am told, to adorn a tall American belle.
Proverbs were on everyone's lips–no, not the Biblical ones, but the ones in 9-year -old Shona Innes' quiz.
Whenever I passed the Treasurer he was talking not of £s but of the difficulty of ‘number 14’.
I do hope he solved it eventually and that he will win a prize, as Shona certainly should, for her enterprising and entertaining contribution to Christian Aid.
Congratulations to Mrs Alison Campbell for accepting the Minister's challenge–to organise out part in the Council of East End Churches house-to-house collection.
She and her volunteers did well, visiting many homes in our area as agents for Christian Aid.
An accolade for Felix Schofield and Mrs Swan — I hear that photographs of posters done by them for Christian Aid have been used by the Church of Scotland's Publicity Department as illustrations of an effective means of poster-design for communication.
Books and magazines accounted for over £10,000 of the total this year.
They came from as for away as the Mull of Kintyre and Cambridge, and one of the sorters had travelled from Devon to help.
This year the sorting team doubled and in consequence sorting was twice as good — even if Henry Miller's Tropic of Capricorn did land up in astronomy!
After the ‘sorters’ came the ‘pricers’(most of the latter being from ‘outside’the congregation), their own worth being above hat of rubies to us and our cause.
I would also like to acknowledge here the advice always so willingly given to us by members of our national institutions–the National Library, the University, the BBC, ‘121’ and Life and Work, Scottish Courts Administration, and even, this year, the Zoo.
‘Special books’ included some valuable law books; John St. Clair's best find, a first edition of J.M. Keynes' epoch-making book on economic theory; and first editions of J.R.R. Tolkien's Lord of the Rings trilogy.
This last was eventually taken by four emissaries from St. Andrew's & St. George's to a famous book-seller in Flask Walk, Hampstead.
They received form this charming man not only a handsome cheque, but the gift of a copy of his own book ‘Modern First Editions–their value to collectors’, inscribed with the words ‘For Christian Aid.
I hope it helps.
Joseph Connolly.’
It certainly will help and we are delighted by the gesture.
My own best find was The Minister's Wife, the story of the wife of the Rev. Arthur Gordon, Minister of St. Andrew's in the late nineteenth century and biographer of Dr Charteris, founder of the Woman's Guild.
I believe Mrs McLellan is now enjoying this little book.
If anyone else is interested there is a copy in the chapel library.
Fortunately for us the words ‘nostalgic’ and ‘ephemera’caught the eye of a lady visiting our East End Council of Churches Abbeyfield House.
When she had returned to Cambridge she kindly parcelled up some remarkable family papers and memorabilia and sent them to us.
Her Father had been a District Officer in N. Nigeria in the 1920's, and she gave us letters; a diary; some amazing old photographs and a telegram; and, perhaps best of all, the mementoes of Piccin, the baby leopard reared by the family and then given to Edinburgh Zoo in 1929.
They sold to the highest bidder, an antiquarian book-seller from Fife.
All noticed the quality and quantity of religious books this year, and the 
popularity of this stall, which dominated the Book Sale from its exalted position round the pulpit.
The Rev. Fred Levison had the help of several distinguished Ministers, and in John Page's case, surely a distinguished Minister-to-be.
It was wonderful to see the lunch-time throng of students of theology, both old and young.
The records, stamps and plants attract many collectors too, and the single-handed work done on them by Laurie Bruce, Scott Anderson and Arthur Crawford respectively, deserves our warmest appreciation.
We ‘book people’ are somewhat defensive about our occupation of the Church for a long period, so the following incident naturally gave us new confidence.
Early one pre-Sale morning a stranger silently passed two sorters working in the vestibule, went for a few minutes into the Church, which happened at eh time to be empty of all nut noods, and then said to them as he walked out ‘You've made that Church live.’
We are often asked what happens to the left-over books.
The good new s is that they go to the Ranfurly Library.
This is a charitable organisation, whose Edinburgh branch is run mainly by retired school-teachers, who work to collect books for sending to under-developed countries.
I only wish I could mention everyone and everything that goes to make up the whole of Christian Aid and its spirit, but be assured that we do not forget any contribution or take anyone's help for granted.
As the notice on the board outside the Church says ‘warm thanks to all who gave, all who came, all who helped in any way’.
We are fortunate that the leadership and whole-hearted support of our Minister and Kirk Session enable us to ‘use our powers for those who are powerless’.
CHRISTIAN AID 1982
The first review was written mainly for the many within and outside the congregation who had participated and therefore knew the scheme of things.
This is an attempt to be more objective, for the sake of those who want to know how over 8,000 was raised.
In April printed appeals were circulated and £90 was invested in baking ingredients.
On 24 April a team of about 10 began to sort the books by then accumulating in the Davidson Room.
They were joined in the lunch hours by Mr Bruce of Standard Life who is the record expert.
At the same time the Unwanted Gifts team was working in the Undercroft cupboard.
The book people received outside help as always from specialists, and Mrs Gellatly also acknowledges her debt to the City businesses who advise her.
The preparations of Arthur Crawford (plants) and Scott Anderson (stamps) had begun much earlier.
Only the weather was ominous — the usual generous gestures of support received from congregation and friends were heartwarming.
Miraculously Saturday 8 May dawned and continued sunny.
It seemed that the entire congregation was there helping, through breakfast time in the Undercroft until evening when everything was stowed away in Church leaving it presentable for he next day's Service.
As beggary the opening day highlights were Arthur Crawford's stunning display of superb plants (£278) and Scott Anderson's artistic and clever presentation of stamps (£177).
The hard core of helpers worked on through the week of almost continuous sunshine and good fortune, and were supported by the essential ‘reliefs’ who came whenever they could to sell and to carry.
Our Church officer, Mr Moore, again gave a week of this holiday to Christian Aid as did Miss Donaldson.
It was surely significant that this year several members of he public asked if thy could join in.
In the Undercroft was the Guild's now famous Baking Stall (£643) kept supplied for the 6 days by our indefatigable cooks, who, it was noticed, were anxious to get away in the afternoons so as to return to their stoves!
Also there was the mainspring of the enterprise, the catering team.
Mrs Robertson and Mrs Taylor were the constant factors and they were backed up both by ladies from the Cathedral and many from our own congregation, notably the Misses Richard.
A full display of Christian Aid posters completed the scene downstairs; and the whole Sale was given real distinction by Mrs Brackett's elegant hand-written posters and Mr Moore's stylish boards.
In George Street, in the vestibule under the shade of the spreading tree were Unwanted Gifts (£1340); Records (£391.09); and separate stalls for all different categories of books and ephemera (£3788).
I always seem to leave till the last the vital, intangible, but certainly not chance factor of the imaginative generosity of the donors.
It is a very great privilege to be ‘at the receiving end’ when gifts come.
one thinks of bread, cheese, butter, tea and coffee from City firms; car loads of books from Roseburn; a pressure cooker from a member moved by the despairing note in one of our appeals; a whole set of Carlyles's works, which was eventually sold to the new Carlyle library in Haddington; fascinating nautical ephemera from the Manse; a huge pile of oil paintings of Edinburgh from a young artist who works at the National Gallery; even geological specimens and polished stones from a lady in our Abbeyfield House; and of course our ‘stock in trade’, those exciting grocer's boxes of ‘mixed’ books.
The final total of £8063.36 was reached because of the collection at the big Service; the House-to-House collection; and of course the contributions from the housebound and those on holiday, who never forget.
We do not yet know whether any other church in the U.K. has raised more money than we have this year.
What we do know is that no congregation can have derived more pleasure from its Christian Aid.
CHRISTIAN AID — May 1986 St. Andrew's & St. George's Church, with help from other churches.
On Assembly Sunday, the one just after Christian Aid Week, the visiting preacher, Rev. Stewart Matthew, told us that the day before, under the dripping trees of Holyrood, he had met a young man who had told him with pride and joy that over £13,000 had been raised for Christian Aid at his church.
Could this have been our Minister?
One of he most heartening things about our Christian Aid effort is the continuity — the fact that the same faithful few gladly play the same parts each succeeding year — and promise to be there next year too.
I feel I cannot mention them all yet again, much as I should like to.
This is not because they are taken for granted — quite the reverse, for each one of them is valued more with each year that passes.
This time, though, I will focus on all that was new or different.
Some say I play down the ‘grinding toil’ that is an unavoidable part of it all, so I will not deny that this year it was done by a very small corps of loyal people, several from without the congregation.
Here we single out Gilbert Clark, of St. Columba's-by-the-Castle, who gave us efficiency at last with his advance-planning and ingenious equipment, along with himself, heart and soul; David Wright, now an old friend, and Shearer Borthwick, of Augustine Congregational Church, who came at 8 am and again at 2.30 pm each day, to help in so many ways; and Duncan Curr, the new Chairman of Christian Aid/C.E.E.C., from Dublin Street Baptist Church.
After hours of gruelling clearing-up work Duncan leapt lightly down from the van with the words ‘I enjoyed that — I'm looking forward to next year.’
The strength and grace that those for brought to the Week cannot be overstated.
Similarly, down in the Undercroft, the ladies form the Cathedral brought something extra special to the hospitality, as they always do.
May they all long continue to enjoy working with us as much as we enjoy working with them.
Clearly more people liked more than ever the fare and welcoming fellowship of the Undercroft.
Once again nearly all the food for catering (and also some equipment for the moving of books) was provided by our good neighbours in the hotels and shops of the Parish.
This year the traditional menu was made a little more exotic by the addition of Turkish Delight.
Incidentally, the hero of the end of the week, when the going was really hard, namely our Church Officer's young grandson, Steven Massey, said to Frances Robertson when she offered him this form of sustenance ‘Well, I don't know about the Turkish, but you're certainly a delight.’
The famous team at the Baking Stall were more successful than ever with the ‘talent envelope scheme’ whereby bakers were given £5 with the request that they ‘Take, Buy, Bake and Multiply,’just as of old the man in the parable had bidden his servants.
The yield on this was more than five-fold.
The day before the Sale Arthur Crawford arrived with his plants for the Sale, suddenly as if by magic, turning a whole section of the pews into a beautiful living garden — perhaps the most appropriate way of all to support this particular cause?
Peggy Wood and her team transformed the Davidson Room into an Aladdin's Cave of Things Past and Present that was to be a magnet and a haven for members of the public.
I heard that you could buy anything from silver shoes to precious pewter, choose from a selection of 85 old thimbles or 150 foreign book matches, or pounce, if you were lucky, on beautiful buckles made from George IV or Victorian crown pieces.
Eddie Moore, our Church Officer, gave up a week of his holiday — and raised over £1,000 for Christian Aid, from the records and stamps, professionally prepared for us by Laurie Bruce and Scott Anderson.
Following this example, and that of Cathy Donaldson, Elizabeth Anne Crawford also took ‘time off’ from work, and we were most grateful for her banking expertise.
‘New people’, I said.
Chief among these were our Minister and his wife.
It was so very good to have Andrew and Irene McLellan with us throughout, and we welcomed Andrew's idea of holding daily prayers for a hungry world’ in the Chapel.
Those of us who had to stay at our posts (‘laborare est orare’ said our text-book expert) could think of the prayer John and Janet Page had composed for us.
This year we added to our tried and trusted team of advisers mathematician and book-lover, Derek Croudace, and historian and church member, Andrew Murray.
Then Alexia Lindsay, just retired from the Christian Aid office, took over the Ephemera Stall with such flair and brilliant success that she will certainly be encored too.
At first the Appeal seemed to have failed utterly and some drily observed that perhaps we too would now learn what it means when the well runs dry.
Then Nancie Swan and Janet Page painted a sign asking for things we might turn into food and aid for the world's poor, very soon our well was over-flowing.
‘Where does it all come form?’ they ask.
The answer is part-miracle, part-mystery, but mainly it comes from members and their friends, and from friends we have in other churches.
Here I am reminded of the staff in the Life & Work office and the member of Broughton-McDonald Church who never fail to respond.
When these calls come I always know we will be all right.
Several members unable to help physically sent donations for which we were deeply grateful.
This year we had some encouraging ‘windfalls’ too.
One evening, when we were sorting, two successive pairs of charming  Americans wandered through the open door to look at the Church.
Seeing us working for what they thought must be a good cause, they said, they handed us considerable sums of money.
One perceptive elderly American drawled ‘this sort os thing is 99% hard physical labour — where are the young men?’
We explained that we had to do without them for the most part— and be tankful for the older ones and the women.
We told them how our oldest member, 91-year-old Mr. Hunt, takes unfailing care of our security, and sits at the hub of the affair providing a whole intelligence service for us as well.
Still, he and we would welcome some more real volunteers.
Teenagers Andrew Duff and Delightful Steven Massey ‘saved he day’ on each of the two Saturdays — would that we had more like them so that we could have ‘Live Aid’as well as Christian Aid.
There had to be a variation in our sorting programme this year, but thanks to the positive thinking of our Fabric Convenor and the kindness of Messrs. Alfred McAlpine we had the use of a magnificent hall in St. Andres Square.
(Now thanks to Nancy Barclay's resourcefulness and the generosity of her employers we are storing books for Christian Aid in a lawyers' office until Mrs. Paton's cellar is ready again).
Sorting went on day and night for a fortnight, and indeed beyond, for books kept on coming till the last moment of the sale.
The process has become so refined that we even had a section called ‘Oenology’, though it must be admitted that this eventually had to be re-named to ‘Study of Wine.’
An observer affected to be shocked at the absence of Bibles from the ‘Bedside Books’ section, but Fred Leson soon remedied this from his wonderful store.
People often ask what ‘finds’ we have made.
All the sorters make them, of course, but in John St. Clair we have someone with a real and learned ‘nose’.
This year he found for us a first edition of an early play by Samuel Beckett, an important book about China, and the original German text of theopera DerFreischütz, as well as other lovely things.
During Christian Aid Week itself it is the finds we make for customers that delight us, whether it is discovering just the right dictionary to fit the schoolbag of the 7-year-old son of a young bus-driver, just one number of the National Geographic magazine to complete someone's sequence, or some early Penguins or American periodicals for the University or National Library collections.
We seemed to send many searchers away happy as well as laden.
Our customers tend to be left out of these reports, but it must be said that they did part cheerfully with over 13,000 and that we enjoyed meeting them.
We could not but be heartened by all the evident good-will towards us and Christian Aid.
I was specially grateful to the 8 ‘Men of God’(those who saw Voyager on 18-5-86 will take the point) who went out into the homes in the Parish as collectors, and as ambassadors for our Church, because the house-to-house collection is such an important part of Christian Aid.
Returning home one night after a sorting session I found a list of messages, mostly concerning Christian Aid, awaiting me.
One was from a member regretting inability to help in ‘86 and saying she intended to ‘pile in for ‘87.’
My non-automatic telephoning-answering machine had added ‘Do you?’
Do we, I wonder? be in no doubt that in 1987 as in 1986 millions will still be suffering.
Can there be any hesitation about our response?
St.Andrew's and St. George's Church Christian Aid 1982
When at 7.30 am on Saturday 8 May I saw Marion Reid sitting in brilliant sunshine on the pavement, beside the doll's house she had made for the Sale, waiting for the Church doors to be opened, I knew that all would be well.
Yet another happy and successful Christian Aid Week is now over and we all rejoice that £8063,36 can be given to the cause in 1982.
Once again the whole formula worked perfectly and once again I am going to find it difficult to capture its spirit without being fulsomely personal and long-winded.
Over the last 8 years we have raised over £34,000 for Christian Aid.
In 1975 the total was £1149, last year we made £7000, and this year we have passed the £8000 mark.
The Church of Scotland audio-visual team filmed an interview with me about our methods, and too late I realised they were making a film about ‘groups’, whereas I maintain that it is because we are not a group that we succeed.
They persisted with questions about meetings, office-bearers, policy etc.
Thy even asked how those outside the group felt and I answered that since I could not even think of anyone in the Church who contributed nothing I could not possibly answer the question.
Finally I declared that we had no Chiefs only innumerable Indians; that meetings and even pow-wows were not found necessary; that communication was by smoke-signal, both between ourselves of the load-bearers form Cubs to Grandfathers/mothers; and our pipes of peace the traditional Taylor soup and bread and cheese.
On the last day of the Sale one senior elder was heard to say in response to another's query as to how he was faring, ‘Well, I've just make 40p which I'm very pleased about’.
Now many a true work is spoken in jest and to me that ‘says it all’.
It is indeed a case of ‘the day of small things’ and it is the doing of them with good-humoured patience and the appreciation of others doing them that makes the sum of these tiny parts such a very considerable one at the end of the day.
Has anyone ever heard of Scott Anderson despising a single 2nd-class British stamp?
Why, in the Davidson Room and in and out of the Church we cherish every Reader's Digest!
Mr whalley, certainly a key figure in our enjoyment and our success, has kindly produced the figures that are set out at the end.
They and the lively photographs tell the story better than I can with words.
When I was chided by someone for seeming oblivious of ‘the magnitude of the accounting operation’ I said that it was because of my consciousness of the magnitude of all other operations that I dared to make these demands of Mr Whalley, who perfectly understands in any case.
Separate figures must be available for information not only for those selling and serving, but also for those who have prepared for ages beforehand in greenhouse and kitchen, in Davidson Room and Undercroft cupboard, and out at Currie where philately rules for a considerable time.
By now most people do know about the Book People, the Bread and Cheese People, the Plant, Stamp and Baking People, and the Carrying People even, but not everyone knows the full history of the Cave People as they have come to be called.
They spend long hours in the weeks before the Sale crouching at a table at a dangerous angle of 45°s; in an airless subterranean cupboard off The Undercroft, arranging the unwanted gifts.
It is because of this, as well as her own personal charisma and dedication to a cause she really cares about, that Mrs Gellatly's won stall is a runaway success (I use the word ‘runaway’ deliberately because of the remark by an observant onlooker that he had yet to see Mrs Gellatly walk, and I was immediately, and I think aptly, reminded of the hymn ‘Take my feet and make them swift and beautiful for Thee’).
Another fact that may not be known to all is that once again we were privileged to have throughout the week the delightful company and invaluable help of several ladies from the Cathedral.
They certainly helped Mrs Robertson and her team from  our own Church, and Guild members who ran the Baking Stall, to create the lovely atmosphere that was noticed by all who visited The Undercroft during the Week.
Will over £1100 was made down there and it was always a pleasure to see the happy throng that congregated daily.
The £90 invested in baking ingredients was soon seen to have been good sterdship, for the unfailing supply of beautiful baking was a marvel.
Gorgeous truffles from Carricknowe, cheese scones from the Manse and superlative Scottish baking from Trinity seemed to arrive hourly!
Congratulations to all.
Certainly deserving of special mention is Kenneth Anderson's small team of loyal people who miss all the fun of the Sale but instead carry out on our behalf our share of the East End Council's House-to-House collection.
One calculation that is beyond even our computers is the number of people who help.
To Mrs Rait's yard-long list and all bakers and caterers, may be added this year two ‘members of the general public’, as they described themselves, who volunteered, as also did some pupils of George Watson's College through Roger Vandersteen, and the wife of an elder of Murrayfield Church (they all made exemplary Indians!).
The work put in by all these was specially appreciated.
It is good to be able to record that the Senior Elder, despite his recent illness, was able to take his traditional place at the traditional place at the religious book stall.
And last those who should probably be first — the experts who have the knowledge that enables them to evaluate books, records, stamps and other valuables professionally and are willing to put this skill and their time at our disposal.
To them must go our warmest thanks.
Another literally hidden factor is that basement in Trinity where Miss Edmonstone so kindly allows us to store books from year to year.
This is a priceless asset and our debt to her is very great.
Now I have somehow contrived to write this screed without mentioning the donors and the customers, without whom there would be nothing.
This is not because I take them for granted — On the contrary I marvel every year at the miracle of that never-empty basket in The Undercroft and the crowds round the stalls.
In the last resort it is really all because of generosity of the members of this congregation, their friends and neighbours; and because of that of the people in the City Centre, who know and appreciate our Ministers, our secretary and our Crofters.
I only hope all these do know how great and how sincere is our gratitude.
The 1982 Results:–
Unwanted Gifts (Mrs Gellatly) £1340.60
Catering (Mrs Robertson) £538.88
Baking (the Guild) £643.82
Records (Mr Bruce of Standard Life) £391.09
Stamps (Mr Anderson) £177.14
Plants (Mr Crawford) £278.16
Donations £214.95
Posters £7.20
General Books £2083.72
Religious Books £277.70
Children's Books £225.00
Magazines £92.00
Paperbacks £832.30
Ephemera (Mr Munn) £278.00
House-to-house Collection (Mr K. Anderson) £512.80
Christian Aid Service £170.00
Total £8063.36
Footnote for Davidson Room Team:–total for our books and records was £4179.81.
CHRISTIAN AID–ST.
ANDREW'S & ST.
GEORGE'S–MAY 1981
This year we shall certainly be able to give over £7,000 to Christian Aid.
How fortunate we have been over the years in our efforts to help this cause, for yet again the story is one of sunshine, success and soaring profits.
This year's Christian Aid slogan, the quirky ‘Soak the Poor’, intended to bring home the point that drought is a prime cause of privation in underdeveloped countries.
So, ironically, while we prayed that rain would not blight our sale, we worked to help those who suffer so terribly from lack of rain.
Last year I curbed my inclination to record in writing my appreciation of individuals, because tho' it was heartfelt it was so difficult to avoid fulsomeness and invidiousness.
Some names will occur naturally in the narrative and I can only hope that the others know how highly their contribution, co-operation and companionship were valued.
Special mention simply must be make of the members of the Cathedral's Catholic Mothers group who helped Mrs Roberton with the lynches, and who were perhaps the best of all the many good things that happened to our 1981 Christian Aid programme.
Despite the date–Friday 13 March–the ‘campaign’ opened most auspiciously with ‘Traveller in the Arctic’, a fascinating illustrated lecture given by Mrs Jennie Gilbertson.
The sum collected that evening–over £100–was invested in baking ingredients.
Many drivers cheerfully collected loads that were offered from all over the city, and gradually with their help and that of certain ‘able-bodied men and women’ mountains of books accumulated in the Davidson Room, while the Undercroft cupboard soon became a veritable Aladdin's Cave of ‘Unwanted Gifts’.
For two weeks all these were sorted, evaluated and priced by the two teams.
Many ‘outside’ specialists kindly came to advise us.
Scott Anderson (with some Christian Aid) and J.L. Bruce of Standard Life, took complete charge of the stamps and records respectively.
We were privileged this year to have Mrs MacNaughtan as book adviser.
To all these, and also to D.J.
Ewans, A.L.
Harris, Dr Semeonoff and J.S. Buist, Christian Aid owes much for their generous giving of time and skill.
Preparation work stopped one day for a tea party.
TO our delight Edinburgh's own novelist Lucilla Andrews accepted and invitation to visit us for a formal presentation of some signed copies of her books.
The photographs taken on this occasion, by the Church of Scotland Publicity Department, can be seen on The Undercroft board.
All along workers were encouraged by donations of every kind.
Particularly moving were the letters and donations received from members housebound or in hospital.
all deeply appreciated and all, I trust, acknowledged.
One of her contributions for the home-baking stall came labelled ‘with love from Helen’.
I reflected that every contribution to our sale could well bear such a label.
Another gesture symbolising true Christian Aid was made by Mr Moore, our dynamic Church Officer, who gave up a week of his annual holiday so as to be with us throughout.
Surely this is the secret of the wonderful spirit that prevails in our congregation, and now even extends beyond, into the ‘City Centre’ where we have so many good friends.
The hige team on Saturday 9 May were rewarded with a magnificent £2,594.70.
On each lovely day of Christian Aid Week the money continues to flow in:–roughly, £700 on Monday; £1,000 on Tuesday and again on Wednesday; £800 on Thursday; and £1,000 on Friday.
Money was not, however, the only currency in evidence–communication with the public and good fellowship among ourselves were subjects for pleased comment.
The figures below tell most, but not quite all, of the rest of the story.
It will be noted, I hope, that original investment in baking ingredients produced a 500% profit.
Also, it should be mentioned that thanks to the generosity of stores and hotels in the City Centre all the money form the catering side goes straight to Christian Aid.
Furthermore, who would guess, if they did not already happen to know, that the huge sum raised by plants was the achievement and gift of one family–the Crawfords?
M.D. 
CHRISTIAN AID at St. Andrew's and St. George's.
Edinburgh 1992
As the two of us struggled with an awkward table at the 3p.m. closure of a day in Christian Aid Week 1992, my companion asked me if I knew the answer to number 13 in Duncan Innes' C.A. Quiz.
The question was: What book begins with the words?–‘I returned from the City about 3 o'clock on that May afternoon pretty well disgusted with life.’
My first thought was that had Richard Hannay materialised at that moment, I would have issued him with a help form.
I thought too of this year's much quoted slogan: ‘We believe in life before death.’
The Dundee deaconess, who helped us with advice about children's books an her own delightful design for a Chalet School sampler, said that she hoped our efforts together would bring ‘help, food and life to many.’
On the eve of the sale, I received a letter, saying: ‘There will be more life and less death in the world, because of what will be done at St. A.'s & St. G.'s in Christian Aid Week.’
A former District Commissioner of Wajir in Kenya said to me, when making a donation, that he had heard that the wells of underground water which had always sustained life was indeed to be our theme, and the Glasgow Gospel version of the Guid Samaritan by our ‘92 celebrity, Jamie Stuart, puts it this way: ‘Wan day an expert lawyer tried tae trick Jesus.
He said tae him, ‘Maister, ah'm keen tae hiv this everlastin life that God has promised.
How dae ah get it?
‘Jesus said, ‘Ye hiv the answer right there in yer law book ma freen–whit dis it say?’
An the lawyer replied, ‘Ye've got tae love the Lord God wi yer hale hert, soul, mind an strength; an ye've got tae love yer neighbour as weel as ye love yersel.’
A great many people gave ‘mind an strength’ in neighbourly love this Christian Aid Week; and simply because more people have worked harder and given more generously, over 41,000 will go to the work of Christian Aid with the poorest 5% of the world, where 176 in every 1,000 children die before the age of 5.
The commitment in time and effort of members and friends of St. A's and St.G's os enormous, but the result can only be achieved nowadays because of the constant support from Saughton, and that not just in terms of physical strength.
Gerry Forte's practical skills and James Lindsay's literary knowledge are both assets to Christian Aid.
They have shared the pleasure as well as the toil of this year's unprecedented harvest of books.
John Ward too has been a faithful helper and specially valued companion.
Scarcely a day passes at St.A's & St.G's without some Christian Aid.
Things Past and Present, plants, books all require and receive care throughout the year.
For me, there are frequent telephone calls from people offering books.
There is a story behind each call, and I should keep a journal of the conversations and then the encounters.
All I have is a list of the names of over 100 donors.
It is wonderfully evocative.
The first name on the ‘92 list is that of a lady who insisted on coming out in her dressing-gown to rill the boot of the car with bags of glossy paperbacks one freezing  February night, and then stood on her doorstep waving till I was out of sight.
Particularly memorable too are the retired ministers who themselves carried into the cellars the cherished contents of their former manse libraries.
I recall with particular pleasure the visit of the younger Edinburgh parish minister who insisted that his strength was of the superhuman variety, but who nevertheless collapsed, laughing, under the weight of a huge box of encyclopaedias.
It was widely known that this promised to be a vintage year for books, thanks to an amazingly generous benefaction from a special friend of St.A's & St.G's.
For several years he has been a helper, and having decided to return to Birmingham where he had a distinguished career as a teacher of English, he resolved to give us the greater part of the library, collected over many years by himself and his late wife.
It was his wish that C.A. should benefit from its value, and also that others in their turn might now have the joy of collecting such books.
I knew that he had given about 4,000 volumes, but I had kept this information to myself.
Great therefore was my respect for our swift and silent counter of books and boxes when he announced at the end of his calculations, made just before the sale: ‘You have about 4,000 more books this year.’
(The story of how we acquired 800 uniform boxes is too long and exhausting for this report, nut Bill Axford is the hero of that one…).
The Elections, both General and Local, were the background to our preparations this year.
Candidates from 3 of the Parties found time for Christian Aid also.
Speaking to Ann Davies of the Church of Scotland Press Office, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, formerly Minister of Home Affairs and Environment at the Scottish Office, said he was very glad that eight men form Saughton Prison were assisting the C.A. campaign.
He also noted that books by John Buchan, his wife's grandfather, were always best-sellers at the sale, and that several of J.B.'s rarer books, including Sir Quixote of the Moors, a novel written and published when he was only 17 years of age, would be on sale this year.
Summoned to collect a donation from an address on the east side of the city, a few days before the Election, I noticed a poster in the window, and realised that it was the home of a candidate (now the Member) for Leith.
Moreover, a certain prominent Liberal Democrat candidate in both elections found energy to spare for some strenuous Christian Aid, thus earning the gratitude and admiration of his fellow church members.
On asking a young woman from whom I had collected books how she knew of the sale, I got the pleasing reply ‘It's the highlight of my year.’
It was only later that I learned, quite by chance, that she was Janet Bloomfield, author of The Fallen Land, the recent prize-winning novel based on the tragedy of the collapse of the Paisley Close (‘Heave awa’, lads’) tenement in Edinburgh in 1862.
She said that the sale provided her with the out-of-print material needed for research.
Our Minister had reminded me of a sermon by a former St. Andrew's minister, about ‘A Garden City,’ where there would be realisation of the twin idelas: service and society.
Arthur Crawford, renowned plantsman, created a glorious Garden City Centre on that first morning of C.A. ‘92, and perhaps the two ideals were realised as we all served together the rest of the week in true society.
We like to think that the arrangement of books has been brought to a fine art, so it was good to hear the verdict of Evening News reporter Bob Watt that there was ‘bookshop tranquillity’ and that you could ‘feel the order.’
I suggest that it may be this very order that adds to the value of the books, records, toys, coins etc.
Let the holders of these stalls speak for themselves.
Of Baking, Marie Ure says: ‘Once again I am lost in admiration at the magnificent response to the appeal, in quantity, in quality and also in imagination.
I am also grateful for the unstinting help of those who staffed the stall and baked as well.
I don't know which is the more satisfying sight–the laden tables at the beginning or the empty ones at the end, after all our customers are gone and we are left happy in the knowledge that our efforts have helped to raise a wonderful total for Christian Aid.’
Of Records, Laurie Bruce writes: ‘Many people are giving up records for cassettes or compact discs–a great mistake as records will be around for a long time to come.
We even sold over £100 worth of '78s on the first day of the sale!
We had the equivalent of paperbacks at 50p as well as beautiful but more expensive delights.
Maybe this annual event will become as well known for rare and fine records as it is for books.
One thing is certain: thanks to the generosity of many, we will be able to listen to a wealth of music at very modest cost when we have bought from the C.A. Record Stall.
Nick Evans records that ‘Toys and Games again expanded and increased, helped by a new, spacious location at the entrance to the Undercroft.
Many young helpers worked hard sorting, pricing and selling, as well as offering face-painting and a pinball competition.
One interesting find was a pre-war Dinky car, identified by a helper with the words: ‘Oh yes, that's the 20 horse-power Rolls Royce with the Mulliner body.
We used to have one.’
Peggy Wood speaks for the Past and Present Team: ‘No sooner had we packed away the remnants of Past and Present 1991, than things began to arrive in the cupboard for 1992–and what a selection of lovely bits and pieces.
‘Susie Cooper’ and ‘Clarice Cliff’both graced us by their presence.
A most wonderful Hollywood-type satin-quilted bedspread, some ‘Twenties’ dresses, and as a complete contrast–4 World War II civilian gas masks!
All were sold.
As usual, the team worked hard and well and we had a lot of fun and good fellowship, which helps to dull the pain of aching backs and feet!
Thanks to everybody who helped.’
It was always a treat for tired and hungry helpers to go to the Undercroft for refreshment.
Jane Duff comments: ‘Once again the Undercroft team provided back-up for all the other workers, as well as coping with the large numbers of the public.
All the bread and rolls we used and most of the cheese were donated by surrounding shops and hotels.
The baking just appears!’
A good feature this year was the gallery of pictures on view in the Undercroft.
I felt quite bereft when the grave old man in his Orkney chair and the King in his Counting-house were bought in the closing minutes of the sale.
These pictures by early-20th-century artist, Anna Guthrie, daughter of an Orkney minister, and those by the other Anna–Mrs. Hossack–gave us pleasure as well as profit; and to Eddie Penham and John Easton, both artists themselves, the opportunity to try their hands at picture-selling.
Eddie, so aptly surnamed, had produced for us, as if by magic, a hand-painted sign proclaiming ‘Old and Rare Volumes–Complete Editions of Popular Authors–Best Sellers.’
Incredible as it may seem, he had designed and painted this, months before he ever heard of our sale.
Our information desk if a focus for customers.
We heard from there of the lady who, seeking a replacement for an indispensable gardening book lent to and never returned by a ‘friend’, found her own copy on the stall.
One of our members told how a German lady met in a Festival bus queue had sent money for the purchase of books for her grandchildren.
A laky, housebound bow but formerly an avid attender of the sale, telephoned the church with an ‘order’ for Scots Magazines, Annie S.Swans, Bible Stories and jigsaws.
It was a pleasure for someone to deliver these to her house.
Bought at the Ephemera stall for framing, and hanging in the ‘121’ office of the Principal Clerk–were the Order of Proceedings in the Hall of Assembly on the occasion of the first Assembly after the Union of the Churches in 1929; and also the Order of Service for Queen Victoria's Jubilee Thanksgiving, held in the Assembly Hall in May 1897.
In the depths of winter, from an old seaside house in Portbello, almost 200 copies of Girl's Own Paper and Women's Magazine, dating from 1913, had been transported to the cellars.
Undaunted by their failure to attract a buyer at the sale, Alexia Lindsay (of the Ephemera stall) drove them afterwards to Chorley in Lancashire, where a shop called Girls Gone By gave 200 for them.
Every year we look for buried treasure.
This time it was discovered in a brown envelope at the foot of a box.
It was a century-old volume of 12 Chinese water-colour paintings on rice paper, depicting the production of tea from planting to picking.
Pronounced both fine and valuable by experts, this exquisite collection of pictures was most happily and appropriately acquired by a generous father for his son, who is chief blender in the newly-formed firm of coffee and tea merchants, Brodie Melrose Drysdate & Co.
Ltd. of Constitution Street, Leith and also great-grandson of the original Drysdale.
A star item of a different kind was T.H. Gillespie's Story of the Edinburgh Zoo, for it contains illustrations by Nancy Brackett, one of the first women elders at St.A's & St.G's.
Other ‘finds’ were first editions of Scott's The Pirate, Stevenson's The Black Arrow, and S.R.Crockett's The Stickit Minister (with the eloquent poetic dedication to R.L.S. unique to this edition.)
An ode should be written about the innumerable helpers, seen and unseen, but I have decided to highlight the debt we owe to the teaching profession.
Senior adviser is Dr. Boris Semeonoff, formerly of Edinburgh University, but we are also greatly indebted to Francis Pearson, a former Headmaster; Eric Smith, formerly Principal Teacher of French and German at Leith Academy; Winifred Coutts and Eileen Mackintosh, both formerly of St. George's School; and, of course, Freddie Wickens himself, our chief benefactor.
We are also grateful to those younger members of the congregation, teachers of maths and the sciences, who keep us up to date with these fast-changing subjects.
David Ewans, Lecturer in Art and Design at Napier College, has valued our art books for the past 17 years.
Then there is that eminent retired Glasgow University Professor who drives over each year from Bridge of Weir with books for us.
There were also welcome visits from members of the staff of Strathclyde University's Law Faculty, delighted that their Library, as well as C.A., could benefit from the generosity of the W.S. firm which had given important law books.
It is therefore particularly fitting that it is a charity associated with the teaching profession hat takes some of the books left over at the end of the sale to ‘sent to countries in dire need’, as Lewis Romanis, former Headmaster of Boroughmuir School, put it in his gracious thank-you letter.
Such was the quality of the books donated this year (realising £6,000 more than last year) that pricing has become an ever-increasing responsibility.
We were indeed fortunate to have advice of the Rev. Tom Kiltie, David MacNaughton, and John Morris of the National Library of Scotland.
Alison Campbell's house-to-house collectors had another good year, and all were agreed that this generous response might perhaps be attributed in part to Christian Aid's TV advertisment.
It was suggested to me that what happens in and around our church in May, the publicity it receives, and the many thousands of leaflets we distribute, all help to raise awareness of Christian Aid in Scotland.
In this way we may be helping Iain Whyte, National Secretary of Christian Aid/Scotland.
He is a keen numismatist and this year we were privileged in that he himself prepared the coins for sale.
At the end of C.A. 1991 it was recorded that over the previous 18 years we had raised over £210,000 for the cause.
At the end of Christian Aid 1992 we had the satisfaction of seeing the grand total exceed £250,000.
For most of us the intervening year has added another milestone to the many we have already passed.
How can we allow any weakening in our resolve to give meaning to the watchword ‘life before death’ for the countless thousands, especially among Africa's children, who have little chance of reaching even the first milestone?
CHRISTIAN AID–May 1985–St. Andrew's & St. George's Church, with help from other Churches
As always our Treasurer's final figures remind me of many people, incidents, and stories, and I only wish it was within my power to convey all these now.
I have decided that I should try to be objective instead, and reflect for a moment.
In Christian Aid Week 1985 we raised £2500 more than we did last year.
On 9 June the Rev. Ernest Cairnduff and some of our helpers from other Churches are to attend the 11 0'clock Service.
At the Service the money raised will be dedicated.
It is surely fitting that this should happen since nearly every member of the congregation contributed in some way to the result.
But at that Service it should also be possible to think about what has been achieved and to express gratitude for the increase.
‘The Churches in action for the World's poor’ runs the slogan on our leaflets.
Is it possible that in 1985 the message has got through to more hearts and minds than ever before?
Think of the passer-by in George Street, main artery of Edinburgh's Golden Mile, famed as the second citadel of Mammon in Europe.
In earlier years, he may have smiled indulgently on seeing us and our makeshift tables with their colourless array of old books and goods.
By many Christian Aid was seen through a glass darkly as just one of the charities helping to relieve the ‘problems’ of the Third World.
Since last May many of these same passers-by have come face to face on their TV screens with the agony, desolation and despair of the people of Ethiopia and the Sudan.
I have bo proof, but I believe that the heartening increase in our total reflects, at least in part, a growing awareness in this centre of mounted successful commerce that the modest, hectic and rather untidy operation mounted each May in the portico of our Church, by ordinary members, represents a dimension which even those Edmund Burke described as ‘sophisters, economists and calculators’ had to take into account.
I like to think that the huge and impressive list of volunteers, who helpfully filled in our Appeal for Time forms, may also represent a positive reaction to the tragic news of the past year.
As soon as last year's Sale was over we received offers of books etc., and, as I hope you would expect, we refused none.
Then, in addition to the usual Appeal leaflets, we had the boon of a free and effective paragraph in the Edinburgh Advertiser.
Throughout the year therefore emissaries from the congregation drove all over the place, from Kirkcaldy to Bonnyrigg, Carricknowe and Musselburgh, and on their return had 
The books were exactly the mixture as before, but the quantity of ingredients seemed to have doubled (‘Dickens and Scott seem to breed year by year Kingsley and Thackeray always appear’ to quote from ‘Irrelevant Thoughts Which Intrude in the Night, soliloquy written by Nan Munn, one of the 15 ‘sorters’).
More sorters had to be recruited and a better pricing system found.
We were very fortunate that our faithful ‘visiting’ advisers were willing as always to take care of art, music, social sciences, and playing cards; and, above all, that Scott Anderson and Laurie Bruce would undertake the entire sorting and evaluating of stamps and records respectively.
Having then decided to try to find people with specialist knowledge from within the congregation we discovered that we could muster a chemical and electrical engineer; a medic and a man of law; a mathematician; a physicist; an economist, archaeologist and educationalist in one person; and even a playwright for the plays.
Add to this friends of members for some of the other academic subjects; a young member with a (growing) knowledge of antiquarian books; members versed in music, gardening and the domestic arts; and of course our own 2 experts, who have now gained reputations in the field of religious books and ephemera.
This combination was so successful that one dealer exclaimed indignantly ‘These prices are what I would charge myself.’
I could barely conceal my satisfaction–I felt we had ‘arrived’.
Having said that, I am of course aware with more humility that ultimately we depend on the professional judgement, so generously given, of Mrs McNaughtan.