

TON-UP
Evening sun tiptoed away — gathered sunbeams from shimmering hills
Farm labourers knocked earth from boots — hurried home to stew and dumplings.
Tousle-haired youth with freckled cheek-bones — schooldays not long left behind
Climbed aboard his Raleigh bike — imagined a white charger — into battle.
A hill challenged him — lungs bursting he reached the summit
Down, down he goes heading towards Ilkeston — cows in fields stare and moo approval.
The young lad sings ‘Smoke gets in your eyes’— the wind snatches at the song, hides it in the trees
Legs made tired following plough and horses — now whizz round like pistons.
He remembers Goose Fair — machinery whirling and twirling, round you go
Wall of Death — stench of sweat and petrol — men laughing and risking their lives.
Better than war — on motor-bikes you had a chance — nobody died on the Wall.
No girl yet to spend his money — no misspent youth, he reached his goal
Brough Superior, gleaming metal — leather seat manly — sit astride feel it throb.
Spoked wheels polished up with Silvo — smell of petrol, aphrodisiac
Country lanes spread out like unwound ribbon — twisting turning, careful there's a bend.
Bike and boy now as one — gather up the lanes like a noisy sewing-machine
The name reverberates inside his mind — Brough Superior — he fingers the throttle and feels superior.
Evening sun once more tiptoes away — but the youth does not notice
He aims the motor-bike at his future and sings ‘We plough the fields and scatter’.
HIGH KICKS
Dolores looked up at the Gallery
As she kicked her legs high the air
She was hungry, felt faint, but she had to pretend
So she wiggled and tossed back her hair.
The music hall curtains smelt musty
Cigar smoke brought tears to her eyes
But she carried on dancing and gave a big smile
At the men who were eyeing her thighs.
Back-stage, when the curtains had folded
Dolores drank gin from a cup
Passed on from the ‘star’ who'd come back from the bar
Lil was tiddly, could hardly stand up.
Outside the stage-door it was raining
Dolores felt glum at the sight
Till a gent with a cane, a black cloak and top hat
Kissed her hand, offered fun for the night.
The gent helped her into his carriage
The horse whinnied and clip-clopped its feet
Dolores felt good, supper seemed to be sure
Some hot soup perhaps, and red meat.
Lord Raymond was cuddling closer
The driver was cracking his whip
His Lordship said, ‘Ooh…
I do love your high-kicks’
But she said, ‘It's hard on me hips.’
The carriage had come to a standstill
Outside a rough pub near the pier
Lord Ray booked a room that was quiet, dim lit
With a waiter who had a strange leer.
Dolores tucked into her supper
Lord Raymond poured out lots of wine
Then he grabbed at her gown, got her down on the floor
And promised a really good time.
‘'Ere…’
Dolores was still eating pudding
‘Let me finish me super, my dear’
It was boring, and sad, but she knew it would end
With her legs, once again, in the air.
TRAVELLERS TO NOWHERE
On wheels that clatter over miles of steel
The wooden boxes we call trains speed by
White garments flutter — washing on a line
On frail brown bodies clinging like a vine.
New morning sun caresses fields of corn
Grey dancing mists twirl gently into haze
The lowered heads of oxen eye the grain
And sway like fat men in a drunken daze.
Trees proudly spread, with roots that suck the ground
Give shelter to the birds with golden throats
In hiding now as wheels of iron go round
Towards the Ganges and her boats.
So fast, the train heads panting for the station
Rich tourists hide distaste behind sunglasses
Pretend they do not see the degradation
That weaves its way through India's starving masses.
Moonlit Taj-Mahal, Cook's tours and Gunga-Din
Childhood visions, Bengal tigers and snake-charmers
We travel by at speed, a careless spin
Pretend the beggar's sightless eyes can't harm us.
Fierce burning sun goes meltingly away
As rattling wheels speed onwards into night
And washing lines of people gently sway
Still cling to life and transport of delight.
WAGONS ROLL
An old prairie wolf kept on howling — he'd had nothing to eat for a week
He gazed up at the sky that was cloudless and dry — and a mountain that had a big peak.
From a distance the wolf heard a rumbling — was it thunder that heralded rain?
The noises got nearer and shapes became clearer — horses pulling a long wagon train.
Smoke signals snaked out of the mountain — then tom-toms commenced with a beat
An Injun' yelled ‘White men…we're in for some fightin'…they're not having our bison to eat.’
The wolf crawled along on a stomach, that would soon be digesting some meat
His tongue hung from his mouth as he made for the south — and dust pothered up from his feet.
The wagon train came to a standstill — a circle was formed right away
Cowboys fingered their rifles and got a right eyeful — of the feather and arrow display.
Quite soon there was hollerin' and shoutin' — and arrows all over the place
But the wolf kept on going, he was cunning and knowing — and in no time was feeding his face.
A big hunk of pork had been hanging — in a wagon tipped up on its side
The wolf took one look, snatched it off the steel hook — then looked round for somewhere to hide.
The Indians ran out of arrows — they decided to call it a day
The Chief let out a cry, he was saying goodbye — then in no time they all rode away.
Wagons rolled on again through the valley — women laughed 'cause they'd kept on their hair
Men rode alongside, chests bursting with pride — smoked cheroots and guzzled strong beer.
The prairie wolf followed the wagons — but kept a safe distance of course 
And as he surveyed just how much it all weighed — he was thankful he wasn't a horse.
CAMELS IN THE AIR
Mustapha Bint, squeezed the camel with his knees
The camel rose reluctantly, from shade of lush fig-trees.
‘I'm nipping down the market,’ he informed wife number eight
‘Then I'm going to The Casbah, so expect me to be late.’
Mustapha Bint travelled quickly over sand
His camel got a move on, was used to dusty land.
Camel parking spaces were very hard to fin
In the place behind the market, where people shopped and dine.
Mustapha Bint, eyed the maidens up and down
Then spotted one with long blonde hair and skimpiest of gowns.
He made a generous offer, and bought wife number nine
She swayed her hips and rolled her eyes, then promised love divine.
Mustapha Bint, was the happiest of men
He wined and dined, enjoyed himself, then travelled home again.
Wife number six was waiting at the gate
‘Tonight's the night,’ she whispered, ‘no don't forget our date.’
Mustapha Bint, shooed the new wife to one side
‘Go and join the others, let them know you're my new bride.’
The old wives int he harem looked Blondie up and down
Then offered her a bunch of grapes and told her to sit down.
Mustapha Bint, found it hard to keep awake
He lay down on the sofa and didn't try to fake.
Wife number six fanned him gently with a feather
And said, ‘It doesn't mater, just as long as we're together.’
Mustapha Bint, yawned and soon fell fast asleep
He dreamed of love and passion, and new wives going cheap.
Wife number six smiled, and had a look at telly
Knowing that her master's eyes were, ‘bigger than his belly’.
BUS TO BLACKPOOL
We caught the coach to Blackpool, a couple of mates and me
The macho driver helped us on and said, ‘come on your three.’
We headed for ‘no smoking’, 'cause we're worried about us lungs
Fags make you smell like ash-trays, play havoc with yer tongues.
I'd had mew hair dyed ginger — not punk — but a lovely red
Our dad said I looked common, but I told him, ‘it's my ‘ead.’
The coach was nice and comfy, with a toilet at the back
With scented soap and linen towels and a plant-pot on a rack.
We set off in the sunshine and quickly reached Snake Pass
Sharon passed round sausage rolls, poured lager in me glass.
The driver rolled his sleeves up — had tattoos on his arms
A big snake's head, I love Mum, and a nudist showing her charms.
The coach purred on, passed cornfields and sheep that didn't look up
Sharon passed round Mars bars, poured coffee in me cup.
An old bloke on a front seat — fifty if he was a day
Sang ‘I belong to Glasgow’ to help us on our way
A group of lads talked loudly and one gave me the eye
Dressed real smart with a lovely smile, he even wore a tie.
They'd never been to Blackpool, last year they'd been to Spain
But the food had made them badly, so they won't go there again.
Sharon promised to meet them, somewhere on the Golden Mile
Me heart beat fast, I played it cool and window-glazed all the while.
You can keep your Eiffel Towers, and your Statues of Liberty
Posh tours that go all round the world — Pyramids and Aegean Sea.
'Cause there's nothing like the feeling when that Tower comes into view
Seen from a coach with Sharon and Claire and a handsome lad or two.
GRANDMA'S HAIR
Dinkie curlers stabbed their way into my dreams as I slept
Turned me into a woman overnight.
The boys'll be ‘after you’ now, Grandma smoothed my curls and young girl's heart
I smiled into the mirror above the black, lead firegrate and couldn't wait.
Sepia photograph — the girl looked just like me — eyes flirting with the camera
Hair, a dark explosion of brown curls, it was me —nearly
Grandma smiling, from days when boys had once been ‘after her’
Before the babies — dole — and pawnshop trips.
Grandma Smith had always looked the same — grey hair straggling — pinafored and old
Summer evenings, perched at open door, glass of stout, if grandad had found work
What could she know, about a young girl's dreams
Nice clothes and lipsticks, high-heeled shoes and love.
I knew it all, could see my life would always be a ball
I'd never once be ill, or old and sad
I'd always be a sepia photograph
My youth forever captured, years of fun and trail of broken hearts.
Let's curl your hair, I picked up brush and comb
Then wound the Dinkie curlers round the grey
Grandma laughed and called it all a waste
But put on lipstick, took off pinafore
Grandma Smith looked taller in the dress, that had a Woolworths' brooch pinned near her breast
Linking arms we laughed at our reflections
Two curly heads, one brown, the other grey
Grandma saw the past and looked quite young
I glimpsed the future — and all at once, seemed old.
CARAVANS AND CLOTHES-PEGS
Eyes, dark as varnish, a gipsy stamps out dying embers of his fire
Horse, black as boot polish, neighs softly and nuzzles his way into a nosebag
Gipsy woman, hips swaying provocatively, walks to hedge and gathers in washed clothes
Turns towards the horse and whispers in a language almost Hindi — eyes match eyes for kindliness.
The home, that sits aloft on wooden wheels, door gaping open, surprised by its surroundings
Is colourful as a rainbow, sturdy like a cabin, its beauty invites, step into my parlour.
Gipsy stamps again on flickering embers, empties bones from stew-pot for mongrel to devour
Then harnesses the horse, the caravan is ready, all set to roll behind the thrusting black.
Down country lanes, through forty shades of green — an Ireland that is cleansed of guns and death
The gipsies care not which religion rules the day — encapsulated, they make clothes-pegs and then, make love.
I MUST HAVE A BAND
I'm not usually mad about funerals
Though I've been to some Wakes that were nice
Everyone drinking and singing
Lasting all through the night, once or twice.
I know funerals bring out the good things
People dress up and look very smart
And we've progressed to journeys in Daimlers
When once, it was horses and cart.
I'm not usually made about funerals
But this morning, a sight changed my mind
Our butcher, high-class, from the High Street
Had a funeral, unusual kind.
Two horses, both blacker than misery
Pulled a beautiful hearse, filled with flowers
The way those two trotted was magic
If I could, I'd have watched them for hours.
At the front walked the funeral director
Tophatted and cane in his hand
You're not going to believe what I tell you
But following behind, was a band.
Brass instruments gleamed in the sunshine
And the music was good on the ears
Our butcher liked Gilbert and Sullivan
We got ‘Ruddigore’ and then, ‘Gondoliers’.
Now that's what I call a good funeral
Traffic-stopping and people who stare
Not rushed in a car to the church-yard
You're special, when you're no longer here.
So, I'm going to leave fresh instructions
When my time comes, I want a good show
I want horses, and band, like our butcher
If I can't have a band, I won't go.
CLINGING VINES
Eve was finding life a bit boring — just roaming around ‘neath the trees
And Adam didn't make conversation — just tended his garden and bees.
Even told him one day, ‘Let's go travelling, escape from our lush paradise
We'll explore the whole world, be away for a year’
He agreed and thought up a device.
Knotted vines that hung down doing nothing — he decided would be just the thing
Eve and him holding tight, they could fly through the night
Be the first man and woman to ‘swing’.
So they packed up some pears and pineapples — set off well before the light hours
Travelled mile after mile, but it all looked the same
Tons of trees, loads of ponds and bright flowers.
Eve swung through the trees crying, ‘Catch me’— but Adam just wanted to rest
Didn't react, just lay on his back, while Eve flirted and showed off her breasts.
The Devil, dressed up like a serpent said, ‘You must eat an apple a day’
Eve took a big bite, then got quite a fright
Her clothes had just melted away.
She offered the apple to Adam — he took it not wishing to be rude
Bit right to the core, saw poor Eve in the raw
And immediately told her, ‘You're nude!’
The Devil was laughing his horns off — looked into the future and saw
Naughty ladies revealing, their charms so appealing
Page three girls and Playgirls Galore.
Adam reached out for a fig-leaf — kept it on while he swung through the trees
He began to feel shame, and knew Eve was to blame
So he covered the part near his knees.
That night Eve discarded her fig-leaf — danced around in the nude, naturally
The rest we all know, they became all aglow
And that's how we're here — you and me.
WHEEL — POWER
The cave-man got fed-up with walking
Travelled miles just to capture some meat
Moaning and ugging, he staggered back home
With blisters all over his feet.
‘I'm tired, being left on me own here’,
Wife nagged him and wouldn't share his bed
So he reached for his number one club-stick
And hit her on top of the head.
One day he was rolling a boulder
It went faster and rolled down a hill
He went back to his woman and told her,
‘I've an idea that just fits the bill.’
He gathered his friends to a meeting
They got cracking and built him a cart
Round stones at each end with some logs on
In no time it looked just the part.
But the other men's wives soon got jealous
All wanted a cart of their own
They didn't only want lumps on their heads
They all longed for a cart made of stone.
In no time the hills got congested
You needed good eyes in your head
If you didn't watch out for the traffic
A cart got you — and flattened you dead.
The inventor began to feel sorry
His wife nagged him and wanted to row
Said his cart ought to get him home earlier
Since he'd progressed from feet, to wheel-power,
Now, inventors still keep on inventing
Say without it we'd all end up dead
But when you see what they've done to our world
It's them that need lumps on their heads.
KEEP YOUR HELMET ON
Boadicea surveyed her surroundings, things were utterly boring and tame
Her men stood around, kicked up dust from the ground, and tried to invent a new game.
A toga-clad man felt inspired, he loved going fast on his cart
He would get men to race him, see which ones could outpace him, they'd wear helmets and all look the part.
Chariots were built for the races, painted lovely in red and azure
Men would all risk their lives, so they made some sharp knives, to stick out of the wheels to make sure.
Fine horses were brought from the stables, Boadicea had only the best
She used them for wars, when invading new shores, so for racing they all passed the test.
Chariots lined up, men were ready, whips in hands, and iron helmets on heads
All the women were proud as they shouted out loud, to the men who were sharing their beds.
Excited crowds stood and applauded, as the chariots started to roll
But as they went faster, they were bound for disaster, one tipped up as its wheels hit a hole.
Contestants began to play dirty, whipped their rivals and drove in too near
Knives of iron locked together, as they went hell for leather, wheels flew off while the crowd loudly jeered.
Round and round, they rode on in a frenzy, Boadicea just smiled and drank wine
The prize for the winner, was to share her next dinner, and ensure that she had a good time.
The winner went by, toga flying, his helmet all cocked to one side
Boadicea raised her goblet, the hero flashed past, he'd survived his first real bumpy ride.