

LOVE AND MARRIAGE
Pride and Prejudice — Jane Austen
Mansfield Park — Jane Austen
The plot of ‘Pride and Prejudice’ is mainly about two young people who eventually marry.
The plot develops the obstacles in which they have to overcome, including their own pride and prejudice.
This story is true to life.
The main plot of Mansfield Park, on the other hand, is that of a young girl called Fanny Price and her development along the obstacles in which she finds she has to overcome in life which eventually takes her from a stage of immaturity to a stage of maturity.
In both of the novels a heroine is involved for committing herself to do something important enough only as itself for example, Elizabeth Bennet walks three fatiguing miles to Netherfield to pay a visit to her ill sister; Fanny Price opposes her cousins' attempts to include her in amateur theatricals.
Pride and Prejudice seems to be full of conversations or references to them and this reveals the character of the speaker but usually the entire dialogue centres around one particular person mainly called Mr. Darcy.
The characters in the novel are that of an extensive range from the proud, head high Mr. Darcy to the clever Mrs. Phillips who is affectionate of talking; from the sweet Jane Bennet to the most jealous  Miss.
Bingley.
One of the main themes throughout the two novels is that of ‘Love and Marriage’.
This theme centres mainly around the difficulties Elizabeth and Mr. Darcy have to overcome before eventually they get married.
Elizabeth, on the one hand, is intelligent, individual and beauteous, while Darcy on the other hand is rich and handsome.
Darcy is practically always seen through the eyes of Elizabeth and the reader has an insight into the Mr. Darcy's real feelings during particular parts of the book.
Even though Mr. Darcy is deeply offended by Elizabeth's low rank in society and that of her family's behaviour, especially Mrs. Bennet and her younger daughters, Darcy still proposes to Elizabeth.
His sense of superiority convinces him that Elizabeth will accept his proposal.
The events which take place in the novel eventually help the couple to realise their mistakes, and to think about their individual character.
This provides their marriage with a foundation of love and understanding for each other.
The theme of ‘Love and Marriage’ does not just evolve just around Elizabeth and Mr. Darcy but many other characters in the novel as demonstrated below:
Charlotte Lucas and Collins:
Charlotte does not possess a high point of view on the subject of marriage.
She has few hopes of happiness in marriage.
Collins only wants a wife because he feels that in the eyes of society it is about time for him to be married and to have settled down in life.
Another reason is that Lady de Bourgh, who is the heiress of a large fortune has advised Mr. Collins to get married and he changes his feelings of compassion quickly from Jane to Elizabeth and then from Elizabeth to Charlotte.
This is evidence that he does not posses any deep feelings at all for any of them.
Charlotte only wants to marry him for the house and comforts he can provide her later in life.
She possesses no respect for the man and want a speedy marriage.
Charlotte thinks that it is better to get the richest husband one can and feels that a happy marriage is simply a matter of chance.
Charlotte's family  are absolutely overwhelmed when they hear news of the marriage while Elizabeth is shocked by the news and believes that Charlotte will never be happy with Mr. Collins.
Charlotte goes into the marriage aware of Mr. Collins's nature and his company actually boresome but her view towards the marriage is that she will gain something greater than happiness.
She believes that she will gain comfort and security for the rest of her life.
Jane and Bingley:
Their marriage was that of ‘love at first sight’.
Bingley possesses an enormous fortune and both of them are committed to each other and love one another very deeply.
Mr. and Mrs. Bennet:
Mrs. Bennet is a woman of poor understanding and possesses a bad temper, compared to Mr. Bennet.
He is an intellectual man but since he has married, a woman who is quite the opposite of him, the reader often notices that he retreats to his library during the course of the book.
 It's seems that their marriage is a lost cause in which possess the husband and wife not real affection for one another.
Lydia and Wickham:
Wickham tried to seduce  Miss.
Darcy by marrying  Miss.
King.
He runs away along with Lydia with no idea of marrying her at all and is forced to marry Lydia by Mr. Darcy becoming between them.
Lydia is ignorant of the ensuing scandal that would result if she did not marry Wickham.
Throughout the novel Jane Austen gives many examples of both good and bad marriages.
Money also plays an important part of marriage.
Both Mr. Bennet and Elizabeth accept that Mr. Wickham would only have agreed to marry for £10,000 which was seen as a vast amount of money in those days.
It was so essential that Lydia and Wickham should get married even though their chance of happiness was slim and Wickham was disliked, the marriage still had to take place because the alternative of public disgrace for Lydia and the rest of her family was so terrible.
An aspect of marriage that is highlighted in ‘Mansfield Park’ is that it is extremely important to marry within your own class or what is even more preferred is to marry a person above your own class.
Edmund sees the necessity for emotional attraction in the marriage.
Women at that time, had no independence.
When they were at home unmarried, they were strictly chaperoned.
So it was very important, therefore, to marry for reasons of security.
Mary Crawford feels that Mr. Crawford is the ideal man for her, for the reasons of money, his social rank and the position he would be able to offer her.
Lady Bertram advises Fanny that ‘it is every  woman's duty to accept such a very exceptional offer’ and Edmund also thinks that it is ‘most advantageous and desirable’.
Edmund recognises that his longed marriage to Mary Crawford would consist of simply opposing characters.
Finally when Edmund marries Fanny, semblance is the main aspect which leads their marriage to happiness.
The first paragraph of the novel describes the three different marriages of the Ward sisters.
We learn that Maria Ward has the ‘good luck’ to marry Sir Thomas Bertram for she  has improved her life financially.
Her luck lies in the fact that she possesses little to recommend except for her good looks.
Mary Crawford says many harsh words about the aspect of marriage for example‘there is not one in a hundred of either who is not taken in when they marry.
’Maria only seems to get married for the sake of being free.
Lady Bertram, on the other hand, feels that she has a fortunate marriage due to this reason of her beauty and also considers it is every  woman's obligation to show off her looks.
Their marriage is based on wealth rather than strong feelings for one another.
During the novel Lady  Bertrmm and Sir Thomas never display a great deal of affection towards one another.
 Miss.
Ward, the eldest sister marries Mr. Norris.
Their marriage is built on neither wealth or love.
The third sister, Mrs. Price has made an  imprudent marriage as she has allowed her feeling to overtake her judgement and finally ends up with little money and too many children.
The reader is shown many bad marriages through the course of the novel and the disastrous effects it causes in the upbringing of children.
Fanny is given the chance to improve her financial life by getting married to Henry Crawford.
Both Fanny and Henry enjoy literature so therefore we can predict that a marriage between  them would not have been a total disaster.
Fanny  possesses strong feeling towards Edmund but at the beginning of the novel is quiet in showing her feelings.
Sir Thomas fears that Fanny will marry one of her cousins but the reader soon discovers long before Edmund that Edmund and Fanny are ideal for one another.
For they both share a similar outlook on life.
To Sir Thomas Fanny is socially acceptable and both Fanny and Edmund will be secure when it comes to finance.
Edmund has always loved and seen Fanny as a sister and now that his eyes have been widened to see Mary Crawford's actual character he looks at Fanny now as his future wife.
Jane Austen believes that a good marriage depends on the marriage possessing a balance of affection between both the man and the woman.
She believes that there is nothing worse than marry without any affection but on the other hand it would be very absurd Lady  Bertram points out to Fanny that it is every  woman's duty to marry a rich man but she is blinded to the fact that this is not the only improvement that can take place in a marriage.
In those days marriage was a crucial turning point for a  woman for it  determined her social rank and their future economically speaking as well as their happiness.
Morals play an important part in both novels and the reader notices that Jane Austen is actually a moralist.
Jane Austen looks at her society.
She mocks the snobbish, hypocritical and materialistic views of many people and their narrow views.
Within the society that Jane Austen features  there are many strict rules.
For example Mrs. Bennet begs her husband to visit Mr. Bingley otherwise she and her daughters will not be able to visit him.
Mr. Bingley must also return their visit by visiting the Bennets, if he is not to be rude.
Jane Austen does not often use the word ‘love’ in both the novels but instead describes love as ‘doubtful, hackneyed, etc.’.
This is most probably because she is unsure of lasting love in a marriage.
Instances of a lack of clarity in thought or expression do, at times, upset the flow of the commentary, but many good points are made about Jane Austen's treatment of the marriage business.
The study is thus a good survey of Austen's portrayal of her society.
English open study
The two books I have chosen to compare for my English open study are ‘To kill a Mockingbird’ by Harper Lee and ‘The Disappearance’by Rosa Guy.
The reason I have chosen these two books for a comparison is because I always prefer to read books that are either true or close to reality as they bring out more emotions in my reading and at leat I know my feelings towards certain situations in the books have been felt by someone before, whether it may be another reader or the character himself, but in more depth.
I also want to compare the authors of the books, the style of their writing, the dialogue content, the different races included in each novel and my opinion on two outsiders in society one from each text.
Both ‘To Kill a Mockingbird’ and ‘The disappearance’are written by American woman authors in the 1900's, but ‘To Kill a Mockingbird’was set in the 1930's while ‘The disappearance’was set in the 1970's and I think this is the cause for the difference of the acceptance of the black race into a multi-racial community.
‘To Kill a Mockingbird’ is set in the Deep South of Alabama, where the majority of white men will not accept Negroes into a white society and it's not only that the Negroes do not live amongst the whites, in some cases they are treated as if they are nobody.
For example on page 198, Mayella says she's never kissed a grown man before and that it might as well be a nigger and after kissing him she says ‘kiss me back, nigger’.
It's as if Tom Robinson (the negro) has no say in what happens to him and a white woman has the right to push him around and refer to him as nigger, overpowering him in all senses of the matter.
I think it must have been Tom's fear from the past, knowing what happened to black people who stepped out of line that made him so afraid to stick up for himself and stand his ground.
It's not only in the dialogue that Harper Lee expresses the tension between the blacks and whites, but all through the book in her description of where people live, where they work, the churches they go to and her detailed description of the court room and how the black community sit on the balcony above, away from the whites, she gives us a vivid idea of the way life was in the 1930's and sets the scene well.
In comparison to this, ‘The Disappearance ’which is set in the 1970's is altogether a different type of community.
The book jumps constantly from Brooklyn to Harlem and in descriptions of both, it is usually black people who are involved.
The only described white man is a police man from Brooklyn who works with his black partner to try and extract information from a black boy, Imamu, after the daughter of the family he is living with goes missing.
In Harlem where Imamu originally lived with his alcoholic mother, all the people he hung around with and the people he meets on return visits to this area are black and then in Brooklyn with the Aimsley family, all the people in their street are also black.
I think this is mainly due to the fact that, Rosa Guy, the author of the novel is black herself and raised in a black community in Harlem.
This book is also different to ‘To Kill a Mockingbird’ because there are no racist scenes, only prejudice towards Imamu from both the Police and in some cases the Aimsleys, when their daughter goes missing and they think that because he is a street boy who comes from Harlem, a lower class area than Brooklyn and that he has just been acquitted on a murder rap, he's got something to do with Perk's disappearance.
The style that Rosa Guy uses in ‘The Disappearance’ is in the third person singular and apart from the descriptive parts, a large majority of the book is written in dialogue form.
To me, in a book containing so many emotions, I find dialogue really important because it lets me know exactly how the character is feeling rather than leaving me to make my own assumptions which are often wrong.
Because I have also read other of Rosa Guy's novels, I know that her style is continuous throughout her stories and it is very rarely that one of her books ends happily.
This point is well illustrated in ‘The Disappearance’ after the death of one of the main characters at the very end of the book.
Despite an unhappy ending, ‘The Disappearance’ contains  a lot of energy which made me come away from the book feeling hopeful and while I learnt more about the characters, I also found I learnt more about myself and my feelings towards family life and friends.
Rosa Guy is also very descriptive and emotional in her writing, one of my favourite descriptions is on pages 53–54 which tells us how Mrs Aimsley has all her glasses set out on shelves and the higher the shelf, the more expensive the glass and of course not being used to drinking out of glasses, Imamu takes the most expensive type from which to drink milk and syrup and after washing and drying it, he put it back on the shelf, but as he takes his hand away, the glass tips over and falls, smashing on the sink.
The reason I like this section is because I like the way Mrs Aimsley thinks, the more expensive her glass, the better a position it deserves on one of her shelves.
One of my favourite emotional scenes in this book is on page 79 when Mrs Aimsley suddenly changes her views on Imamu, especially after it was her who decided to bring Imamu into her family after sitting in court listening to Imamu on trial for murder.
It was her who put her trust in him and then turns on him as illustrated on this page.
She begins to shout and accuse him and says,
‘what did you do with her?
What did you do with my child’
Although his may not sound much, after reading the book and getting to know the calm character of Mrs Aimsley, it comes as a big surprise when she starts to get very emotional and make irrational accusations to Imamu.
While Rosa Guy makes some parts of her book easy to understand, it was only after the second time I read the book that I was able to give unanswerable questions an answer.
However I found I was  a lot more satisfied when everything slipped into place.
For example, when Perk disappeared she was wearing a yellow dress and it was only after the second time that I realised the significance of Gail (Perk's older sister) finding a yellow ribbon in Mr Elder's (the lodger) drawer.
It was the fact that Perk had many different coloured ribbons and every day she would select one to go with her outfit and because she had gone missing wearing a yellow dress, Gail suspected that it was Mr Elder who had taken Perk.
More evidence to back this up was that when Gail was about Perk's age, Mr Elder had tried to kiss her.
Unfortunately, Gail hadn't realised that it was only because Mr Elder had only been in Hospital for so long, that he was overjoyed to see her and him wanting to kiss her was completely innocent.
Another part in the book that I didn't understand until I had read it for the second time was a bit right at the every end.
It was when they discovered Perk's body buried in the cellar of one of Dora Belle's three houses.
At first they saw only the little hand — the fist, decomposed but stretching out of the  shallow grave.
Then it relaxed, opened, releasing a treasure it had been holding: a chain a locket, a gold locket.
It then took me a while to realise the significance of it, but at last I remembered it had been around Dora Belle's neck, the person who murdered Perk and she must have placed it in Perk's hand when she buried her.
It's small links like this that only fit together if you are quite alert when reading the book and remember small factors such as a yellow ribbon in a drawer and a gold locket around  someone's neck.
Apart from the fact that ‘To Kill a Mockingbird’ is written in the 1 st Person narrative and is an older person retelling incidents from their childhood thinking as if they were still that child and although due to the age of this child, not all incidents are understood making some parts comical meaning that the  humorous style contrasts with the horror, I think in many ways, Harper Lee's style is similar to that of Rosa Guy.
her book also contains  a lot of dialogue which again I find really important because ‘To Kill a Mockingbird’ is a very emotional story, but what I especially like about Harper Lee's style is that she is able to add a comical aspect to some of the more serious scenes.
One example of this is on page 156 when Scout and Jem have discovered that Atticus is sitting outside the county Jail on one of his office chairs and as they cross the square to get nearer to him, four dusty cars come in from the Meridian highway, moving slowly in a line eventually stopping outside the Jail.
For a while, Jem manages to restrict Scout who doesn't realise how serious everything is and wants to run to Atticus, but eventually she breaks free and runs as fast as she can to him.
Unfortunately Atticus is not too pleased to see her and tells Jem to take her and Bill home.
After Jem refused Atticus' request several times, a burly man from one of the cars said ‘I'll send him home’, and grabbed Jem roughly by the collar, nearly yanking Jem off his feet.
This gesture obviously displeased Scout because she said ‘Don't you touch him!’, kicked the man swiftly with a bare foot and was surprised to see him fall back in pain.
What she had done was intended to kick his shin, but aimed too high.
Out of the two authors, I prefer Harper Lee's style of writing because she is much more fluent in her writing and it contains energy, happiness, sadness, and  really imaginative descriptions.
Although Rosa Guy's style also contains energy, hope, imaginative descriptions and sadness, there are no contrasts between happy and sad scenes seeing as there aren't any happy scenes and although Rosa Guy has chosen to write a book on a very serious topic, I don't think any really stylish book can be without a hint of happiness.
Even though there are many more than two characters in each book, I have chosen this number from each, as one of the characters from one book is very similar in comparison to that in the other.
Firstly I am going to compare Perk from ‘The disappearance’ with Scout from ‘To Kill a Mockingbird’.
The first main similarity is their age.
Perk is eight and Scout is nine years old, but the main similarity is their innocence.
We are introduced to both characters at the beginning of each book and as we find out more about them, it's not that they are rude offensive children, it's purely down to the innocence that all children have at that age.
Neither of the girls understand fully what is going on around them and in  Scout's case, her incomprehension is sometimes comical, for instance, Jem grasps long before she does that it is Boo Radley who was putting the gifts in the tree as a friendly gesture from him to them and he lets Scout continue to wonder long after the reader has also guessed it was Boo Radley.
Unfortunately in Perk's case, her innocence leads to her death after on her way to school wearing her yellow dress, she pops into see her Godmother who is often  referred to as the most beautiful woman around and has beautiful skin, a good body and lovely thick dark curly hair.
When she enters her bedroom, Perk discovers she does not have lovely dark curly hair, but is bald with a few grey wisps and because this woman is so vain and can't  bear her god child seeing her without her wig, she ends up pushing her so hard that Perk falls, hits her head and dies.
So in Scout's case, her innocence leads her through her childhood and because she is too young to understand fully the barrier between the different races she lives among, she is saved from the emotional torments other people suffer, but in Perk's case her innocence leads her straight into a very touchy emotional situation and ends up suffering death, too young to understand why.
Secondly I am going to compare Imamu from ‘The disappearance’ with Arthur (Boo) Radley from ‘To Kill a Mockingbird’.
We are introduced to Imamu in the first  sentence of ‘The Disappearance’ seeing as he is one of the main characters of the book, but although Boo Radley plays a large part in ‘To Kill a Mockingbird’, I wouldn't consider him to be one of the main characters and it is not until we are well into chapter one that Boo is first mentioned.
Imamu and Boo are not similar in the way that they are both the same age or the same colour, but what makes them similar and comparable is that they are both outsiders in society.
Boo lives in a town where the people are very religious, but narrow minded and intolerant of those who do not conform to their very rigid code of social behaviour, and where everybody knows everyone else because the same families have lived there for generations.
Boo does not conform to the community's code because when he got into trouble at the age of 18, his father, a very strict Baptist, undertook to punish his son himself, rather than let the law do it and for the rest of his life until he died, he kept his son away from the outside world and would not let him mix with the neighbours.
Because Boo is locked away, it makes his character very mysterious and at first it's hard to know if the rumours spread around about Boo only coming out at night to hunt for his dinner, eating squirrels and peering in through  people's windows are true, but gradually as we read more into the book, we are given clues to suggest that he is not the monster, people make him out to be.
On the other hand Imamu is a very unrestricted boy who has lived in Harlem for the majority of his life doing what ever he liked with whom ever he liked.
This was due to his mother's severe drink problem.
Because he had the freedom to hang around with anyone, it only seems natural that somewhere along the line he was going to get mixed up with people who were bad news.
This led to the murder of a shop owner and the next thing that happened, was, Imamu found himself in court on trial for a murder he had not committed.
After being found not guilty, a member of the jury called Mrs Aimsley offered Imamu the chance to live with her and her family in Brooklyn.
What made Imamu an outsider in Brooklyn is quite similar to the reason Boo is an outsider in ‘To Kill a Mockingbird’, he did not conform with his new community's social behaviour.
In both books, neither community were prepared to give the outsiders a chance, it's their obvious  ignorance and old ways which prevent their neighbourhood from being a complete one.
I feel deeply sorry for both Boo and Imamu because they both have to prove themselves before people actually begin to see them for what they really are which are two very kind and loving people.
I think Imamu takes the most slack when it comes to proving himself because he is always around to hear the people who criticize him, where as although Boo is criticized, he is not there to hear it, seeing as he is locked up inside his house.
Imamu is also subjected to physical torture when Perk goes missing and the police think that by torturing him, they will get some information out of him.
The fact that he is  blatantly innocent makes what the police do to him one hundred times worse.
In both books we have to read to the very end before we are relieved of the fact that we know that both Imamu and Boo, are genuinely nice people.
In ‘The disappearance’, Imamu has to prove that he had nothing to do with Perk's disappearance by finding her dead body in someone  else's house having been murdered by that person and Boo has to risk his own life in order to save that of Scout's before his most  ignorant neighbours realise he's not a squirrel eating monster.
It's at this point nearing the end of my open study I've realised a connection between the four characters I have just compared.
It's the fact that the two outsiders in society only prove themselves when they either save the innocent or find the innocent.
I think it is this link between knowledge and innocence that makes both books  thoroughly enjoyable to read.
I've actually quite surprised myself and enjoyed writing this open study.
It's given me the chance to look further into two books that I've really enjoyed reading than I ever usually would.
It's also made me more appreciative of books and in future, I'm not going to judge a book by its cover.
Finally this study has given me a good idea of what life has been for people living in the past in America, where as before, I wouldn't have had a clue and it's also taught me that no matter how many times you read a book, you'll always find new links and connections.
Thorough, detailed and well-organised.
There's a good balance between individual and comparative treatment of the books, and the conclusion is a good reflection of an Open Study that has been approached with thought and sensitivity.
Open Study: Comparison of ‘The Catcher in the Rye’ by J.D. Salinger, and ‘Villette’by Charlotte Bronte.
I have chosen these books because they have similar themes; they both portray individuals who have problems fitting into, accepting, and being accepted by the societies in which they live.
Holden Caulfield, narrator of ‘The Catcher in the Rye’, and Lucy Snowe, narrator of ‘Villette’, both criticise their societies and acquaintances, and struggle to be true to their own principles despite pressure to conform,
Lucy Snowe is a Protestant living in a Catholic society in France.
Her main line of criticism is directed at the members of that Catholic community, whose unscrupulous ways are created, she thinks, by their religion.
It is a central theme throughout the book, and she criticises frequently the Catholic beliefs and customs.
For example, when she has to listen to the legends of the Catholic saints, which are read at ‘la lecture pieuse’ in the school where she teaches English, Lucy is sickened by ‘tales that were nightmares of oppression, privation and agony’; in a silent act of revulsion she breaks off the points of her scissors as she listens.
She believes that the more placid Protestant religion to which she belongs is infinitely better, because it provokes fewer emotions, but calms the soul.
Lucy Snowe comes as a stranger to the school, but after a while starts to settle into place.
On one memorable occasion, she thinks to communicate her feelings about Catholic beliefs to some of her older pupils.
In that community it is not considered a grave fault to ‘invent’, whenever ‘a lie is necessary’.
Lucy thinks this is due to the Catholic confession; ‘I have lied several times’ formed an item of every girl's and woman's monthly confession: the priest heard unshocked, and absolved unreluctant.’.
However the failure of someone to go to mass is considered to be a serious crime.
Lucy remarks to her pupils, in conversation, that she considers ‘falsehood worse than an occasional lapse in church-attendance’; thereafter a cool distance is kept between her and her pupils, in case she should influence them wrongly.
She is often rejected by the Catholics, because she will not conform to their religion: the local priest says that she will immediately burn in Hell, when she dies.
Even Lucy's friend — and later lover — M. Paul seeks advice from the Church, and questions her at length about her Protestant theology, before they become seriously attached.
Holden Caulfield is a sixteen year old, living in America.
Like Lucy, he has problems fitting into his society, but although religion seems to play an important part in the book, his criticisms are not really of religion.
His main criticism of society is that it is hypocritical, or ‘phoney’ as he calls it.
He does not disguise his feelings; he has been expelled from four schools for not conforming or working hard enough.
As Holden puts it, he ‘left the school because (he) was surrounded by phonies.
That's all.’
Holden calls someone a ‘phoney’ if they behave in a superficial way, or if they value the wrong things, for example money and beauty, and are hypocritical in order to be accepted in society.
He avoids these people (who seem to constitute most of the people he knows!) and often seeks the company of children instead of adults.
He does this because of their  naivity ; they are more honest about their thoughts and feelings, and do not judge him as the adults do.
Holden appears to believe in the innocence and simplicity of youth, and is upset and outraged when he sees, ‘— you’, written on the wall of his young sister's school.
He worries that the children would be upset when they saw it, so he rubs it off the wall.
Holden is terribly protective towards children, and the title of the book is an illustration of this.
When his sister, Phoebe, asks him if he has any career ambitions, Holden tells her that he would like to be the ‘Catcher in the Rye’(a misquote from a poem by Robert Burns).
He imagines himself as the only adult in a large field of rye, standing by the edge of a cliff.
There would be lots of little children running around, and if any of them ran towards the cliff, he would catch them before they could fall.
This is a very symbolic picture which shows that Holden is trying to save the children from danger — perhaps of becoming ‘phonies’.
Holden has a very strong relationship with his younger sister Phoebe, and his younger brother Allie who died recently.
It is noticeable that when Holden needs help, he ‘asks’ Allie, and not God, to help him.
Although Holden is an atheist he takes an interest in religion, for example he mentions his opinions about Christ and the disciples, and recounts his experience with two nuns.
He seems to be more interested in non-institutionalised religion, and is drawn towards the childlike state of innocence and the idea of a life away from society.
Near the end of the book, Holden fantasises about his ideal life, in which he would go West, and pretend to be mute.
That way he ‘wouldn't have to have any goddam useless conversations with anybody.
If anybody wanted to tell (him) something, they'd have to write it on a piece of paper…’
Holden Caulfield and Lucy Snowe have both been rejected by their societies; Holden for refusing to conform to standards which he considers ‘phoney’, and Lucy for voicing her Protestant beliefs in a strong Catholic community.
The narrators have been persecuted for standing up for their principles.
However in many ways, Caulfield is the complete opposite of Lucy Snowe; where she is quiet and retiring, and hides her feelings, Holden speaks his; for example, he will strike up a conversation with anyone he meets — at one point in the book, Holden asks his taxi-driver if he knows where the ducks in Central Park go when their lake freezes!
He is very open, not nearly as controlled as Lucy Snowe, who restrains herself constantly.
In Villette, other characters than the narrator are described in great depth, not only for their relationships with Lucy Snowe, but as characters in their own right.
Miss Marchmont, Lucy's first employer; Madame Beck, the very capable head-mistress of the French school; M. Paul, her foe and lover; Dr. John, her cousin…to name but a few.
This is because Lucy is by nature a very quiet and observant person, one of life's spectators, who recounts very precisely all her many observations.
This in complete contrast to Holden who, although he criticises other people's behaviour, does not describe them as individuals; consequently in ‘The Catcher in the Rye’, there is no serious development of any character except the central figure, whereas in ‘Villette’, several characters are developed.
Other differences between the books are found in their plots —‘Villette’ has a very complex plot; ‘The Catcher in the Rye’has barely any plot at all.
‘Villette’ starts in the narrator's girlhood, and takes place over several years; ‘The Catcher in the Rye’is over a period of three or four days.
Holden's story contains no suspense, while Lucy's grips the reader totally; for example she ‘forgets’ to inform the reader for six chapters that ‘Dr. John’is in fact her cousin whom she has not seen for ten years!
Although the plots of the two books would seem to be very different, they actually end in a similar manner, on a promising note.
In many ways, these books are very different.
They are stories situated in different countries — Villette is set in France, and was written in the 19th century, while ‘The Catcher in the Rye’ is set in America, and was written in this century.
The authors, Charlotte Bronte and J.D. Salinger, wrote very different novels.
The narrators, who are the central figures of the books, have completely different characters, as we have seen.
Yet in spite of these differences, the main themes are shared; individuals living in societies which they do not like, and which have rejected them.
It is remarkable that these books are so contrasting, but seal with the same problems of the individual.
An absorbing study, full of perceptive points.
It keeps well to its focus on the individual's relationship to society, and sustains the comparisons.
English Open Study —
Science Fact or Fiction?
A subject which is and has been explored time and time again by authors is a vision of the future.
Man's curiosity and desire to have an insight into his destiny has inspired many writers to explore their own ideas on what is to come.
In all novels and short stories which tackle this subject, there is a feeling of great change.
With constant progression in the scientific world, most would consider that technologically the world will be a very different place in years to come.
But, although many authors appear to be optimistic about technological developments, morally and ethically most seem to be pessimistic.
The two books I chose for my study are ‘Fahrenheit 451’ by Ray Bradbury and ‘Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep’by Philip K. Dick.
Both are science fiction works, although ‘Fahrenheit 451’ is a novel and ‘Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep’began as a short story and was later expanded into a novel.
I have chosen to look at these two particular books because both struck me as very vivid accounts of what the authors foresee in the future and they tackle primarily the serious repercussions of the dehumanisation of man.
The main characters in the books become increasingly aware of how the society they live in is destroying life as we know it now.
The future seen by the two authors is one in which robotics has become a very important part of life.
In ‘Fahrenheit 451’, the main character, Montag, is employed as a fireman.
As a fireman in the future, he is not employed to put out house fires but to burn books.
(Fahrenheit 451 is actually the temperature at which books ignite.)
Reading, or even keeping books in your home has become illegal and firemen must investigate all complaints, find the offenders and destroy their books, after which they will be dealt with appropriately.
At the beginning of the story, Montag is happy to do this job and does not question the law he enforces but, as the book progresses, through his friendship with a young girl Clarisse McClellan, he is transfigured.
He realises that he does not have to conform to the laws which have been set down by his community.
As the book develops, it shows the progressive purification and freeing of Montag's mind.
he frees himself, with the help of Clarisse, from the confinements of a society which restricts not only people's actions but their minds and emotions as well.
The chief form of communication is Montag's world is television.
It has become an indicator of status, the number of television screens you own a factor in your popularity.
The television network is so complex that it is possible to actually link yourself into your favourite programme and read the script as one of the characters.
However, television is such a major part of people's lives that simple human interaction has been cut down to a minimum.
Although participating in a programme may seem to be involving, it is no more personal than simply viewing.
It leads to a break-down in communication between people, which in turn leads to the loss of relationships.
This can be seen in the relationship between Montag and his wife Mildred.
Although Montag himself is not involved in the television very much, Mildred is an avid viewer and this affects their relationship as husband and wife to the extent that they rarely talk to each other.
They do not live as a unit, together, but as two separate people whose lives converge briefly from time to time.
The life created by the television network is surreal.
It is, for the viewer, the perfect world through which you can even make friends.
But, when the viewer returns from this lovingly created dream world to reality, they find it very difficult to cope.
Possibly this is part of the reason for Mildred's attempted suicide near the beginning of the book.
Montag returns home just after his first meeting with Clarisse to discover his wife has taken an overdose of sleeping tablets.
The feelings which he experiences on finding her are described vividly by Bradbury.
‘As he stood there the sky over the house screamed.
There was a tremendous ripping sound as if two giant hands had torn ten thousand miles of black linen down the seam.
Montag was cut in half.
He felt his chest chopped down and split apart.
The jet bombers going over, going over, going over, one two, one two, one two, six of them, nine of them, twelve of them, one and one and one and another and another and another, did all the screaming for him.’
Two men come to treat Mildred.
Montag is astonished by the off-hand way in which they seem to regard the case.
One operator justifies the absence of a doctor by saying ‘we get these cases nine or ten a night.
Got so many, starting a few years ago, we had the special machines built.’
The solution seems only to be on a practical level, no attempt is being made to attack the root causes of widespread unhappiness within the community.
Bradbury uses the metaphor of fire to represent the hatred which he  foresees manifesting itself in humans, devouring their minds, spirits, ideas and also the books created from man's imagination.
He shows the reader that whilst this community is progressing chronologically, it is far from progressive in other ways.
His community is emotionally and morally primitive.
This seems to be attributed to the mechanisation of mankind which he visualises.
The community he has created is self-destructing.
It inwardly destroys itself by concentrating on efficiency and on building a convenient systematic way of life which largely ignores the humans it caters for.
As people become swept up in conforming to this, they lose their individuality.
As Montag begins to realise how wrong his community is, he starts to steal a few books rather than burn them all.
Gradually he builds up a collection of all sorts of different books and reads them secretly at night while his wife sleeps.
He becomes caught up the in the magic of books until one day, when reading a poetry book at home, he suddenly no longer cares if people know his secret.
His wife is in the television room with her friends.
Montag joins them.
Listening to their shallow conversation, he becomes hostile.
His wife asks him to read a poem from his book.
He does.
When he has finished reading, one of the women is in tears.
Asked to explain herself, she says she doesn't know why she is upset by this.
One of the other women, angry at Montag's reading, says
‘I've always said, poetry and tears, poetry and suicide and crying and awful feelings, poetry and sickness; all that mush.
Silly words, silly words, silly awful hurting words.
Why do people want to hurt people?
Not enough hurt in the world, you've got to tease people with stuff like that!’
Montag replies by saying’
‘Go home and think of your first husband divorced and your second husband killed in a jet and your third husband blowing his brains out, go home and think of the dozens of abortions you've had, go home and think of that and your damned caesarian sections too, and your children who hate your guts!
Go home and think how it all happened and what did you ever do to stop it?’
This confrontation shows clearly the general attitude to books.
Books, and the words they contain, are blamed for causing hatred and sorrow in the world.
Montag's speech is a desperate attempt to show her the reality of her life.
It is not the words themselves which are the root of the problem, bust people themselves and their actions.
Montag's wife reports him to the Brigade and he is forced to flee, making his way to a place outside the city described by Clarisse, where a group of people have gathered together to memorise books, keeping the words immortal.
Timeless words of great writers are learned by rote, the individual becoming the book and, in turn, teaching it to the next generation.
Montag is astonished to find that they too burn books, however they destroy only the cases which contain the words, the ideas can never be destroyed while they live on inside the people, to be written out once more to give joy after the ‘Dark Age’ has passed.
The city is hit by war bombs and destroyed.
Montag and his new companions remain unharmed.
They set about spreading their memories of the books.
One of them shares his thoughts with his companions.
‘There was a silly damned bird called the phoenix back before Christ: every few hundred years he built a pyre and burned himself up.
He must have been the first cousin of Man.
But every time he burnt himself up he sprang out of the ashes, so he got himself born all over again.
And it looks like we're doing the same thing, over and over, but we've got one damned thing the phoenix never had.
We know all the damned silly things we've done for a thousand years, and as long as we know that and always have it around where we can see it, some day we'll sop making goddamn funeral pyres and jumping into the middle of them.’
‘Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep’ is set on Earth in a time after ‘world war terminus’.
Radioactive dust has settled on the Earth, killing off almost all animal life.
Most humans have emigrated to a colony on Mars and those who still remain on Earth are encouraged to leave by the inducement of a free purpose-built robot, or android, to help them in their new life.
The androids are made as human in appearance as possible so that they can be more companionable.
The Earth is sparsely populated and desolate, with many tower blocks lying decayed and uninhabited.
Those who still remain, do so for varying reasons.
Some, labelled ‘specials’ or ‘chickenheads’, damaged by the radiation, have failed to pass a basic IQ test and are forbidden emigration, others remain because of their jobs.
One such person is Rick Deckard, the main character in the story, together with his wife Iran.
Deckard is employed by the police as a bounty hunter, paid to hunt down and ‘retire’(or kill) renegade androids who have escaped from off-world planets and returned to Earth posing as humans.
At the beginning of the story, it becomes apparent that eight Nexus-6 generation androids have escaped.
Rick Deckard must ‘retire’ the six who remain free.
A new generation of humanoid androids, the Nexus-6 types are highly intelligent and extremely difficult to detect.
Deckard employs an empathy measuring test to identify them — the ability to feel what another is feeling being a group response existing only in the human community, it is believed.
The book follows Deckard's progress both in the pursuit of the androids and in his realisation that it is not ‘retirement’ but murder.
John Isidore is a ‘special’ who lives alone in an apartment block, far from other humans.
He works as a driver for an electric animal vet.
(Since the radioactive dust has killed many animals, the ownership of a scarce animal is greatly to be desired and very costly.
Android animals which exactly mimic the real thing are produced to fill the gap, but their owners hide their mechanical origin from outsiders.)
John relies on his television and his empathy machine for company.
‘Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep’ is similar to ‘Fahrenheit 451’in that there is a sense of limited human contact.
John Isidore reflects this.
‘Silence.
It flashed from the woodwork and the walls; it smote him with an awful, total power, as if generated by a vast mill.
It rose from the floor, out of the tattered grey wall-to-wall carpeting…
He wondered then, if the others who had remained on Earth experienced the void this way.
Or was it peculiar to his peculiar biological identity, a freak generated by his inept sensory apparatus?
Interesting question.
Isidore thought.
But whom could he compare notes with?
He lived alone in this deteriorating, blind building of a thousand uninhabited apartments which like all its counterparts, fell, day by day, into greater entropic ruin.’
John Isidore is isolated both mentally and physically.
These are John's reactions on hearing what he thinks to be someone else in his apartment block.
‘It's someone else in this building, he thought wildly, unable to believe it.
Not my TV; that's off, and I can feel the floor resonance.
It's below, on another level entirely!
I'm not alone here any more.’
It transpires that the new tenant is Pris, one of the androids Deckard is hunting (though John does not realise this until later in the story) The presence of Pris excites him a great deal.
Pris is later joined in the apartment by Irmgard and Roy Baty, the remaining replicants.
In both books there is the use of mood control, but, in ‘Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep’, they can control these ‘mood organs’ for themselves.
Emotions cannot be true unless they are spontaneous.
When Deckard asks his wife why she has programmed herself for a ‘six hour self-accusatory depression ’, she says
‘And I heard the building, this building; I heard the —’ She gestured.
‘Empty apartments’ said Rick…
‘At that moment…when I had the TV sound off, I was in a 382 mood; I had just dialled it.
So although I heard the emptiness intellectually, I didn't feel it.
My first reaction consisted of being grateful that we could afford a Penfield mood organ.
But then I realised how unhealthy it was, sensing the absence of life, not just in this building but everywhere, and not reacting.’
During much of the book you do not feel anything for the androids, but as you see their struggle for survival and begin to sense that they have gained the feelings that humans are losing, you realise the irony of the book.
Life is sacred, not just for the humans but for the androids as well.
The humans are slowly dying because of the radioactive dust caused by a human war.
At the same time, the humans are destroying the androids which the created for the service of Man.
But the androids have developed their own emotional responses and therefore they suffer as the humans do.
Just as in ‘Fahrenheit 451’, the human are destroying themselves.
While androids are becoming more and more human physically, they are also doing so emotionally.
In the end, it is almost as if they are more human than the humans themselves.
As a reader, it becomes easier to empathise with the androids and their fear than it does with Mildred and her friends in ‘Fahrenheit 451’ who have become passionless.
Both books are  essentially optimistic, although it is not necessarily apparent at first.
The books show that emotions cannot be suppressed.
In ‘Fahrenheit 451’, a group of humans will carry on and rebuild society.
In ‘Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep’ however, the androids will carry on after the humans have died.
This is not sad because the important part of humanity, its ability to  respond emotionally, will carry on in the androids.
In both stories, the importance of memories is emphasised.
In ‘Fahrenheit 451’ there is the group of self-exiled book lovers.
They will preserve the books and ideas of people before them.
The memory must be kept alive.
In ‘Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep’, the androids lack only memory to believe themselves human.
Once given a set of memories, they are, to all intents, human.
After Deckard has ‘retired’ the remaining replicants, he recognises that he will not be able to continue as a bounty hunter.
‘The electric things have their lives too.
Paltry as those lives are.’
Humans have a constant struggle to maintain their individuality.
If that is lost, then you are not human at all.
In both books, while some are defeated, freedom of the mind remains in some form and will continue for ever.
A study that conveys just how good these books are: it's full of significant ethical and philosophical ideas and does an excellent job in conveying the bleak vision of each future.
THE STRUGGLE BETWEEN GOOD AND EVIL IN TOLKIEN'S LORD OF THE RINGS
The Lord of the Rings is a tale of the struggle between Good and Evil and how Evil is finally overcome.
The struggle emerges in various themes showing the terrible weapons of Evil and how Good fights back.
The fight is not only within the creatures and people of Middle Earth but also in the treatment of nature and the landscape.
Evil sets many traps for the company (and indeed others) who are travelling to Mount Doom in order to destroy the Ring of darkness.
Not least among them is temptation.
The Ring makes anyone who sees it wish to gain possession of it and the more often it is seen, the stronger this desire becomes.
What Evil offers are potentially good things: power and the strength to do good.
Anyone who wants the Ring does so because they are convinced that they could use it in order to destroy Darkness.
This is not so, as with many evils, once you have succumbed, it is too late.
In this case the Ring would use that person for its own ends and foul purposes.
Frodo the Ring bearer does not really want to carry the Ring and offers it to the elf-queen Galadriel.
She does not deny that she wished she possessed it but knows she would not be able to stop herself falling into evil if she were to accept his offer.
Evil is devious, it is trying to turn Good against Good by making Frodo try to give the Ring away.
Boromir, son of the steward of Gondor, falls prey to the Ring and almost kills Frodo in his desire to have the Ring and wield it in order to do good.
The Ring is not the only source of temptation.
Sauron, the Dark Lord has access to the Palantirs, crystal balls in which past, present and future events near and far can be seen.
Here Evil does not use promises of power and authority to tempt people but instead the eagerness for knowledge.
This knowledge is perhaps too great for a small hobbit such as Pippin, one of Frodo's companions, who is tempted and looks in a Palantir where he sees Sauron.
Fortunately Pippin only passes out but others are not so lucky.
Denethor, steward of Gondor, succumbs to the desire for knowledge and is sent mad by what he sees.
In many cases temptation goes no further than desire or possibly trying but failing to seize the Ring.
Those such as Boromir are saved by their friends' love for them.
Frodo can see that Boromir would be ruined by the Ring if he took it, and even though he would quite like to dispose of it himself, he refuses to allow Boromir to be burdened with it.
Others, however, do not have the will to resist.
Saruman the great wizard uses his Palantir too often and cannot withstand the power of Sauron and becomes evil.
Perhaps the best example of corruption is that of Gollum.
Gollum was once a hobbit who came across the Ring by chance and keeps it for a long time.
During this time he falls completely under its spell.
When it passes out of his hands, Gollum is so eaten up with desire for the Ring that even though he has become evil he helps Frodo find Mount Doom in order to stay with the Ring.
Evil has such a strong hold on Gollum that he does not have control over his own mind any more.
He is drawn to the Ring and his thoughts are tortured by it.
It seems that the wise are the ones who are most afraid to take the Ring.
Gandalf (a good and respected wizard), Elrond and Aragorn (friends of Frodo) all refuse to take it to Mount Doom.
Elrond says ‘I fear to take the Ring to hide it.
I will not take the Ring to wield it’.
Those who are afraid understand more fully the evil of the Ring.
All three are already very powerful and know that if they used the Ring for their own purposes, good or otherwise, they would be wielding more power than they could cope with.
Elrond's adamant refusal to take the Ring is because he has considered its advantages but is wise enough to see that it would ruin him utterly.
In some ways the more temptation is increased, the more a strong character might want to resist.
Frodo is a good choice for Ring bearer because he seems to worry less about the possibility of using it himself.
He is only an ordinary Hobbit who came to own the Ring because he was given it and he does not consider himself great enough to do anything with it except destroy it.
Just as Evil fights with temptation and corruption, Good triumphs using pity.
On more than one occasion Frodo and Sam (a hobbit who travels with Frodo) have the opportunity to kill Gollum.
Gollum wins them round by saying how hard done by he is and they take pity on him.
Although they are cross with themselves for being so soft, in the end they discover that they did the right thing because it is Gollum who shows them the way to Mount Doom, and Gollum who finally disposes of the Ring.
In the Forest of Fangorn Gimli the dwarf wants Legolas the elf (both companions of Frodo) to kill an old wandering man but Legolas takes pity on him and again the right decision is made, the old man turns out to be Gandalf whom they thought was dead.
Wormtongue (a servant of The/1oden Lord of the Mark but in the pay of Saruman) is pardoned even though he has poisoned the mind of The/1oden, but he receives his punishment when he is sent back to Saruman.
Even though creatures such as Gollum and Wormtongue deserve death this is not always the worst punishment.
Gollum is kept alive and his suffering, because of the Ring's existence, continues.
Bilbo, Frodo's uncle once had the opportunity to kill Gollum but he did not and Frodo questions this, however Gandalf answers, ‘It was Pity that stayed his hand, Pity and Mercy: not to strike without need’.
It is easy to understand Bilbo's pity but it is still true that Gollum deserved death for all the wrong he did, but Frodo must remember that it would be unfair to Gollum as there are others who also deserve death.
Gandalf tells him that since he is not in a position to pass judgement on everyone he should not pass it on one person.
Gandalf says ‘many that live deserve death.’
Good achieves victories through Pity.
If Gollum had not been spared, the quest to destroy the Ring and darkness would never have been completed.
Another aspect of Evil is that it has no love for other things even those on its own side.
This is one of the reasons why Good is able to succeed.
Evil is unable to care for anything else.
If the ring had not captured and ruined Gollum's mind, he would never have been overcome by desire of it and hence he would not have snatched the Ring and fallen into the Cracks of Doom, the only place the Ring can be destroyed.
If necessary one evil will fight with another in order to advantage itself.
Fear is one of the Dark Lord's most powerful weapons yet some of his army are defeated by it.
During the battle with Sauron's warriors the Dead Host sail up to fight for Aragorn.
Sauron's army is so overcome with fear that no swords are drawn and they run away.
Gandalf comments, ‘with its own weapons was it worsted’.
When Sam succumbs to the temptation of putting on the Ring he feels Sauron looking for him.
However he remains unseen because Sauron cannot pierce the shadows he made for his own defence.
Saruman is eventually murdered by his own servant Wormtongue.
In the end Wormtongue is fed up with being beaten so he cuts Saruman's throat to free himself.
It is interesting to note that in the last analysis it is evil which is its own undoing.
By the time Frodo reaches Mount Doom he is loath to get rid of the Ring.
Gollum cannot now resist grabbing it for himself, he succeeds but leans too far and falls into the Cracks of Doom taking the Ring with him.
Even though Frodo was also under the spell of the Ring and clearly unable to throw it away, Gollum's own greed released Frodo from his torment and ended his quest for him.
Evil also inspires great goodness.
E/1omund's daughter E/1owyn rides into battle and confronts the Nazgul Lord and kills him even though she herself lies near to death for a time afterwards.
Elves and Dwarves have a long history of hate yet Legolas and Gimli become friends because they travel in Frodo's company together.
Evil may inspire goodness but it does its best not only to ruin people, but also nature.
Sauron turns the land of Mordor (his realm) into a desolate wasteland.
Saruman ruins the valley around Isengard and even Frodo's homeland, the Shire is marred by industrial chimneys built by Bill Ferny (a man under the spell of evil).
In contrast the Elf-land of Lothlorien is a panorama of beautiful trees and plants.
The Queen Galadriel of Lothlorien gives Sam seeds for the remaking of the Shire and the tree creatures the Ents punish Saruman because of the destruction he has caused.
Despite Good and Evil fighting, the fact that it was Gollum and not Frodo who threw away the Ring shows that in some ways Good and Evil belong together and need each other.
Without Gollum Good could never have succeeded in destroying Evil and when the Ring is gone the Elves feel forced to leave Middle Earth because there is nothing more for them to do.
Frodo has completed his task and also leaves.
Although Evil has now been banished, paradoxically, with it goes a lot of beauty.
The woods of Lothlorien where the Elves dwelt was a wonderful place but now it will wither.
The men of Middle Earth will also diminish with the passing of the Elves.
Although Good succeeds in destroying Evil, some goodness has also been taken.
OPEN STUDY
‘Pride and Prejudice’ and ‘A Room with a View’
In ‘Pride and Prejudice’ Jane Austen describes a society in which women are considered to be chattels — independent-minded chattels, certainly, but nevertheless objects to be handed from man to man until they are suitably married.
In ‘A Room with a View’, E.M.
Forster shows women in apparently similar circumstances — their objective is still to marry a suitable gentleman.
However, in Forster's world, almost a hundred years after that of Jane Austen, women are trying to break free of the conventional mould.
It is a difference which is shown, first of all, by the two authors' contrasting portraits of relations between the generations.
In ‘Pride and Prejudice’ there is no chasm between the opinions and ethics of a forty year old and an eighteen year old.
‘A Room with a View’, however, clearly shows the division between the generations.
The older generation is faithful to the time-honoured values that represent a suitable marriage as the goal for  all young women.
Lucy Honeychurch's generation are trying to assert their right to choose for themselves the path of their lives.
However, it is not the propriety of marriage itself they question — this remains the inevitable end of a young woman's life; the issue is what kind of marriage they should aspire to.
For Austen, marriage is as much a practical as an emotional matter.
The woman's task is to marry, not only for her own social advancement, but also for that of her family.
In Austen's time society was still essentially hierarchical.
The only possible way for a woman to rise in class was to marry into a family of higher social standing than her own.
For a man it was possible to join a higher class through success in work.
But those who made their fortunes in trade were despised by most members of the middle classes and all of the upper classes.
The crucial factor was the identity of your parents.
The rich were, by and large, country gentlemen.
To own land was to possess, not only a symbol of status, but also the most prized source of wealth and power.
Thus, for Austen's heroine, Elizabeth Bennet, marriage was not just important, it was compulsory.
As she had no brothers, her father's estate was entailed on a cousin.
If she married well she could keep her mother and any unmarried sisters after her father had died, when the estate was no longer theirs.
This does not mean, however, that Elizabeth has no freedom of action at all; it is simply that her actions must stay well within the bounds that society has placed on her.
At the same time, her individuality demands a settlement of her life that is not entirely conventional.
In her portrait of Elizabeth, Austen depicts someone who observes the conventions, yet stays true to herself and her needs throughout the novel.
In Austen's vision, there is a reward for integrity: Elizabeth ends up with the life that society would wish for her and yet which she also wants for herself.
This suggests that Elizabeth does have some freedom to shape her life, although society will always place limitations on that freedom.
Eliza does marry for her advancement, after all, but does not sacrifice her self-respect to do so.
Austen's portrait of her characters reinforces her argument about how one should behave in society to achieve  one's own happiness.
Elizabeth is portrayed, throughout the novel, against a backdrop of alternative fates.
Lydia is the character contrasted the most strongly with Eliza.
She does not have any commonsense and is swept away by her ideas of romance.
As a result she is cast out by society and some members of her family.
Austen thus advocates a conditional view of women's freedom within society.
She does not dispute society's conventions but states that a woman of spirit and goodness, like Eliza, need not submit to the pressures of society where those pressures are unreasonable.
Eliza is portrayed as the most emotionally-balanced member of her family: she is loving as well as reasonable (hence the original title of the book —‘Love and Reason’).
Mary, her younger sister, is at the other end of the spectrum.
Not being attractive she is unlikely to end up captivating a man.
It is assumed throughout the book that she will end up as a spinster.
Thus Austen represents in her a portrait of one who is a stranger to love but wedded to reason.
In ‘Pride and Prejudice’, it is balance that is all-important.
For the younger generation the marriage problem is one of choice.
For the older generation — above all, their mothers — it is one of reminding their daughters of social pressures, while listening to their daughters' desires.
But there is a large contrast between the way the two mothers approach the problem.
Mrs. Bennet's approach is that her whole task in life is to get her daughters married as well as possible.
However, she carries this off badly.
She is a limited woman with limited horizons.
She is an example to her children: ‘don't end up like this’— that is, marrying just for the sake of it someone to whom you are totally unsuited.
In ‘A Room with a View’ Mrs Honeychurch's position, concerns and attitudes are similar.
She makes no attempt to precipitate Lucy into any engagement, agreeable to her or otherwise.
Yet she must still get her daughter married.
Spinsters are still despised and mocked.
Charlotte Bartlett is Lucy's warning: ‘marry early or you may become like this’, that is, fussy, dependent on others, pitied, a nuisance.
To be a spinster is not quite the abnormality it was in Austen's day, but it is still a fate to be avoided.
Forster shows Charlotte as someone who has never known love and is emotionally dried out because of it.
Forster's main concern is emotional freedom, and he has a much larger idea of it than Jane Austen.
The world he lived in was, of course, a much larger one too.
In Austen the continent is a shadow across the horizon.
However, for Forster the continent can be part of  one's own life.
By the late nineteenth century travel was available to the middle classes and, for Forster, travel played a crucial role in the struggle for personal freedom.
The way to live a fulfilling and authentic life, Forster implied, was to go abroad, leaving behind the petty restrictions of British society.
Forster developed this conviction, possibly, because he was a homosexual.
At the time, homosexuality was illegal in Britain.
The only way for him to be true to his sexuality was to go abroad.
And journeys always played a central role in his imagination.
Thus Lucy Honeychurch goes to Italy.
Here she experiences real life and authenticity.
She, however, is not changed sufficiently to love George, although she does feel a strong emotional tug towards him.
She goes back to England where she becomes engaged to the ‘suitable’ Cecil.
He is of good family, educated, rich and therefore a perfect match.
But she comes to recognise the strength of her own individuality.
In Lucy's ultimate rejection of Cecil and realisation of her own feelings she rejects the conventional life society offers her, to live a life of authenticity with George Emerson.
The two books taken together provide a fascinating portrait of the break-down of conventions over the century between their composition.
In ‘Pride and Prejudice’ it is essential for a suitor to request permission for the hand in marriage of the women he has chosen.
When Wickham and Lydia elope and, therefore, flout this social code, they are, effectively, ostracising themselves from the circles they have moved in hitherto.
In ‘A Room with a View’, Cecil asks not only Lucy's mother's permission but also her brother's.
This is considered eccentric both by Mrs Honeychurch and Freddy and they ridicule Cecil's values.
One of the central contrasts between the two novels revolves around the value of position.
Darcy and Cecil are both insiders.
They come from the upper classes and are socially acceptable.
However, in ‘Pride and Prejudice’, Darcy is accepted and loved, whereas in ‘A Room with a View’ Cecil is rejected in George Emerson's favour.
Cecil and Darby appear to be equally conventional, but in one case this is rejected, in the other it is accepted.
In Austen's world, position is everything, but for Forster, with his view of emotional authenticity, position is the first thing that must be criticised.
However, it is worth noting that Darcy is not entirely conventional.
In this he mirrors Eliza.
He loves Eliza, despite the fact that it was against his ‘will, reason and even against his character’ to do so.
Despite his pride and his knowledge of her prejudice against him, he takes the risk of declaring his affection and allows  Eliza to pour scorn on him and on any idea of love between them.
Finally, he allows himself to marry one of inferior rank and connections, against his family's wishes, because he is in love.
What makes Austen's work interesting is that it can never be reduced entirely to simple analytical frameworks.
In the same way that Darcy and Cecil represent a contrast that centres on the value of observing convention, George Emerson can be contrasted with a character in ‘Pride and Prejudice’— George Wickham — who flouts convention.
Emerson rejects convention and in doing so stands for all the values that Forster believed to be most important — authenticity and truth.
His counterpart in ‘Pride and Prejudice’— George Wickham — stands also for the rejection of society's standards, but he turns out to be a rake and a liar — a totally unsuitable match for any of the Longbourne girls.
Austen's view is here opposite to Forster's.
It is inconceivable that Eliza would have married Wickham, just as Lucy could only have married George.
In this simple contrast is reflected a century of change.
What has changed above all over the century is the view of what is possible for the individual to decide for herself.
In ‘A Room with a View’, Lucy's struggle is fundamentally a private affair.
No-one is strongly opposed to the match, and she certainly does not have to defer to anyone's opinion.
The problem is a 
Elizabeth Bennet, on the other hand, cannot only be guided by her own feelings.
She has to take account of the views of society at large.
We are not given access to her private emotional struggles, but we are clear that she cannot reject social values.
Austen believes in love and marriage — the happy medium.
It is a young woman's role, in her eyes, to play by society's rules while not allowing them to define her.
If a girl is both virtuous and spirited she will surely attain her desires without sacrificing either society's values or her own.
It is imperative, in Jane Austen's view, to maintain a proper balance between reason and energy.
What lies behind the different views of the books is, of course, social and economic changes.
Austen describes women in their time honoured role of debutante, wife and mother during the last period that such a role was unquestioned, before the Industrial and French Revolutions had changed the material world and the way European men and women saw themselves.
Forster is a product of those revolutions: he deals with the changes that they brought about, showing women free of the strict codes of respectability and suitability, but defining themselves in pursuit of a new code of emotional truth which still haunts us today.
I don't agree entirely with your assumptions about Jane Austen's values, Sarah: it is significant that Wickham is a ‘liar and a rake’ whilst surely Emerson is a man of principle, whom Austen would have respected.
I don't think her view is that different from Forster's.
Nevertheless, this is a truly outstanding study in every respect, displaying a very mature style and analysis.
A Comparison of creations which go amiss in ‘Frankenstein’ by Mary Shelley and ‘The Food of the Gods’by H.G.Wells
‘Frankenstein’ by Mary Shelley is about the life of Victor Frankenstein.
It focuses particularly on his creation and the actions of his creation which cause Frankenstein' to become mentally and eventually physically ill.
Mary Shelley started writing ‘Frankenstein’ when she was only eighteen years old and completed the novel within a year.
She, her husband and Byron had been discussing the principal of life and wondered if a living thing could be re-animated before Shelley had the idea of writing a book on this theme.
This discussion helped her to discover and develop this idea.
‘Frankenstein’ is a combination of letters and chapters.
It contains three points of view; those of Victor Frankenstein Mr Walton and the creation.
Mr Walton is a captain of a ship sailing in the ice flows of the Atlantic Ocean when he meets Frankenstein who is, at that point, searching for his hideous creation.
Mr Walton's view is expressed at the beginning of the novel and at the end.
He is writing to his sister, narrating the extraordinary tale that he has been told by Frankenstein.
This story, of course, is the life of Frankenstein and his creation.
‘The Food of the Gods’ by H.G. Wells is about the invention of a food which causes living things to grow to six or seven times their ordinary size.
The scientists who invented this food thought it was ‘marvellous’ but it changed the world and created a disaster.
The first edition of ‘The Food of the Gods’ was published in 1904 then reprinted in 1920.
To my knowledge these are the only times this book has been published which is obviously why it's unknown to most people.
I wouldn't have known ‘The Food of the Gods’ existed if my Great Uncle hadn't spoken of it.
It sounded fascinating so I decided to find the book to write this essay.
H.G. Wells includes several  people's points of view in this book, the creators, the general public's and the ‘Children of the Food’(who are the ‘guinea pigs’ of the experiment).
Frankenstein was an inquisitive student studying science at university.
He neglected his family for more than two years when he became obsessed with his studies on the secret of life, despite the advice of a professor called Krempe.
Frankenstein was encouraged by his other teacher, Waldman, to pursue his studies because Waldman thought it would help mankind.
In this case his studies lead to the making of a creation but this creation murdered members of Frankenstein's family and caused the deterioration of Victor's health.
Unfortunately, Frankenstein built the body of a man using bones collected from charnel-houses (buildings where bones are deposited).
He reanimated these bones but we are not told how he brought them to life.
Frankenstein created a man but he was so disgusted by its sight that he gave it no name.
Throughout the book he referred to it as the monster or used another word which expressed his hatred for it.
After he made this impressive creation he said:
‘I beheld the wretch — the miserable monster whom I had created.’
Two distinguished and academic scientists called Mr Bensington and Professor Redwood were the creators of the food in ‘The Food of the Gods’.
They worked together in a laboratory studying growth patterns and ‘alkaloids’ when they found the recipe for the continuous growth of living things.
Immediately they thought they would make a fortune if they were able to sell this food in shops.
Unlike ‘Frankenstein’ the scientists had several names for their creation.
Mr Bensington, at first, wanted to call it ‘The Food of the Gods’(hence the name of the book) but Redwood thought the name ‘Herakleophorbia’ meaning Hercules' food was old fashioned and more appropriate.
Later the newspapers called this creation Boomfood.
Both books contain some Greek mythology.
‘Frankenstein’ 's full title is ‘Frankenstein or Modern Prometheus’.
Prometheus tried to rival a God called Zeus by stealing fire from heaven then giving it to Earth which is similar to Frankenstein's actions because he stole the secret of life and proposed to give this to humans until it went disastrously wrong.
Prometheus and Frankenstein are both punished for these deeds but Prometheus doesn't die.
‘The Food of the Gods’ other name is Herakleophorbia meaning the food of Hercules.
Hercules was a strong, courageous hero who was known for his indulgence for food and drink as well as for his strength and heroic deeds.
The food was called Herakleophorbia because it suggested that food made you strong and tall.
The creations in both books go amiss.
Frankenstein's creation was hideous.
He had yellow skin, watery eyes, black hair, was eight feet tall and was very strong.
The creature, although ugly, was intelligent but when he was rejected by his creator and by the people he  helps ; he became an outsider who turned to violence and sought revenge on his creator.
The monster discovered who his creator was and where he lived when he found some papers as a result he travelled to Geneva.
On arriving he murdered William Frankenstein, Victor's youngest brother, by strangling him.
Victor knew immediately that his terrible creation had committed this murder but stayed silent, because he feared being thought  deranged .
Victor's silence caused an innocent girl, a servant of the household, to be tried, convicted and killed for a murder she didn't carry out.
The monster after committing this atrocity felt upset.
He told Victor his story then asked Victor to make a female monster but Victor, after agreeing to make the woman, didn't keep his promise.
As a result, Victor's friend and wife were murdered by his creation.
The monster was hurt, upset and didn't have a friend.
His misery was so great that he wanted revenge therefore Victor's family were his victims.
There were many deaths in ‘The Food of the Gods’ as a result of the creation.
Humans and chicks were experimented with.
They were fed on Herakleophorbia so they grew and became extremely strong.
The people who looked after them were inadequate because they were dirty, messy and disorganised so inevitably there were leakages of the food.
‘He went upstairs to see some rat holes…they certainly were enormous — and discovered that the room in which the food of the Gods was mixed…was in quite a disgraceful order.’
The carelessness of the creators (for not noticing the mess their employees were making) and of the people who looked after the food meant animals, plants and insects were  accidentally given Herakleophorbia so they grew.
Eventually the Herakleophorbia spread all over the world.
They were dangerous because they, these  enormous living things, had gained the strength to kill people.
Huge rats roamed the streets slaying then devouring their victims.
A canary creeper strangled a man.
Giant wasps noisily hummed around the countryside killing innocent people with their deadly sting.
This is similar to ‘Frankenstein ’because the innocent people are the victims and the scientists in each story couldn't control their creations.
Babies were given this amazing food so some children grew up as giants compared with other children their age.
The babies became outsiders like Frankenstein's creation became an outsider when he was rejected.
A six month old baby:
‘weighed fifty-nine and a half pounds, measured forty eight inches in height, and gripped about sixty pounds.’
This creation had:
‘unexpected developments’ which ‘upset all their arrangements.’
The cost of feeding and clothing a giant child was astronomical because they demanded large quantities of food and needed large pieces of cloth to cover them.
The size of a giant child meant it couldn't be educated in schools.
Big books with a big print had to be made and an enormous nursery was constructed for four giant boys.
One boy called Caddles wasn't educated instead he was forced to work in chalk pits.
When the children grew up they had a restricted freedom because the ‘little people’ did not permit them to go beyond certain points on a piece of land so the giants rebelled against this, thus starting a war.
There was another problem, the Herakleophorbia was addictive.
If the ‘Children of the Food’ didn't receive their daily dose of Herakleophorbia they would have screaming fits and eventually die.
On the other hand if Herakleophorbia was eaten in excess it caused illnesses like tumours and cancer in humans.
Both creations frightened people.
Frankenstein saved a girl from being drowned.
When he reanimated this girl on observer shot him because he was terrified of this ugly creature.
‘The Food of the Gods’ became a political issue.
Frightened people joined the party against Herakleophorbia and fought against the giants using weapons in an attempt to kill the result of this terrible creation.
‘Frankenstein’ and ‘The Food of the Gods’have bleak endings.
Frankenstein dies and his miserable creation decided to commit suicide because his conscience troubled him.
‘I shall die and what I now feel will be longer felt.
Soon these burning miseries will be extinct.
I shall ascend my funeral pile triumpantus and exult in the agony of the torturing flames.’
At the end of ‘The Food of the Gods’ the giants are fighting against the little people, for freedom.
Neither side will compromise which will result in the deaths of yet more people, unfortunately.
A giant says:
‘Tomorrow whether we live or die, growth will conquer through us.’
Although both endings are bleak they are both entirely different.
The creation and creator die in ‘Frankenstein’ but the creation lives on in ‘The Food of the Gods’.
(It isn't relevant whether the creators live or die at the end of ‘The Food of the Gods’).
These tales are unusual and fascinating.
The creations are totally different and have some dissimilar effects but both creations have not been controlled by their creators so they have had disastrous consequences.
Very well done — you've examined both books most carefully & made some excellent links between them.
LITERATURE COURSEWORK: Open Study
‘ANNA KARENINA’ by LEO TOLSTOY
‘FRENCHMAN'S CREEK’ by DAPHNE DU MAURIER
Introduction
The two books I have chosen to look at are in themselves extremely different.
‘Frenchman's Creek’ is a much shorter and a more simple book, written by a well known authoress this century.
It is a romantic adventure set in a time when the role of women was very much restricted by dress and their rights, but compared to ‘Anna Karenina’ it is a modern novel, first published in 1941.
Tolstoy first published ‘Anna Karenina’ in 1918 and based it on an event he himself witnessed.
He wrote what many believe to be the greatest novel ever written.
The theme I am looking at in this study is that of the illicit passions of married women and their escape from their places in society.
Both authors have the skill to make you feel great empathy with their heroines.
The two plots unfold in quite similar ways.
Both women are dissatisfied with their lives and feel the need to change them.
They do this in the form of infidelities but they have very different consequences and conclusions, partly due to the differences in their characters and also their circumstances.
‘Anna Karenina’ has other plots which introduce the story of Anna, her husband and lover and provides a rich contrast to the events involving these three parties.
‘Frenchman's Creek’ is solely made up of Dona's life and is structured in a very different way.
It is introduced by looking back at the events which took place at Navron  through the eyes of a ‘trespasser in time’ observing the memories that still haunt the place after Dona and the others have been and gone.
Dona is well introduced and her character soon becomes apparent.
She is living in a superficial world appearing to act as the ‘lovely creature’ she is.
Enjoying herself by rebelling; drinking and flirting with her  husband's friends, she creates quite a reputation for herself.
The situation with her husband is one where she is very misunderstood.
She realises how pointless her life is in London, then the other side of her character makes her ashamed of her behaviour.
Anna, however, remains  mysterious and undefined.
She is introduced ironically enough when she saves her unfaithful brother's marriage.
It is on this trip to Moscow that Anna meets Vronsky for the first time.
Meeting him  aroused something inside her and made her realise how empty her life really was.
It was not an intentional change but one that just happened, unlike  Dona who goes to Navron House seeking sanctuary from her married life in London.
There is a definite spark between Vronsky and Anna at their first meeting and they are affected by each other even if it is just subconsciously.
Anna allowed herself to believe Vronsky's attention to her displeased her but before she even encouraged him she realised that sadly this ‘persecution’ was the sole interest of her life.
Her life was changed by that visit to Moscow, as was Dona's life changed by going to Navron.
Both women allowed themselves to be involved with another man in the absence of their husbands but in very different ways.
Dona's affair was secretive and so well thought out that she could continue it without damaging her reputation.
Anna's relations with Vronsky, however, were well known to everybody around them.
Dona change a lot more than Anna did because she was very impulsive and impressionable.
She went from being childish, not caring for social conventions and so  spoilt that she could follow any whim she liked, to realising how nai ‘3vely and shameful her ‘rebellion’ really was.
She had her spirit of adventure and desire for romance and excitement fulfilled becoming less superficial and pretentious and a more mature person.
At the start of the story Anna is portrayed as being ‘perfectly unaffected and was not trying to conceal anything, but that she lived in another, higher world full of complex poetic interests beyond reach’.
Indeed she appears to be beautiful both physically and as a person.
The spark that arises between Vronsky and Anna proves not only damaging to Karenin (Anna's husband) but also to the young Kitty Shcherbatsky, who seeing Vronsky as a possible suitor, was in love with him.
Having also admired Anna greatly, she was shamed deeply to see that ‘something terrible and cruel in her charm’ affected Vronsky.
Realising this Anna leaves Moscow but is followed by Vronsky.
After two months of Anna and Vronsky meeting he says: ‘Friends we shall not be, you know that yourself; but whether we shall be the happiest or the most miserable of human beings…rests with you’‘Only one happiness is possible for me in life,…love…’ he declared.
But Anna can't accept the use of the word ‘love’ because it means too much for her; far more than Vronsky could ever understand.
Karenin also tells Anna he loves her as a husband but she doesn't believe he is capable of love or knows what it is either.
One main difference between the two heroines is that Dona's husband had no idea she had been unfaithful.
He noticed the change in her behaviour but she was more intelligent than he was and so it never  occurred to him she had had an affair.
Karenin does discover Anna's infidelity and can't disregard it.
His reaction is particularly vividly described by Tolstoy, as him crossing a bridge that is being dismantled so he has to face the abyss below:
‘The abyss was real life; the bridge was the artificial life Karenin had been living.
It was the first time that the possibility of his wife's falling in love with anybody had  occurred to him and he was horrified.’
Both men were content to have their wives back even though both Dona and Anna had changed so much, they just wanted to make everything agreeable between them.
Unfortunately Harry could never understand Dona and Karenin in truing to help the situation made Anna even more dissatisfied with her life.
After her affair Dona was more mature than Anna and had the capacity to accept a life with her husband.
Anna's affair went on for much longer and she became so dependent on it that there was no way she could go back.
In my opinion Karenin acted in quite an unpredictable way but I think this was because he was so entirely shattered by Anna's actions.
He was almost unbelieving of his impossible situation but on principle he didn't allow himself to feel jealous.
Instead he was extremely magnanimous towards Anna which irritated her further, and made her repulsed by everything to do with him.
Even though in giving advice to her brother's wife she had told her to forgive him for his infidelity and take him back, which is what Karenin was doing for her and exactly what she didn't want.
In a climax of hatred and despair of her husband and life she admits she is living in pretence as his wife while loving Vronsky.
She leaves herself totally at his mercy and continues her affair.
The point when Dona's affair finishes is the point the book finishes.
She married Harry ‘because of his laugh and she had thought that the expression in his blue eyes meant much more than it did’ she didn't dwell on the subject of her life too much.
She, like Anna, had a momentary wonderful escape and love affair, but Dona made a choice to stick to the married life she had chosen.
She had two young children and was going to be thirty she felt the responsibility of having to forget her fantasy life as her Frenchman's cabin boy.
However we know nothing of the background of Anna's marriage which may be a great contributing factor to her eternal unhappiness.
Anna, at first, didn't change her situation because of her son, but it went beyond that and couldn't continue staying with Karenin and loving Vronsky.
She had a much more difficult decision to make than Dona did, and had no obvious options.
This meant Anna spent much of her life being unhappy and sad.
She was constantly torn.
Anna was much more oppressed by the society around her because her affair was more public than Dona's and also because the surrounding she was living in were so suffocating.
Tolstoy gives a good and clear image of the Russian society which caused Anna so many problems.
Karenin was a direct result of that society and even before she left him she knew there was no way out because she wasn't strong enough to sacrifice her position in society.
It was too dear to her to take on ‘the degraded position of a woman who had forsaken husband and child and formed a union with her lover…she would always be a guilty woman continually threatened with  exposure , deceiving her husband for the sake of a shameful union with a man who was a stranger and independent of her, and with whom she could not live a united life.
She could not even imagine how it would end.’
She continued thinking like this throughout her affair, separation from Karenin and life with Vronsky because she couldn't help it.
She had hoped her life might be completely happy and perfect, and expected Vronsky to sacrifice his whole life to love her entirely.
For a time, like Dona and the Frenchman, Vronsky and Anna were very happy together in love; but because of their circumstances their relations became more strained.
Dona never had that problem because during her affair she entered a new and secret world that was so different from her other life.
She took on another personality and a new role as an outlaw.
She experienced danger and love but in one end accepted reality and ended it all.
In my opinion Anna acted more childishly but through no fault of her own.
Even when Vronsky tried to get Anna to re-enter society, she suffered more from  loneliness and her situation just got worse as she got deeper and deeper into the role of a fallen woman.
Dona managed to retain a steady and strong personality throughout, but Anna changed and deteriorated.
She went from being a beautiful, gifted, intelligent and respected member of society to a pitiful, misunderstood and disregarded woman.
Dona and Anna went against the grain for love, but Dona benefitted and got away with her actions while Anna escaped convention and let convention have its revenge.
She was too cowardly and let herself be isolated; something she could not bear.
Dona wanted to be alone and was bored with social graces.
If she had been like most women of her time she would never have gone to Navron or kept  Willian (the Frenchman's  servant employed.
She would have reported the ship as soon as she discovered it but instead her first reaction was purely selfish — to tell no one about it so as not to spoil her peace.
Anna needed society and needed to be accepted by people.
Vronsky accepts and loves her, but in the end she can't believe even he respects her and convinces herself he doesn't.
This horrid feeling of being completely alone is illustrated rather tragically by Tolstoy right near the end, when she sees a joke (about Tyukin, a hairdresser) and has no one to share it with at all.
It also shows that regardless of all her suffering she has retained some of her charm and kind personality.
The conclusions of both Dona's and Anna's affairs are inevitable.
There is no way Dona could have left her married life and children behind to sail the seas with pirate lover.
Instead she takes part in his piracy and gains meaning for life, before she helps him escape.
She goes on to make a new life in Hampshire with Harry still remaining ignorant of her great change and her children, of which she is extremely fond, remaining unaffected.
Before she went to Navron she told Harry she felt like the well fed birds that could only fly about in their cage, but ‘one day I set a linnet free which flew straight out of my hand towards the sun.’
Afterwards through her affair with the Frenchman she is content because as she says ‘the linnet found it's way to the sky’.
For Anna too, the only way out is the one she takes and although her story is one of great tragedy, it was one she chose for herself.
I cannot help feeling that the life Anna lived was at least lived in every sense of the word, rather than spent miserably, in gossip and the petty concerns of the women around her.
There are two references to Anna's situation which I think are connected, and hold importance.
When Karenin warns Anna of her dangerous position he says
‘Our lives are bound together not by men but by God.
This bond can only be broken by a crime, and that kind of crime brings it's punishment.’
This punishment, though, was dealt more severely than I think it should have.
The quotation at the beginning of the book: ‘Vengeance is mine; I will repay’ continues ‘Saith the Lord ’(from the Epistle of Paul to the Romans 12,19) sums up the way in which Anna was treated.
It shows she was unjustly treated and I think that society is wrong to judge; if she has broken a bond made by God, then he should be the only one to reprimand her for it.
It is very sad to think that after Anna tragically  committed suicide under a train, only a few people are grieved and the rest of society regard it ‘as such a woman deserved to end.
Even the death she chose was mean and low.’
Dona never had to feel the pain, torment or be racked with guilt as Anna did.
Instead she could continue and have a proper life after her infidelity.
Anna's end is particularly poignant because there is a continuous theme of death throughout the book.
The suicide of the railway station when she and Vronsky first met, was her inspiration as a solution to her problems.
With it came the realisation of the meaning of the horrifying dream about the little muttering peasant.
Both books are well written and enjoyable to read.
‘Frenchman's Creek’ is obviously much easier but is hardly in the same league as the rich novel produced by Tolstoy's impeccable skill.
This study might appear one sided with more detail about ‘Anna Karenina’ but I think it is inevitable and although I found it quite hard to compare such different styles, I enjoyed reading and studying both.
They have differences and similarities in dealing with this subject and I think they both succeed in making their readers consider the subject more deeply.
Very well done — you examine both books sensitively & perceptively.
The Portrayal of Women in Two Novels of Anthony Trollope
Anthony Trollope was born in London in 1815.
He didn't come from a particularly literary background, though his mother, Frances Trollope, supported them for a while on the proceeds of novels such as‘The Vicar of Wrexhill’.
Though he worked full-time as a clerk in the Post Office for most of his life, he wrote forty-seven novels plus various other books before his death at the age of sixty-seven.
I chose this topic mainly because of the television series ‘Barchester Chronicles’ with Donald Pleasence and Alan Rickman.
The novels I am studying, ‘Barchester Towers’, published in 1857, and ‘The Last Chronicle of Barset’, 1867, are from the same series, set in the imaginary county of Barsetshire.
They have their background, in the church and church matters in England but I personally don't think it matters if you are not familiar with the details.
In 1986, Hawthorne, commenting on ‘The Warden’ and ‘Barchester Towers’, wrote that,
‘It needs an English residence to make them thoroughly comprehensible, but still I should think that human nature would give them success anywhere.’
The books are written in what would seem to some today to be a slow and overly elaborate way — who after all uses words such as‘eleemosynary’?— but he explores all of his characters thoroughly and gives lots of detail which, though not absolutely necessary and sometimes totally irrelevant, make the novel more personal and make the readers feel that they know the characters.
As the books are in the same series, ‘Barchester Towers’ being the second volume and ‘The Last Chronicle of Barset’the last, one of the characters I am going to study appears in both.
I am going to look at some of the major female characters in the books — Mrs. Proudie, who is in both, though in a less prominent position in the second, Madeline Vesey Neroni, from ‘Barchester Towers’, and Mrs. Crawley, from ‘The Last Chronicle of Barset’.
Signora Madeline Vesey Neroni is the most exotic character in Trollope's novel; she is the second daughter of Dr. Vesey Stanhope, one of the diocesan  clergymen in Barchester.
Her life is described over at least two pages and is very dramatic — she lived in Italy where she was much courted because of her great beauty but she eventually married ‘the very worst of those who sought her hand’— Paulo Neroni.
Six months after their honeymoon, she arrived at home, a cripple and a mother.
She established herself firmly in her parents' house once again, with the addition of her daughter, and decided that, as she did not appear at her very best when moving due to her injury, she would remain on a sofa all the time.
She called herself, ‘La Signora Madeline Vesey Neroni’—‘Vesey’ being her father's Christian name which she had appropriated.
Trollope describes her eyes as having talent, the fire of passion and the play of wit but no love, but still she inspires an envy in the hearts of the readers which is amazing considering her background.
I was made sorry for her at first, as I would be for any young girl, crippled — it is hinted by the cruelty of her husband — and a mother, but even at the beginning there is a niggling doubt that she is rather superficial and shallow.
It turns out that she has no real feelings for anyone except herself, not even her daughter who is burdened by the name Julia, and she likes to play with people's emotions, such as Mr. Slope.
The one time I feel sorry for the chaplain is when he falls into Madeline's clutches, not that he minds but Trollope makes us aware that Signora Neroni is like a spider, trapping innocent people and sucking their will and life from them.
He says that Mr. Slope knew that when he visited Madeline he was going against everything he believed, he knew he could be ruined and society would be scandalized, but ‘he could not help himself’.
Though at the beginning, she seems a sad character, with whom life has dealt harshly, you soon begin to realise that she is a heartless and conniving woman.
Even Mr. Arabin, the debatable ‘hero’ of the novel is drawn to her and nearly loses Eleanor, the ‘heroine’, though in a strange quirk, which reflects human nature, Madeline does actually bring them together.
Trollope portrays her as someone who knows she is cynical and too worldly, but knows she cannot, or does not want to, do anything about it.
Mrs. Proudie is the wife of the new Bishop of Barchester, in ‘Barchester Towers’, and she immediately gives the impression of being the head of the household, and perhaps being rather arrogant, which view is borne out by Trollope's choice of surname.
Trollope portrays her as an overbearing, bossy wife and woman right from the start even though he says ‘it is not my intention to breathe a word against the character of Mrs. Proudie’.
In most novels there is at least one character whom the author makes into the ‘baddie’.
In ‘Barchester Towers’ though it is actually Dr. Proudie who takes the position wanted by Dr. Grantly, he is made out to be a rather insignificant and weak person whereas Mrs. Proudie is seen at once to be strong and authoritative, too much so, and Trollope makes of her the kind of character a reader loves to hate.
I find Dr. Proudie and some of the characters such as Mr. Harding and Eleanor Bold rather pathetic and not worthy of sympathy — I do not know whether these are the sentiments Trollope hoped to arouse, but though I obviously dislike Mrs. Proudie as we are supposed to, I find that I can admire her and sympathise with her for having the bad luck to be surrounded by such people.
However, at the beginning of the novel it seems that even this admirable lady, for she is definitely a lady, cannot think totally by herself — she is guided by the abominable Mr. Slope.
At first I thought that Anthony Trollope, though an amusing writer, was another male author of the nineteenth century who assumed that women could not exist without a man somewhere in the vicinity.
But as I read on about the growing disharmony between Mrs. Proudie and Mr. Slope, Trollope rose in my estimation and count him among my favourite authors.
Mrs. Proudie makes an immediate impression when introduced to Mr. Harding and Dr. Grantly because when they are shown into the new bishop's study, they see Dr. Proudie, Mr. Slope and also, to their surprise, Mrs. Proudie ‘an innovation for which a precedent might in vain be sought in all the annals of the Barchester bishopric!’
This makes it clear that Mrs. Proudie is a woman the like of whom neither Barchester nor any of  its inhabitants have ever before seen.
Even Mr. Harding, who in ‘The Last Chronicle of Barset’ is described as the sweetest gentleman and best Christian ever known in Barchester, ‘felt that he ought to rebuke the lady’.
My own impression of Mrs. Proudie is that of a domineering and annoying woman, but one who has her own opinions and is not afraid to express them, which seems to me good rather than otherwise, but the gentlemen, Mr. Harding and Dr. Grantly, are unused to mere women daring to say anything in the presence of men, who are obviously much more intelligent!
I say this of course in the late twentieth century.
Though to me, Mrs. Proudie seems to be the strongest of the trinity that makes up the Bishop of Barchester — Dr. Proudie, Mrs. Proudie and Mr. Slope — Dr. Grantly at first dismisses her saying that ‘when a woman is impertinent, one must only put up with it, and keep out of her way in future’.
Mr. Harding on the other hand does not underrate the ability of the bishop's wife, declaring that he thinks ‘Mrs. Proudie was the worst of the two’— referring to Mrs. Proudie and Mr. Slope.
In ‘The Last Chronicle of Barset’, she appears again, as the novel is also centred around Barchester in Barsetshire, but not so prominently.
It is easy to see, however, that she is still the same forceful woman that she was in ‘Barchester Towers’.
It seems in fact that she is immortal — for how would the bishop manage without her kindly meant tyranny?— but no! she dies, and with her, for me, the most interesting character.
The last woman that I am going to look at is Mrs. Crawley, in ‘The Last Chronicle of Barset’.
She is a more acceptable creature in the eyes of society than the domineering Mrs. Proudie.
Her husband, a clergyman, is the base of the novel, which starts with the gossip and rumours about his stealing, or not, depending on your point of view, a cheque for fifty pounds.
She is a much more down-to-earth person than Madeline Vesey Neroni, and supports her husband through thick and thin, always doing what she feels is in his best interest.
She manages her husband, who is rather eccentric to say the least, in a manner which suggests that he is officially still the head of the house.
Trollope shows right from the start that Mrs. Crawley is a typically admirable person, when he writes:
‘It is declared that a good wife is a crown to her husband, but Mrs. Crawley had been much more than a crown to him…she had been crown, throne and sceptre all in one’.
So immediately, the reader feels that this is a good woman, whom any man should be proud to have as a wife, and therefore rather annoyed that the Reverend Crawley seems not to value her as he ought.
She does stand by him to the end however, when it is found that he is innocent, even though he seemed to proclaim his guilt by resigning.
Trollope possessed the skill of being able to portray these three very different women, Madeline Vesey Neroni, Mrs. Proudie and Mrs. Crawley, in such a way that makes the reader feel on intimate terms with each of them.
I myself prefer Mrs. Proudie out of the three, but Madeline I also find interesting and thought-provoking while Mrs. Crawley seems the most boring as she is admired by everybody and does nothing wrong, which is very dull but does provide contrast.
These women seem so real that I feel sure that they were based, at least in part, on women that Anthony Trollope knew.
With Mrs. Crawley, the narrative reflects the belief of most people in the nineteenth century that the best place for a woman is with her husband, supporting and caring for him.
Mrs. Crawley is the most typical woman of the three discussed — she looks after her husband, cooks his meals, hardly ever reproaches him and she bore his children — very admirable and very boring.
Mrs. Proudie, on the other hand, definitely has a mind of her own — and though she supports her husband she does it in her own particular way and follows her own idea of what is best for him.
Signora Neroni is very unusual — she has a husband but is not at his side which seems to suggest independence; however, she seems to have a need to flirt and have men about her, under her spell.
The accepted view in the nineteenth century, except in the working class where people were viewed very differently, was that women should stay in the home, quiet and supportive, looking after the husband, home and children (probably in that order!)
Mrs. Crawly is basically the stereotypical middle class female, Mrs. Proudie supports her husband but is not quiet, while signora Neroni is totally outrageous!
If just these three are taken, Trollope's view of women seems to be quite reasonable, though rather odd for his time, and encompasses all types — from the ordinary to the extraordinary — without really saying one is better than the other.
However, if one takes the women from others of his novels, they seem mostly to be devoted wives and mothers or grieving widows, or at the very worst spinster sister house-keepers.
He portrays Madeline and Mrs. Proudie as not very ‘nice’— one too fond of using her femininity and the other hardly seeming to recognise it — which could be seen as a criticism of any woman who dared to question her accepted niche in society.
I don't think this was the case, though, as many women did conform and those who stuck out in the way of Madeline Vesey Neroni and Mrs. Proudie were few and far between — few dared to be too independent or to try and think for themselves.
These two novels are rich in originality and credulity, and as such, I think, should be included in the library of any literate person over the age of fourteen.
They give an account of Victorian clergy life which, although perhaps not totally true to life, is basically correct, and they are also subtly amusing.
Anthony Trollope possessed great talent which I think can be seen clearly in ‘Barchester Towers’ and ‘The Last Chronicle of Barset’.
An elegant study, combining sound judgement of Trollope's characterisation with an excellent discursive style.
English Open Study
Based on: Fazisi by Skip Novak
Maiden by Tracy Edwards M.B.E &: Tim Madge
Fazisi and Maiden the first time entries
The 1989–90 Whitbread was 33,000 miles long, the world's longest and toughest yacht race ever to take place.
Since the event began in 1973 it has been held every fourth year and split into 5 legs of different size and difficulty.
For the first time in the race's history the 89–90 race included a Soviet entry (Fazisi) and a boat with an all women crew (Maiden).
There were many parallels between the two yachts and their crew.
Both had been ridiculed, struggled for sponsors and money and both had gained respect for their efforts.
Tracy Edwards, the author of Maiden was project manager, skipper and navigator of Maiden.
After being cook on the last Whitbread she announced her intention to enter the next Whitbread in her own yacht, with an all women crew.
Hardly anybody took her seriously.
At 27 she succeeded in her dream; her book tells us her story and how she made her dream a reality.
The crew of Maiden was very diverse.
Six different nationalities were represented, ages were from 24 to 35 and all were from different backgrounds.
The 12 were brought together by one common aspiration, to conquer 5 seas and sail around Cape Horn.
They succeeded in winning 2 legs, one of them the hardest in the race and finishing second overall.
Skip Novak, the author of Fazisi and skipper of the boat brought much needed experience to the Russian campaign.
He is an American with 3 Whitbreads behind him, and a reputation for getting a grip on campaigns that were going astray.
‘The Fazisi crew were ordinary men from an extraordinary country.
Their eyes popped when they saw the Hamble River flowing with yachts.
In Hamble village, their first precious spare hours were spent not in the pubs but in the Tesco's supermarket watching shoppers walking up to overburdened shelves and putting all manner of goods in their baskets.’
The Whitbread is a long race full of hardships, so it is unlikely that people who hardly knew each other would not have disputes and in the end form friendships.
The Maiden girls didn't know each other before the race but by the end many were firm friends.
In the words of Claire, a crew member ‘I have also come away with lasting friendships, borne of total trust, respect and deep affection.’
The other crew members all felt the same and said it in different ways.
Tracy shows us these friendships  subconsciously and shows us a scene of deep friendship.
By the end the Maidens were like a family.
These friendships had to be made for without them the project would have fallen apart.
The Maidens were living on a fifty-eight foot boat with twelve people aboard, wherever they moved there was somebody else.
The friendships held the crew together throughout the race and the original crew remained throughout the 5 legs, a very rare occurrence on the Whitbread.
They had had occasional disputes as all families do but none had been damaging.
Tracy was very good at picking people as crew, she found a team that worked well together.
During the campaign she found 2 women with whom she could not work, they were dropped for the good of the project.
In the book Tracy doesn't tell us anything about them except their names merely that she couldn't work with them.
Nance Frank, one who was dropped, tried to put an all women crew together but failed dismally.
The current Whitbread has her skippering the US Women's Challenge.
Updated information is that she has dropped out, due to financial problems.
This highlights how Fazisi had to struggle and how great their achievement was.
Fazisi was a different sort of campaign.
There were many crew changes therefore lasting friendships did not have time to mature.
Skip brought a few friends on the boat when he found the Soviets were not skilled ocean racers (it became most apparent in Alexei's case).
The crew may have resented this.
 Throughout his book Skip conveys no feeling of deep friendship, maybe because men tend not to share their feelings and problems with each other.
Possibly this led co-skipper, Alexei Grishenko to commit suicide during the stop over in Uruguay.
There were several reasons why disputes happened on Fazisi that were not shared with other yachts in the fleet.
They included language difficulties and the ostracization of crew who joined the boat after building work had been completed.
The men also tended to have different political views as they came from such a huge and diverse country.
Russia contains 20 different races of people all with deep rooted beliefs, values and rivalries between each race.
Russia also tends to have no class range there are the educated rich and the uneducated poor.
On Fazisi both classes were represented.
On Maiden no communication problems existed as all had a common language, English despite their mother tongues being varied.
In Fazisi's case this was not true.
Skip could not speak Russian and only a few crew members could speak limited English.
It became an effort to communicate and therefore problems were not talked through.
Both books have a different style of writing aimed at a different kind of reader.
Maiden explains sailing terms with little diagrams making it enjoyable for anybody to pick up and read.
The diagrams have explanations underneath for some sailing terminology.
‘Gybing: often a violent manoeuvre as sails and boom sweep across deck rapidly.
Accidental gybes can result in broken masts and injured crew.’
Other words such as tacking, beating, heaving to are explained in this way.
Fazisi is more complicated, almost the entire first half of the book is about the campaign, how it originated, how sponsors were found (Pepsi sponsored them and then dropped them on the first day of the race).
Also a description of how and where the boat was made.
It makes harder reading but really shows how hard it is to get to the start line and get people interested in the project.
Fazisi does not tell us about the birth of the dream and the background of the person who was the heart of it as Maiden does, it is not as personal.
Tracy shows us her feelings a lot more, increasingly apparent in video shots of her when she received the Beefeater trophy.
Maiden's structure as a book is different, it is peppered with diary entries of the race and pictures.
Some chapters (written by Tim Madge) just deal with Tracy and her family life that help you to see how she grew to be the strong character she became, making the book more personal  than Fazisi.
At the end of each section there is a summary of the main events of each of the legs showing us the different problems of all 23 entries.
Tracy also brings in people if they  affected her personally, people she liked from the other crews.
She tells us about the two deaths of co-skipper Alexei Grishenko and Janne Gustavsson both friends for whom she grieved.
Fazisi concentrates more on the Russian entry and the different crew members and their problems.
There are no diary entries or chapters explaining Skip's personal life but there is a chapter for each leg.
The book tells us mostly about the problems of raising money that had to be done at each stop over.
Fazisi survived only on the good will of the people at each stopover.
As this was a continuous problem it dominates much of the book.
The two books are written differently.
I think Tracy did a better job of conveying her experiences of the race than Skip.
Skip however showed us more of the struggle it took to get recognition as a serious competitor.
Both campaigns struggled, I believe that this was what made them different from the rest of the fleet.
In Maiden's case there were no crew changes and they all became very close.
Tracy wasn't obsessed with winning like many other skippers which created a different atmosphere.
Indeed Maiden was competitive which on the first leg may have come as a surprise to the girls.
Tracy seemed happy with the idea that, they should just finish each leg with the boat undamaged and the crew in one piece.
Despite this Tracy was a competitive person, however, she knew how to motivate her crew, when to push and when to stand back.
Fazisi was not as competitive, maybe due to the Soviet crew not being used to such advanced technology.
They were very relaxed and Skip conveys the feeling that they were treating it more as a cruise  than a race.
Skip shows us in the book how his aspirations for the boat decrease and how newcomers to the boat had to get  used to the  crew's relaxed attitude.
At first Skip conveys to us that he was competitive and that he had hopes for the boat.
Later on there was an incident that shows us his declining ambitions.
‘Look, mon cher,’ I told him when he stormed below after having a row with Igor.
‘I went through the same thing.
Take my advice, appreciate this ride for what it is — a cultural experience — and try to relax.’
Skip was saying this to Bilou who had just come from grand-prix multihull racing in France.
He was used to sailing with the best and got exasperated with the Soviet crew.
The crews became part of history.
They had proven that it could be done.
These books show us a great adventure that only a few people undertake and finish.
Both books are highly recommended by myself because even if you don't know anything about sailing you will hopefully share the feelings of the crew due to the writing skill of both authors.
Well-structured — providing background to the race and the books, then focusing on the books themselves.
Several good points of comparison on style, presentation, narrative emphasis.
GCSE OPEN STUDY — OBSESSIONAL LOVE
For my GCSE Open Study I have chosen to look at the theme of obsessional love in ‘The Collector’ by John Fowles and ‘The Great Gatsby’by F. Scott Fitzgerald.
Both books tell of the extremes a man will go to to obtain the object of his desire, and how despite all his efforts, neither hero succeeds ultimately.
Everything that Clegg and Gatsby do is devoted to their loved ones, this is the whole focus of their lives, which is what makes them so dangerous.
The dreams cease to bear much relation to reality, but are so important to both men that they cannot be awakened  from , controlled or stopped, by anything short of death.
Clegg, in the first novel, is obsessed from the beginning, after he has heard Miranda speak for the first time, he says ‘It haunted me.
It kept me awake at nights, it made me forget what I was doing during the day.
It stopped being a dream and began to be what I pretended could really happen.’
‘The Collector’ is arranged in three parts, each told in the first person by Clegg, Miranda, then Clegg again.
Parts one and two overlap in time for a while, but from different points of view, which makes the book all the more fascinating.
You can see into the mind of a normal, everyday man who has somehow become a murderer, he works in a way which is hard to understand, as everything he does is due to his obsession, which makes whatever he does perfectly  acceptable to him, it's almost as if he can't help it.
You can also see the direct  effects of this obsession on his victim, and how she tries to combat it.
‘The Great Gatsby’ is also told in the first person, but not by either of the main characters.
The narrator is Nick, who is Daisy's cousin and Gatsby's neighbour and friend.
He is closely connected to both the lovers so, in this book too, we have a chance to see the situation from both sides, although it's harder to get involved with the main characters and really understand their thoughts, feelings and motivations.
Nick is only a bystander, like the reader, and fairly impartial, although he does have a character of his own and  separate events involved in his life, apart from Daisy and Gatsby.
We find out more in both books, especially ‘The Great Gatsby’, about the lover than the object of love, as this character is the more complex one and the one on whom the story is focused, as is shown in the titles of the books.
Clegg is called The Collector, as he is a butterfly collector, who has now started gathering and trapping women in a similar way, this is a powerful metaphor throughout the book.
The title of ‘The Great Gatsby’ is catchy, but also quite ironic.
He may be great in the eyes of the world, with his  property and wealth, but he has very few friends to attend his funeral and never achieves the only thing he cares about.
Gatsby uses his money to try and attract Daisy, whom he was in love with as a young man, although she later married someone else.
He buys a hugely expensive house for the sole reason that it has a view over the bay of a winking green light from Daisy's house.
He also holds large extravagant parties every weekend for five years, just in the hope that Daisy may come to one of them.
He has planned his reunion with her for so long, that it almost ceases to become real by the time it actually occurs.
They finally meet again at Nick's house.
Gatsby is very nervous, as he hasn't seen Daisy for many years and if she no longer loves him his whole purpose for living has gone.
She must have changed greatly in this time, although Gatsby still has a fixed, perfect image of her, seeing her more as goddess, than an ordinary human being, with bad as well as good points.
In ‘The Collector’, it is also money that enables Clegg to act on his hitherto impossible plan to abduct Miranda.
He wins the pools and with that money he buys an isolated country cottage, where he plans to keep Miranda until she falls in love with him.
Although, like Gatsby, the meeting between him and Miranda is well planned, he is very vague about what happens after that.
Like most stalkers or abductors, Clegg is friendless and unknown and can stay with Miranda as long as he pleases, as no one would miss him.
He waits a long time before seizing her, getting to know her habits and other information about her, but she is really a complete stranger who has never met or loved him, unlike Daisy and Gatsby who at least know each other before the book begins.
This means that Clegg has an even more unreal, fantasized image of Miranda, as he knows virtually nothing about her real personality.
Both men are driven by their  obsessions , but Gatsby is certainly the better man and more human of the two.
They both want to own their loved ones and have their complete faithfulness, but Gatsby wants to earn Daisy's respect and wants her to choose for herself to belong to him only.
Clegg knows he can never gain Miranda's respect except by force, as he has nothing to offer her that she wants, and so, to  fulfil his desire he has to kidnap her.
Gatsby seems alive like the glittering social circle that surrounds him, whereas Clegg is, emotionally, as dead as his butterfly collection.
He seems to treat the whole incident almost like a scientific experiment, albeit a deadly serious one, with great precision and planning and a kind of coldness.
He knows so little about being loved, he cannot really provide Miranda with any more than material gifts and force to persuade her to love him.
He does not really expect her to love him, and when she does it has to be total.
When she offers to sleep with him, he refuses, as he knows it's only for release and not love.
So he is not particularly after a physical relationship, but someone who loves and cares for him alone, Miranda, however, thinks his reason is that ‘his pleasure is keeping me prisoner.
Thinking of all the other men who would envy him is they knew.
Having me.’
He is deeply insecure and doesn't expect love, never having received it before, yet he deals with Miranda's death so matter-of-factly, hardly seeming upset at all, that he can't have cared for her very much as an individual, which is not surprising as he really doesn't know her at all well.
Gatsby does have more success than Clegg, as he and Daisy do rekindle their affair for a time and plan for Daisy to leave her husband.
It is Gatsby who ruins it all by demanding too much of Daisy.
He believes in his heart that Daisy has loved him during the many years they have not seen each other but he has pined over her.
He feels that as he loved her so much during this time, he can't believe she wasn't feeling the same way.
He insists on making her say that she has never, for one moment, loved anyone but him, not even her husband.
She cannot do this, pleading that surely loving him now is enough, but this does not fit into Gatsby's dream and he cannot accept this, ‘his dream must have seemed so close that he could hardly fail to grasp it’, but it was he, himself, who finally stood in the way of fulfilment.
But, I think the major difference between the two comes at the very end of the books.
Since the beginning of all storytelling, true lovers are shown as willing to die or face extreme hardship to save each other.
Gatsby's love is so much stronger that Clegg's as he will do this for Daisy, whereas it never occurs to Clegg to make that sort of sacrifice for Miranda.
What makes Gatsby's action even more splendid is that he knows by this time that Daisy is not going to leave her husband for him.
The car they are both in, although Daisy is driving, runs over a woman and kills her.
Gatsby decides to take the blame and pretend that he had been driving and take whatever punishment comes, which in the end meant that he was shot by the dead woman's husband.
Clegg could not release Miranda, the only way of making her happy, and face the punishment, but his selfish desire to have her always with him  overrides a desire for her good, even once she becomes seriously ill.
Another difference which the reader discovers at the end of the books is that Gatsby is truly faithful to Daisy, he will always and only love her, whereas Clegg soon spots another girl to replace Miranda.
This is a very sinister way to end, leaving you to imagine whether this girl will suffer the same fate, and with the feeling it could be you next, and the collector will never stop.
‘The Great Gatsby’ ends more hopefully, despite Gatsby's death, with the thought that no matter how impossible it seems to reach something, you must keep on trying to get it and maybe one day you will.
He ‘believed in the green light, the orgastic future that year by year recedes before us’.
There is wistfulness in this message too, as you know, and so did Gatsby, that he finally failed.
The portrayal of black female adolescents and the trials they face growing up
The two books I am going to study are ‘The Color Purple’ by Alice Walker and ‘The Friends’by Rosa Guy.
Both these books are by black American women writers, writing about black people, I am going to study these books from the aspect of the main characters' adolescence and how they overcome the trials they face.
In ‘The Color Purple’ the main character is Celie and in ‘The Friends’it is Phyllisia.
Both these books are intense and powerful novels written by prolific and successful writers, which is why I have chosen to write about these two  books .
‘The Color Purple’ and ‘The Friends’are very similar in many aspects, the differences can be indicated by the contrasting styles in which the stories are told.
‘The Color Purple’ is written in the form of letters to God but transcribes as a diary which is a style close to the way Celie speaks, although her later writing matures, it does not lose its frank appeal!
‘The Friends’ is written in the first person narrative, it is rather clear and direct, but it too later develops, conveying the emotions of an ardent adolescent growing up into womanhood.
Celie remains uncomplicated and straight forward but the childish brevity sets the right tone of gratuitous violence for Celie's early vision of the world.
‘The Color Purple’ is set in the first decade of the twentieth century, in rural Georgia and most of the characters are black Americans as are those in ‘The Friends’which is set in the seventies, in Harlem, New York.
Celie is fourteen years old, she has one sister, Nettie and numerous half brothers and sisters.
Her mother is mentally disturbed and her step-father, who she believes is her real father, rapes her.
This causes her to write a letter to God, asking for a sign, because she cannot understand what has happened.
This begins a sequence of letters from Celie to God, written at intervals over a period of more than thirty years.
In ‘The Friends’ Phyllisia, also fourteen, had moved from the West Indies with her sister and mother, to New York where her father owns a restaurant.
Her family are quite well off whereas Celie's family is poor.
Phyllisia faced many trials while she was growing up in Harlem, the first occurred when she was mocked by other pupils in her class, they called her ‘Monkey chaser’ and ‘Teachers pet’because she was cleverer than the others.
She felt all alone ‘Was there one who would come down to help a young girl, desperate with fear, ready to be set upon by a mob?
I knew the answer.
No!’
In the same way, Celie too was all alone, she had no one to turn to but God as there was no one else to pay attention to her.
She was treated like a slave by her husband who she was forced to marry.
Being alone meant being abused, threatened and beaten up.
In both characters' lives it was mainly men who had oppressed them, for Phyllisia it was her father who preferred her sister, Ruby.
She never called her father ‘Daddy’ but Calvin when talking about him, she feared him for she described him as if he was some towering evil giant.
Even though she feared him, she respected him and was always trying to impress him.
In parallel, Celie too was oppressed, but by all the men in her life, she looked at women for she was not afraid of them.
She never told us that her husband, Albert was attractive, this implied that early abuse has killed her heterosexuality.
She too feared Albert, she called him Mr. —, she treated her brutally, often beating her.
Someone asked Phyllisia why Calvin was so mean to her, she answered ‘Because he  says I'm ugly.’
After she was beaten up by the other pupils, Calvin said, ‘The trouble with than one, though, is she's ugly.
Yes, man, even if you take away that fat swollen nose, she still ugly.’
He did not care how this made Phyllisia feel.
In the same way Albert too denounces Celie, ‘You black, you pore, you ugly, you a woman.
Goddam, you nothing at all.’
He treats her like this because he wanted to marry Nettie, Celie's sister, but her father said he would give him a cow as a dowry if he married her instead.
The portrayal of many incidents of rape and beating are so carefully and tactfully described that the effects are realistic and pitiful.
Grotesque aspects of violence are portrayed by Celie in her accounts, but it is a tender rather than violent book.
Phyllisia had seen this girl called Marian, she wanted to be her friend because she was perfect and her father would have been impressed, but when she approached her, Marian snubbed Phyllisia.
In the same way, when Celie first saw a photo of Shug Avery she wanted to meet her and would day-dream about her, ‘She like a queen to me.’
But when they finally met, Shug greeted her in an enigmatic tone, ‘You sure is ugly’.
Both felt alone, Phyllisia shows it well when she says ‘It was lonely to be in this city but I longed so much for her friendship.
So very very much.’
It is often true that the oppressed tend to accept the thinking of those who oppress them, Celie told her step-son to beat his overpowering wife for she resented her pity and independent ways.
Phyllisia too, rejected Edith, her only friend, like her father would have done if he saw that she dressed like a ‘Ragamuffin’.
Both regretted the way they behaved and resumed their differences.
Phyllisia found friendship in someone who was the opposite to Marian — Edith, she was poor and therefore dressed in scruffy  clothes , she had gone against her father's orders of never to see Edith again.
In parallel, Celie had a great passion for Shug Avery and finally after caring for her through her illness, Shug and Celie struck a companionship.
It is Shug who protected Celie from Albert, she promised to stay with her, since Albert never beat her when Shug was around.
Celie felt special, Shug made her feel special, especially when she wrote and sung her a song.
‘First time somebody made something and name it after me’.
Shug made Celie feel wanted, this made her feel secure, ‘For the first time in my life, I feel just right.’
Phyllisia was also insecure because her father told her she was ugly, but Edith and her family made her feel special, ‘They thought I was pretty, all except Ellen, the baby, and she thought I was beautiful.’
Edith had also stopped all the pupils in the school from beating her up again after the first incident and during the riot it was Edith who had saved her life.
Both Phyllisia and Celie realised that the men they had feared were not as monstrous as they had thought.
‘Nobody fight for Shug, he says.
And a little water come to his eyes.’
This showed  Albert's sensitive side to her which brought them close together, they now had a shared loyalty, towards Shug.
In the same way Phyllisia noticed the same softening in Calvin when they found out their mother was ill.
Once Celie finds out her sister was still alive and had been writing to her for all this time but she had not received any letters because Albert had intercepted the letters, she stopped writing to God.
Celie now had many people, all women, who loved her dearly, she was no longer alone.
She also believed that ‘If he (God) ever listened to poor colored women the world would be a different place.’
Celie finally stood up to Albert after Shug told him that she was taking Celie with her to Memphis.
She let everything out, she did not hold back, she no longer had anything to fear for she had the support of the women behind her.
Phyllisia too stood up to her father when he says he is going to send her and her sister back to the West Indies.
She wanted to stay in Harlem and be with Edith for it was because of Edith she was still alive and she finally knew that their relationship was genuine.
Phyllisia told her father that she was not going back.
The one person each loved, for Celie it was her sister, Nettie and for Phyllisia, it was Edith, their oppressors had driven away and as Phyllisia said what made it worse was that, ‘I let you.’
They were no longer going to let them continue.
Both were successful in  their task, Phyllisia no longer has to go back to the West Indies and Celie was reunited with all her family.
Both these books are very similar, their main themes are the same; that with the support and love of other women they overcame their oppressors and emancipate themselves.
Both books show that poverty and even ugliness can be overcome; once emancipated, Celie grew rich and thought better of her appearance.
The same thing  happened with Phyllisia, she grew up  throughout the book and turned out to be a beautiful woman, who was more sure of what she wanted and could stand up for it.
Both were under the power of men, then at the end they are wholly independent of men, free women, this enabled them to talk to their oppressors as some sort of equals.
The central theme, that blackness and womanhood are rich and beautiful endowments, is asserted through the books.
Both gain a sense of confidence and security provided by other women which helps them overcome the trials they face growing up.
Very nicely compared with apt quotation.
Nicely summed up too.
THE IMAGINATION OF LEWIS CARROLL
For my open study, I have decided to investigate the imagination of Lewis Carroll, using Alice In Wonderland and Alice Through The Looking Glass.
Rev. Charles Lutwidge Dodgson, more commonly known as the famous author of Alice in Wonderland — Lewis Carroll, was born on January 27th 1832.
After leaving school he became a  mathematical lecturer at Oxford in 1855 and he continued with this job until 1881.
His most famous work, Alice in Wonderland, was published in 1865.
The sequel to this, Alice through the looking glass, was published seven years later in 1872.
Lewis Carroll had a very vivid imagination and I will use some extracts from both books, to show how he expressed his imagination in his work.
I will begin with the Mad Hatter's tea party, which was not in the original version but was later added.
In the days when Lewis Carroll wrote these stories, people who made hats were considered to be mad, because of the fibrous fumes they inhaled.
Carroll based his character of the mad hatter on a Mr Theophilus Carter, who was known in the area for his eccentric ideas.
He has taken three characters to make the basis of this chapter.
The mad hatter, the March hare and the  dormouse .
This is a pretty odd combination if you think about it for  dormice and hares do not really talk and so would not be able to talk to the mad hatter, a human.
It is a good idea of Lewis Carroll to think of the March hare because in March hares tend to go a bit potty and they stand on their back legs and box each other.
So both the March hare and the mad hatter are very mad.
I think that the  dormouse is quite a unique character and he adds absurdity to the story, for all he does is sleep!
The whole chapter is ridiculous, for example when Alice asked to sit down she was told there was no room, by the characters already sitting there, yet there was plenty of room for everyone to move round the table several times before returning to their original places.
It seems that Carroll's obsession with time in this chapter is not completely dreamt up, or was his infatuation with continually waking up the  dormouse .
Both these obsessions were based on Mr Carter's invention of the ‘alarm clock bed’.
However, it does not take somebody with a great imagination to think of using someone's invention to base two of the hatter's obsessions upon.
The conversations which are held between the March hare and the mad hatter are complete nonsense.
‘What day is it?’
‘The fourth’
‘Two days wrong.
I told you butter wouldn't suit the works’
‘It was the best butter’
‘Yes but crumbs must have got in as well’
This conversation also shows that Carroll's characters were mad.
Who would use butter to fix a watch unless they were mad?
The hare and the hatter also decide to put the poor little  dormouse into the teapot, which is rather cruel because he didn't do anything to them and it is rather a strange thing for his companions to do.
I will now look at the ridiculousness of The Queen's Croquet Ground.
It is pretty odd that whilst playing croquet they do not use ordinary equipment, instead they use flamingoes as their mallets and hedgehogs as their balls.
The soldiers bent over to form the arches but they were no good as they kept moving all over the place and there seemed to be no rules or sense of order to the game.
It was rather clever of Lewis Carroll to think of an animal, flamingo, which could be used as a mallet and also to think of hedgehogs as balls.
It is  peculiar that the hedgehogs should be used as the balls, especially as they keep wandering off and getting into hedgehog fights.
One Character in this chapter which really stands out is the Queen of Hearts.
In my opinion she has been created very well and nobody dares to cross her path or they end up being executed.
She has only one main thing to say in the book and that is:
‘Off with his head!’
I think Alice was right when she thought about the amount of beheadings that were carried out:
‘They're dreadfully fond of beheading people here: the great wonder is that there's anybody left alive’
This is true, because if the Queen keeps having people beheaded, where is everybody coming from?
However, a child, having the book read to them, would not think of such complex ideas, and after all the book was designed for a child.
Another ludicrous character in this chapter is the cheshire cat, who I personally find to be one of the nicest characters.
However, he is strange, he only shows parts of his body and often only his eyes and his mouth.
The cat is someone Alice can talk to and someone she can tell all of her problems to, ie. complaining about the game of croquet.
‘They don't seem to have any rules in particular, at least if there are nobody attends to them.’
The King takes a disliking to the cheshire cat but expects the cat to show respect towards him.
However the cat doesn't wish to so Alice supported her friend by saying
‘A cat may look at a King’
Lewis Carroll used an English Proverb here which means there are things which a minor can do in front of a superior.
By using this proverb Lewis Carroll has stretched his imagination into bringing in  an intellectual side of things ie. proverbs, as well as the nonsensical side of things.
The Cheshire cat is an odd character and he causes confusion when he literally disappears into thin air.
I will now move on to look at one chapter from Alice through the looking glass.
Beginning with Tweedledum and Tweedledee.
These two characters, created by Lewis Carroll, are probably two of the most well known characters from Looking glass.
In this chapter Lewis Carroll uses a word which isn't in the English dictionary, he uses a word he made up with his vivid imagination —‘Contrariwise’ which means to be contrary.
When Tweedledum and Tweedledee talk to Alice they are almost talking in riddles.
First of all they say that if she thinks that they're waxworks she should pay, and then they say that if she thinks that they are real, she should be talking to them.
They also manage to muddle up or confuse the issue of which Alice is speaking on, for example,
‘I like the walrus best’,…‘because he was a little sorry for the poor oysters.’
‘He ate more than the carpenter though,’ said Tweedledee.
‘You see he held his  handkerchief in front, so that the carpenter couldn't count how many he took: contrariwise.’
‘That was mean!’
Alice said indignantly.
‘Then I like the carpenter best — if he didn't eat so many as the walrus.’
‘But he ate as many as he could get,’ said Tweedledum.
This was a puzzler.
When Alice met these two  peculiar characters the words of a famous rhyme going through her head: ‘Tweedledum and Tweedledee agreed to have a battle…’
It is thought that this rhyme is based upon a musical rivalry between Handel and Bononcini.
The brothers are very childlike and I think that Lewis Carroll is reliving part of his childhood through this chapter.
The chapter appears to be based on the famous nursery rhyme  about Tweedledum and Tweedledee for at the end the brothers fight over the rattle and also the crow appears.
Having looked at both Alice In Wonderland and Alice Through The Looking Glass, I have confirmed my belief that Lewis Carroll had a very vivid imagination and this makes his work fascinating to children and adults alike.
A pity you didn't take more examples from Looking Glass & mention the idea of going across the square, in chess, which it is based on.
What you do say is good.
ENGLISH OPEN STUDY
THE USE OF TELEKINETIC POWERS
When given the task of writing an English Open Study, I had absolutely no idea as to how I should begin.
I thought about all the books I had read in the past and remembered one in particular which I had enjoyed immensely.
This one particular book is called Carrie, and is written by the famous American author, Stephen King.
Having decided on this book, I then had to find another interesting book which had some connection to Carrie.
The obvious connection was that of the idea of tele-kinetic powers, and so my search began.
After hours of roaming through booklists and library indices, I came across my second book named Hear The Children Calling by Clare Mcnally.
I know absolutely nothing about this authoress, except for the fact that she has written many other horror stories.
Many people may think I am rather strange in comparing two horror books.
But I personally feel that these two books are not just blood and gore, for they both actually have deep, rather strange and mysterious story lines, and not the usual one of an horrific axe-murderer!
The idea of people with telekinetic or telepathic powers frightens me a little.
To know that somebody could read your mind, or move an object without touching it, seems unbelievable.
Yet many scientists have proven that there are some people who are born with these sensational powers, in particular twins.
According to the Oxford English Dictionary:
‘Telekinetic is the ability to cause the movement of a body caused by thought or willpower without the application of a physical force…’
‘Telepathy is the communication between people of thoughts, feelings etc…involving mechanisms that cannot be understood in terms of known scientific laws.’
Well there you have it, straight from the book of knowledge!
So, now that we know what both of these terms  entail , I can continue with your full understanding.
Stephen King is now known as today's leading horror book writer and needs little introduction.
He has written many books including Carrie, Misery, The Shining, The Stand and Christine.
In order that you can understand what I am talking about, I will tell you a little about the story line.
Carrie, properly named Carrieta White, who is the main character in this book, is a young rather ugly girl of sixteen.
She has an extraordinary gift, as she is telekinetic and so has the power to make things happen through thought-transmission.
Carrie never had any real friends at school, she was teased constantly and was the butt of everyone's jokes even from the young age of five.
Now eleven years on, she is still teased and when to her dismay she gets her first period, the girls start chanting and throwing tampons at her.
Carrie seems to have dug herself into a huge, deep hole of self-pity and has no desire to get out of it.
The reason for her rejection of society is mainly due to her mother, who is a religious fanatic, and  believes that the ‘Day of Judgement’ is just around the corner.
She also believes that smoking, nakedness, periods and breasts are all sins and so Carrie is repressed.
The main plot of the story becomes more interesting towards the end when Carrie realises that her powers are without limit.
So, after practising lifting her bed with the powers of her mind, she is ready to face anything or anyone who tries to repress her.
She decides at this point in the story, that nothing is too bad for those people who have tried to humiliate her throughout her life.
So, when to her great surprise she is asked to the Spring Ball, by one of the most desirable men in this school, she feels that this is just to be another of the many jokes played on Carrie.
The night of the Spring Ball arrives, Carrie looks beautiful, she's being escorted by the nicest possible person and then they get elected as King and Queen of the Spring Ball!
Carrie's life seems to be perfect, maybe she had misjudged them all along?
However, as they say, once a misfit, always a misfit!
And so, as predicted, two buckets of pigs blood were poured over the two of them and they were received by hysterical laughter.
This continuous laughter finally made Carrie lose her grip and her remarkable gifts led to a disaster whose consequences were chaos and destruction, to all who lived in Chamberlain, Maine.
Carrie uses her powers to cause the death of sixty-seven high school students, her mother and four hundred and nine towndwellers.
At the end of the book, she too dies, but not until she has killed everyone who had hurt her in the past.
Having given you a run down of the main events, you can see how harmful rejection and repression can be to a vulnerable sixteen year old girl.
My second book, although it has used the same idea of telekinetic powers, has a completely different story line.
For a start, this is a story of a number of telepathically gifted children who were accidentally killed six years ago.
Although their families still mourn their loss, they have tried to put their grief behind them and rebuild their lives.
So, when they begin to receive ‘messages’ from the youngsters, they are stunned and dismayed.
These ‘messages’ are cries for help from children who are obviously in great distress.
These cries and messages cause many unnecessary deaths but yet, the families of these children continued to search for their long lost children.
Their search for their children ends up at the La Mane Centre in Albuquerque.
This centre looks like a huge barracks in the hills and no one knows what goes on in this place.
In reality, it is run by a Dr Lincoln Adams, a man who had seen the TK potential in all of these children.
In order that these children  didn't get suspicious of his works, they were brain-washed and then placed with families on campus.
However, when some of the children start to communicate with the familiar but unknown people, Michael Colpan's dad on the campus lets out a little of the secret, in order to save these poor children from being used as national weapons, since they had the power to make a harmless teddy bear savagely attack a human and kill it.
After a long rather awful ordeal, the three children escape from the rule of Dr Adams and rejoin their true families.
However, Dr Adams manipulates the remaining children, as he knows that they can telepathically communicate with Tommy, Michael and Jenny, to get the three of them back.
Michael cleverly gives in and tells Dr Adams where he is and that he wants Dr Adams to come and take him back.
What happened next, was done by a child ‘who had suffered years of subtle torture at the hands of a madman whose twisted mind helped him justify all his crimes’.
As you can imagine, Michael used his telekinetic powers to kill the dreaded Dr Adams, in order to save all of his friends.
Having given you a run down of both books, you can see one obvious connection — the use of telekinetic powers.
In both stories the children used their powers to kill the people who had tortured them and used them.
Michael freed the children from the evil hand of Dr Adams at the same time as reuniting the children and himself with their true families.
Carrie freed herself from repression by both her schoolfriends and her religious fanatic of a mother.
Therefore they were both very successful, as they both carried out their intentions to the full.
Although the children at the La Mane Centre were made to use their powers for the wrong reasons, when it came to using their powers when it mattered, both Carrie and Michael used them in order to kill and destroy.
They both knew what they were doing and didn't just rush into it.
Both books talk of this power as being abnormal, but I cannot believe that people have the power to just FLEX and move an object.
It just doesn't seem convincing to me maybe because I've never seen it done.
Another connecting point in both books is the use of fear.
Although these children were potentially a lot more intelligent than the rest of society, they still feared something and this is what  suppressed them for a longer period of time.
Dr Adams tortured each child with something he or she feared.
The same element of fear is portrayed in Carrie, as her mother threatens her with the power of God.
Both Michael and Carrie do not use their TK powers to cause a knife to kill someone, instead they controlled the death as if it was something they really wanted.
Carrie used her TK powers to cause her mother's heart beat to slow down until, finally she said ‘stop’ and Margaret White collapsed and died.
Michael uses his powers to make Dr Adams stab a rake into his chest.
Even though, he lost his footing and ended up ‘floating face down in the dark water, his body resting over the length of the rake as if it were afloat.
The tines pointed up towards the neck, where blood began to gush out with the flow of the water.’
The main difference between these two books, is that although all of the children were born with these powers, only Michael and his friends were exploited.
Even though Carrie's mother suspected something was different with her child, she was too caught up in her own religious world, that she did not do anything about Carrie's obvious talent.
In fact, if anything, she only made it more prominent.
Both of these books, show the use of telekinetic and telepathic powers as being evil and causing destruction.
However, surely if they were used in the right situations, then they could be extremely useful?
I personally felt that the characters were very stereo-typed and extremely predictable.
Dr Adams was made out to be an evil scientist who uses young innocent children for his own benefit.
In Carrie, her mother is  given the stereo-type of a wicked, religiously fanatic witch who has warped the mind of her only child.
The two plots were also very predictable, because we all knew that Carrie would not be accepted back into society just from going to the ball.
Also that the children of the La Mane Centre would not live happily ever after until they had killed Dr Adams.
It is strange how people like to read books like these two, as surely there is enough violence in the world already?
But, I believe that we all like to be scared a little, as long as we can shut the book at the end of the story, and still be in our cosy, safe bed.
That is why people are attracted to horror books, because it makes us feel part of the action for a little time but yet we can get out of it as soon as we desire.
Having read both books for the first time, I really enjoyed them, but once I read them for the second time, I saw how little there really was to them.
There was not enough action and they were just too predictable, that they simply did not scare me but surely the point of a horror book is to scare you?
As I am drawing to a close, as I can find no further connections or criticisms of these two books however obvious or unobvious they may be, I would like to leave you with an appropriate quote from one of my books.
It is from Hear The Children Calling and sums up the real reason for both Carrie and the other children's doings, however murderous they may have seemed…
‘It was done by a child who saw no end to his nightmare other than this…’
You write quite well abut these 2 books which aren't really worthy of your  intelligence .
There is really no  subtlety of character to connect in.
You are rather forced to tell the story as there isn't much else to do!
ENGLISH COURSEWORK
OPEN STUDY
Theme: ‘Outsiders’
Books: ‘The Outsiders’ by S.E. Hinton ‘The Color Purple’by Alice Walker
INTRODUCTION:
I have chosen to link two books on the theme of ‘Outsiders’ for my English coursework open study.
The books are ‘The  Outsiders ’ by S.E. Hinton and ‘The Color Purple’by Alice Walker.
Both are written by young American women writers and are set in this century.
I read both books this year and found them so interesting and closely related, that I decided to use them for my coursework.
The books are written in a different form to other books.
The Color Purple is written in letter form.
Alice Walker, the author, starts the letters at the beginning of the book, telling the story of a poor black 14 year old girl called Celie, and continues right to the end of the book when Celie is a middle aged woman.
Alice Walker changes  Celie's dialect, vocabulary, thoughts and views as she grows up.
Giving Celie a ‘real’ feel as she matures to womanhood.
This is also illustrated in ‘The Outsiders’ by S.E. Hinton.
Ponyboy, the main character, is 14 when the book starts, he narrates the story, as he is writing it down in essay form.
This book is also written in the type of language that Ponyboy would use, eg. ‘Buddy’, ‘Shucks’, ‘Gee’.
Both Celie and Ponyboy are fourteen when the books start and both books follow their main characters through the most eventful periods of their lives, expressing the main characters' outlook on life, their feelings and most importantly, their own personal tragedies and joys.
‘The Color Purple’ is set at the beginning of this century.
We are not told this but it is easy to say that the plot opens up in the Deep American South between the two world wars, from the way the coloured people are treated, the fashions, and the descriptive backgrounds.
It is easier to set the time of ‘The Outsiders’ as the early 60's or late 50's, even though the date isn't made obvious.
Certain factors pinpoint the time such as the fashion, the idols and stars, the slang language and the general background and area in which the story is set.
Eg. One of the idols is Paul Newman and the favourite cars are mustangs.
I believe the best link between the two books are the characters of Celie and Ponyboy.
Their characters are very alike in mannerisms and quirks as well as in their shyness and innocence.
They are both so likeable and even though they are of different races and sex.
The same kindred spirit flows in their veins.
Throughout both books, the main characters, Celie and Ponyboy true to find themselves — to create their own individuality and not to conform to the stereotypes of their class.
Celie strived not to conform to a stereotyped henpecked housebound wife.
Ponyboy feels he should become tough to fit in with his friends, but soon realises that by doing this he would never achieve a better life.
Ponyboy wanted more out of life than his brothers.
Although in ‘The Outsiders’ he has more of a group and social life as he spends most of his time with friends or his brothers.
His eldest brother, Darry, could be compared to Celie's husband, Albert, in that he  represents the head of the family and as such  takes the lead in the running of things.
I linked both books to the theme of ‘Outsiders’, not because of the title but because I felt both books told the story of two lives lived on the edge of society.
Both characters were ‘outsiders’ in their own community, whether through poverty, skin colour or beliefs.
‘We're poorer than the Socs and the middle class.
I reckon we're wilder too.’
Ponyboy, ‘The Outsiders’
One can feel that the emotions in these novels are very deep as they seem to bounce off every page to reveal yet another new anguish as the protagonists' sad, poverty  stricken lives unfold.
Celie and Ponyboy both suffer a sense of loss, and this is illustrated throughout both books.
In my opinion, the books revolve around this central feeling of loss.
Celie's loss is that of her illegitimate children.
She was raped as a child, became pregnant, gave birth and then had her children taken for adoption.
She never knew them, she pined for them and for the better life they might have had together.
‘I seen my baby girl…
Like more us then us is ourself.’
Celie, ‘The Color Purple’
Ponyboy, although living with his two elder brothers, lost his parents when they were killed in a  car crash when he was young.
Ponyboy constantly reminisces about those ‘golden times’ when his parents were alive and how, now, their lives were a daily struggle to survive and keep the remaining family together without the love, warmth and security that their parents would have provided.
This loss is an empty gap in the characters' lives and both Celie and Ponyboy try to fill it by  installing great love and understanding into their friendships.
Ponyboy and his brothers have their own gang of friends.
Each friend, an outsider such as they — abused kids  adolescences from broken homes.
There are two main supporting characters that feature prominently in each book — Shug in The Color Purple and Dallas in The Outsiders.
These are idol-like figures and both Celie and Ponyboy look up to them as role models and surround their lives with these friends.
Eventually Ponyboy and Celie realise that they should always be themselves and rely more on their own inner strengths.
At the beginning of the book Celie despises her husband, Albert, because of the way he treats her as an object.
As a result, she turns to friends for support, especially Shug, a singer.
She learns to stand up for herself and becomes more aware of her own personality.
Albert then in turn discovers Celie's true self and slowly they build up a trust and confide in each other.
At the end of the book, these opposing characters become closer and their real love for each other shows through the bitter shell that they hid under to protect themselves from the awful life they lead.
An important emotion that comes across in both books is the constant feeling that the characters have been ‘hard done by’ and have had the worst possible luck just because of their colour and poor background.
The Outsiders is set in the East Side of a fictional town.
We are given a clear description of a very poor downtown area with run down housing and abandoned cars.
The books is very clear about the yawning gap between the two classes of rich and poor.
They never mix socially or academically and  thought badly of each other.
Although the book ended on a positive note in that the enemy's group leader tried to let bygones be bygones.
In The Color Purple, Celie is not really aware that she is poor, simply because she knows no other lifestyle apart from the one she is accustomed to or the wealthier white people's.
Her house and those around her are all made of wood and tin!
The town in which the story is set in has a close knit black community who are very cautious about commenting around white people, as feelings of racial prejudice were very strong.
In The Outsiders, the gang, their friends and rivals spend their time mugging and jumping people, stealing and robbing from shops.
This eventually causes the death of one of the boys, as the gang try to protect themselves from being attacked by a rival gang — The Socs.
Eventually Ponyboy's best friend, Johnny kills his attacker in order to save his and Ponyboy's life.
This leads Ponyboy to question why he and his friends' attack people.
He doesn't even enjoy it!
‘Greasers are almost like hoods; we steal things and drive old souped-up cars and hold up petrol stations and have a gang fight once in a while.’
In the end, the children get themselves into trouble with the police simply because they are bored.
Perhaps they feel it is a way of getting back at the system that keeps them in the poverty gap.
They struggle but are never heard.
The Color Purple does not portray this same view as widely as The Outsiders, mainly because Celie is coloured and in the era that the book was set — 1920's, racism was very strong and coloured people had no rights at all.
Being in a coloured community where Celie lived, attacks and prejudices could not really be fought against.
They just had to put up with it and turn a blind eye.
There were no champions to fight their cause, so Celie, her friends and family could not show their anger openly in case they punished for speaking out.
In both books, hope is a predominant trait that comes shining through.
It is the hope for a better life that keeps the  characters' heads above water.
Ponyboy hopes he will finish school and go  on to university, so that he can gain qualifications and lead a better life.
Darry and Soda Pop (Ponyboy's brothers) hope they can earn enough to keep their family together and alive.
Johnny, Ponyboy's best friend, hopes his parents will stop  arguing and fighting, so that they may lead a normal life together.
Hope keeps the characters searching for a better life.
Even the West side rich kids need hope.
Life is rough all over.
In ‘The Color Purple’, hope is also a very strong feeling.
It keeps families together during the hard times of the depression.
It keeps Celie alive every day — waiting for her sister and children to come home.
Hope is an every day essential that is needed in each of the characters to keep their minds and souls alive.
I think that both books share the same moral.
If you hope for a better world then maybe if you try hard enough, it can be achieved.
Both books have a closely related theme.
These books are well known and thought of, because of their great literary and imaginative content.
The language is not always clear as the dialects and slang can be confusing but they do convey the right atmosphere.
The description of feelings and emotions are so well portrayed that the reader is able to feel with the character at every twist and turn of their lives.
It is not often that two such good books are written within such a short space of each other.
However, if they are both read in close conjunction to  each other , readers will experience strong emotions combined with a beautiful story, that they will remember for a long long time.
Just by glancing at the first chapter of the book you feel a sort of ‘zing’ that brings them together, so much so that one could never rate one higher than the other.
I have always enjoyed reading books but feel  privileged to read these two  books , simply because of the hardships suffered by Celie and Ponyboy in the quest for access to the world of books and knowledge, that because of their poverty they were not always able to afford.
The world of books was in fact the world of luxury to them.
How different to today