

What time do you get there   what, what time did you get there?
.
.
No,.
You said this morning  didn't ya?
Travelling, between Woking and Guildford, or whatever.
Er, and that, you, you'll  at the town cooking dinner, watching television, talking to my friend, or just roughly what you're doing at that time that conversation took place, okay,at work,form, then make me a cup of tea, she was photo-copying,
Mm.
that's what she was, she was doing  .
There's an awful lot involved though.
, you're usually saying oh it's just, just general .
Mm.
Went shopping or whatever, as I say, it, it, it, a couple of days or whatever you feel, if you, if you, if you want to get into it you might find you want to do them all
Mm.
but if you, in two days, that 
yeah 
would be grate, okay, and the same thing for next page, this is the day I started which, like maybe tomorrow or next day or when ever you start it Wednesday, I started at ten o'clock in the morning, was I, I was in Woking, what was I doing  nothing just reading a, do whatever you have to put in your whatever you  ,
yeah 
where you went for a walk, down, went to the shops
mm.
or whatever, just let them know roughly what you're doing, cos, all they get is a tape, it gives them an idea of what sort of things were happening at that time, any words they can't pick up  if she's cooking, maybe that's something she was making or whatever, erm, in the  please write the first names and details, why you know them, of all the people speaking on this side of the tape, in order in which they speak on the tape in the first, first instance, right, you know, so now Carla, my husband, myself, Lee and, you don't need to repeat them again after that
Mm.
so if you don't, don't want, not worried too much about this, I mean, although we want you to do this, I mean, rather just get the conversation, in, even though you don't do this .
You want more than that .
The knob on the cooker's been turned.
Put it in the dish.
Does everybody finish their work experience then ?
Yes, no not everyone, some  I know one person who's name's Adam, he finishes Tuesday
Why?
Cos he  .
Why's that then?
It's just the way they've done it, the firm.
Oh, the firm.
Kim was saying , they do it for two weeks  can't believe they would, the different school though, and then that other chap said that, that, erm 
Oh Steveo's under .
yeah but that other one said, oh look there's .
, oh yeah, mm,, he's a polo, he .
Eastenders is on.
have bath, watch the telly.
What have you gotta do, write your  assignment then?
Geography and my diary.
What of the  and every day?
Yep.
How long's the diary got to be?
I dunno, page, one page
Would you write it like an actual, can you fit it in a diary or have you got to write it, the date, just, just like a proper diary?
I'm not sure.
You should really do it like a, like make a little folder thing up and then date it Monday, you know 
Yeah.
If you do it for when you've actually left home , when you, when you've actual left at twenty past seven  no 
What doing Monday then?
I asked them how old she was?
Charlie Chaplin, thirty six years old.
Big, big boobs   go run your bath.
Gosh look at the size of those glasses.
.
Well, yeah.
six years, how can you always say they're    Ah
Ah, what's wrong the baby?
.
What's the matter with Gary Lineker's baby then?.
.
keep fit till after Christmas, don't like the cold weather, he's gonna go back after Christmas and do it.
Is he?
Does it, is it, just, is it just run erm
.
, what erm, does that cricket thing  , Steve, is it  or is it just cricket season?
Cricket season.
who is it then?
Goodness when you, mum and dad's done the back garden, when you meant to be doing the front garden with the weeding and that?, well what's all, you know, all these wages.
I haven't got the time.
Where you gonna go and get this seat then?
Dunno , it mean's I've got to spend money, it'll be late.
.
Oh yeah.
and some clothes.
.
No way, unless you're getting in, if you, if dad's getting you some clothes and then,
.
wrap them up for Christmas.
No.
Wh ,wh , what you having for Christmas then?
.
Yeah, and have all this stuff and then they make  greedy.
Greedy.
You buy the suit.
No.
You buy
You wear .
you said you were gonna club towards it all the money out your post office.
Dad had said he'd pay for it on Access.
Think you'd give him the money.
Get out of it.
There's still
There's ninety pounds that I'd borrow off you, I'm going to use that towards it.
No, you pay me that ninety pound back
I will do
plus a years access to the .
No.
.
No.
Oh come on Lee.
That must of been where, that must be where we got .
We've got the fifty pound computer.
We didn't have to pay for that.
Who's done that?
No one,I can keep that,.
What?
We bought  a fifty pound computer and said to Kevin you can keep it.
.
Yeah and I paid ten pounds.
I put that down on his Christmas list.
I'll draw it in a suit, clothes.
Yeah, but you won't be getting much  because you've had lots.
Don't want , chocolates.
Didn't get any .
tenner on chocolates.
You go out and do eight hundred pound this weekend.
Oh are you?
Yeah.
Where you going to go to get for you,, I don't know why they're cutting down all of erm, his, they've got some nice ones on there.
On the top there.
How much?
Bought a few last night down at Mitcham didn't they?
how much?
What?
The receipt.
Do you see this at Mitcham?
No more than a hundred pound.
No .
They got a nice one in
Mr Harrod.
I don't know where, a hundred and forty pounds.
Too much.
Why?
Because it is, isn't it Dave?
What?
A hundred and forty pound for a suit.
What is?
He, a hundred and forty pound, far too, be like those green trousers you bought, well you've never worn them yet.
Don't fit me.
No, I have worn them actually.
You've worn them one night.
I've wore it a couple of times for .
Don't give me that rubbish.
I have, but I like my jeans though.
Well think, why pay out for a hundred and forty pounds for a suit, when you gonna wear it again?
Could be, wear it every week.
Yeah, I'm sure   a walking bank   be glad when you've got a job, you'll be earning your own money  you can buy your own things.
Yeah, but I do any way.
When?
Trainers  lost that eighty quid
Oh.
trainers.
You've lost it?
Why?
Cos I haven't got it, I owe Vincent that nine pound, I must of spent some of it.
I wanted to, look, I've made a list, list out for Nan and I've, there's, the C D you've gotta put on that list, and I also wanted a C 
Don't want C D's, set of tapes, C D's are a waste of money.
Why?
After having a C D for Christmas last year, they're a waste of money.
No, but it's cheaper to buy a tape because the .
Yeah you ain't got, you get better quality on a C D.
If you've got the C D we could all , yes you do, we could all use it, then you could have blank tapes, and then you can tape it on cassette  but I want a list of two C D's and I, in Argos if there's a watch  nan want's the list and she want's it this weekend.
No you don't .
Mm.
But, I want it done tonight.
.
Yes, I've got to give nan a ring.
What tonight?
Well, over the next couple of days, what's the matter then?
If you've got a hole which is like that
.
put the water which is rushing through
Yeah .
, go flying up it, how far you gonna go?
Not all the way.
aren't ya?
Yeah.
And then what you do there?
You stay there.
That's what Carla's got look.
No, cos the water's not coming up above your face, the water's filled the whole  going down and it's got gates.
Have to try sitting down then.
How can you swivel through the gates?
Well how do you get through the gates?
Loads of water get up through the gates.
So.
Yeah, so up to the gates, just push yourself off the gates
.
How quick can you get to the surface, must be strong ,, two, three  riding down to the  and you're gonna push it out the way, it's like, it's like the tide, it comes in and then goes back out,.
Should be two in there.
Why?
I don't see .
No if, cos there seemed a  pair.
.
At this work experience .
In .
Do they?
I asked for some once.
You did?
No, I never pick up the phone, they do that, pick up one phone and speak for a minute, while that ones ringing they say hold on a minute, and pick up the other one.
What's it about then?
, it's only about this erm, I have to do the practice.
Huh?
Have to do the practice.
Know how to do them now?
You should  at Peter's.
I don't know Peter's .
No, I don't actually.
Cos I don't know his  can't do it.
Quit easy though isn't it?
All you do is, stick it through, phone your number, push the button, it's gone through.
I get fed up doing the .
Yeah, but, even when you leave school that's what happens don't it?
I, I mean you usually start off with the boy  everybody has to start at the bottom,.
.
Mm, I'm sure.


You make yourself cough more by lying down there.
Some of those  Kim's, women she work's with the teacher, he daughter's in this, doesn't half get paid a lot of money 
Not for doing this though, ah?
It is, yeah, something like that, I  it's quite a lot of money though.
you might be doing it?..
The kid's love it, Carla would love it wouldn't she?
Yeah, Lynn just ordered that one for Victoria, she had it on order for seven weeks  twenty four pound it was that one 
It'll be easy if you write it down.
No, just mark on, just put a cross straight through.
 

What you have to, what page is it in, in the book?
Page forty six
Page forty?.
Yeah,.
Classical.
Yeah.
I .
That's three.
Yeah what's it called?
.
Be about .
,.
Who is it?
B I B
Yeah.
A L 
G I B, is it one word or two?
One,.
.
B I B
Yeah.
A L D I, one word
Yeah.
four seasons.
.
.
Dad we wanna play it on Saturday don't  toys, toys and games.
oh we don't know how much it is.
Yours .
Yeah.
Right next one.
Huh, he's probably too much  excited of   .
Right, welcome  page forty four.
Yeah, item number.
Six.
Yeah.
Amy Grant, Heart In Motion.
Don't know to use Bob Marley one or not.
Who is it?
Amy Grant.
Yeah.
Erm, Hearts In motion.
Heart In Motion is that two words or one?
Hearts In Motion, all three words.
What is it m, o, t
i, o, n.
Moton?
No it's not, i, o, n.
M, o, t, i
o, n, Amy Grant, I don't know if got Bob Marley one or not.
He's good.
We can buy you that then, if you want it, we never know what to buy you.
Right now that's it, were now in the Argos  .
So did you get your good work for, your good sticker for  work again or what?or what?
Yes.
And that's  is your letter box up at Christmas yet?
Your poster box?
We have to .
That's on Sunday, so what's happening on Sunday Carla?
What do you do?
On Monday eh
So what is it  ad  advent calendars.
Hooray.
Which one is it Lee?
.
Don't you like that other one,, it's just plain leather strap?
There
That one?
No up the top, third one down on the right hand side.
With the grey strap?
Yeah, I thought that was quite nice  on the right hand side page, that one,, three down, yeah.
That one?
Mm.
Thought that was quite nice.
Her dad said he lives there and erm.
Pick that one up now,the bits.
and erm,.
Won't hurt, spying on them in it?
Sorry.
They're the .
What you want they .
 

That's it, it's just after the  look at the ballerina broach and see what you think, broach, no silver, keep going
That?
keep going 
That's a nice ring,number one.
What's it say?
One,it's eleven ninety nine, nineteen carat gold, erm, something ring, size one to T, no I to T .
What size was you?
Erm, U, no .
I like that one the best, shall I put that down?
Argos number one.
I know the one.
That .
Can I try that one?
We'll see  Christmas, who?, no it's  , er it's on the right hand side, it's, it's the next page at the bottom is it?
That's not there.
How much?
Sterling silver, ballerina broach, nineteen, no, eight, eight ninety nine.
Got crystals in it?
Mm.
Do you think she'd like that?
Bennettons, you can buy that .
Which one, yeah that's the one that erm Kim's been trying to get Lorraine the Bennetton one.
Nineteen ninety nine.
That's not bad, Bennetton one?
Shall I put that down, Argos number fourteen  Argos number fourteen.
Hang on, page first.
Page six.
Yeah,
Number fourteen,
yeah,
Nineteen ninety nine.
The one that .
nineteen ninety nine pounds.
About sixty nine, seventy pounds.
Seventy pounds.
What is?
Oh yeah, you can get the one I want in.
Extra  brill.
I'll write it down but you'll have to write to see what father Christmas says.
I might .
That was seventy.
Seventy.
. Right now it  oh it's seventy in Argos.
What's that?
Erm, one and a half keyboard, item number
Hang on.
One and a half keyboard  item number five  and it  sixty nine quid, fifty p.
Sixty nine quid, don't you mean sixty nine pounds and fifty pence.
Pounds .
Mm  .
Got no baby strap.
Fallen in love with that  stuff.
You'll have to get your stuff down and, you know what one we'll have to get, you know those big cases that she get's from Ikea, and bring it all down and get one of those for your bedroom and keep it all in  Started your homework yet Lee?
What?
Started your homework yet?
No.
Didn't you do it while I was out?
Yeah, when you come in.
Was that rushing you to get that paper going?
.
That's  that little powerful car, like, Kearin's, but he's got the motor bike .
Daddy can we swop places now?
Why?
Cos I wanna sit next to you and Lee.
No.
Why?
You're gonna have to go a long then, cos I'm going up the pub, ha, ha.
No you're not actually.
.
Is it on now?
, play .
.
Carla, pass that bag for me please,, what did I tell you about jumping on that couch?
And when you come home from school, mm.
Saturday.
No but you're going dancing tomorrow morning at nine thirty and then you'll be going straight to the , you won't have time tomorrow 
tonight?.
No, I'm trying to get my Christmas shopping done.
Got to take me out.
I will take you out, I don't want you out with me this time..
Taken off the black bush.
No,second tonight, the second .
.
.
Got a wipe somewhere, don't wipe yourself,rubbish.
Going to get Lee's ski stuff  Your cold better .
Ah?
Is Lee's cold better?
What are you doing today?
Nice day today.
Might be able to finish about twelve.
Why?
Cos the building lot they're all going to a meeting at er Arsenal.
Can I have some lemonade .
You've got to go to meeting?
Dad said he's buying me a hotel .
You going back to work on .
I might.
You might?
That's when I'll be finished.
I've still got another week to come though, that might be  about January the third onwards, for a week.
Christmas.
Can't get any time off, they won't let you take it off, two days I get.
Probably get Christmas day.
Christmas day and Boxing day if I .
What's Boxing day, the day after?
Mm.
Oh dear,working for a living,you get the work don't ya?
Loads of people there.
You get up Christmas day morning to do all the breakfast with the screaming kids.
Is it .
Mm.
.
What is?
.
Where's that then?
I've got dancing .
Yeah, but leave at quarter past four, you are pushing it.
Take to London?
No, erm,school.
What's  there then?
School, school on a coach.
Forty five minutes.
What to get to Guilford? forty five minutes.
No, forty five minutes before I get, when I get home, I've got, I have my dinner.
Oh, it takes forty five minutes to .
as long as she has her dinner.
Er, when I get home I've got to have my dinner, got to get changed
No, cos you can go without your dinner can't you?
Oh,.
and have that at seven o'clock.
That's what  .
.
It's  they're all doing erm,I've got you , right and there's a really daffy bloke he   I've got you  .
That's how he's singing it?
Yeah, he had to sing it like that and then, then there's, there's only two of them, you know  and erm, the, er, other, the other one, he's a black man yeah, and he goes who's that big gorilla in the back and he's pointing to me .
Oh was he ha, ha .
And then erm, then they had this thing called Niff, which was water, and they came round spraying all of us.
So where do they come, is Vicky in the actual group?
Why is she, what, does she watch?
Not her, not just her, all her mates.
Ooh, feeling a bit tired.
Why isn't she in it then?
It's not eight o'clock.
She's not in domestic .
Did you get all that stuff in .
No, it's not .
See that Robin Carla, see little Robin over there.
Where?
Over in that tree there,, see it, that big tree, er, on the left hand branch, see it, see it now, with a red breast.
Rocking Robin.
What one?
See the branch that sticks up?
Goes that way.
What one?
What tree?
See the new tree they've planted.
Oh them.
That broken, that bird, that 
Oh yeah, I can see it.
there it goes.
Gone in Keith's house, I was looking in our garden .
, oh.
.
You wouldn't know what tree was Brenda.
Is that, is that my cup of tea?
look he's  come down stairs,sit on the chair Carla.
Certainly .
Oh no, that's what have you been doing then?
This week .
This week .
Yeah, but I don't normally do I?
Have a cup of tea though.
I have a cup of tea  do think he's  on holiday.
there multiplying, and I'm loosing control .
Got another .
Yes.
Oh, oh.
What you working on essay at the moment?
.
No, what is it, like these do that, do, do you do algebra in that school yet or not?
When you go to secondary school, you'll do that?
No, we do do algebra.
And that french, go on let's see that french.
Go on say something in french to us Carla.
What one?
Say good morning to Nan.
Can't say good morning.
Why?
I'll say how are you?
Well say what you can.
What one, whatever you got    
Pardon.
.
Is that all you know, I thought you new a lot?
Yeah,
What does that mean?
.
Yeah .
Yeah  
Get out Carla you don't have to go to football, oh yes, you'll go to football Sunday afternoon.
Don't want to go..
I'll have to see if dad's around.
.
No way.
He promised mum, one Sunday after my .
I did it Carla.
.
I was gonna do it in a minute.
I was just finishing off that, erm, going to drink my cup of tea.
What.
I shall zip that up in a minute.
Haven't you got nothing important today.
You need one of those big box  like Lee don't you?
.
.
Right, I'll see you  I'm going back to have that half hours kip, I'll be up .
Dad can you try.
you're gonna break it, let me see 
.
Mm.
.
Does it, saw how that .
Well I'm .
Think it'll get lost, oh mum I'll get it .
Right oh.
I'll see you later, I'll be home probably about half past two.
I'll look forward to that Brenda .
See you later then, bye.
Jackie phoned me up to say , she phoned me up today for a chat, we were chatting away and she said erm,I heard Brenda, Brenda, so I knew it was  girl, and er, I was saying she walked straight into the kitchen and I was sort of still on the phone, I was saying yeah, yeah, ok and erm, I said I'm going out shopping and I'm taking the dog with me, I said ok fair enough, she said well you'll probably be gone when I get back, I said oh might be but she said but I don't know  and erm  you know and I just put the phone down cos she wanted to see the pictures, my little girl asked put all the pictures up for him and er were looking at all the pictures and I'd  forgotten about Jack on the phone you know , so she s all of a sudden I got back she said oh your phone call she said who you talking too?
Oh no you know she's gonna sort of, sort of suus, so erm, I said oh it's alright it's only  Eve's house keeper, and I got back on the phone I said no I'm every sorry to leave you hanging on I said no I don't know where she is, I haven't seen her all morning, I haven't seen her at all, and er I said bye then, she said what's the matter with you she said , I said what do you mean what's the matter with me, she said oh, why you talking funny?
I said bye then see you sometime, bye and I put the phone down, and she said what does she want then and I said oh she wanted to know where, you know she'd gone and I said oh I haven't seen her all week  you know after, while we was hanging, she was hanging pictures, erm, she come through, she said oh they look wonderful she said I've got pictures she said, I want my mountain put up in my lounge, with that June burst out laughing, Neil went through and he, he put her pictures up and he was gone there, he said, god he said, you know literally it's a day to hang pictures, I said well don't worry about it, you know, that's what he said to do
.
like that little thing, you know, the actual picture hook with a hook
The string.
you just knock it in.
Yeah well he's got brass wire on the  he just, special picture wire it's called.
And he spent all day with them.
He had about thirty pictures to hang, and he had to measure it wall so it was spot on and he want, he wanted them all upstairs, he did, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight about twelve just downstairs in the hall way 
.
What?
Well they're not new blimming, new pict though they've decorated haven't they, they've done one coat now, I look like Nora Batty with wrinkles in this tights  I told her to phone me from Woking station but she's probably er
.
well she put, cos she usually she buy phone card or what does she call, cos I asked her do you remember?
Asked her what sort of coins she uses  do you reckon they go with it, do they say on the front page then about that superstore.
Yeah.
What do they say, they're up in arms?
outrage  
So where else will they  then.
They say, the trouble is they're, at cricket club they want it update.
They want it updated, but I thought that was, doing away with it.
Is that, is that staying there?
building built on the running track .
Mm.
And then Tesco's there,.
Do they, and where was that?
further down.
.
.
And they're actually, and that cricket .
, yes, what they do is  say a bloke, one bloke owns quite a bit of that cricket ground, Tesco's he said, Tesco's  what they sa , they know that he want's, he's put the plans in to upgrade all, to get a bigger site somewhere else, for 
Mm.
Tesco's have done it, Tesco's  he sell it to  we buy it .
But doesn't it cost them money?
No, he, he don't .
That's what I'm saying, when it costs, doesn't it cost Tesco's an extra lot of money?
Yeah, but they get this .
Yeah, but then don't they have to get permission?
Oh yeah, oh it'll be a long mean fought out battle.
I, I really don't see .
But I can't see why they wanna put er a Tesco's, if there's a Sainsbury's coming to .
Well, it all goes .
They've got a Waitrose and , they've got Sainsbury's in Birmingham, but then again  you've got .
Yeah, but they're out of aren't they cos they're saying out from eight to eight sort of time, or sixteen a week aren't they, because of the competition with them all.
Yeah, but I, I don't think it's,.
Yeah, if, it's such, I mean.
.
But it's .
Oh yeah, it's .
That would go.
They .
The cricket pitch has been there for thirty five years.
It's  for it .
No one 's  and they can buy, they can re-build  it maybe .
That always .
Well yes .
Well there's a lot of land there because they've got opposite the church, that bit of land.
.
Yeah, but it's like that, I mean are they still wanna  car park, are they still gonna put erm hotel there?.
Don't know  .
What are those pretty things down there Brenda?
Oh this is Carla's, were economising you see, this is Carla, wants to, Christmas presents, we've made them.
Ah.
They're chocolates.
Ah isn't that nice.
There's them and then there's, there's those, they're not as good as those ones.
Oh that's attractive isn't it?
Because they're, they're the balls in there.
Yes.
And these ones they've got just those  erm smelly's in there, they're for her teacher's.
Very nice.
Yes, she made them for her teacher's as well, they'll  chocolates .
Go on , mm.
So she had great fun making them.
Do you want a cup of tea Dave?
Yeah, I will.
Want to put that on, I'll just nip upstairs  oh.
June was saying that all they're tubes all broke down.
Has it?
Got on one tube and that broke down from the end of she's at Liverpool Street then she had to go different end to Oxford Street, but she ended up in Charing Cross then she got on another tube line at Charing Cross and then that broke down, so she said  it took hours , then she gave a taxi, had to get a taxi back to Oxford Street and, and from Oxford Street back to Waterloo and it's four pound and he gave her a change for a tenner instead, and she gave him a twenty pound note  but, you know she's absolutely haggard, so I said it's just as well she can have a cup of tea before she goes, I just told her briefly about that so, erm, Carla's a bit late ain't she?
 

It's just actually turning quite cold out there you know.
Where?
.
Yeah, but .
Fresh  for three quid a week buy a trailer, want a trailer?through these sales people who .
Oh my god  one to ten it's got one in there already, so what have I got in there?
.
Which one?
.
That's the demonstration one probably.
Oh no perhaps she had an extra, oh no it's already .
Your pictures came out brilliant.
Oh they've come.
Yeah I was thinking wonderful, your bedroom it looks like a palace your bedroom,.
..
These are what we took at the museum aren't they?
Oh yeah, oh brilliant.
She went on a school trip to a museum and we gave her our little camera which I could never use.
Yes, aha.
And she's used it, you know, really, really.
Oh they turned out really good 
They're really good the ones er of your trolls Carla it looks like it's an actual
.
.
Oh Dave, my journey, running about early in the morning to leave everything tidy for the chaps, came out without anything inside their tum, provided that I could have coffee on the, in the buffet car on the train from Stow Market, no hot drinks madam, we haven't got enough power in the batteries, I thought well you know it's all , we got to Liverpool Street on time
These are brilliant.
from Liverpool Street I wanted to get to Oxford Circus which meant that I had to change at, I forget where now, because I'm in such a, a muddle now after all this ,
 
where ever it was, whatever it was I had to do, I got stuck, there were, there were just no underground trains in either direction on that line at all and a, a great tanner went 
dad,
and I looked at people, we were all saying why we waiting here, why we waiting and we saw people rushing off so we thought we've got to rush off after them and we were all put on the train and sent to Charing Cross which wasn't where most of us wanted to go or anything like we wanted to go
and from Charing Cross
Those pretty good.
I worked my way  over
.
on an underground train which couldn't decide if it's going to move or not, it did eventually move I got a taxi at one point and I was so sick and tired and they put me outside Liberties, I gave the man a twenty pound note and he gave me change for a ten   yes, coming back from Oxford Circus from Liberty's, I thought I'd better economise, I've been done out of ten pounds, I don't think it was dishonesty I think it was just sheer muddle, I, I'm ten pounds down, I'm must cut down a bit, so I will come back underground from Oxford Circus to Waterloo to get down to  and you've guessed it, I got into an, an underground train which would not move, it simply stuck, and it would go chugga, chugga, chugga, chugga, chugga, then it would stop in the tunnel for a while, while its .
Oh god.
Thanks very much.
.
I really shouldn't I.
.
So British Railways under your vote of confidence then.
No it is not .
You had a good day at school then, yeah .
.
Had  school today.
Eh?
James disconnected his thumb.
Did he?
Disconnected his thumb?
No, he break, he broke his thumb .
Dislocated it?
. How did he do that then?
.
Mm, poor .
What happened to rugby then, did he played rugby then?
No that's next .
Ah, it's .
Sixty points in Danish long ball just for myself, I got, I scored 
Mm, mm, mm , what about French today?
Aren't these lovely?
I, I
Oh .
Mm
Actually  I, I passed the next star test.
You've passed your second one.
Yeah.
Oh well done, so how many more to go?
Six.
Well done.
How many did you have to do for that test then?
What test?
For the Gulf test .
.
Animals  like  .
They've got to a adjust the tie backs, they haven't put the tie backs up yet because they've got to come down a bit, I just hung them up to let them drop a bit .
Mm, they are lovely, don't they warm the room up.
Mm, very much so, the only thing I don't like, I don't like the, that pink against them, those blinds now, don't know if I've got enough material to cover them.
Oh.
Mum.
Yeah.
It's a 
Well done.
And 
You're doing brilliant in French, absolutely brilliant, she hasn't been doing it long.
Jolly good darling.
Do you know French?
A little, yes, a little .
Do you know 
Say it again dear, slower.
no, I do it different to you, say I do,
is that what it is?
No, I, I
.
Yeah.
Yeah, mm.
Ah, I'll do you another one, erm 


Eh 
 

.
I haven't got it right, but a,what I'm trying to say is you don't ask a lady her age .








Erm,


Er,
No,
Erm, can't remember the other one .
It's all so tremendous  cos you're
It's so lovely .
no, you know, go back to the beginning 






.
.
About erm
I think the word is, height, I think.
.


What?
What animal is it that you hate?
No, I'm asking you what, what, what animal you just asked .
Oh .
Oh erm
that's why, but


Spider
Spider's yes, I don't know what the word for spider's
Do you like crocoldee?
Sorry.
Do you like crocodile's?
Mm, so long as they don't .
You do you like fou fountains?
Sorry
Fountains?
Just having a French lesson.
Well .
Jean's actually answered  .
.
Start from the beginning again so dad can hear it.
Oh.


No, it's 
Oh , I didn't hear you.
.
Correctly, no, erm
 
 
Ah, I'd better not ask you your age.
.
Right 
Eh 








don't know, no I won't ask you that cos I can't remember what I have to ask the teacher's,, erm .
.
Er,.
Oh er,
What colour is it and I'll tell you


What?
Er 
Black, Brown and White.
That's right, yes.
Erm
Well done.
Good ain't she?
Mm.
What about 


, yeah, if he goes, if I go like  you would say, if you like to you would go .


No.
No.
.
Erm,


I can't remember that
I can't remember the, the French for it .
What about seconds.
oh, oh that came, that, that, came out very oddly .
That's good though isn't it?
Mm.
Well she don't, she hasn't got, I mean Lee he can, I mean he's getting A's in French cos he doesn't, he doesn't, he did a tape with her didn't he the other day, they actually spoke to each other and they had a conversation
Good.
but it does help
Oh yes, rather.
because this, this, your friend, I mean you haven't been doing it long have you and she will only talk to you in French won't she?
Won't talk to us in English.
Which is
That's very good, yes.
Our, our last teacher does, but she's not very good.
That's how I was taught you see and so in spite of the long lapse of years there's still a tremendous amount up there because it was, it was properly learnt, you learn something thoroughly 
Cos Lee, since this one's been talking to him all the time
Mm.
she won't have English
No.
and I, I went to see her in open evening, I couldn't understand her, cos she you know, she real , I mean she is French
Yes and he English is not very good.
No not at all.
Very interesting that, yeah.
.
You know seeing this lovely glowing pink, it reminds me of two thoughts, I wish I'd bought that instead of my pale brown chintz.
It's nice though that.
Oh it is, I shall love it.
It's nice, yeah.
In the next house you see I shall have to have different seating, they, they, I'm going to, I'm going to get somewhere smaller, so that three piece suite, it owes me nothing it only cost me what seven hundred pounds
You've had it quite a long time haven't you?
and it's been and it's been beaten to hell.
That's right.
Erm, I'll probably have er two or perhaps a three seater sofa and for the rest fire side chairs.
Mm.
And er, I thought I'd probably have wall paper on that wall, you know, use, use the curtains just as plenty of fullness, but have them for keeping out the light or keeping in the heat,
Mm.
not make them an enormous feature.
Mm.
The grey, I mean if, if they .
They're lovely.
It's the wrong, that's the  the wrong pink.
It's a sort of salmon rather than the pink.
Mm, that's the only thing I don't like.
Mm.
But they, they so, so, you can, I mean I haven't phoned up yet, but, they, you can just have the, the slates replaced, you keep all your fittings
Yes.
and all your, all your weights and everything at the bottom and you just can have them replaced if you want.
Yes
Well I'm gonna work, see what it would cost
Yes, yes.
alternative, I could buy that pink sheeting from John Lewis
Yes.
and run them up the strips.
Yes.
You know make it sort of to match
Perhaps line your strips with lining, to give them body.
To give them, yeah  yeah, don't talk into it, it just, just chat away, they're, they're not interested in what you're talking about, it's just they're interested in erm on what's what, you know, what's, what's erm
Who's got a ?
Sorry.
A tank?
A tank?
What sort of tank?
Not a tank a bowl a glass one, no not a glass one, plastic, supposed to be quite .
How long is .
Well what's it for?
No, it's got to be right, right, er big and I'm going to stuff it with a plank of wood and put  I've got about two bushes and what the problem is, is you've got get
I don't see any way your school's got to make this.
we have, you've got to make a model, yeah and that's mine, you have to get two men and two children across the river, you've got one  and they can't swim, this is my one, two boys go across, one boy comes back, one man goes across, the other boy comes back, two boys go across, one boy comes back, one man goes across the other boy comes back two boys go across, I need to show that on, on .
You've gotta do what?
You've got to
I need two men
You can draw it can't you?
You gotta do it
No, cos I got to show it and I can't
Oh I see, but you, you don't need anything big, you need small things surely .
You want something like a little erm, like a moose  you know, a moose carton
Mm.
How you gonna fit a little baby canoe to go across and two
Well where you gonna get a baby canoe from any way?
I can make one.
You could ma , you could, you could get something like or erm a pudding bowl, then you could make a little baby canoe out of tin foil
Mm, mm.
and the men out of tin foil
Oh yeah.
Or pipe cleaners
Or pipe cleaners
Pipe cleaners are very good for that .
Can pick some pipe cleaners up , they're good for making little
Why don't you just put a rope across it there then, walk across the rope.
Cos, haven't got nothing except canoe.
.
I can, yes I can remember having this sort of question about people with jugs and they wanted to measure out a certain amount, but they haven't got any markings for this certain amount and that awful  
This stupid Lee at the moment for his exam, he's meant to have done it by Christmas and he hasn't done it for C D T, and he, they had to just choose something erm to make that actually sort of works, so Lee couldn't, I mean they did crane's and things like that and he couldn't, the thing he came up with and he's teacher was a, a go erm, what was it Dave, a goalie stand in his goal 
I got 
and he had like a shooter thing that would er, erm a bolt or something would shoot the balls out
.
Mm, mm.
erm, to give the goalie sort of practice, yeah ,
practice, yes 
but he's still got to come up, he's got to make this thing, I mean it's gonna be enormous with football's.
I can remember at Westfield school about fifteen years ago we had an art teacher, who got the children to make an enormous thing, I think it was a Loch Ness Monster, and it went out of, out of the door of one room into another, you know, and they spent days and ages on making this thing
Mm.
and I thought at the time it's, it's quite good enough just to have the idea and talk about the idea, make some drawings and
Mm
you know  .
Well this  .
.
But I said to Lee, you know,
Open.
have a chat with you, cos there might be something that you think that it could make, that sort of like, not such a big sort of model
.
Mm.
If I cut some wood, crosses
Well if you start cutting wood, you want to do things that are simple.
You've got your  upstairs in the bathroom, why don't you use that.
Oh no, I wanna do something to go across there, get a piece of string, get some string, yeah, make a plasticine canoe yeah, and then put, join two pieces of string to it 
interesting .
and then, not if you can't get, held up by a piece of string would it?
Well, why not use your own penny boat?
Yeah, you can use, put your people in it, all people.
Cos they look like real people 
yeah, that's better 
yes.
all, you know that's, now you're learning French, one of the things that the French say, they're always saying it, is , make things easy, go the straightest way, towards any thing .
You can go and make , you, pick out, you're like Lee you pick out these hardest things.
Yeah,yo like you say y , I love the kids dearly I said to Dave I bet that's why this I weekend  and he
Yeah, yeah.
He said too, it'll do you good, sort of time, so I look don't you think, ooh!
Don't you think I look a bit 
 
haggard and  my eyes and 
Yeah .
I'm starting to put on a bit of weight.
Oh good!
Which is good cos it was just 
Yes.
just over erm  er  just over a stone I've lost.
Yes.
And, you know, it sort of 
Mm.
frightened me
Mm.
cos of this.
Yes you can't afford to lose it.
That's right and I mean, you know, it's like now my hair needs cutting and  you know 
 
you just feel, I think when you've sort of lost much weight 
Mm.
and I mean  you know, and I always feel the blooming cold!
I mean I feel 
Oh yes.
the cold anyway but sort of 
Yes.
I said to Dave you could feel my hip bones  and it oh 
Ah!
it was awful!
I dunno 
Yes.
you know I always said  wouldn't it be lovely to be thin and I said thank God 
No!
for a bit of fat on you!
Oh absolutely!
I said because
Well I remember Jackie  telling me, she came back from  sh she came up to meet me in London one day and she came up with  the woman, a German woman, who at that time was  a buyer for Army and Navy  er  women's fashions  and this woman said that  the model girls  who are so thin  she said  they're always bursting into tears and crying because they're under such stress to keep their weight down  and  their boyfriends don't like it because  the girls are are lovely to have on their arms to take out, you know everybody sort of goggles, you know, lovely slim girl with yellow half way down her back etc.  but, in fact, these girls get very, very ratty!
Mm  have you seen Jackie  lately?
She phoned me a couple of days ago and said, you know, that life was really quite on top of them  her  mother-in-law died and they've had all the problems of putting the old man into a home  the main problem 
 
being of course, is first of all find your home  and while he wasn't in a home he was driving the neighbours mad because he's beginning to get confused and wander about and  maintain that he hasn't had his dinner when two people  have already taken him in lunch , you know  and the other problem is erm  er er having found him a very nice home, he didn't want to go!
He didn't want to go?
No  not likely!
He wanted to stay in his own place  but Jackie and Neville were nearly driven mad  running up and down to Letchworth when all that they had to do, Jackie's full time teaching and Nev is trying to build as many kitchens or build as many doors  for millionaires as he possibly can.
So how's erm  young Neil?
Neil  poor boy  he had a driving lesson yesterday  came home and said I don't want to do any more!
What driving?
Mm  so  he was going to go up to.
I bet!
Neil, bring cup of tea in here and we'll talk about it  and I didn't really want to spare the time because you could imagine that I wanted to get ready to come away  but I I made myself sit and really give him time
Mm.
and he said  he lacks, he totally lacks confidence.
This is what he said?
Yep  and  and he doesn't seem to be able to concentrate  and I said, but Neil you can drive, when you go out with me  you drive beautifully  yes but yours is an automatic car, I said, it's not that I said  you've got road sense  you know what you're doing, I said your good.
No I'm not I'm awful!
I said look Neil  you can drive, but let's not  let's not take it that I'm saying that you must drive  let's go into the question of why you're making a mess of it at this time  and we, oh honestly  Brenda if I've got black circles under my eyes do not be surprised because, of course, this all goes back to his absolutely, appallingly, stupid mother!
He's really on a downer, isn't he?
He is, he said  my mother said she could have been a forensic scientist if it ha if I hadn't been born!
Well Brenda  you can tell, I hit the roof !
I mean normally I never criticize the woman because after 
No!
all mothers are sacred  but I just had to put the boot in on her, I'm afraid, I said  stuff!
I said she could have taken a degree in her spare time in th she's only she's not yet forty  I said that's absolute rubbish I said th the world is full of these damn women going around saying, if only I hadn't had children I could have been Lord Chief Justice of England, I said, it isn't true!
I said an er I said do you think that I wasn't a career woman, I said I gave it all up for yo er to have to look after my young babies  and then when the babies were no longer young, when I  got through that phase of my life I went back and combined  looking after a home very adequately, thank you!
With quite a difficult job, I said this is a  I said your mother is living in a fantasy world, of course, I see the stupid bitch prancing around Stowmarket with her silly nose in the air!
She's a very conceited woman, Pete  the adulterous told me she was a very conceited woman  and  er Neil says I I I'd have to talk to him to him about this, she couldn't discuss anything with him  she would lay down the law, that was how it had to be  and I said no  I said Gerry and I, I had no hesitation, as I said, in putting the boot in  and Brenda and Dave  take the same the attitude to children  that  you let them  first of all when they're small, you have to tell them no  like you do not 
That's right.
put your handy  in the fire, dear!
Mm.
And then when they get bigger  you give them more and more freedom  to do just what they want to do and all you do is watch carefully and make sure they're not doing anything  obviously, outrageously daft  but you let them find themselves  and if there are problems they bring their problems to you and you sit down and you quietly talk about it, there's not shouting, no  I say you've got to do this because I am your parent!
That's obviously her, that was her answer.
that's her answer  yes.
You just sort of wa you know, argue it an 
I know.
and and he says too  he had to admit that he's lazy.
Who Neil?
Neil  yeah  and he said my mother is a lazy cow!
Yeah but don't you think he he he finds, I mean if  alright y y you're not ex always exactly like your parents but if you've bro , if he's brought up, his mother's lazy
Yeah.
so I mean  you know, that's part of his life isn't it?
Yes.
I mean it's he won't know better.
This is what I said to him  this is what I said to him  an but he said I I see you with all your get up and go  so I didn't make any reply to that.
No.
I thought, well  let it sink in.
That's right.
And I came in one day  a few days ago an and running around like a  bee on heat  with erm  cries of oh  I've got so much to do and no time left in which to do it and I went  ha  I said yes, if you  got up early, you know !
That's right  he cos he is very bad on timing isn't he?
Shocking!
I mean, like you say, you ought  you know  you ought to buy her a talking alarm clock for Christmas.
Oh yes, he's got to  have an alarm clock.
Or a radio one 
Yes.
so tha that would actually
Yes.
the noise.
Of course, I've I've left him in the charge of  of not  I haven't asked Paul to take him  under his wing over the weekend, but I've left Neil a list of things that I would like done.
Mm.
Like get back the dustbins which  took them out  but she didn't bring them back at the end of the drive  erm  and I hope that Paul  tells him off!
And make him do it, do it.
An and you know, says, look Neil you've got to get your ideas together  because that's what Neil has lacked, he's lacked  masculine influence.
Mm   
It's no good 
now, I mean  you've been very to Neil  over the last year or so  and I mean now it's time to get his act together.
Oh yes.
She can't keep on
No.
I mean
I mean I've stopped  I've  I I don't any longer get up and get anybody's breakfast for them.
Nope  but if you get, you know 
I get out  I get out of bed at eight o' clock when the  last of the lodgers has gone  well the last of the  two lodgers 
Mm  but you can't 
gone 
you know,y y there's no more now, I mean, running around 
er of being unemployed the thi Neil is the third lodger, of course tha who  get's out of the pit  at about eleven o' clock in the morning !
Mm.
But er that's  from now on Neil has got to carry th the responsibility for his own actions.
That's right.
I'm not going to bail him out by jumping into the car.
And really he's got to, I mean, you know, alright with work wise  I mean he's got to take  even if, I mean  the kids these days, I mean, even at Neil's age, I mean  you know, I've come the conclusion now  these kids  they think the world owes them something!
Yes they do.
They're not like in our day
I know  no.
I mean they really think  I mean it's like Lee  he's doing this work experience an yes it's great an it's a bit boring, mum  and Dave said  Lee, you know  wake up!
Yes.
This is reality!
Yes.
This is what people go to work in an office 
Quite.
work nine to five thirty.
Yes  yes.
He said we I tell you what I didn't like, mum  an I said what?
He said, making the tea, I said tough!
Yes, exactly!
I said what do you think  you go 
Yeah.
into  your  I said you go into a job, your earning
Mm.
twenty five grand a year an and you're sat at that desk and you're boss?
I said it doesn't it work like that Lee!
No.
I said you're the general dogsbody!
Quite  quite.
He said oh God!
And I said we 
That's the way life goes 
you know I said that is life!
Yeah  mm.
He said, God, he said  I didn't realize it's like that, I said, no you didn't!
Do you do you think they get a false idea from the television or something,wha what is it?
Well I dunno I thi I think the teachers to be honest, Jean, no you 
Ah!
know  th the teachers in this  I mean  you know I don't know, I mean  so some of the teachers have got  got really weird ideas!
Have they?
I mean, you know,it it's unbelievable!
But
Ooh I'd like to know what their weird ideas are.
Well it's just erm  ah I don't know, I mean  there's there's certain things  I mean,it it's like this maths   I mean, I I spoke to her  erm  and she said yes Lee had come on and everything in his maths  and I said we the thing is, I said, knowing Lee has difficulty  in in th l in the high level maths, yes you don't want to drop him, but  surely  I said I'm willing to help  in my spare time, Lee's willing to do it and I said  can't you show Lee  I said I'm not  I wasn't trying to tell her
No.
you know, that what you were told 
No, no, no, no  no 
and I think  
Yes well I think I told him a wrong, you see, there were two  there there are two ways of tackling it and I don't think the way I told him is what they want for the examination purposes, at all!
Oh I don't know  he under , when  you that told he understood it a lot more  than when she said it  and she sort of went all 
She's probably trying to explain them in a very complicated way of doing maths.
No she answered me, she said well I haven't got time to sit down, explain it to them, they just gotta, if they're in a high level they should be able to grasp it and I 
Frankly I think that's very bad 
that's no attitude!
you know, that is no attitude!
That's bad!
You know the fact is they've got to  erm  be explained.
Yes.
Erm  I mean, Carla I can't fault her teachers.
No, no 
at that church one  she has learnt so much  erm  I mean this  to speak French, now she speaking it in three weeks!
She's excellent isn't she  yes.
You know, it's unbeliev 
Three weeks!
three weeks, that's all she's been doing it.
That's marvellous.
You know, I mean  but this teacher won't stand no nonsense  and I said to Lee  y you were at it three years before you could speak like Carla speaks it!
You know she has learnt so much!
Erm i in this school, I mean 
Yes.
they're very strict  I mean 
Yes.
you know  but I think half of Lee's it  there's no discipline
No ha
but then
and when you try t in the past when I tried to find some way  of imposing discipline, there is no way because  quite rightly, you're not allowed to strike children, I never wanted to and I  I hardly ever did  at one school where  there was a marvellous spirit of give and take  I used to whip off my little black velvet slipper occasionally and whack some of the larger boys about the top of the thigh.
just for fun, you know  but I'm not a believer in using your fists, you ought to be using your brain to teach with  but  there were no  there are no sanctions, if you say  you must stay behind after school, you have to send a letter home  and half the parents will write back and say my son or daughter is not staying after school and that is that!
Mm.
And that's their right  and so  you think of something else we you're not allowed to take them out of a favourite lesson, you're not allowed to say  you are going to miss your football or a P E  P E teachers and the football teachers, quite rightly, say  if you can't keep discipline in your class why   why should we be penalized ?
Mm  that's right.
And er  you're pretty helpless really.
You are.
You see the only way that you can really discipline them  is when you have a school where  the rules have been very, very strict from the moment that they went into that school  and they have had their noses held to the grindstone  with work up to their brows  and they just don't think of being tiresome  and anybody who is tiresome is pulled out and put in a special room on their own, called a sin bin  an which is rather boring  and made to work even  harder!
Mm  but no what I'm  sort of, getting back, I mean, you know, I don't  I think it's the kids  I mean, I dunno why?
Whether they have too much or what they have  but, I mean  they're just  they just think everybody owes them something, and it's like Neil, I mean, to me  I mean  I can't see why he can't get off his backside  and go and work in a supermarket  but it's not the job they want, the same answer I said to 
I think at the moment Brenda he would take  any job if he could get one.
He would take if offered it?
Yes I think so I  
There's a lot of  I mean it's like 
To be fair  to be fair to him I think that he would  erm  he's set his heart on going and working at the lawn mower place on the production line 
Mm.
and he isn't  in my opinion  really considering half the other jobs, but he has said that he wants that  and by the mercy of providence  this business of Lee being flung out by Andy  and being  put back onto the  into the job centre coincides with my being  very tight on money.
Mm.
You'll notice that I've said to you  we're going to run the .
That's right, yeah.
And I'm going to pay it back  with lodgers money really.
Mm.
I mean  my dear, I said to Paul, Paul yesterday was was  babbling on about  if Karen would take him back and I said Paul  I shall be extremely displeased if you ever leave this house  to go back to  Karen, you know o after only being with me for something like three or four weeks, I said you'll never come back again  I said I'm not going to be messed about like that!
No that's right!
What did he say to that?
Oh   I'm counting on you, lodgers money !
That's right.
And I am Brenda!
Yeah, but thing is  I mean, you know, there's a lot of kids out there, I mean I've know with, sort of, Lee's friend  you know, okay, with us I mean  with Lee o okay we don't I've often said to him, why don't you get a Saturday job?
And he said no  and I said okay, fair enough  but then, you know  you can say to Lee, well  if you want something  now you're gonna have to work
Yes.
and then he will, he'll go and do something.
Yes  mm let's go here  I won't talk.
Erm
Erm
but thing is there's a lot lot of like Lee's friends and that and they say  well I couldn't work in a shoe shop and I wouldn't work in a, and I say why?
Quite.
Well they say, well would you do jobs you don't like?
Yes if I need the money.
The  the only job which I told Neil I do not expect him to take  is working for  waste disposal  because he did that, this time last year  and before he started he was full of big talk about you make a lot of money and you get a lot of tips at Christmas  he found that  you do not make a lot of money  and you do not get generous tips at Christmas
Mm.
and he used to come home  looking as white as a sheet  sick to the teeth  and he used to just go to bed and collapse in a heap, he isn't strong enough to do it and it's pointless for him to try  but other than that he can do anything he fancies.
Mm.
I vir I just got 
Neil, I mean he 
No but I mean he has had a bad start 
and hasn't had the example of either a mother or a father  who understands the necessity of 
But there are a lot of 
work.
that have had the support  but they won't get off their backsides and it tends to be this ge generation.
Well you know when my son was eighteen  he and his friends were entertaining each other to pocket parties at which they were  working out  what University courses they were going to apply for
Mm.
and what they wanted was the easiest ones  and they came up with the answer  economics  Gerald simply, we Ge Gerry and I put our heads together and went bib bib bib bib bib, you know as good parents do  and we both presented him with a  fait accompli you either take an engineering degree, we don't care what sort  or  you go out to work in a bank  because  economics  you will not get a first  because you are not reader and t to  get a first in economics, which is what you'll need if you're gonna make any money out of it 
Mm 
and have a decent life  to get a first or either a two one in economics  you have got to read  a very great deal, you've got to be a reader, a student  a taker of notes, a writer of essays  and we said that is not you  so   within two 
Mm.
minutes he was looking through all the advertisements for civil engineering .
That's right  but you had the encouragement, who's that waving?
Who  where?
That car in front  I dunno, he was waving, I just hope it wasn't  waving at us.
That one E E?
I dunno.
The Fiesta?
Maybe she wasn't waving at us 
No 
it was only for a minute.
Oh.
No, no, no, she's not
Yeah.
I think she's realized she's made a mistake   she was waving away .
Oh yes, yes, yes.
And thought it was somebody else.
Yes.
But er  no I mean there's  th there's  
 
that they've just, you know  I mean some of the kids  I don't know where we were going  me and Dave  somewhere or other we were  and there was some kids an and their attitude, you know, it's  well why should we do this, you know 
Mm.
this isn't fair, I mean life's not fair.
I think it's the television as much as anything else.
Yeah  probably  yeah tha that does
I mean I'm appalled at the way that teenagers are still being shown on the television  as they were twenty years ago  able to rule the roost  because they did.
Mm.
They did  erm  twenty years ago a teenager, a girl of sixteen could leave home  she could pick up a job  just like that!
Mm.
And, you know get reasonable money  and there were  there were still rented rooms of a sort, but she could find  somewhere, of a sort, to live  with other kids and they could do what they jolly well liked!
I dunno it's  I mean  you know it's 
But those days are well and truly over!
And I don't think they'll ever come back!
For one thing I I don't think that the next generation of parents are going to stand it  because with the , cos I told you what, what I said Neil about erm  when er  when he was a father  I said if you had a pretty fifteen year old daughter would you want to have some  rough oaf taking her down a back alley and screwing her?
No I bloody wouldn't, he said cor that's awful!and it it's just what he's been doing .
Doing that's it  it's alright for him to do it!
okay for him  but nobody's going to touch his little girl.
Ah  but erm 
Or my own boy.
no  I mean I I do really feel sorry Neil because people wa it it it makes me cross because people won't give Neil the benefit of the doubt.
No they won't  they won't 
You know and if they just won't give him a chance.
No they won't 
And I mean the fact  you know  y you can see his point, I mean
Yeah.
Harry hasn't given up totally  I mean he hasn't 
No he would've done if you hadn't, but he says this
I mean he feels like it, obviously, like with 
Oh yes.
his driving.
Yes.
What's the point?
I've got 
Yep.
no confidence  who cares, you know, whether I pass or that  I mean 
Well  I did  we we talked about this, you see Mary Anne,half way through the conversation  er  Neil went out of the room so that I could to Mary Ann  and I said towards the end of my conversation, you know, Mary Ann you're a very wise person, give me some advice  I said, I told her about Neil not wanting no not doing well on the driving, although he can drive  she said he doesn't want to do it  she said don't hassle him  so when he came downstairs I said  I've been talking to Mary Ann and she sends you her love  and because, of course, you know, we've got a grandson, you know she had a son, my 
That's right, yeah.
grandson is about that age  and very sympathetic she is  erm  I said er  Mary Ann says she doesn't know what the point is, you don't really want to do it  he said, she's right, I don't  he said, in a way I do, in another way I don't, I said 
You see 
well we can't go into the reasons for that but I said let's respect the reasons  I said if that's how you feel I said, you're a man you you must make your own decisions  I said probably in a few months time you'll come
Well I don't know why, I was drawn to that colour.
It's that's my colour, isn't it?
Yes.
In your  got my fork instead of a spoon didn't I?
Oh  Ooh!
So it it's Paul  has the other lodger gone yet?
Philip?
Yeah.
No, he's going  pretty soon, I think.
He's a pain though is he?
Mm  I went into his room  and yet again  he has got wet washing hanging up inside that room.
What in his bedroom?
Mm.
How does he put it out then?
Where did you buy that top you've got on  ?
British Home Stores.
It's lovely.
Mm.
Is that the one, when you were with me?
Mm.
Looks really nice on.
Mm.
So have you seen this chap any more?
Mark?
This  new man  is his name Mark?
Little o little old one  erm  when did I see him?
Sunday.
Sunday?
We went over to Lavenham.
Where did you meet him at?
Marriage agency.
What Dateline?
No  Destiny, a local one.
Oh you're not with Dateline any more?
No  no good!
Not for me  this local one is absolutely splendid!
Is it?
Mm  You ca 
What about 
You can talk to the man who's running it.
Is Ron still going with his ?
Oh yes, he's still with Trudy.
Do you reckon he'll end up getting married?
No.
No  what on  her side or his?
Her side  she won't have it.
Won't she?
No  I've warned Ron  he's such an obstinate so and so, he won't be told!
I said that I think you'll find, Ron that Trudy  if she married would have to give up her  late husband's occupational widow's pension  so that the way you're going on now, where you go and stay with her for two or three days at a time  is far better  oh no, no, no, she'll be able to keep her pension   I said I very much doubt it  then I said  people are so jealous  that if she does marry you  and he doesn't tell the firm  I bet that one of her  dear neighbours will  oh no they're all very nice people round where she lives, I thought there's no good arguing with Ron!
Would she lose he pension then if she got married?
Well  mostly, yes.
Careful when you put your cup .
If you haven't, if you worked  if you haven't worked at th sorry?
Careful when you pick that up, it's ever so slippery.
Oh my God!
If you get a  a pension based on the fact that you're your late husband's widow  when you are no longer your late husband's widow, but somebody's wife  they don't have to pay you that pension.
Oh  so I suppose Trudy doesn't know either?
No.
Actually I can't blame her.
No  and she doesn't want Ron  to move into her house  because there is no way that he could.
The thing is he's so  isn't he?
Yes.
It doesn't, sort of, change anything  Has he organized his ?
Sorry?
Will he organize his ?
No not really  no  it's still a great big  muddly tip!
You have seen it, haven't you?
No.
Oh  oh you must!
Cos how old is he?
Seventy.
He's quite good for seventy, in he?
Oh very  oh yes.
The thing is now, you see there's no way  would you change him?
No.
But he wouldn't want it, would he?
No.
This is lovely!
Mm!
I mean poor old Ron!
He's been going with her quite a while, though has he?
Yes, oh yes.
So she's just happy with that relationship, is she?
Yes  in fact, to be perfectly honest with you  the relationship is a bit more than she wants  Ron    is a bit of a pain  I told him over and over again  not to push his luck, I said for goodness sake, Ron, be  grateful for what you've got  apparently she  doesn't like to make love with the lights on  I said well if that's what she doesn't like that's what she doesn't like, you're not going to change a woman of sixty eight!
Oh   the way she and her husband went on  that's all in the past  I said yes, but it's there was an awful lot of it.
That's right  he should really, especially tha at her age!
Mm.
He should, sort of, honour her wishes shouldn't he?
He should.
So has he all gone to his gr mother's at Christmas?
Mm  yes  I told Paul  that he can bring a lady up  at Christmas-time.
Is he not going home then?
No  and erm  I'm leaving a turkey in the freezer,an Paul is quite good at cooking  standard cooking.
Yeah he'll he'll  I remember he cooks for himself, doesn't he an ?
Mm, mm.
He  I mean I know he eats you out of house and home, but  he's quite a good lodger isn't he?
He's a very good lodger 
Mm.
yes  last week he helped me turn the garage out  he took all the rubbish left over from the tip  down to the tip.
So did Nev come and do your kitchen?
Well  almost  I got the cupboard done  and I got the tiles  lying by the side of the hob, but they haven't yet been cut to fit  erm  and glued down  but one of these day's he'll get around to it.
He's doing a lot in his house?
Mm  well Jackie rang me  Thursday evening and said  you know, then my life is get up early  let the dogs out or whatever  stagger into school  stagger back  do a meal  do some marking  fall into bed.
That's a lot.
That's her life.
Where's she going Christmas?
She's going home I think  she's not having Benita and her mother up.
Are they?
They still can't do it.
What will Paul, just go and visit his mo Neil go and visit mum and then come back, cos although Paul's there 
Mm.
it's better isn't 
Mm.
it?
Yes  that's right.
Are you gonna have a tree up?
Yes  didn't buy any new  ornaments when I was up in Liverpool  cos I didn't see anything that I particularly liked  but  what Carla has done  gives me an idea for making some extra bits for the tree  Where did you get that  from?
 Bernard Singers the what the netting?
Mm.
Yeah that's all it is  all it is is like 
Mm 
like netting.
Charlatan it's called.
Oh that's what it's called?
Mm.
Mm  ninety nine pence a meter.
Mm.
Erm  Singers do every colour, it's just the fact she wanted to give friends a present and I said 
Mm mm
you know,it it you can't afford to  to 
No.
do it
No.
and I said to her one night, and we bought those bags of sweets, it was ninety nine pee for about forty
Mm.
and I said just put two or three in each
Mm 
that's enough for 
Mm.
a child 
Mm yeah.
and she had great fun, we 
Mm.
did them in an evening.
Mm, mm.
And I didn't use ribbon cos it would have worked expensive for her  I just used that erm
I saw.
curly stuff 
the 
for her.
Yeah  mm.
But for kids, I mean 
Mm.
they're only gonna throw 
Yeah.
it away, aren't they?
Mm  oh yes.
And it'll be a  you know, a waste, ribbon, so I 
Mm.
thought I'll just put that on it.
Mm.
And she thinks they're wonderful.
Mm, they are 
Well 
I was just thinking  what a dozen would look like hanging on my tree.
Yeah  they're so simple.
Mm.
I mean, all I use  I mean, if I was making them for somebody I would  use about four or five layers  and then I would put  a piece of lace of braid or  something at the top
mm.
just to make, if I was making them really 
Mm mm 
but for the tree I thought well I'm gonna make some  I'm gonna make six, like the colouring we did erm  the  erm  wa black, red and white
Yeah.
on the top  and then in erm  go to three circles  and then all different colour  you know, erm  .
What, another skirt?
That's right, yeah  It's really hot isn't it?
Mm.
Erm  but you see these si I mean, Debs do it as well all that  that netting.
Yeah.
mm.
But I think I would do four  and  the green's quite nice they do  cos I've got a white Christmas, you see
Mm.
so I've gotta think what colour
Mm.
Have you still got your artificial or did you have new  real?
I'm going to buy an artificial  this year  I'm sick of the real ones.
But I mean I bought my artificial  my white one ten years ago now.
Mm.
I remember when I bought it it was about twenty five quid
Mm.
which was a lot of money 
Mm.
then.
Yes.
But it owes me nothing now.
That's right.
I think if you get a decent one
Mm.
it lasts a long time, dunnit?
Yes  they do.
But I I couldn't get over  you know, I say, I had a quick look the other at Marks  you know, to even do the Christmas serviettes  they're doing a lot more and they said  if people aren't buying as much on the clothes side  erm  so they they've come down, I mean now I can get erm    come over, and I said  you've never looked at Marks I said  you never buy clothes, I said have a look in Marks, I said they do some really lovely 
Lovely clothes.
and he saw  two sweaters in there  that he really liked 
Mm.
and they were nineteen ninety nine.
Ah.
It's a good thing too 
Mm.
cos I would always thought Marks were  that  it was one day 
Mhm 
you know?
Yes.
And usually  .
I know.
but erm  filling innit?
Mm  very.
Look at that little boy there in the leather coat and the little glasses I think it looks lovely.
Ah yes!
Mm.
It's ideal though, isn't it, when y I suppose you go and do your shopping an somewhere to stop.
Yes  Well I'm just going to have a little nibble at the end of that.
So what about erm  so where are you going, to Johns' or Mary Anns'  for the holiday?
To Johns' 
Johns' ooh!
He's having Mary Ann over and my sister-in-law Rosemary.
These are the serviettes  Who's coming over?
Rosemary
Ah!
my sister-in-law.
How old's she now then?
Erm  if I'm sixty five  she must be sixty seven  two years.
Has ana Anorak gone down well in Stowmarket?
Very well  I don't haven't worn it a lot in Stowmarket I 
Oh.
keep it for best.
Mm  Are they in the  up your way?
No.
No?
No.
Re an article in the paper  about   and it was saying the mar in Marble Arch  that it  it's got the top rating apparently.
No  not surprising.
It said Marble Arch was good  erm  but because you can't park here  it gave a  that you could do like  three or four loads  load your car up, come back, load your car up
Mm.
where in Marble Arch, nine times out of ten  you've gotta get round the back to pick it up 
Yep  yep  and who 
and so 
bothers!
That's it.
I certainly couldn't  can't drive that well.
Oh it was really  those are flapjacks.
Ooh! ooh! ooh! ooh!
And that's jolly good, isn't it?
Mm try it in a minute  not greasy at all that flapjack.
No, mm 
It's nice.
Lovely.
So when are you seeing this chap again then?
Well he phoned me last night  and he's going to phone me again on Sunday afternoon, we get on so well, Brenda  I can just the imagine the pair of us tucked up into a four foot bed!


Whether any good would come of it  is another matter !
Is he, what's he looking for, is he  does he wanna relationship or does he want .
We haven't even talked about that  we just talk and talk about  anything and everything.
Is he divorced or  widowed?
Widower.
Widower?
Mm  divorced men  of fifty five and upwards are bad news.
How old's this guy then?
Seventy five !


And he's   he's a little old man and I think he's smashing!
How long ago did he lose his wife then?
Erm  a year.
Does he talk about her still?
Mhm.
A lot?
Mm  quite naturally, you know  doesn't worry me.
But he's not  comparing?
No I don't think so.
Cos some of these are, sort of, like  they go on and on and there, sort of 
Oh my dear some of them are comparing you with  Racquel Welsh or whatever, you know you get the impression they're looking down their nose, as much to say  oh how dreadful for me to have to be seen with this  old person !
But he he's nice?
Mm  he really is, he's kind
Where do you go out  
and he's not mean, so many of these old men are mean, they're crafty  and cautious and mean!
He took me out last Sunday and I said  as we were driving over to Lavenham, I said an early would be much appreciated, I said I cooked  the Sunday Lunch for my lodgers, but I haven't, in fact, had any myself  he said you've got to have a high tea, he said  you must have  a proper meal  and he ordered up salad and  a a ham salad and  have this and have that and have the other, where as some of them  like this chap Gerald  who was erm  sent me by one of the other agencies  the first time we went out he took me to a meal  and he obviously felt that quite enough, after that he used to come out  to see me after he'd had his meal    meanness, hanging onto money!
Wasn't going to waste money on a woman of around his own age!
Tesco's as you see it's got the er er  the go ahead to er  open Sunday's hasn't it?
Yes  yes 
Now , is a big thing.
Mm.
We co we were horrified with erm  we got thing through the door like erm  this one was like a survey thing  saying they wanted to, you know  er  the cricket  amongst others  they wanna put a Tesco's superstore there.
Oh no!
And anyway it's in the paper  in the paper this week  and they've been saying that er  the outrage  the residents!
Yeah  yeah.
I mean, like Dave said, I mean, alright we could perhaps do with a superstore, but not the  .
Not there  no, no  no.
I mean that's a bit daft really!
You know who it is that wants to make money on that?
That's that dreadful man,!
Councillor   he's had his greedy little eyes on that area for years.
Has he?
Mm.
Yes because I know, do you remember we were gonna buy a house down there
Mm.
Mm.
but then when we went into it they said  erm  obviously look at the development plans and it would go ahead  eventually for something there, they didn't state what.
No.
I mean it might be  whatever year
Well I went to a  a big meeting round about nineteen eighty five
Yeah I remember you said 
and they he wanted  to  where Marge  lived  remember The  Grove 
Mm.
They wanted to
That whole bit?
raise that and have that developed as a road, the other one, would  be closed
Yeah.
and developed   would be  destroyed  and another,an an another big road put in it's place and  he they they were after Horsell Moor  which is where they're going to put the Tesco's.
Mm.
That area's called Horsell Moor
I don't think they made it 
I bet 
though, do you?
Well I hope not!
We do need one.
Yes, we do we do need another store in Woking of that kind.
But they're are not 
Not there!
how long has Anthony  been there, twenty 
Ah 
thirty years?
Thirty years, easily, I mean it wa , it was already established when we arrived in nineteen fifty nine.
But Dave said Tesco's can't do, what they did they did it at Weybridge, they said let us buy your sight  you say where you wanna sight and then they and we will build what you 
Mm.
want on that sight 
Mm.
for you.
Mm, mm  yes.
But as John still got a lot of work on, and Mary Ann?
Yes.
Is it getting ?
No, but Mary Ann's a 
 
public servant and they're  pretty well prot protected  erm John's firm is simply doing extremely well in spite of the recession.
Yes right.
I mean they're very pleased with him because he's the front man  having appeared on the Anneka Rice thing and being kissed by Anneka Rice in the full view of millions  I mean John can do no wrong  by r by Johnathan   I doubt it.
Did he manage to see get it did he video it?
Yes Mary Ann's done it.
Oh Mary Ann did it, he'll be able to see it.
Mm.
What did he think of Anneka Rice?
Oh  you know  she is what she is what she'll be.
Is that's right.
Vital, lively, attractive.
Yes.
Yeah.
Did you see you with that gas that advert she did with that  poor woman!
Yes.
Yes.
I don't blame the woman for doing as much as possible on television  with in those advertisements because I think that woman  have got only a short  life in those ads because she'd get bored with them .
Wonder why ?
Well she she's  she gets up and does things doesn't she.
Yeah that's what I mean, they say ooh can't stand this woman sh but I mean, I don't know why.
Jealousy I think.
Probably.
Hell of a lot of 
I mean 
jealousy.
she's got a lot of get and go  
That she has  she has.
this is taping now  so what was erm  Libertys did they have it?
Re remind me tomorrow  I must take those  twenty  vouchers
Mm.
to erm  Debs
Mm.
and Jenny was saying she went to  Debenhams yesterday they had a twelve day spectacular at eight thirty to eight thirty at night    there was  clothes they were half price  plus you got a third of ten per cent off.
Yes.
But I think a all the sales will be off before Christmas.
I  I looked at the fabrics in the Libertys
Yeah.
and  if I can't get want I want at the  Famlingham Textile Centre which is  excellent  when I next need fabrics I shall come up, I will come up to London and I'll go to Libertys, but I will have measured first of all to within an inch as to what I want because
It is expensive.
Well some of the stuff is eighteen pounds a meter  but if you think of the cost of a  a well fitting jacket for somebody like myself, it's astronomical!
You know what you should have done while you was up there this time  you should have took asked for some samples.
Yes, my dear, I I did not feel well enough just 
No do you think that they will?
I didn't even think about, yes they will, they'll give you a little cutting, I suppose.
Yeah, but not only that, I mean, they will now  all these shops are doing like a mail order
That's interesting.
and they would actually send  and I know why because erm  John Lewis in London  erm  Jackie wanted some fabric  and she'd seen it up there and Harrods  and erm  she found out she didn't have her card with her, just her Barclaycard  said would you post this we wou we'll have to charge you, like, two pound 
Mm, mm.
fifty packaging, but that's fine she said 
Well yes it's very good.
well I couldn't get up there because she know  
Quite.
park
Quite.
and  she wanted sort of so many meters of each 
Mm  yeah 
and the the they sent it to her.
Yes.
And I suppose you could treat 
Worth going.
people this year, if they'd done all their Christmas shopping mail order.
Oh yes  yes.
Rather than, sort of go round themselves  I reckon we'll take that with us.
Good idea!
Might want them for a cup of tea .
Yeah.
I think we should have got away with a small Coke, shouldn't we?
Mm.
That's nice of them.
It's so big!
We've been  thrilled with this work experience  cos was Dave originally  had these five days off  taping  and he said no, he said, you know you're so tired, have a little rest  we'll go up I'll go up on the train  only to get to the Selhurst Park he's got four or five train journeys  
Yeah  mm
and he has to get, like  Woking to Surbiton  Surbiton to Clapham Junction
Yeah.
Clapham Junction to S S erm  Thornton Heath  and he has Thornton Heath to Selhurst Park.
Mm  yes.
So it's five trips
Mm.
there's no easier 
Mm.
way
No  no 
round it  and like Dave said  it would've cost him, sort of, seven or eight pound a day in petrol
Mm  quite 
and he managed to get a ticket for a week 
Mm.
for fifteen 
Mm.
pounds.
Yes, yes quite
You know it 
Yes.
but erm I bought  
 
sort of, quarter past seven he's had to leave in the morning  to get there  and then not getting home to, sort of , seven o'clock  Dave picks up from the station  and I think 
Part of life.
and I, sort of, said to him it's he's enjoyed it, he hasn't, sort of , moaned.
No.
He he just moans about the fact of making tea!
Mm.
That just made us laugh because 
Mm  quite
I said to Dave, they've got no idea the youngsters, have they?
They don't
No.
no idea what so ever  because erm  he starts on this  on Monday.
Oh God!
He's got three er  he's got the , two languages  the three sciences, biology, chemistry an erm  what's the other one?
Science.
Mm.
there and  the maths .
Mm.
So  but I think with this  I mean this homework, that's the only thing I don't believe in because  they've gotta revise it  which is brilliant, I mean,at the moment  but they also give them three hours homework a night!
They're not thinking what they're doing, are they, they're 
No I can't talk 
overloading 
I mean Jim was saying that Winston  has given them two weeks off so 
Yes  yes.
alright I don't  two weeks is too long I think 
Mm.
because obviously like  Kim very soon after revising she's going out.
Yes, yes.
Erm  but, I mean, you know, I think they need to s they should say, no homework  for this week, because they've already 
Mm.
got a lot
Mm.
just go through  revision
Yes.
you know, two weeks before 
Yes.
or something, no time 
Mm.
off school,
Mm.
but total revision  an I mean, the other night he sat in, he came home at four o'clock  and he was up till nine thirty  just doing homework.
Mm.
He's hardly got time to revise much cos he's so tired!
Mm.
And erm  he he said it's stupid, he said they were given all this and it's the homework  it's nothing to do  with the revision you've got to do in his the exams!
Yeah, ha  ha ha.
You know, it's sort of, totally different.
Mm.
Are we fit or?
Just about.
Do you want or would like 
No.
another cigarette?
You have another cigarette  yeah.


I'm shattered!
You'll be alright, when you get 
I'll be fine once  once I've had another  five minutes.
Yeah.
Ooh!
Well you'll sleep well now  always do.
Yeah .
Did you still put stilton cheese in that roll or  did you want that?
No.
Oh!
Is that  it all or  or did you try it?
I Haven't needed try, Brenda, I can't I mean at one time I'd have devoured that.
Yeah and me look how much I've eaten.
No, no I can't I just can't eat  so I'm not forcing myself to eat, what I'm trying to do is only to eat the right things  and I must start vitamin supplements  I think I've got the age when I probably  need that, I mean, this cold  is a warning to me that my immune system is not as strong as it ought to be, I shouldn't have had another cold  so soon after getting rid of one!
Crikey, cos the last time you were down you had that stinker didn't you?
Yes yes  and this one isn't as bad, but  I shouldn't be having this one at all!
At all, no  you need either a multi-vitamin or vitamin c.
Probably a bit of both.
Do you not take any  any at all?
No, no I don't  the time has come I think!
Ah but tell me  what happened about your  fracas with Peter?
Oh yeah, well I won't tape.
Yeah, I said, I honestly can't believe, yeah, I said I though we had a good working relationship 
Mm  mm 
and you know  why?
And he said well I'm pretty sure, but he said fifty, fifty and I said to him, well I said  you know, you think about it  but I'd already, sort of, made up my mind that I wasn't gonna, sort of , next year anyway
No, no.
that that that is it!
I mean
As soon as his 
Yeah  yeah.
I said because, you know, I've had enough
Yeah.
of us being used over and over!
Erm  what difference will it make to your life  to have Carla at the secretary.
I think I'm not  she will then come in and let herself in, I have to be in at three 
Of course, yes, yes yes 
o'clock
Yes.
and for somebody to let her in, but
Mm.
when she gets  she's actually in thirteen
Yes, that's right.
so she's old enough to have a key.
Yes  yes.
Yes, I still would like to be in the house, but 
Yeah.
if I'm not
It's not disastrous.
she's old enough 
That's right.
to let herself in.
And you can work locally  pick up jobs locally.
That's right, you know, and I still pop in.
I mean by  by the time all that happens then that'll be next October.
Yes it's in 
Well 
October.
by then I may have sold the house  and, I mean, as soon as I sell the house
mm.
You can have a  couple of thousand for a diner.
Yeah.
You know  you said that Rob is very good on
Yes  he is  but the thing is cars at the moment are so cheap
They are.
I can pick them up 
They are.
because, I mean  it it's like anything at the moment it it 
Yes.
it's sold so cheap.
Mm.
That erm, made me laugh because he said to his secretary  erm  you know, I I honestly don't think your time is  she is so down in the mouth.
And he had,did didn't you say to him, haven't you got eyes in your head, couldn't you see how 
Well 
ill I was!
still I think it's the fact  erm  you know  y you're not  she's got a problem on her mind  she's not been well  you're not taking her serious 
Mm mm 
you ought to cut the leash a bit 
Mm.
which cos I think
Mm.
and
Mm.
she's obviously, you know, when you think what she does for you, marvellous!
Mm, mm, mm.
Erm  and she said an also I think she wants to ask you something  and  you know  she asked you before and you've taken no notice!
Mm mm.
And  and he said well  do you think I ought to give her, you know, what about two pound a week?
Ah!
And she said well look  all I'm, all I'm 
Brenda!
saying is that, all I'm is erm  why don't you erm  ke don't think of the money because how valuable is she to you?
Quite  quite.
And it it really shook him up and she turned round and said  he turned round and said, very valuable.
Mm, of course.
And he said well happens, she said what happened if she  walked out  tomorrow?
He said I could never replace her  he said e nobody is to  she is  he said I just couldn't, he said I'd  you know, I'd pay what I'd have to
Yeah.
he said we'll be realistic
Mm.
he said, you know  fifteen pounds a week, and I said to him  what about the petrol?
I said, you know, it's costing fifteen pound a week in a , a least and you you're you're paying ten  and he said, no he said, he said I think that's ample, he said.
It isn't  because I keep on going down and filling up the metro with ten pounds worth of petrol and I'm not making a  a trip back and forth to work every day.
Go on, I put that in on Wednesday and I've got to about a quarter of a tank again.
Mm.
So it'll be 
Mm.
tomorrow  I put it in .
And it's an automatic, isn't it?
They use it up.
They use a lot yeah  the ch I put it in my  I mean, I said yesterday to him, we've got the decorators in  and then co they turned round and said  he is meant to be a businessman and they said  he cannot believe  they've never met tha such a penny pinching guy
Mm.
in all our life!
Mm  yeah  yeah.
They come in, he said somebody with a house like this, the money you've got, the cars that  got
Mm, mm.
and he turned round penny pinching, saying that  you know, why has this cost me thirty quid, why can't I 
Ooh!
get it for twenty?
Oh yes, yes 
They nearly walked out last week!
Mm.
They just honestly couldn't believe that 
Yeah.
somebody could be like that.
But some people are appallingly mean  did I tell you about that Ned  being done out of six hundred pounds by an indian doctor and a her husband?
No.
He put in a kitchen  and he thought there was something funny about these people  erm  they didn't want to give him money up front for  the fabric, you know, the woods and things and he wasn't asking the full amount anyway  and  he said, you know, a  things are very tight in business and I do not want to run up any more debts  if you will let me have  some of  cash, some of the cash fo for the wood  as soon as the wood's delivered I'll come and do the job, it's not as though your money is going to be  tied up in any way  and there was a bit of a face pulling  and saw this woman drop to, sort of, always hovering around  always putting her motty in  and erm  when th when the job was nearly completed  madam steps forward with the cries of  that isn't quite right and that isn't quite right and Nev was putting hours doing  nit-picking  fussing about getting things  absolutely perfect  got it absolutely perfect but when it came to the final bill  they knocked off six hundred because there was the tiniest little scratch  on one of the panels!
Oh    he couldn't do anything about it?
No it was fi it was fixed in.
Perhaps  they're fiddling 
Ah.
a bit.
Yes.
That's one way to put it, anyway  and he said that  and he said he lost out on six hundred pounds?
Six hundred yes.
Did he not, sort of, think to take them to court?
I suppose it would have cost him more in court fees!
Well I think he can  go through the small claims court for  five hundred  but I suppose six hundred was just over, it's probably something very crafty that they thought up between them, this pair!
It's awful isn't it?
Tis awful  I was taught as a child in catechism  the labourer is worthy of his hire  there are four sins that cry out to heaven for justice  one of them is a oppressing the widow and orphan and the other  is defrauding the labourer of his hire  because the labourer is worthy of his hire  that's a sin that  cries to heaven for justice, that's what I was taught as a child.
I bet he was really, sort of angry?
Oh they were, they felt sick!
But the er it's does he still see them or?
Oh no, I mean the these were clients and they could never be friends after doing that  I've come to the conclusion you can either keep your money or you can keep your friends, but you're not going to do both.
No.
In life.
Right, shall we make tracks?
Yep.
and your instrument panel started showing that  the wheels had fallen off and one wheel was on fire  first thing we had to think was  are the   reading correct!
Get out quick!
Yeah !
That's it.
Ah  he flew a thing called the flying coffin!
And  you had get the two people who were at the back, you have to get them out  before you landed because when you  when you brought the flaps up  if they were still in this little bay you would squash them to death  and one day  his dials showed that he had, in fact,squashed them to death !
Oh!
But he hadn't.
He hadn't?
No.
Come on car, don't start playing on me now when I want to get home .
Ooh don't, at the thought of tea!
So it's like that without, I mean, with Carla, I mean, you can't  you know, you just can't think when you've gotta  I mean she would have been bored and she wouldn't have looked at the gifts.
Of course, poor little child!
No!
No!
Oh you're clever.
Ah ah dear me .
I can't get out u any o another other way!
No   oh dear      Neil said yesterday  he was running  he was running in thr in through the hall way with  karate suit or something  he was muttering to himself and he said smoking  a healthy, dirty habit, it's expensive and it shortens your life  I love it!
No it's dreadful   they are  give it up but I said 
 
I   with my nerves at the moment.
Oh no an it it's  it's like slimming  nobody should try to slim when they're feeling tense and agitated and worried about things.
I'll go up Tescos way  sure it gets busy over here, dunnit though?
Yes well 
I mean it's not packed though, the shops weren't  I mean tomorrow morning  it'll be  m murder there  it'll be 
Yes.
people with kids, see at night time 
Yes.
they don't 
Yes.
come with the kids.
No, no  I'm looking forward to coming back here in the Spring  and having another go at clothes for you and me  I'm going to save like mad.
Might have won the  Jean
Oh I 
in the Spring.
I should  I should have some idea about selling the house.
We all know, sort of, what's, sort of , happening.
That's right.
Cos, I mean you've got the feeling that, didn't you that  Neil might move on.
Nope  I don't think he'll leave me until he marries.
No I don't  apart from getting married I don't think he'll leave you!
No.
I th I think though, you know, after a year or two if he'd moved away an if he moved out the area he would then break with his mother.
Yes
It's the fact, that's how I see it.
I'm seriously 
the fact 
thinking
mother was, sort , up in Wisbeach 
Yeah.
and I was in Surrey.
That's right.
A lot depends  on  what point I sell my house  if I 
What price you get.
Yeah, if I sell at a time when there's still a recession on  and you see  somebody has to get my  they had a visit  perhaps that was somebody that actually bought a house, not she not  
She 
they haven't to sold the house  they had a visit from a Bank Manager  her preferential mortgage treatment  as part of their  immonuments  they always have had
That's right.
the bank seems to pay the  a cripplingly low salary  demand that everybody dresses in  in Saville Row, but  you could buy a house on a something like two and half percent mortgage  well it's not like that now, but it's still  still get a preferential mortgage  and this banking person  man was looking around only three or four weeks ago, but    you see a lot depends on your luck as to whether  you pick up a  a very good buyer.
Is your  friends have they had anybody look at theirs yet?
They had a couple of people round, but no  no nibbles, or I think, yes, I think somebody a  silly offer because of course all the  property pages and places like that, Daily Telegraph are urging everybody, go on  put in an offer for a house, put in a silly offer!
Yeah.
Which is all very well, but nobody's phoning in to accept a silly offer.
That's right.
This is why, at the moment, I'm being a bit cautious about  remaining in my cavity  I don't want to find myself in the situation that I'm held  to sell.
Mm.
That's why I'm so keen, I shall I tell you what my plan is, at the moment but as soon as the  the uncourteous Bill  has decided to  move into his  new house  new flat, rather, I am going to take my ensuite back
yeah, I'm going to go back into my bedroom  and Neil can still use the ensuite shower cos he's got the tip of the idea that he's got to come in  clothed  and knock on the door  cos last time I was in my bedroom he asked if he could use the shower,situation   he'd  you know, and I'd let him  after all, it's not as though my be , there's a door between my bedroom and the
Shower, that's right.
the ensuite  and er  and then I will have three lodgers, I will have Neil
Mind you Neil's not worried about parading around with nothing on, is he?
Oh well I made him worry
Mm.
my goodness, I have!.
Don't you like his new dressing gown, he was in 
Love that 
last time?
yes.
What was he like, when you took  cos you took the boxer shorts
Yes.
dressing gown and some 
all 
silly bits, oh no sweets  biscuits 
Yes.
was it?
some money, you spent on me  ooh!
I bet he was like a big child, was he?
Yes, of course he is, he is a poor child  I hate to think what Christmas is like for some people.
Do you think she'll buy him something  
I have no doubt wha did I not tell you about the fact that I hit the roof when he said that  she has said that when he was twenty one, she was going to buy him a Vauxhall Chevette.
Sh she's going to?
Yes.
Well why didn't she pay for his lessons then?
Well that's I say 
that's when he wanted help.
I said it's sh I said, I he said don't you think it's a nice gesture?
I think that is showing off!
I said I  
How he's supposed to tax and insure it and run it?have said!
Well that's I said  that's what I said an and I said where's she going to, where are we going to put it.
Just because you've passed your test doesn't mean 
Oh I 
I mean, it's years normally before someone can get a car.
You can tell what sort of a 
You can use  
fool the woman is!
She is dreadful!
Does it strike an answering chord with your mother?
.
I have no doubt that if they owned their council house  they would now be very busily  selling and buying and  selling and buying .
She's  sh she's a bitch, she's a oh has she still got that horse?
Oh I have no doubt  of course I never  I despise the woman so heartily that I never ask any questions about it.
How does Neil get on with y Philip?
Very well, they all three get on well together.
Oh they do?
Yes.
I was very surprised about Tony though.
Yeah.
Cos I remember you saying about he didn't really want to know did he, about the ad er  er
Neil's boss, no  no he said oh I think I'll wash my hands of Neil  I thought that's another one  If I don't stick by Neil 
If he was still living with you  he wouldn't wash his hands of Neil, would he?
He might have done, he's very a strong mighty chap and I don't know that  anything I said could have influenced him  and anyway Brenda to be perfectly honest I wo I wo 
 
I wouldn't be doing it  I wouldn't dare!
I, I mean, I  at the moment I'm not doing anything about Neil's training because  we've got coming and it's  it's too soon to start  stirring up the bud again.
I think you probably could have stopped anyway  
Yes, quite, yes 
you know, wouldn't it?
Exactly  yes we'll take a breathing space until the new year  I mean Neil says that at the moment he'd be quite happy to  get into a job  where if he was a good worker he could  progress in the job  and I said an what about doing your  radio repairs in the evening, but he just, he said yes.
I said, well was it like a part-time thing?
Yeah well you see  you can make quite a few  nice little pounds for yourself  if you can say to your friends  I can undercut  I won't chat while you get across here  if you can say to your friends  I can  do it cheaper than the
Well you can it's like 
standard repair.
Dave  these computer been  you know  up in the air for about six months and Dave said you've gotta get it repaired he said, cos you know y he's gotta print out on it and everything 
Aha, aha 
a lot of his work is, sort of, rather than getting copies you just do a printout
Yeah.
and erm  you know, and I said Carla needs it for work  anyway so Dave said I'm gonna while I'm on holiday I'm gonna do all the stupid jobs, so I can take that computer in
Yeah.
and he said only cost about twenty cost about twenty five quid to get 
Yeah.
repaired
Yeah.
took it in and they said well they have to send it away and Dave said, yeah okay, he said well  it's forty nine pound  before you start
Oh no!
and erm  providing it's nothing, sort of major  and that forty nine pounds will cover  but if they find anything major they're  it's on top of their forty nine pounds!
And I said to Dave, you need somebody  you know like a 
Yes.
handyman or so something like Neil, I mean 
Yes  exactly.
to fix things like that
That's right.
so that if they charge twenty quid  when they start
Quite.
you know, half the price
Yes.
you know that's
Yes.
you could make the money up.
Of course you can  well I knew of a girl who married  I wouldn't say she'd married well  when she started out but her husband  was enterprising  e eventually got himself quite a good job at the  at people who print the bank notes so so that they  they started off in a  prefab  and they ended up with a new four bedroom  bungalow with central heating  at   Athorpe  Roding .
And er I lost touch with her after that but Joyce was very nice, very, very  a down to earth cockney girl from Hockston  and she said er  she'd tell her sister  she said I do admire my sister she said they'll never have anything other than a council house, I don't suppose  but she said  my brother-in-law  mends people's motorcycles  as a side line  and the money that he gets from that  he gives her most of it  and she buys things on hire purchase, this was the days when hire purchase wasn't  fearsomely expensive
Mm.
and she said my sister spends  I mean, we're now talking about  nineteen seventy  my sister spends twelve and six a week  on  things from  for the house  on the hire purchase  if she ever  truly runs into debt she'll save  part of the cost of the thing, you know  and then she knows that she's always going to have to put twelve and six a week aside  but she does that and buys things for the house  and you see if you've got  if you've got that little bit of extra coming in it's quite  well it's like my lodgers, Brenda  if I couldn't if I couldn't get  what I need from my lodgers  well Neil pays me  Neil's house rent which thirty pound a week
And that's not very 
No  I stop 
No 
when he gets another job  when he gets a proper job, when he's employed it'll stop.
Oh I see.
But at the moment I get thirty pounds a week
I see so if he gets 
and if he gets 
some money coming in
that's right, and he gets some unemployment money and I take  ten pounds a week off him, for his food, I mean, it's not enough but it'll do, you know  and then in dribs and drabs begrudgingly from that forty  over the week  once he starts to run out of money  cos he's paid once a fortnight  I begin to give him  his karate money  and  here's two pounds fifty to go to the pub with Neil, you know, little bits 
Mm.
little bits, little bits  and I'll buy you your tobacco Neil  nothing much but  little bits of something  now if he were  working and could give me the full sixty that is thirty for his room and thirty for his  food  so that I didn't have to worry about th actually paying for him  but he was paying me  Paul is going to pay me fifty  that's thirty pounds in, I made a rule to Paul that he is going to eat thirty pounds worth of food  and there are only twenty pounds in my profit  and then the other rule, a man called Alan  this window cleaner  he wants the room  that I'm in at the moment
Oh dear.
because he doesn't want the ensuite, he can't afford it, he can't pay forty pounds a week
Yeah.
or thirty five, he wants to pay as little as possible.
What will you charge, twenty five for that one?
Twenty five, yes an and for that  he can make hims he doesn't want to to really to pay me for food at all so I'm going to tell him that he can have his cups, spare cups of tea and a drink of milk an and some toast.
Just bits and pieces 
Yeah.
he doesn't want main 
No 
meals, sort of thing.
Or main meals , no  but he can have that on the twenty five he needn't give me anything extra for that.
When's he moving in then?as soon as 
Well he was probably  actually hammering on the door now to er come and see  where he's going to put his ladders, he wanted er  a bit of wall to put the brackets up to put his ladders  but Paul said  that  he Paul thought you could suspend ropes from my garage roof, you remember  what a lot of criss-cross bracing there is 
Have you seen what we've done in our garage?
No I haven't.
We took erm  just wood beams across  for canoes   
Or if 
might as well up there 
Richard put over, put a lot of beams  and Paul  at the weekend put an immense amount of his  household gear  up on the roof  in the garage.
In the garage, yeah  that's what we did we  
Yes 
the ladder and 
Yes.
everything on the beam.
Yes  well it's possible that er Alan may see a way to using that but  he is quite ni , I mean he he's got no doubts he wants to come to me  he's in a divorce at the moment and the moment that the final papers are signed, he's got to get out of the house  he has to stay there till the last minute  and then the moment that the papers are signed, he must go.
But what happens if Philip's still there?
Well  Alan says he'll sleep on my sofa.
On the sofa, for now, yeah.
I mean h he under he says this is, you know  a very nice house  and he wouldn't normally expect  to get a room for twenty five pounds in a house of that character.
That's right  but twenty five quid is a hundred quid a month, innit?
Precisely!
Well it's it's say I say I was  doing my best, as it were, say that everything was going swimmingly  I'd be getting a profit of thirty pounds from Neil  twenty pounds from Alan because five will go on the tea and the milk and the box of Cornflakes and the toast  er twenty, thirty , that's fifty  and  twenty for Paul which is  seventy.
You get thirty from Paul, don't you?
No, he's going to give me fifty because, don't forget, he's in a small bed  and he eats thirty pounds worth of food.
Twenty pound from  that's seventy quid.
exactly!
The price is considerably better.
Two eighty a month.
Exactly  much, much, better than any pokes in the eye with a sharp stick!
So what does it  did Philip pay up on time?
Always excellent on that  yes, he's a toad in some ways but in other ways he's very good.
What about  Paul?
Well he hasn't got any money, but when he's had it he's paid  on the dot  the only one
But hasn't he got that job still then?
At ?
He's only just started.
Oh he's just started.
And he has to week before he gets any money  he has to work a week in arrears, you know, they  they  
So has he been there this week, Paul?
Yes, he's been there this week  
Next week he'll get paid.
money  yes.
So from next week you start getting paid.
Yes  and if that bloody Karen comes on the scene  and wants to take him back I shall tell her, if you go back Paul
That's it!
that's it, I'm having no more of it!
I've had two lots of terrible upheavals.
Mm  he can't, you know, he's 
He mustn't!.
That's right you're gonna, sort of,
Build a trench ha ha oh ha oh oh ha ha.
Yeah he  you can't keep on and on helping them out, I mean, they've gotta 
No.
themselves I mean 
Quite!
Shan't be sorry to see Philip go, will you?
Oh, I can hardly wait!
I mean I  I went in there  yesterday, I think it was, or this morning  erm  he put wet shirts into the wardrobe admittedly with the doors open  but that bedroom is not a bedroom that I like to get any dampness in at all, Brenda.
Why does he just hang it  you know  put in the tumble dryer or hang it in the garage?
Too lazy!
Easier to do it that way!
Has Tony taken all his stuff out?
Yes, he has at last.
Is he in his house yet or is he still in that 
Yes and he's very, very difficult to  feed himself, to get the food in  because, you know, he liked to come in a half past ten and bully me to cook things for him  that's why sometimes I used to run up to bed and pretend I was  asleep .
Asleep .
So what er  so how does he cope now then?
Cos I thought that was a with a utmost difficulty  and he has to get his little daughter on Sunday to help him to clean the place.
She'll soon get fed up with that.
Well  tough he's not getting my, he's not getting the ensuite room, I can tell you  If I if I have got three lodgers and I'm getting on with them and they're  they're paying me regularly  for the sake of an extra  twenty pounds or whatever  and the annoyance from Tony  coming in  at ten  a or there abouts  and then sitting there like a stuffed frock  waiting for me to leap about and put food on a plate and microwave it  not doing it, Brenda!
No  you shouldn't, I mean you
I mean I w when I was dropping dead with exhaustion one evening I said to him  look Tony,the there's I've cooked a chicken, there's a big chicken cooling on the table  and there there were  red sauce, potatoes, gravy, I said, stick the lot on a plate a micro and, you know, film it over, microwave it  oh well I shan't bother to eat anything  now of course he was paying me for his food
Mm.
and he was jolly well seeing whether 
But if you'd said  oh well I'll prepare, what about if I prepare you , oh yes well I'll have that  probably if you'd got  done it  he'd have it because he had to help himself.
Oh well I th I then said oh well  I'll alright I'll fling it together for you  oh good  can you bring it into the sitting room?
I very nearly brought it o 
See don't.
in the sitting room and banged it over his head!
Tell you something I'd like to pick up tonight , if I see it  is a blooming couple of trays.
You know Paul has lent me  some  very clean  but very ugly  old fashioned trays of the sort that  people have in restaurants  that his mother  lent him   and they're  they're a God send !
I tell you really, I mean, I used to have one and went to look 
beautiful trays in John Lewis's this morning  I was licking my lips with desire, Brenda!
The amount of ti , sometimes I feel like a bowl of soup, especially with not being , I felt like a bowl of soup and then
Yes.
not wanting to sit in the conservatory  
It's cold.
winter  and then, you know, you have to sort of use a plate to 
Yes.
and Dave said why don't we 
Yes.
have a couple of trays, and I know it's so easy
Mm.
and we had a couple  Mark's had them, I sa , but they wanted fourteen ninety nine.
Yes.
I mean they probably are quite expensive  but I mean  I I'm sure A and N or somewhere, Debenhams or somewhere would have them
Debenhams probably, but the John Lewis's were excellent, and some  some of them were tin and I do wonder if you're eating on your lap  a tin tray might be rather cold  but on the other hand, you let the heat from the plate through to your poor little legs.
I never noticed that!
No.
All-weather pitch.
Yeah.
And we had one  rugby pitch.
Yes  Is this where Jenny  used to live, or still lives?
Up there by those weather boards.
Oh yes  yes.
What about, have you heard from them lately?
Yes she wrote to me, I'll tell you what when I get back I'll pop her letter in the post to you  she seems alright.
Who Jenny?
Yes, they've sti they've stayed together  she still, mark you, in the letter she does come across as a misery guts.
They all do, don't they?
What about  have you heard any more of her cos she was having trouble with her husband, wasn't she?
Yes  she still phoned me up in the morning and  at vast expense to tell me how awful everything was.
Still bad is it?
Oh I phoned her back a few days later and said how are things now?
Oh they're alright she said.
I expect Jenny, her kids are off at school now aren't they?
They are and I I think the whole trouble with Jenny was that  not having, I mean, I was alright as a sort of mum subject  I wasn't the same as a bona fide mum  that could be called upon in all weathers, at all times, to do everything
I don't 
And I think she found looking after tiny children a bit too much for her.
Didn't like   she was more the career girl wasn't she, I think?
She should have stayed in beauty therapy, she's a very gentle  and she's very able.
She's very good at it wasn't she?
Very good  and kind  and small children are cruel  noisy  and demanding, and unless 
That's right.
you've got  a soul of  steel, a heart of steel  you can't cope with the buggers!
the bath   off.
And obviously I think there was a little bit left in there.
Yeah.
Cos you can't get your hand right to the bottom  without a  I mean 
Mm.
it shot down the hole.
Mm.
So it's a right pain!
Unless there's a special fluid or something  they could put it in there to wash through 
You can't because it wouldn't come out through the taps would it?
For someone like Nigel who's got all the tools  it  it'd be a  a  it's not a job you can come in and just do it  cos you have to take a bit off  clean it 
 
and then  a bit more cleaning.
Mm.
I haven't got any of the tools.
Mm  no but it even for a 
 
plumber it's a big job.
Be a bloody long job!
Well no not really cos you could find  once you've found it, once he's, where you found the clog 
So is that Lee, jacket that's got a hole in it?
Marked at the top and , yeah.
Why?
Well cos it had sunk and fallen, that's why  going  cos the jacket had s fallen  
What the new jacket we got off Lee?
Yeah, it filled with water, it'd gone into the tank.
But why, why did it?
Well it must have had a split in or something.
Mm.
The si it's all round the sides  you don't really need a top on a tank, it's just the sides you want.
Can you come on the neo have you come on the insurance?
Can you come on Les and can he come on his insurance?
I doubt it.
I mean estimated
Ah.
because Nigel like  privately
We didn't, we haven't cos Les  has to go through the  books and charge 
Ah yes of course.
so we do it, we have like  Nigel as our own plumber
Ah yes, yes 
and he doesn't charge, he charges still
Mm yes.
but not as much.
Mm.
And me  being a silly idiot, see if I'd realized  I didn't think  you don't think that there's three parts of the tank, you think it's a tank and you just turn your tap on and the water comes out  or 
Do you know Dave  I read erm  we there's a magazine called Good Housekeeping  and it's been going for  it had been going for seventy years, last year it started in nineteen twenty one, women's magazine, very good one  and they had a sort of seventieth birthday issue
Do you want a cup of tea now?
and  one woman said that the year, nineteen twenty one  she was a bride of eighteen years old and she took Good Housekeeping and she's got the whole lot  although she's now a very old lady, and she said  my first lot of housekeeping was done in a  house in Wales where we had water from the well  we had to  build the fires up by hand  we could get Welsh coal cheaply  but they had to  you know  use paper and kindle  and we swept with brooms and my life has never been easier  she said I had three children in four years and my life has never been easier  she said and all these modern things came in  life has  got more and more complicated and difficult !
You're not kidding  he certainly ain't kidding you  now now it's happened to me I know if it ever happened  I know never to do it again.
The the the buggeration of it  is that  the next time round that something goes wrong, it'll be again something that you've  encountered before !
Yes yes  and me and  there's one 
Bugger!
thing house, I never touched  electrics  anything gas, electrics  it's funny me and  are absolute disaster!
Yeah  yeah.
I mean whatever I touch 
Yeah.
with the plumbing it  so  
Plumbing is very difficult  erm
I hate it!
Years ago I had a class of very bright children  and they did some really good projects, they weren't silly projects where they just scribble a bit an and draw some rubbish the they really worked  and I saw to it that they produced really  good work
Yeah.
and one boy chose to write about plumbing  and do you know, he found that there was nothing written down about plumbing  in the early nineteen seventies  there were one or two plumbing text books, they were very expensive and you could only get them through The Institute of Plumbers  plumbing is something that until about nineteen seventy five  was passed from father to son or uncle to nephew  it was a sort of secret craft  you know, you can 
It can 
understand it.
Yeah.
Yes.
Yeah I still I watched Nigel, I mean, I can dig some of that
Got a burning in the tum now.
What dear?
Got a burning in the tum.
Oh yes, you would have  I mean that that  i it is a 
 
stress  symptom yes  and it's not funny, I've had it.
So did Carla go off okay?
Yeah.
Oh could I ring  home?
Course you can.
Thanks very much.
Put your glasses on to see.
Oh yes.
Can you spot a little clip?
Oh the little clip?
Ta love  thank you.
Yeah the little microphone.
Oh!
such a silly little thing
No answer?
No  erm  one or other of them is probably taking Neil to karate  I think Friday night's karate
Oh yeah it is.
is at eight o'clock.
He's probably down the pub!
Try later.
Doesn't go to erm  his  brothers or something afterwards?
Yes yes  and I expect either Phil or Paul is driving him and which ever   it's 
And 
possible that Paul has had a  already had a reply from the  Destiny people, you know, the ap at my urging Paul joins these people to find himself another girl  because I'm so sick of hearing about Karen who's treated him  made a fool of him totally
Mm.
and er  if Paul has had a  phone call from one of these woman then he's been off like a shot!
I've lost the little silver thing.
What sort of little silver thing is it?
It's a little just a funny shaped bracket thing it's sort of stand.
Oh I didn't notice that  I saw that thing in the car but I didn't notice a bracket.
Yeah well I had it here so I dropped it.
Ah!
It's probably floating round.
It's probably in th in the internal works of the  chair.
So what did Jim have to say  much?
No not really.
When's he coming back?
Didn't say   till Monday week  What you lost?
My little stand to go with the microphone, I had it here  probably fallen in my handbag.
Yes.
Still got three of  our tapes go than the rest of them !
You you never get to the  this way did you?
Mm  We're on number three she's not allowed to go home till she's  done at least seven!


I have three now.
How long of you got?
How long are you allowed to
have?
A week.
A week, mm.
Only started last night.
Oh well.
Don't have nothing else in your life  it's probably in this stupid handbag!
So what is there no answer as Nigel's?
No.
I think actually he he g doesn't he go to his Gym.
I know he's  does   .
Well it wasn't your fault was it?
It's not even silver at all, it's black!
Ah dopes!
Ah erm!
Stupid    I lost my fags!
I'm exactly the same, Brenda.
So is it a good li lovely meal.
Mm.
Mm  chicken gourmet  right  erm  with a  pop poppadom was it?
Poppadom  yeah.
Poppadom.
Mm.
I'm going to scream in a minute!


bloody loud!
Erm  I've found the original packet I lost.
Oh.
From the restaurant  Oh my God   up  need any matches when they're not lost  ha   Dave so  they never offered Lee any
No  plenty of bloody  but no   or see  he forgot to go up and help    was busy   on Boxing Day  they won't pay, they give them a free ticket to get in.
For what game, what for Wimbledon games?
If that's alright I'll do it  gotta pay your own train fair  I said Boxing Day they only do Sunday service anyway.
Mm  very restricted services  on Boxing Day.
All it is, he had to help, there were  fifteen and seventeen year olds, weren't they?
Older than him  and they were mentally  er 
Ah what retarded?
wh is i yeah but Lee said they wasn't, they were just, I think  kids that er  rough kids  there was  big coloured 
Mm.
chaps weren't they?
Mm mm.
He said  did he do football today?
No he's  again.
Oh he could do it at work?
Yeah, you're not   out  you know  .
Did he go in and see that girl?
No.
Why?
Cos the girl in the office went out and bought the lunch today  didn't go out    come in, phoned James and then  started his second half of the day  around  some girls.
Mm.
He's a   .
But was his bath hot?
Well it was hot but it didn't come out quick.
Just doesn't come out quick  mm.
It's like someone's got their finger .
Mm  you'll have to be careful cos that could affect the heating too, won't it?
Cos it's the hot water that comes on the tank runs through the
No it's a different system.
Is it?
.
Well we had a wonderful time at Marks and Sparks.
Yes, it's great!
Didn't we?
We did.
Should of bought most of our Christmas pres and a holdall to carry them in.
Mm.
How about that!
Yeah.
What did you spend, about eighty  pounds?
Oh, we've gotta finish it off tomorrow.
Yes.
I don't want them  after this visit  tomorrow  I might go out one more time
Mm.
just for a few bits and pieces and any extras and 
Yeah.
that's it.
Mm.
It's probably better, cos I mean  normally I start  back in January.
I think  you're hot waters turning the heat, it's turned off again  somewhere because i the tank don't fill up quick enough it cuts itself out,we I don't know.
Turn that number three up to number four  might be just  sometime a the ther you know it might need it on number four.
Mm  I don't think I've ever seen your  log effect, is it a log effect  fire?
Yeah.
I don't think I've ever seen it on.
Erm  we do have it on  sometimes 
Mm.
when we have you, little lights off.
Mm.
Looks quite effective.
I bet!
Nine times out of ten you put the big, sort of  the kids always put the big lights on, I like low 
Mm.
lights
Mm.
but the kids always put the big
Mm.
tend to put the big, oh this cup of tea's wonderful!
Ah!
Marvellous Brenda !
Mhm.
Oh I'll show you that letter you told me  to read cos I got a  here.
Oh yes.
That's my letter on top and then the letter underneath it's the people
Jolly interesting!
Yeah.
Just gotta fill in  fill in this  today's the   ooh that one there, I'll let you just have a look at the Debs book  and that Marks and Sparks.
Mm.
But these are W H Smith's a Woolworth's.
Aha.
Oh that what I was gonna show you  that's Peter  he bought it and didn't want it, you look at this month's Prima  for Christmas.
Ooh tough!
We the plumbers on his way!
What now?
Haven't got any money to pay him!
Don't worry about money  he's alright, no he's said he'd come and have a look  if he sees, he's gonna have a look at it first, see what he thinks.
Just don't tell me then.
Go and have around Tesco's .
Cos we can't afford to blow it out every  see how much Nigel says it's gonna cost first  just don't give me any more stress, please!
I can't cope!
Deep breathing exercises that's good for stress.
Oh that's what you told me, I know, but it's easier said than done, innit?
Want the telly on, Jean?
Do you want the telly on?
No thank you.
talking.
Yeah, I talk  books, letters 
You turn it on you turn it on, Jean 
You goading 
yeah?
Jean


even if we see each other every week we still have loads to talk about.
Ooh masses yes .
I don't I hope you haven't shown him in David!
Ooh it's this spot, I shall  in a minute  you haven't seen a leaflet Dave, for Debenhams have you?
There was one out in the kitchen.
What was it called?
The Christmas catalogue, it's called Debenhams
No.
it's just like one of these brochures, I had two of them.
I ain't thrown them away  they've got twenty five percent off ain't they?
Yeah.
When?
And er  er  a jewellery test tomorrow  at the 
Ooh tomorrow Debenhams?
Oh no, no I think it's at a  is it a jewellers  Ratners, something like that?
Yeah.
Friday and Saturday they've got twenty five percent off everything in the shop.
Yeah, they're  jewellers.
Well the sort of thing
Yeah .
Mm.
You're gonna buy me this  dearly expensive watch aren't you?
Oh yeah, I'm full of tricks like that!
Ah.
I bet Nigel's sitting at home now laughing his head off  at 
What does he think it is?
Well he's  he he said he doubted  he said he doubted very much if it was that.
Oh.
Now he said he'd come round and have a look
Yeah.
but he said he didn't think  er  that was it.
Mm.
Mm.
Still you lot  going to bed with it tonight are you?.


Get the floor boards up for you.
He will, I was gonna say he'd be here till two o'clock I don't know why .
Well I see, if he's gonna do it I'll phone him up and .
And just say y your wife's taken ill.
No I'll say my plumbings gone funny  had a burst pipe.
Mm.
Ah!
Oh,.
Not now.
Especially if, mind you, he might not be able to do anything, it's like I say you you've got your hot water  and it's probably a job he can do better in the week, one night  as long as he says it's safe to use and you're not gonna blow the tank up on yourself!
That's the thing yeah that's what you want to know.
That's all you've gotta 
Yeah.
worry about, innit?
That's it  yeah.
Maybe you just gotta wait another ten minutes to get your bath full.
That won't hurt will it?
Phoned my mum up, she said you can come down here and have a bath   say at seven o'clock in the morning, she says yeah!
ah.
Oh for God's sake!
I've put occupation, husband!
It is yes, yes!.
Did you go in Tesco's when you was over there?
No we didn't  we thought there was a bomb alert in the toilet in the restaurant, didn't we Jean?
Mm  yes.
This hi oh  the  made her edgy !
They did, they say they got water hammer  we went into the ladies toilets  and  one door, one cubicle was shut  and there was this loud drumming noise and I said to Brenda perhaps it's an alarm signal  perhaps somebody on the other side of that door  has been taken ill and has pressed some sort of  alarm signal, anyway we went out and they said oh no  it's always making that  noise !
Did they?
Well.
Brenda tell you of Tesco's expectations of putting one up in  Horsell Jean?
Yes  charming!
Can't see that going down very well!
No.
That's the last thing they want in Horsell!
No  not the right place for it at all.
No  I don't think they need it actually.
No  no.
So now I know why they tell you fill this as you go along cos you forget what   
Mm.
Sounds like Nigel now  See the whole things going to  again.
Will you tell him that, it might be the thermostat's gone.
No.
What's your regional accent, Jean  London?
No erm  su er no  hang on, hang on  my regional, they want my regional accent  er  well I would have said it's standard received northern.
Northern?
Mm  standard received, S R.
How do you spell friend, F R I
That's right, I before E except after C.
forgets don't you?
What you looking at there?
The Marks and Spark's book?
Ah!
Is that what you're looking at, no?
No this is Prima.
Prima.
Yeah  and it's very good.
Got some really 
The Prima 
interesting things 
a lot in it.
Yeah  really 
Mm.
lot isn't there?
Yeah.
Yes  for that I don't know cos  in wo one  oh actually it might be this  they've added this ste Essentials actually  on conversation it is a  you end up with so many don't you?
Yeah.
And I haven't thought like that really 
Oh!
and half of it is  rubbish and  decent rubbish   and  that's rubbish  there it is  I knew it was in here somewhere  I knew I thought it was in the Prima they gave it to you but obviously it was  erm  in Essentials  everything out of there  don't think they had many Christmas  You used to  was it you, you see you can make your own  , was it you that we went up to town that time  and brought  those erm  from John Lewis  the round 
Mm.
it was you 
Mm.
did you use it?
Yes.
For what?
Well I tried to fix them on the door and they wouldn't stay
No.
There was, unless I was prepared to put a ruddy great nail through my door  I couldn't hang the thing!
What did you decorate them or did you just leave them plain?
Well they were decorated weren't they, they were rings with and they had  little tiny boxes, little coloured  like little parcels sewn on.
Oh!
Oh no I thought you bought just some plain green ones.
No.
No?
No  no.
Perhaps we were going to and then decided 
Mm.
against
And I tried to fix it to the door  and it wouldn't, I tried to do it up with Blu-Tack and would have none of it, I tried to do it with Sellotape and wouldn't do it  the Sellotape kept on coming away  something in the varnish I think that resisted that  so then I thought, right I'll  I'll tie the thing up in someway, I forget how, and blew away  went down the drive!
I didn't mean to laugh when you said it it blew away down the drive !
 
You can just imagine this bloody thing dri flying away down the drive !
yeah  so I chased off after it  one of the little boxes had come loose  and  carted it back to the house I said  your going to be a Christmas decoration  whether you like it or not !
 
So first of all I put it on a little er  I've got a rather nasty little table that looks as though it ought to have a chamber pot underneath it  you remember that nasty little wooden bedside table that I hate 
Oh yeah, yeah.
so I put it on the top of there, every time anybody went by they knocked it off !
 
In the end I simply flung it on the 
Away!
middle of the dining room table
Mm.
with cries of get on with it!
That's half half the trouble with home decoration is  it's not practical.
No, no I was gonna say some  you know, just sort of just some ideas are good  but I tell you haven't they got some beautiful erm  candle holders around this year  some really unusual ones.
Ooh yes!
Well the one I saw in Liberty's it was eight ninety five, it was that high
Was it that well that was quite good.
and it was dark green  oh it it's not bad but you know I'd just lost ten pounds to the taxi driver  to him giving me the wrong change so I was feeling in a very frugal mood  an and this the green of this candlestick holder  you know what I call the old fashioned dark green, of some china?
Mm.
This wasn't quite that  it was more like a glossy young holly leaf  oh it was beautiful!
Here you are   one time only  twenty s twenty per cent savings on a single purchase of Debenhams own brand  throughout the store  erm Debenhams has bought to blah blah blah outstanding values da da da and to encourage to do your Christmas shopping at Debenhams we'll making a special offer that you won't be able to resist until December the twenty fourth  commencing on November  you can get an amazing twenty per cent off at any Debenhams own bought range, that means you can shop throughout the store, visit every floor, buy all your gifts under one roof and save twenty per cent providing you do all your shopping in one go to get the benefit of the voucher  because the voucher can only be used once  from men's, woman's fashions, accessory, children's clothes, furnishings, gifts  simply present this voucher and attach  simply present the voucher attach and receive the train fare discount, we hope you enjoy your shopping .
Mm.
Well you think today i if you'd had that
Mm.
at mark, that twenty six quid,
Yeah.
that be
More 
No  fifty quid.
More  fifty quid.
double cos that's ten 
Mm.
per cent, yeah 
Yes.
yes  oh lovely cakes!
Here Jean just look at this, this is what Carla wants for Christmas, look  that doll, she collects porcelain dolls.
Ah!
Ah!
Isn't she gorgeous!
Oh that's lovely.
Nineteen ninety nine, I don't think that was bad.
That's not bad  I'll buy her that.
Yeah?
Yes if they've got it in tomorrow, I'll buy her that.
Because i that she can keep right through adult life, can't she her 
That's the beauty.
thing, and she's so careful with them.
A a lovely decoration for her bed.
Cos you know how  her ballerina one she's got you bought 
Yes.
her from John 
Yes.
Lewis the 
Yes.
musical one
Yes.
I mean nobody's allowed to touch it!
No quite.
You know, I mean, it's fair i 
I know she's very careful with things 
Cos she said to me the other day, she said have you been in my room and touched?
And I said no, I was going to, she said I think you have, she said, because you've moved the ballerina and I did I listened to it.
Oh I say!
While I was making her bed.
She knew.
Oh she knew
Yeah.
But she said leave my bed, I'll make my bed myself now.
Mm  mm.
But they've got some lovely, lovely things in.
Yeah  yes.
But you have that Mark's and Spark's catalogue  to take back with you.
Oh great thank you.
Because y they've got a good  lot of recipes in there, fish and 
Aha!
Aha!
all and you do a lot more cooking than me, I know they've got some really good
Every day!
That's right yeah but I mean they've got some really, sort of you know, like those things, what have you said tonight that you like, those  that jar of stuff, was it something in rum  pineapple?
Oh yes!
Yes.
Where is it?
Can I just pinch the Debs on back again?
Mm.
But it's the first time I've ever known Mark's to do a catalogue with their gifts in.
Mm, quite  shows how desperate they all are, to get rid of their Christmas gifts.
Well Debs has never done one.
No, no  and very often they charge you for one  a tremendous amount illustrated!
Mm.
Yeah   Oh Brenda  ah ha ha ha  .
.
I love that, look at that!
Ah!
Ever worn them?
What's that dear?
The basque thing, they're called.
No!
Basque.
Gerry would never have allowed it !
I used to make myself 
If he did he wouldn't you wouldn't of kept it on would you?
No  I can't go 
You wouldn't of kept it on long!
I would not  well 
I think that  that Christmas tree is definitely you.
Mm.
That forty nine 
Mm 
pound
Mm.
cos, I mean, that
Mm.
did you hear that woman behind?
No.
Said she would never think, she said I thought it was real!
Yes.
She said, she said the one next to it 
Yeah.
she said now that looks artificial, but I would never have thought the 
No.
cheaper one!
No.
The fifty nine pound that looked one that looked 
Mm , mm.
but I know it cos  the other week when I had to work  till half past eight for Peter, he was having a dinner party  and erm  we went down there, I had to go shopping with him, he made me die cos  he asked me if I'd work a bit later and I said yeah I need the money, so I'll work later  so er  he made me die because he said  in this flare up, this argument  when when I worked that day, I mean, I worked all day, I had nothing to eat and I couldn't eat af , you know, cos of this trouble I couldn't eat after 
Mm.
four o'clock
Mm.
and er anyway he got home about  half past three so we had to go down to Marks  went down to Marks, came back and he bought me a sandwich, I said I've eaten nothing all day, bought me this sandwich, I was hoping to go away at six 
Mm.
and at eight o'clock I went home  and  anyway he went to pay me my weeks money and h he gave me an extra ten pound
Mm.
I thought that's big of you, I mean, I would have charged him more anyway 
Mm.
but 
Mm.
I didn't I thought 
Mm mm 
Oh well 
Mm.
he's 
Mm.
given me ten pound bonus 
Mm.
and when we were having this argument on Wednesday  he said  I said we what  what was your reason then for not paying me for that  when I was genuinely sick and he said er  oh he said because I gave you such a good bonus last week, I said what was that then, he said erm  twenty five pounds, I said no you didn't!
No.
I said, you know, I did some extra hours for you 
Mm mm.
oh yes he said I've worked it out those extra hours I've paid you for them  but I thought you actually worked for them for nothing and I've just given you a bonus
Oh good god!
and er
This man is pathologically mean!
Well the these
Pathologically mean!
these decorators just could not believe how  
No.
.
No.
they were just so amazed!
Yeah  yeah.
Just, you know,th th well they just couldn't, just couldn't believe that somebody could actually  you know, sort of, react, sort of , in in that way.
Mm.
I'm saying everything's turned off at the moment, alright?
Was it ?
No, he's not sure, he don't think it is that h he's he's gonna cut the gas, he said it's not right   the er central heating pumps are well hot, he said it shouldn't be like that  so he to there's a little box up there he thinks it's probably this box  but he's he's trying to figure out what it is up there because he's  he's just such amazed at price of pieces 
Mm.
trying to work out exactly what's going round  might have a
But did you tell tell him that, it doesn't get that hot in the conservatory?
No that's .
Nothing to do with that and the radiator key?
No, can't be that  no don't worry about that.
It's a worry, isn't it?
It is, I don't know.
I suppose even sort of, with a  with a plumber, you know,y you don't  I mean, I suppose they don't always know what they're looking for.
Well no because  unless they put the system in and know exactly what it was  there are so many different ways of delivering water.
Mm, the thing is the guy that used to live here was such a bloody prat!
Oh like Brian?
A didn't help chap!
Oh  oh my dear!
And the jobs we've found
Yes.
that that's gone wrong because he's a do-it 
Quite 
yourself chap 
Quite  yes.
it's just totally unbelievable!
Yeah  well this is my  this my
Yeah.
this is the story of my life  now in the bathroom I have had, I have had to pay  a hundred pounds to Mr Butcher the plumber  to put in  a new  shower thing  because that was  cheap and rough and  eventually wore out  should never have been put in.
What about your leak that came through the ceiling, is that cleared now?
Oh it's doing it again it's doing it again, dear  oh yes, doing it again  erm  I had the plumber up to look at that  cos I thought the plumbing was all wrong and he said no  he said the plumbing is wrong  the waste pipe of the  en suite shower and the bath are connected, and they shouldn't be  they should be separate, but they had been connected  and that is bad  but no, he said, what's happening is quite simple, he said erm  the people using the en suite can't control the water it's going out  he said the curtain doesn't fit flush against the wall, because the wall leans, you know
Mm.
and he said water is getting out, he said tell people to be more careful and put towels all round  so in my lovely en suite I've got old towels all round my  surround 
Oh!
I love that 
God!
Brenda, I adore it, it's me all over  so  the bathroom  I had endless trouble, as you know, with Shirley  I had to buy stuff and Shirley came in  and I gave her  little  presents of this and that and helped her with cooking meals for her  she re-grouted practically  my bath tiles and my en suite tiles because we thought  water was going through the wall, and it was  and then I had to replace the  where you take the plug out in the bath, I forget what you call that, the trap
Mm.
all that has had to be replaced  because that was starting to drip down into the hall, again!
And then  I had to th the shower just  came, you know  came to pieces in our hand, as it were it was not working as a shower  so a plumber had to come  Mr Butcher came into me 
 
unscrewed the whole lot and he said this is cheap old rubbish!
It's continental  and is not  is not U K  and that was  a hundred pounds, more or less for his  fee and  and buying a and buying at  a discount through somebody who I knew  buying this  new shower  and the tappy things, you know 
Mm.
the mixer things  that's the bathroom.
And the next thing that's going wrong in the bathroom  will be that I'll have to replace that  central heating pump.
Is that going wrong then?
It's it makes an awful noise  in the morning!
I I've got a bill to come in from the electrician for his call-out charge  he diagnosed that it's was not an electrical fault  and then thought it was an electrical fault by the noise, it was making a fizzing noise  but he doesn't th he said it's, it's the pump  the pump is  on the way out  it needs replacing  house is built in nineteen eighty five!
So  the bedrooms  and they're not too bad because he hasn't been able to do anything  in the bedrooms   the bedrooms are alright  except that over the lintels in most of the bedrooms  the plaster  is is not right, it's it's flaking in great lumps and rippling  and cracked  something to do with the 
So was he the guy that did everything himself then?
Yes and he hadn't the faintest idea of how to do it!
But that  flakiness and that is obviously when it was new  he didn't let it dry out, he just painted 
Quite.
over it.
That's right  so  you then go into the en suite room, well I cannot tell you the trouble I've had from the en suite!
Water pouring through into the kitchen  water pouring down the electric wire of the lamp in the study!
What from there?
Yes  and  eventually  Shirley and I thought, well I mean, we spent weeks grouting, we grouted and we grouted  and still water was coming through and we grouted and at last it seemed to be dry  and the man came and did the re-artexing on the insurance  and I had wa new wallpaper put up, for which I paid extra because he only allowed eight pounds a roll, the insurance company only  pays eight pounds a roll  and I had eleven pound wallpaper and a border  and having got the whole thing up  the s the patches have appeared again!
And they won't pay out again will they?
Oh no  er  and I
Did they come and check it  first or they just 
No, no they just take your word for it  and  now I have got  as I said, I've got  that, I've got to paint that over  and reseal and I've got to make sure that nobody makes a mess in there, but the plumber said  what you really need to do  is to get rid of this cheap and tatty, horrible  plastic tray  which doesn't come right to the edge of the tiles
Mm.
and buy  a screen  five hundred pounds he says!
Mm, very clever isn't he?
I just looked at the man, I thought, I oh god I can't cope with this!
So you've just got a curtain round it?
Mm.
Mm.
So you come down the stairs  and you come into the kitchen  in the kitchen  we start with the refrigerator being put next to the  cooker
Mm.
and I've had that taken out because I couldn't, I just could not stand it especially in hot weather!
You've got a new cooker haven't you?
I've got a a a well I got a new cooker  had a have a new cooker because  when they took the old one out it was already in seven separate pieces!
Those, bloody useless one though!
He bought it off the town dump!so  new fridge- freezer in the cu which is now free-standing in the corner  bought it from Doug 
Oh I've seen that.
you know  reduced price  but never-the-less money  new cooker  gas hob removed because that was going U S  and an electric hob put in  the formica in the kitchen, if you remember when you first saw me, it was tiles it wasn't formica, it was ghastly tiles  and when Ned lifted all that out  it was black with with rotten mould!
Mm.
The man hadn't grouted  the tiles in properly  he'd used some sort of rough old cement and the water was just going through and staying there!
Oh my God!
Fortunately  Ned gave me that pink formica and the new sink as a present.
So you didn't to buy it.
Ha  what else have we got?
Gas fire.
The gas fire  I have formed a really deep and meaningful relationship with  Andy at Anglia Gas  he's been back and forth to my house, I know all about the fact that he hasn't got a girlfriend  and his mother is a marvellous cook  and that Worlingworth is a bit off the map  he and I are buddies, dear!
I hate to think how much money I have paid over to Anglia Gas  if I'd known what I was into  I could have walked into that house then and I could, while I had all that money  before I gave any  away  I could have said, right, I'm going to have to spend that, that, that, that and that  and I would have done it and it would have  I would've been  alright because I wouldn't have had things going wrong!
Is it still working now, the fire?
Yes.
But after about three hundred quid innit?
Ha  I could have had a lovely new one!
That's th the trouble is they keep repairing,they don't tell you this do they, I mean 
No!
they could have, sort of, said look 
In the end I bullied Andy, I said, Andy there is something fishy about this fire  he said well it's possible he said that  it was erm  a display model  and every time anybody came in  and needed a replacement part instead of sending for the part  they took it out of the display model!
God, what was that bloke!
Was he a youngster or what was he that lived in your house?
Well youngish, he'd got youngish children, you know.
Blooming idiot, weren't he!
Well  totally!
I mean  next time I buy a house I shall say excuse me but are you a blooming  idiot?.
Are you gonna be  but these D A Y, D I Y 
Oh.
are okay if they know what they're doing, but I mean th this this guy, I mean
My lovely Gerald was very, very clever  he was a mechanic, he was a graduate mechanical engineer  and he knew everything about cars that needed to be known.
Mhm.
And he thought as a result that he knew about everything else as well and Brenda, he didn't.
No.
Because another way in which I had to throw  good money after bad was that after he died  once I started having things done in the house  they kept on turning up things that he had done that were absolutely N B G


the al do you remember those wires hanging about in 
Yeah.
the kitchen?
The electrician turned quite white when he saw them!
I know that was you  but y you don't, I mean I remember u the fire we used to have here  and it wasn't till I gave it to a friend, I mean we kept here for a year  alright, lucky enough, we didn't use it  anyway I gave to a friend who doing car boot, I found it in the attic an he said to me  Brenda, he said, did you ever use this fire?
He said well obviously you didn't, he said, cos you'd be dead!
I said why I?
He said, how are y he said the wiring on this, he said if you plug this in, he said ho , you'd electrocute yourself!
I say!
I said, you're joking and I said they sell the house to you
Yes.
you know, and you 
Yes.
plug it in and they 
Mm.
obviously just left it, luckily 
Mm.
enough we did!
I'm going to ask some very, very  straightforward questions when I buy the next house
Well
and I'm going to write down the answers they give me and get them to sign them  because I have I have really been   beaten about the head by this !
Well it's, I mean, you know, it's  I I don't think I could live with the conscience, if I was selling I would say well look 
No I couldn't  I mean, and these people are Jehovah Witnesses who sold me this house  and my feelings about the commercial probity of Jehovah Witnesses  are that they haven't any commercial probity.
 
They're they're probably  so wrapped up in their  devotion  that they don't bother about standard commercial morality, it was sh a shocking thing to do!
I mean, if I were to sell my house now  supposing somebody came galloping in  along before Christmas  ooh ooh I want the house on the first of Feb  and  they'd come and they'd see the house and they say yes I want it, want it, want it and it was plain that they were going to want it  and we started to talk money, as soon as we'd got  the solid block  of money  I want one O two  you er  estate agent tells me I can get ninety seven  between ninety five and ninety seven  say they offer me ninety six
Mm.
say we'd be, you know, be  fiddle around and get to ninety six  I would then turn and say to them, I will give you five hundred pounds  I will knock five hundred off that  so that you can put in  a proper shower tray  and screen
Mm.
put in by 
That's it.
by Mick  of Debenham  because I understand from him that that is what's needed.
Mm.
I just would not 
But even if you didn't sell, I mean but, death trap things  electrical things, I mean  you would 
Quite!
sort of feel  you know, I mean, I've known people where, I mean, it was like us the day we moved in here 
Your conscio as you say 
went to bed that night and thought   gas, you know  and the blooming boiler, lucky it didn't blow up!
I mean it had all, it had gone!
You know, I mean, the next day we had the gas man out 
Mm.
and said we , you know,we we lucky we weren't gassed!
Oh Brenda  Brenda!
You know I mean people are so, sort of,un un trustworthy and
Yes.
well they're just not honest are they?
No , no  they're not.
You know I mean, alright y you wanna sell your house and everything, but I mean for goodness sake, I mean!
You've got to live with yourself.
That's right, I mean
What I have said to Neil  and Neil is honest  but once or twice he's said things and I've said, no Neil!
No, that's wrong!
There it's better to be  it's only poor and have your self respect
Mm.
than to try to take a mean and petty advantage of anybody or anything.
That's right.
He's only said these things, sort of, trying out to see because  he doesn't  he doesn't know if very much, oh it's so sad Brenda, he said to me  we were talking on Wednesday night, I think  and he looked wistfully at me and he said  I only want to be taught.
Ah!
I only want to be taught.
So he's just like a child isn't he?
Well he is, I say that he's six, he's twenty going on sixteen.
Th doesn't the  doesn't the stepfather, sort of, say anything?
No, what what does  what do modern men think about, Brenda, you tell me  your Dave 
isn't it?
is a one in a thousand  one in a thousand like my my Gerald  that thought about his duties, his responsibilities, his tender fatherly fig .
We'll get the stuff in then
Yeah 
When she's gone off the 
Yeah  yeah
cos I dare say we'll latish in bed, cos you won't be that late with  Marge in bed, will you, tomorrow night?
No no.
Not of Maureen  spoken to her lately?
Well yes I had to  spend quite a lot of time on the line to her because er  her husband's been quite ill with bladder trouble.
That's right I remember you saying.
And she was  very worried and kept on  crying down the phone, and saying now I know what you went through with Gerry  I said, oh come, you know
Has it gone off again, Dave?
No, well I
in the kitchen.
central heating  central heating and all  
If it's the  and that down it  he couldn't see a blockage.
Mm.
And as soon as he  put some funnels and that down it  rods  pressure came back.
Mm.
So you can't, but what Dave's saying is  i if lighting the boiler  and then it's going
It's switching in and out is it?
switching off  and 
Oh.
the water's stone cold.
Yeah, yeah.
touched that  he touched several things.
What I'll do  so is anything sucked down into the boiler  or
Right, I'll turn the central heating off.
What about the  didn't you say tha what was the central heating thing, why was that hot?
.
Bet that boiler has already had it!
What's the boiling point of water, people?
It's a hundred, Dave.
Ooh.
Is it  so what would be si sixty five  being a reasonable temperature for hot water for a bath.
hot in the tank.
Obviously you've gotta have cold too.
You nearly ready?
What just sixty five in a bath?
Well not sixty five  water 
Sixty five from the hot tap.
Oh what do you think it is then?
so.
Well it's about, I mean that's normal about sixty, sixty 
About  
five.
Yeah.
Has it gone 
Yeah.
up again then?
It has but I've turned the stat back up  on the cylinder  just made the boiler cut in again  cos that's that's why the boilers cutting out cos it  what it does once it gets up to temperature  then it'll shut itself off.
Where's the thermostat for that then upstairs in the attic?
On on the tank.
Yeah but why would it be all of a sudden need to turn it up  now?
I've turned it down.
Oh you've turned it down?
Yeah.
I thought you meant a 
See it might have reached temperature before  I mean I don't know, I can't  do a
I mean it's been 
do you have 
apparently alright, I mean 
do you have cold water coming out
it was put the boiling w w really hot
Yeah
and then
what hotter than normal?
Well I thought it was, yeah.
But you don't you remember Carla had a bath Sunday she ha , we had a bath about nine o'clock  and then  when we got back she went to have her bath  and she got in it and it was stone cold!
Ah!
I actually hear Lisa the other night she was coming out of the bath, oh she said, the bath's cold.
There's no hot water was there?
Mm.
And it was about three hours later and I said to her 
It's really cutting out a lot.
Might be the stat  playing up.
There thermostat?
Yeah on the
Mm.
from the erm  tank  see what it does once 
How much long do they last?
when it get's up  well  who knows, sort of thing  once it gets up to temperature
Mm.
it like  sends the thing down the old wiring and flicks the boiler off  the same as with the heating once it gets up to temperature the boiler will cut off.
Yeah.
That might be that.
So does, it that a new one
that's on there?
 
 
Yeah.
Well it's  
Would have they put  when they put the  boiler in cos the boiler w we've had in three years.
Yeah well you have  before you had an immersion heater didn't you?
Yeah it's not 
 
a new cylinder there though is it?
Yeah cos they did a lot of work didn't they, or they should have done er 
see on another  
 
they'd have to put
they put the new bo o the only thing, we had everything new  three years ago except for the   they did all the work in the attic 
Quality system yeah well i that boiler that's in the airing cupboard   that do you know?
No, they do 
No they must have had a cylinder there already.
Yeah, no they just put pipes and that they run in there.
Yeah.
Different pipes but 
I'll see what's new and what's old and what 
Yeah.
they'd have done.
Mm.
Who done it, Brian?
Brian and 
 
who's the other one?
Jeff.
No.
No not big Lefty?
Lofty  Lefty.
Oh Brian .
Brian  yeah 
And er 
Lefty.
Lefty yeah.
Yeah they did it.
That's that  now see  I  before did you have  was your heat  heating  the hot water on the immersion?
Well we don't know cos the day we moved in
Oh yeah  
it blew up.
It was a Servowarm boiler in there.
Oh right.
Servowarm in there  and then Les 
but the heating 
would
boil I think  there is a  there's a thing there for the  
Yeah that's that's what I mean it's if it if it run on  the immersion before  then you wouldn't have had that tank stat on there.
You don't we were u we had to use the immersion didn't we cos w we moved in in the June and  Lofty and Brian said well don't have it done cos you're not gonna use until August  so we  they did it August time for us  so but we didn't use Servowarm cos it had blown up, they just disconnected it for us, so we used the ho the immersion heater 
 
until they came
Mm.
and then when they did it  thr three months after we moved in 
 

we went back to we had the new boiler
Is it still going?
put it
Yeah.
It's all very confusing Jean innit?
Yes   but to me it's old stuff Brenda  I mean I've been hearing this kind of conversation  in number   between chaps coming in to mend things 
Well the fire's a dump.
Honestly!
Well it's just  it just goes on and on and on dunnit?
It does.
I put a ha ha  it's age next to you I put thirty seven!
 

God what a what an idiot I am now!
Sixty six !
You're not!
I'm sixty six this month.
Oh I've got you down as sixty two dear.


God I didn't realize you was that!
Yes.
Dear me!
Ah dear dear dear dear  haven't they got in the Prima some lovely er  Christmasy things?
Yes I didn't really have a good look through it because  I got stuck on a  an article that was so good at the beginning
Oh I must s sort your  your watch
Oh my watch!
the reason I didn't post it
Oh yes, not to worry.
I went to post it in the index book I've got  it's stopped it's been in 
Oh no it's 
my jewellery box
Aha!
and it and I looked at it 
batteries probably run down
at the battery so 
Mm.
if we take it tomorrow 
Mm.
get them to do it while you wait 
Yes ooh yes 
Well they do it 
 
within an hour so we 
Yeah.
drop it in
Mm.
and then er 
Good.
and your lipstick  as 
Mm.
well, in the bathroom.
Mm.
That's here  erm  what else di did you see this lovely picture of Carla?
Oh 
Did you see that one?
isn't that good!
That is really lovely!
Good one of her, innit?
Yes it is  oh oh oh ha ha!
Oh you  saying 
 
that  they had a ki ki she had a fes you know the festival we went to?
Mm.
Well they did a, straight afterwards they went to a Kingston one  gets there, here's the bloody judge  adjudicator!
Not him again!
The same guy!
Well Tracey pulled most of us out 
Ooh!
and  again he picked  the dro th not dancers, non-dancers and all that
Mm.
anyway the festival company, Kingston, phoned up Tracey and said, you know, have we upset you?
And Tracey said what do you mean?
She said well you've pulled half  your dancers and they're such good dancers, what's happened?
And she said well I'm very sorry she said but your adjudicator's so rude and the way he described himself, he should 
Mm.
never get up and dance like he does!
No, no.
Because that's what she  she noticed
Yes.
and cos I told 
Yeah.
her you had
Mm, mm 
and she said er  and they said well we've had so many complaints we'd never ever have him again.
Mm.
He's been to banned from Hounslow, banned from Kingston.
Aha!
Mm.
Because he's just  it's sort of a pain in the backside!
Yes he is isn't he!
Yeah  aw awful sort of chap!
Mm better go and get Carla in a minute, it's only in the village we've gotta go.
Yeah.
He's gotta go and get a suit tomorrow ooh my God it's like a nightmare innit!
Yes  and the 
Doug took him over in the week to look Mark's but  I mean they're beautiful suits
Oh but they're expensive!
but they're you know 
Mm.
expensive.
Mm  I mean my son buys  two or even three at a time  and 
He's got to though hasn't he?
He's got to look 
well he has I mean er my my daughter-in-law said he takes  he mu he very often drives he's got a season ticket, an annual season ticket t er to  take the train  but more often than not he drives because  he gets into the into London at about quarter to seven in the morning  he goes and  you know, parks the car and then goes and gets breakfast  and she says he always takes at least one shirt in the car with him to change into.
He does?
Yeah  yeah.
Mm.
Wears he wears white Swiss cotton  and he'll change half way through the day, depending on whether he's got, you know, in fairly important meetings.
They they they buy very expensive things don't they?
Mm.
Mm.
Mm.
Do they buy, sort of, when they buying like Christmas presents do they lash out on them too?
Oh they , yes 
Varying sort of choice presents are they?
Oh yes they are  they're nice presents  and erm  she said she is is sort of in charge of his suits  and he can only wear a suit  she takes a suit to the cleaners every three weeks.
Every three weeks she has to?
That's London.
Yeah.
And also of course he goes on the building sites he's still wearing a suit.
muck aren't they?
Got a  a yellow hat and  and a sweet little wellingtons but never-the-less there's the dust and the muck lying about.
How often does he have to change the suits  you know, how long do they last?
I mu I must ask her how how long they do.
Because they must, I mean even though Mark's are good suits, I mean they must get a lot of wear.
Oh he's gets through them  I know he gets 
He must get 
through them.
He must have to have about half a dozen though, mustn't he?
I'm sure he has half a dozen.
I mean he's on the site
Yeah.
he's in the office and he's meeting clients.
When when he has got  when he's got the time  to go to, I don't know where he gets them, he doesn't get them at Marble Arch Marks I think.
Probably Reading.
Not sure, I must ask her where he does  he goes to a Marks where they  always have every possible man's suit that Marks make  and  and he takes the time to buy two or even three  because he doesn't get that much time for shopping.
No he doesn't get that time  what about his shirts, where are his shirts from?
At Marks.
Marks.
And she buys them  white Swiss cotton, no other.
Mm.
Or he occasionally buys a er a shirt with a  a fine stripe in it, but he says the continentals  expect you to be wearing a white shirt.
Mm.
A co a fine white cotton shirt.
God if that's that thermostat gone!
The thermostat's the worst thing innit?
You've gotta  
Brenda they are 
it won't be a simple, it won't be valve.
No it couldn't be  possib 
or a  mind you, a pump's the other worst one, isn't it?
I've got to I've got to replace that pump  I've got to brace myself on that one.
The thing is you've got to  it's it's like Nigel, I mean, he works for my uncle  erm  and he had the other guy Mark working for him for a few years and then he employed Nigel, but Mark  wasn't a fully qualified plumber and Nigel was and he's  ooh I don't know about  I think he's about nineteen or  no he's about twenty three I think, yeah 
Mm.
twenty three he is 
Mm.
is Nigel erm  and him and his girlfriend  he's just bought erm  a maisonette down  you know 
Mhm.
well it's a house and 
Mm.
turned into, sort of, like 
Mm.
maisonettes
Mhm.
the ground floor  he's got erm  and then he's got a sort of I don't know how it's it's a big house and it's sort 
Mm.
of like  cos a maisonette's got an upstairs hasn't it, and his
Yes a maisonette is  a sort of  two flats really, one up  a maisonette you you enter usually by climbing up stairs outside.
That's right well I think he's got the downstairs then, he hasn't got an upstairs  
Mm.
I'm not sure  and erm  course they're  you know, struggling to do the mortgage  but it it's good because he  you know, he's done quite a few jobs for us 
Mm.
and I mean it's like 
Mm.
now, I mean  when he's come before we've always, sort of you know  paid him, sort 
Mm.
of, on time and 
Mm.
whatever
Mm.
and  normally  somebody'll phone him up  oh it'll be a week before I can get out.
Yeah  quite  quite.
And as I said, when you get hold of a good tradesman 
Mm  mm.
and treat them right
Yes.
you know  y it's so
Mm.
these days, I mean, I know  over at Windersham but they can't get a plumber and I was talking 
No.
to the 
No.
decorators  and they were saying that their plumbers  they charge a hundred pound a day!
Yes quite, to come out.
You know and do the work.
Yeah  yeah.
But erm y you just can't can't 
Mm.
get hold of good  tradesman tha that you got your washing machine chap haven't you?
Oh he's marvellous, yes.
I mean he's  what does he do?
I buy everything from him but I've got to buy another tumble dryer  erm I've been drying clothes off in the house and the three men and all them  well two of them wearing work wear  jeans  and the next one that comes in will be wearing jeans, it's no go  I just cannot dry stuff off in the house, I've just got to have a tumble.
Too busy.
And the tumble 
Have you got a tumble dryer then?
Yes, but it's an old thing.
So we freeze to death!
What's the, what's going on?
Well he doesn't know, he turning it off and he says we've gotta, sort of, try it and if for some reason the water gets red hot  we've gotta turn the whole system down.
Mm.
And off.
Right 
No no 
Are you sure?
Yeah  
Paying him.
Alright then I'll find out and er  
Cheers Nig .
Alright?
Thanks a lot So?
Yeah.
So what can't we have the heating on then?
You can in a minute, yeah.
Oh yeah.
You can have the heating on  I'll  I'll check it about  ten minutes  but if the hot water gets really, really hot  then it's the thermostat  and 
Mm.
he said turn turn  the hot off  but you can 
Mm.
still have the central heating on.
Mm.
And he's going to have a chat with erm  one of the blokes tomorrow and he's   tomorrow afternoon  but he's  he's cured the water.
The blockage?
Well he's he  there's a couple of a little boxes up there, little ele electronic boxes
Mm.
and they do it  electrically  or you can do it manually and he's turned them round manually  and now the water's coming out normal  put them back to how they were
Mm.
so he said perhaps that it there was a fault in there  it's cured itself.
Mm.
Mm mm.
You 
He was go 
would never have known that would you?
No  but he's said 
No.
those er  he said, there's something going down the pipes, I said no  cos that pipe there, you can put your finger where that pipe is now and the water's flying out.
Is it?
So  it weren't nothing blocking that up.
Mm.
But what so  i it does he think something from the ga cos it keep coming on and off?
Well he don't know cos he don't know how those, figure out how they work.
It's always coming on and off though innit?
Well I don't know, I never s stood and listened to it.
Yeah it's always  yet if you run a tap now  turn the hot tap on that'll come on 
You haven't got 
again?
you haven't got any hot water at the moment that's why I said  that should  well I would have thought he did it  but you got no hot water then that should keep going until the water stops.
No it doesn't  you run the top tap now  in the kitchen, turn it off  that will ignite and come on  go and try it.
Yeah but you  the thermostat on your tank is telling  should be telling that that you've got a cold tank  that's what thermostat's for.
Well no because it'll  tha it doesn't work like that it takes about  cos it's cold it's gonna take about an hour  to warm up  and that won't come on  that'll just cu keep coming on and off all the time  till it's hottened up.
Will it?
Yeah it won't  I mean, that won't stay on for an hour  I mean I've literally had a hot bath  put  the water on, you know,af it goes off at nine o'clock in the morning  put that radiator, put that button on to reset the hot water  for five minutes it's bo boilers  lit up  ten minutes and then it's gone off
Mm.
and I think  a but you couldn't go and have a bath cos the water will be stone cold.
Mm.
No, there's something wrong.
No it's always been like that.
Well I would never have thought of that.
Yes because y if you've used all your hot water  you can't have that boiler going  for an hour or two can you?
Why?
Cos it'll be so hot  it gets so hot that boiler 
Well it's it's like you trying to say you're gonna boil a pan of potatoes  and you've gotta keep turning it off every two minutes, cos it'll be getting too hot!
Well no because there's a ba pa pan of potatoes is a bit different to
It's not no y you using a  you put a boiler in for a purpose, is to heat your water up   innit?
Yeah I suppose so.
Yeah, do you like me  like this?
No.
Let me see if I've still got pressure, see if we, see what you think  gotta pick her up.
Yeah, half past nine.
Wanna see the ?
Did you do much in rehearsals tonight.
Yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah!
No, mhm mm.
I should clean it.
I I saw that.
It's gonna be filled up with water.
Yes.
 
Oh that's good is that a boat  out of that shampoo lid?
Yes.
Jolly good, isn't it?
Now right, I've gotta get two men across and  I need t one  two boys to fit in there and one man  so two boys go across, yeah 
Yep that's right.
that one boy stays there, one boy comes back
Yeah he paddles does he?
Yeah I get 
 
got paddles  and that man goes there  that boys comes back  yeah  two boys go back across
Yeah.
one boy stays over, one comes back
Mhm.
the man goes across  that boy comes back
Mhm.
and two boys go back across.
Oh  well  great!
Come on Dave!
But there'll be 
Oh!
there  there'll be a paddle so pretending there's a paddle.
Yes  paddle yes.
I'll wrote it down  this is what I wrote 
Yes 
I put  I think it takes nine times to get them across so if  two boys go across and  one boy comes back  one man goes across  one boy comes  back, two boys goes  go across  one boy comes back  one man goes across  one boy comes back  and two boys go across.
Mm  that sounds right  yeah
Including that.
Mm.
We need  in we don't need this.
Mm.
Did you know, did you get me any plasticine.
No they don't sell plasticine  where we went dear  we'll get it tomorrow  no problem.
.
You're barred!
You know if ever you're in any sort 
 
of a  well not exactly a disaster, but if ev if ever you're in some sort of uncomfortable plight  er  stuck in a train or anything like that  the way t to cope is to go off to sleep if you can 
 
Mm.
and
Do I have to take that?
No  it's my tupperware box.
I know is that 
Very expensive!
It doesn't need to be all, all that it needs t to do  is to just demonstrate.
black 
Yes you don't have to paint it.
You put some insulating tape round it cos that peels off.
Mm.
Wasted it  it's for the house innit?
Well it won't be
Well no it's only seventy pee a roll  it might take two rolls but at least it's, sort of, done.
Mm 
Yeah 
I should do that.
She already said it paints .
Well alright I'll get you some.
Mm.
Rather than paint it cos I I wanna use that again.
Ooh yes, it's very good that  there  cos they're 
I don't have to do it.
six pounds.
again  but I might be.
Well I think it looks good but like that cos it looks like clear water.
Why don't you use 
Yes it does 
the other  cardboard box and paint the cardboard box .
Mm  that's an idea.
 

Yeah but it don't look like a sh like it does with a shoe box.
Yeah.
And let that sit in the shoe box and then tape the shoe box.
Yeah.
It's too fat to be in a shoe box.
No I don't think it is.
Get a big box  if you got a big box from the supermarket tomorrow  painted it  then it 
You're not allowed .
sit in the middle and you can fill it up  up with dirt   
 
grass all round it 
 
That on there 
That'll be nice.
like trees.
That would be very nice.
  
Yes.
.
Yeah.
Get some glass 
Yeah.
some bits from the garden
Yeah  have a lovely time!
How!
You got a clever old dad!
Yes!
But I still thinks it's just best to leave that on there.
Well it's nice  very nice!
It's better in it's better in the 
Who's is that, dad's suggestion?
My suggestion, didn't I?
He made 
Mm.
the holes though.
Dad cleaned the holes and wasted the  
 
the hole and put it in there.
Isn't it surprising at what you can make
Yes.
I mean, out of 
Yes
a shampoo lid!
Mm.
What we need to do is  don't we?
Well I can I can remember when I was a child  and  kids had a lot of time to do hobbies  and a favourite hobby  was to make a  a garden  and I never made one, but a friend of mine was ooh forever making these things and giving them away as presents  you got the lid of a biscuit tin or something of that sort  and you  I don't know what they used for grass  they used to model little ducks and things and he had a piece of mirror  to make a pond  have you ever seen this done?
Yeah.
And it does  it does look so attractive!ooh.
Do you like my man's groovy hairstyle?
Mm.
I put white .
What   quarter past ten I'm gonna bed, I'll just make sure we don't forget the clock.
Go a bed in a minute  Where you going tomorrow, Nan?
Guildford, aren't we dear?
Yep  it was  j just finished this diary, I've got all the wrong dates!
All in a muddle!
 
Oh oh!
Be able to get me some  if you can, get me some green 
Alright.
Plasticine?
Nearly     gotta be  something special on Wednesday .
Yeah i well he's just distressed cos I think  Gill's phoning him in the morning  and she said she'd give him a lift to the hospital.
Who to?
So she might be better  he might be better going with Gill, I'll tell him tonight  erm  she's going over there at two and coming back at three thirty  and she wanted Lee to go, like, at three thirty  and she'd bring him back at half past eight at night.
Get dad to .
I don't think he'd wanna stay five hours.
.
Joe.
He's in hospital.
Why?
Because he's not very well  and I might say him 
 
what  he can say that  he'd go with her but he'd had to be back, sort of, by four  cos he's going out with you  he says that, that'll get him out of it then won't he?
Daddy's taking him out.
Cos Gill's phoning him 
 
about ten thirty  what time's he coming in tonight?
I thought after I was having a shave I'd come downstairs, then I thought I heard the garage door go  thought Lee put his bike in, I thought perhaps he ain't gotta key   
Nobody knocked did they Jean?
No.
No  no one was out there.
No.
So what d I want some soap  what do you want Carla, Plasta  
Green  Plasticine.
Oh green Plasticine.
A box  remember a cardboard box.
What from the supermarket?
Get it there.
Well why can't you walk down to the Co-op tomorrow when you're at dancing and get one yourself.
Oh far better because then you'll choose the one you want.
Cos I'm not I'm not near a supermarket, tomorrow 
No.
I'm not
We're not going to go anywhere near food tomorrow.
Yeah I bet!
  

What's that for then?
Boots.
So did you ask Tracey if she had the results?
Yeah.
What she say?
No results.
Got your results yet?
This one's 
She was late.
She was only in a  in a  she said she was earlier than  the other one and the other came  in two days time.
I might actually have to take some Gaviscon tonight.
Yeah.
Don't be naughty!
So he didn't say what time he'd be in?
Well that's why I was here
don't poke 
half nine that's why I thought it was the garage door.
Mum, what can I make a paddle out of?
Pencil.
No.
Lolly stick.
Lolly stick.
It's only gotta be a little tin foil.
Cocktail stick.
One of those bud things.
Yeah cotton buds.
Sort of cut in half.
That looks like a paddle
It does look like a paddle.
No even with the white things.
Cotton buds?
We can leave the white things 
Ear  picks.
Yeah.
In the bathroom.
Like Johnson's baby buds.
It looks like they're a paddle, doesn't it?
Yeah.
The things you put in your ear!
Yeah.
Yeah.
Can I cover that in tin foil?
Or you could leave it on it's own, couldn't you cos it's got the white  things like dad's 
Oh yeah!
got  th that shaped at the end.
Yeah.
.


That's quite a good i , go and get one  and see that you cover it tin foil if you want but it'll probably be alright as it is.


What a brain box ah!
Yeah!
Oh between the lot of us we must have some intellect.
I bet that hasn't gotta be in for a week!
I bet she's the only one in the whole class doing it.
There's a  
Yeah, quite likely  quite likely 
She's got to  please the teacher all the 
She's enthusiastic.
so much
She's very 
and she 
very well motivated.
Every night she comes out, I've gotta do the homework, it'll gotta be in tomorrow, normally gets a week!
When's this gotta be in by then Carla ?
Well look, well you can do it if you want to do it but i 
Mm.
but  you know, you don't have to do it.
When I think of the difference between Carla  and Neil  Neil doesn't really want to do  anything!
Oh she's gotta be  
Absolutely  bumbling over with 
 
life.
Should see her work, her books!
I mean my poor Neil tried to commit suicide in nineteen eighty nine.
Mm.
Took seventy aspirin!
It was fu ah!
It was funny she did erm
What looks better?a or 
The tin foil.
b?
Yes.
The simple one  mm.
The tin foil 
That one 
looks nice.
Mm.
When's this gotta be in by?
Monday .
Is everybody gonna do it or is it your choice if you do it?
You can either draw it  model it  made me draw the last one   I'll model it this time, it's good fun!
Mm.
If you use the 
So this one looks better?
You said you had to model it  but make it, squeeze it in the middle so it's fatter at the ends  that's it, so it looks like a  canoe
Bren!
paddle, yeah.
What's that  back of your car?
Oh I've opened the boot  I gotta bring, you wanna bring all the shopping in Dave, ha ha?
Mm mm mm mm mm mm.
Y you ca you can talk to Jean  there's that paper.
Bring it in.
Mm mm mm mm.
What ha what about if   all the pen, what if I put some extra tin foil just a bit at the end.
Oh I don't know really  I haven't thought.
I got a bit left over from when I cut it  I'll just bring it in  this bit, there.
I've sort of squeezed the tin foil  so that it it fits very, very tightly around the middle.
Oh ah!
And then it bulges at the end, you see, that'll do  cos if you 
What about if I do an extra bit at the end?
Well I don't think it'll be a good idea at all because  my no my knowledge of tin foil leads me to believe  that tin foil  wrapped on tin foil  falls off.
Oh!
I think you'll be better off with it like that.
Where's my ?
Not yours!
Can I have my  my twee?
Oh lovely!
.
.
from Marks.
 
well it's good !
 
Well that got me to a lot of good  for warmth!
Got not sleeves in it!
Stick that on the wall, want to put it up there, see if you can ?
Mm.
Oh I like the little red basket.
Isn't it lovely, I I fell in love with it, Brenda, I really did.
And you'll be pinching all the chocolates off this!
Yes.
But once up you can put in fro you know, you can afford to put some little bows and some
Yeah.
little decorations yourself, can't you on it?
They just, they just  it's just  as you say it's got a   think  a with the top bit  will got straight up
Yeah.
the top bit is called the  Dover 
Can you pass that card again, I didn't have a closer look, did you buy it here?
Oh well do have do have a closer look   
Oh no you've got  !
Yeah .
Yeah.
Yeah, thought I wouldn't notice!
Oh look!
Oh yeah!
That goes up
That's right, that will go up  where 
Where?
all the little branches will open out  it's going to look extremely nice when it's er  when it's displayed.
And this year they've got some de like this  beautiful gold and silver out!
It's nice isn't it?
Yes.
They really have got some 
Yes.
Mum do you reckon I should make two paddles ?
Could do but I  
No there's only boat  one boat only needs one pair of paddles.
Have they ?
Yeah so you want two paddles on don't you?
Oh they do  I see yes.
If it's if it's a 
Mm  mm.
either cos that's a  C Canadian  paddle.
Cos look  if they're going that way they need th they need the paddle outwards
Mhm.
but if they're going that way they need it   Can I 
 
change my water 
So 
please?
Oh no no I've 
 
dropped the paddles!
Ooh!
What we're doing is, when they've gone to 
What about, if you're going that way you need the paddle away from you, don't you?
way.
Does she 
If you go there you need it here, so actually do you think I should have two paddles?
Well when you're going that way you need that one  mum  how can I stick that on there?
I 
cos if they're supposed to be  
cos if they're gonna go   rowing   
 
Do you remember that programme that was on the telly, where those people went ?
Mum it's meant to be a canoe, but this is gonna be I'm using this instead.
pulling itself along the road.
She's not gonna be like that
How come?
I put it there.
Oh I see, that's just the guiding pole.
You could have had a paddle like this 
Mm.
right  cut that lot off the top  right 
Don't mess it!
I'm not gonna cut it, hang on, listen  cut that off at the top
Mhm.
another paddle you can have  instead of having them at the side and have one man and bursar
Don't they look lovely those bags?
S sitting at the back of the boat like that and how  
Those Marks and Spark's bags, can you see them all?
That's in the water, that's underneath the water, right?
And push it, like that      that's how   you know like they do in the gondolas that 
Ooh yeah.
Vienna.
Mm.
That's how they do them, right?
Mm.
No I was telling you she did this this erm maths  and she got a  ah at the end of it she got a, like, pleasing work  and at the end of it the teacher had written  erm your work is beautifully presented Carla  erm  you work  i instead of your work and Kim says  that teacher's a bit naughty she's missed the r out!
So she went and told her  she said
Mm  mm.
You know, Mrs  it's nice but, you know, you've missed the r out, she said have a house point, she said 
Mm.
the good 
I disc!
a disc 
Good for her.
that was it.
Good for her  yes  mm.
How 
Mm.
can tell if y a extra hot then?
.
Well it w you wouldn't be able to bury your hat under would you?
Mum, I made another hole.
Did you rub it?
You wouldn't be able t 
Yeah  another hole.
  
 
like a pig.
And shouldn't you, you've done the spare kitchen scissors good!
They're my sewing scissors!
I say!
Every sewing scissor I get in this house 
Anybody got a compass?
Mm  there.
Well we don't need to do it now, cos you're going to bed  oh!
What's that in there?
Well  tired, we're not in a desperate hurry to be done tonight, you're not gonna have them now.
Desperate hurry  we are not in a desperate hurry.
You're going to bed!
She  maybe in a desperate hurry !
Go on then gotta sit down and do the list and see what and see what, what's what  Just now, you feel that warmth on you now?
My legs were so cold you could really feel the draft!
Mm!
Well you could couldn't, you put your coat on.
want the door shut, Jean?
Sorry dear?
Do you want the door shut, there  that makes it
No it's alright  no 
Sure?
Quite sure.
makes it drafty 
Yeah I'm very much warmer now.
Are they ?
Yeah.
That's the draft then, I can feel it, it's freezing, Jean with that 
Is it?
it really is 
Mm  course I've got this thing over my feet, cos I getting faint.
You take it off and you 
this is the  er  survival technique  take your coat off  supposing you in London  tube and it's broken down  plus this thing's not as useful, do you remember what happened,know how  starts to get cold, take you  w wearing a coat in winter   take your coat off 
Dad !
and put it so that it goes over your feet 
without a front garden  
get your feet warm  put your hands inside and if you've got a scarf or anything 
 
put it over your 
What?
head.
For the banks.
So that you keep the 
 
heat of your body
In.
from escaping through the top  and if you're i if it's a  fa you know, there's some light or disturbance you and want to  sleep and the best thing to do is to go into a light doze cos, you know, you can't do much else  that's cover your face.
Keeps all the warmth of body heat in.
Mm  body warmth.
Go on Carla, upstairs and get your jim-jams on  say night night to Jean.
Hey!
Oh night darling!
Carla !
Ha ha ha.
Ha ha ha ha.
Yeah !
  

Yeah, can you take these two cups to dad please darling?
I just hope these bags  
 
and beans.
What did dad cook you for your dinner?
Pizza and waffles.
Ooh great!
Ooh!
Ah!
And .
What did you have?
We had chicken curry
Yes.
and a piece of flapjack.
Flapjack  yes.
Fatties   yeah !
 
What's 
Oh ah!
But we couldn't eat all the curry it was very, both of us at one time, we could have scoffed the lot!
Yes.
Your stomach, obviously with this virus, your stomach's reduced isn't it?
It is  it is  and I'm not fighting to get it back again.
No.
At least I  you see, with the virus  I was sometimes  in such a state that I thought I might have bowel cancer
and cancer, that's right, I remember you saying 
and years ago  Doctor  said to me  if you start to lose weight and y and y and I said if you're you're a plump girl so he said if you start to lose weight and you can't understand why  try to put some on  he said 
Oh.
stop worrying about  you know, losing any  try and put a couple of pounds on  if you can't  then come to us and we'll find out what's wrong
Mm.
and we'll catch it early  and so I haven't  been, sort of, saying to myself ooh I've lost some weight, I'll try to lose more  at the moment I'm not worrying too much about what I eat 
I wasn't when I lost it!
Because I can't  I can't eat all that much
No  when I lost it I th I don't want to be this thin I want to put it on again.
I went out  I went out with Peggy    er on Wednesday  er for meal  and she's been saving Daily Telegraph vouchers  and when you got so many vouchers you send them up to the Daily Telegraph, who's sent them, it's offers closed now and they send you a thing like a  credit card  and they send you a list of all the places that you can go to  for a half- price meal 
Hey! daddy turn off the 
erm 
!
you can take a friend and whichever of you has the cheaper meal  that's  what 
Free.
they give you and that's and that's  
Oh that's free.
and that comes free, that's right, that comes free  so two people go out and they share the cost of the meal.
Oh that's a good idea, isn't it?
I couldn't eat the damn meal  I had erm  steak and kidney puddings, no steak and kidney pastry pie.
Was it a pub meal?
Yes, well  a a very nice pub.
Yeah but they do some, those pub meals they reckon now are best value for money and the most 
They are.
filling.
They are  erm it was er steak and kidney pie, brussels sprouts, carrots and bo plain boiled potatoes  I could only eat about half the kidney and meat, I cou I could only eat about a third of the pastry, couldn't cope with the carrots at all or the brussel sprouts, they were beautiful brussel sprouts  like little cabbages, you know  I could only eat a couple of them!
Okay can 
Right you go and get your jimmy-jams on, I'll be up.
I had sherry trifle of des as a desert and I ga gave Peggy half of it!
God  
It's not like me, I mean I normally  yum yum yum!
Well that meal tonight wasn't exceptionally big that curry 
It wasn't, it was a standard portion.
normally we'd eat that and a great big gateaux!
That's right!
But I mean  no I think I think it's obviously sort of sort of reduced
Oh yes  yes.
and you,, I used to eat so slow they'd all all sort of finish and I was still sort of tuck 
Mm.
I said I don't know what i 
Mm.
whether, I dunno, what it is  whether it is your  your tummy reduced or
I don't know  erm  one of the  most interesting, in some ways.
one of the nicest things that happened to me since I've been widowed is having Neil to look after  not only is he an exception
Oh I wondered what you.
What have you got in that little bag?
Oh we've got some make-up.
Oh.
Dickens and Jones.
Do you wanna drink of fresh juice or something?
Er I don't think so.
you have some too 
.
No?
Alright then.
No I don't want any.
if that's what you fancy.
I'm fine.
Anyway I feel that I've been thoroughly tea'd up.
. Tea'd and coffee'd.
Do you wanna put this on?
Yes please.
I want to clean my face.
I'm very interested to see what this is going to be like.
Is this new Brenda?
No.
It's years old .
Is it?
It's nice.
It's one we normally keep in the attic  but we've been keeping it down here
Mm.
now because of it's like Lee if James sleeps they sleep in the erm  down here.
They camp out.
James uses it  down here 
Have you got a rubbish bag ?
That  plumber didn't charge Dave anything.
Oh that's nice isn't it?
That's kind.
So Dave will just get him  some cigarettes or something.
They say that it's the poor that helps the poor and that's how I've found it goes  quite honestly.
Well he's, he's he's a sweetie he is.
Mm.
Oh I like that.
Have you got it on?
No I haven't.
Oh that is nice.
I like that very much.
Yes.
Unforgettable.
Is it a new one?
Revlon.
Mm.
You see I've decided that I'm going to leave Clinique the  the expensive make-up er for some, you know until I get myself re-established financially.
And erm Revlon is a very very good medium priced range.
Ooh we've  we've brought home half of Marks and Spencers with us.
Isn't it lovely?
.
Erm I think what we'll do is  we'll write down  I've got this nice big paper  what we've got
Yes.
and what we've gotta get, you know who they're for.
Yes.
Right.
Right.
Er  Jean  Brenda  presents 
for It was no good my making a list before I came down because I just hadn't seen anything like this in the Marks  in Norwich.
Well the thing is you probably wouldn't have a day would you?
No.
To be honest
No.
with Peggy or anybody.
No.
Going to get this amount.
No.
No way.
Because you wouldn't, you'd think oh no, no they wouldn't want that, we wouldn't want that.
And same as me.
Mm.
I wouldn't think 
We're definitely good for each other 
Mm.
as shoppers.
But what I thought I'd do  is like for Ellie and Linda  for Christmas presents  say, I mean you know it won't be a a lot but  that'll be it
Mm.
and I would sort of put that in there.
Yeah.
Pair of knickers in there
Yeah.
Like that.
Yeah.
And then something like erm 
Do you know I think that I should have got something like that for Shirley  shouldn't I?
These are lovely these boxes.
Bits and pieces.
Yeah.
We'll see
And another thing, I know my  my ironing lady er Lynn, she does car boots every week.
And she actually sells erm junk earrings a pound a pair.
Mm.
I mean they're not very  but Ellie and Linda
Yes.
up in Wisbech they love that sort of thing.
You know I mean  sort of 
Yes.
Yes.
Is Ellie in Wisbech now?
She's been there for the last month.
Yeah.
With your mum?
Yeah.
She's gotta, met another boyfriend up there.
She dumped Steve.
Yes I knew she'd dumped Steve.
Yes.
But that I mean I  you know you can sort of screw that up.
But I just thought that  if you could afford it
Yes.
you could put something extra to it.
Yes.
But if not I mean you've got the tissue paper there.
Yes.
And then you've got the like  even the stickers
Yes.
look it's lovely  
Yes it is.
design paper on there.
Yes.
Yes.
And the stickers to seal the actual box.
Well then  I don't think, I don't know about you, but I don't think personally that needs wrapping up.
No it doesn't.
No it doesn't.
It's it's own wrapping.
Look it's one under the  you know and then whatever
Mm.
even if you didn't put
Mm.
you know I mean people would think you got it from Marks and Sparks cos it's got the label 
Mm.
Mm.
Yeah.
Mm.
You seal it and I mean  I think that's lovely.
Mm.
I mean you know how much boxes are.
Quite.
I mean to get the tissue paper
Yes.
and the labels
Mm.
and the cards  for ninety nine p.
That's not bad.
Right  so that's  and Jane.
Right, Jean.
. Right  who's is this for?
Ooh.
Son-in-law.
For Mitch.
Son-in-law.
Mitch.
Mm.
Mitch.
Erm  what do we put?
Basket of smellies?
Basket of toiletries.
Yes.
put this  as we do it
Yes.
Right.
over there.
Yeah.
And then we can actually see 
And then perhaps put Marie-Ann's next.
Yeah.
That was, that's lovely isn't it?
Yes.
Daughter.
Marie-Ann.
Marie-Ann 
Basket of toiletries.
Right.
Then I got, didn't I get for  Kim  that the was the one I got, I got the mini version didn't I?
Yes.
For Kim.
That's lovely that is.
Yes.
It's nice again   to keep isn't it?
Mm.
She loves, she, I mean she loves the Body Shop.
Aha.
But even that doesn't need wrapping does it?
No.
Look put your lot sort of separate from mine 
Separate.
and we can see how we're going.
That's right yeah.
Yeah.
And what we've spent then can't we?
Erm  Kim  box smellies.
So what erm 
Now shall I do daughter-in-law?
Marie.
Erm  fruit.
How do you spell Marie?
M A R I E.
A R I E.
It's like Marie?
Mm.
Mm.
Erm right.
What did you put for her?
Er bottled fruit.
Yeah.
And  tin of sweets.
Are these what?
No.
No what are they are.
They're biscuits aren't they?
Continental biscuits.
Ah yes.
Are they hers?
They're hers, yes.
And, and the tin of sweets as well.
That's right, yeah.
Tin  of sweets.
So that's three items.
Then I've got Aunt Ivy.
I'm gonna chat to Lee for five minutes.
Mm.
So I got them for  Rob  Chewchocks  Chewchocks So you didn't get any of these did you?
No.
No.
Right.
Decided that they were too expensive for  people.
Hi Lee.
Hi.
Hi Jean.
Hi, Hi.
How are you?
Not bad.
I'll be in in a minute.
Here we are.
Ouch.
Cat er one of the cat's fleas must have bitten me last night.


What, I tell you what I don't see.
Where's the, where's the  cat book for Marge ?
I did buy it, did I?
Where's the list?
Price.
Where's where's the receipt?
You had it.
Did I.
Aha.
You got it, you put it with your card.
Ah right.
Yeah that looked  unless we left another bag in the car.
Give it to me.
I'll have a look.
Yeah.
Er    Christmas crackers  gifts gifts gifts .
No, I don't think you bought it.
Ah.
You had it in your hand.
Yeah.
But I was a bit doubtful about it wasn't I?
Do you remember?
I kept on saying these pictures are a bit too bright.
And we've seen these cats over and over  again .


How are you then?
Not too bad thanks.
You're late tonight.
Dad said that you'd be in at half nine.
No  he said I wouldn't be late.
Oh.
So how did your work experience go today?
Er  it's not too bad.
I've done my diary for the 
Was it a bit boring?
Don't they set you much work?
Not a lot, no.
I just done my dia , done three and a half sides of the diary.
Oh that's good.
So is that finished.
.
And that's about it really.
Been Christmas shopping.
Yeah.


We're on tape four.
Fourth tape?
Yes.
Yes.
Yak yak yak yak yak.
We er we can't got to bed until we've done at least five.
Ooh.
Is this just starting?
Yeah, just on the 
Oh.
Erm
Any phone calls?
No.
Tomorrow, cos dad's erm Nigel's gonna be phoning dad  in the afternoon.
So Jill's gonna phone you tomorrow, but you're not going out tomorrow morning are you?
No.
Jill's phoning you tomorrow morning.
So it might be easier  she said that she's going to visit Vic at two o'clock
Mm.
till about half three.
Then she's coming home  and then she's going back over there about six o'clock till eight o'clock.
And she was gonna said, that she was gonna drop you off there at two then pick you up again at eight.
Now you're not gonna wanna be six hours  at a hospital bedside are you?
And er Clare said tonight she's going and Joe's gonna probably pop over tomorrow.
What time are they going?
Well they just said tomorrow, Clare said tomorrow evening then Joe said oh no I'm gonna go Sunday.
And Clare said oh I'm going tomorrow.
So what I thought to do, if Jill phones tomorrow  morning
Mm.
cos dad's gonna be working now till about three anyway so he's not gonna be able to take you.
Say to Jill, yes you could go over with her at two o'clock  and then come back with her about four.
And just you're just gonna nip in with dad then and try and get your suit.
Mm.
Yeah?
Yeah.
I looked at that one again at Burtons today.
Erm  and the, is is James' sort of like the lightish grey, was it eighty nine, ninety nine sort of a slate sort of grey?
Dunno.
Might be.
It's not, it's not a light grey with lines in it?
Sort of, looks almost sort of shinyish?
I don't know.
I can't remember.
You can't remember?
Well they've got that 
No.
and they've also got it in a dark green which is really nice.
In a dark green?
Yeah.
Sort of erm 
Burtons in Woking?
Yeah.
It's sort of like an olivey green.
Not bottle green.
It's sort of like erm  what's an olive green in here Jean?
Well I was just looking round, is it like the colour of that 
Yes.
Very sort of lighter than, no lighter than that.
That's bottle 
It's a lot lighter than that.
Yes.
Something like in that picture.
Mm.
It's like that.
Yeah.
Mm.
Mm.
Have you seen it?
Yeah well that's eighty nine plus there's fifteen percent off.
What are the ones that the Italians wear called?
Special ones.
What do you call the double-breasted Italian suits?
Don't remember.
But what I'll do is, if tomorrow I get time  I'll have a look in erm  Top Shop.
If I'm over that way.
And if there is any decent suits then I'll let you know.
Mhm.
And then  if you don't get it tomorrow perhaps one night after school 
It might be easier just to hire one.
No.
Why pay fifty quid to hire one?
It's ridiculous.
 
When you're gonna pay seventy five quid and you've got one.
Mm.
Mm 
Yeah but where am I gonna wear it again?
I'll  would  outgrown it within a few months.
Well no you buy a size bigger.
Oh definitely yes.
You like them bigger.
I mean you buy it you're not gonna, I mean  alright you're gonna have a bit more grown but you're only gonna get a bit more muscly.
And you like them baggy anyway, you don't get one that fits you er buy  That's why I said it would have been probably better to pay the extra twenty quid and bought the Italian style double- breasted
Mm.
for their baggy effect see.
Yeah but where can you buy them?
Tut  that shop next door to  erm Intersports.
Suit and Co  I think that's called.
No.
That it's a nice man's shop.
It's a beautiful man's shop.
Yeah I know.
It's dear.
Yeah but I don't, see savings they've got on suits at the moment, special offers on them cos they're not shifting them.
But it's ridiculous you  fifty quid a night to hire a suit.
Because you pay your fifty pound and that's it.
But this suit, I mean.
That's what I said if you buy a grey suit  the trousers  you'll, I mean alright if you don't, I mean you'll wear, grey won't date.
Will it Jean?
No.
No.
It never dates.
Green will date.
Yes.
And you'll get bored with it.
Mm.
Yeah.
But grey will not, I mean Granddad Sid's 
Goes on forever.
sixty five and he's still wearing his grey suits.
Yes.
Yes.
I mean dad got married in his suit.
I mean now he's given it to granddad.
But grey, the actual 
It doesn't fit him.
Yeah it doesn't fit him.
I mean it hasn't, I mean dad's was quite an expensive suit when he got married.
I mean alright that's eighteen years ago.
And the trous I mean the jacket never  I mean very rarely does a suit jacket style change.
The trousers you get flared, but that's no problem cos you just have them altered.
If you have them  you know I mean I can't see, I mean you wear your trousers baggyish and long .
It's not it's not time for flared trousers yet.
No.
That's what 
 
I'm saying.
It's not time.
And I haven't got no shoes to go with  whatever I get.
Well, you'll get a pair of shoes .
Well you got to have shoes, we know you've got  I mean you've got, need new school shoes.
You've gotta have this new pair of shoes as well.
No good worrying about it Lee, you've got  I mean, you can't  you've gotta have the things you've gotta have.
Mm.
But you'll have to get your  moonboots and things like that.
You'll have to buy them for your skiing trip.
Mm.
sort of been given a hundred pound upstairs.
Because that's what  they money they'd owed you?
Does he?
And it  well you're meant to get fifteen pound aren't you, he's meant to pay you for the work?
Yeah.
But you haven't got fifteen pound.
You're a bit skint.
Well I'm going to chip in with thirty aren't I?
Jean's gonna help towards your trip too.
Okay.
Thanks Jean.
And nan's gonna help so 
Oh yes  
You'll cope with it but you've gotta buy, your moonboots we should be able to get the market Jill said  around, I mean we can get them in cash and carry for nine ninety nine but  we should be able to get them at Blackbushe market for five to six ninety nine.
Yeah.
We've managed to hire the jackets  the Salopettes  the ski glasses  the socks  I've sorted out, I've told nan to buy you for Christmas.
That's no problem.
The anorak we've hi we've borrowed.
So we've borrowed everything erm  oh you've gotta buy some proper ski gloves.
You want those  cos they're thirty seven quid aren't they and they're in the sale for seventeen quid at the moment.
Half price.
Yeah I saw that but it's not, they're going quite quickly.
Because
Yes I'd I'd pounce on those because  
has got?
We might have a look in Intersport cos Woking  Yeah.
But I looked today in  erm cash and carry sport and they were the same price.
No they were nineteen quid.
But they were the short ones.
The ones you want are the good long ones aren't they?
And thermal
Your hands are really warm.
I know and they're thirty odd quid.
The right price.
Mm.
And what are they down to?
Seventeen ninety nine.
Throw your body across them.
Yeah.
We'll see if we can pick up a pair of them.
Mm.
Perhaps you can have them for Christmas or something.
Erm  so we've managed to hire everything so all you've gotta, you've gotta buy is your moonboots.
Mhm.
Erm  the suit you've got to have.
You've got to have  
I've got to have that by December the thirteenth.
Yeah well  if we don't get it tomorrow we'll have to go one night, it's late night shopping till nine o'clock.
Mm.
If dad's on his half past four, if he can get to kip  if you go over at seven o'clock one night.
It's not gonna take you, it's only gonna take you and dad an hour isn't it?
Mm.
But he's got to do it on Access because  there's no money in the bank to write a cheque out and pay for the suit.
So I can't go and do it.
Have I got any cash cards?
No and you're not having cash cards either.
Why?
What do you want a cash card for?
No it's  
You can't draw out cash if it isn't there.
And, and that's the trouble with the cash card.
You you tend to think  
You can't have a cash card with a post office account anyway.
No.
No with the Alliance though.
Yeah but what do you wanna cash card for?
So I can get money out if I ever need it.
Yeah but that money is, you've saved  and I mean nan put that in when you were younger too, a lot of it.
So I mean it's for when you're older.
When you're desperate, you need it, not to just draw out and spend.
I know.
I won't just draw out and spend.
No you don't 
You will you know.
I'm the expert on that.
Mm.
I've drawn out and spent.
Because it was there.
I I mean it's ever so difficult to resist the temptation
Mm.
to spend money.
It it, it's like me.
If I had an Access card  I would buy him this that and everything.
And I'd say oh come on we'll buy the suit.
Mm.
And then right, and then you can also buy  the shirt and tie.
Mm.
You can afford that.
Cos you've got all that money saved.
We've had to sponge off him all week.
Borrow all his money.
And it ended up we owed him say ninety quid.
I know.
I know .
Mind you he went out and he had to have er  erm mind you he's had that, when you think of it you've had half of that back.
I said to Dave  I said how have you spent all that money?
He said I've been giving Lee dinner money every day.
I said well I wondered, he didn't ask me for it.
I said I thought he was using his own.
No  all he's given me each day is paper money  plus about one fifty.
So all together  given me about five pounds.
Yeah well it adds up.
Yeah I know.
And we had to pay fifteen quid for the train ticket.
So that's another twenty quid.
We've gotta  pay for your computer.
It adds up dreadfully .
I mean I'm subbing one  well I'm subbing two of my lodgers.
I'm subbing Neil  but that's out of money which he gives me and which really in theory ought to be for my own, own use you know for fun but  I get housing benefit for him, from the council.
And most of that goes back to him for his karate and a  pint of beer in the pub.
And I, I sort of dole out a little here and a little there.
And I'm also subbing my lodger Paul.
Erm and it, it it mounts up.
By the time you've bought them some cigarettes and given them some  money for the  pub  and said well if there er and the car hasn't got any petrol so you pay for ten pounds worth of petrol.
You're through fifty pounds before you can blink an eyelid.
Mm.
It's one of the  well known things about money.
How much  would you say, this lot here was Lee?
Including these  and that here?
Yeah.
They're all Neil's presents.
Erm  Was there a sale on?
No.
No?
Sixty?
 
Two hundred and fifty nine.
Two hundred and fifty nine?
Yeah.
That was it, wasn't it Brenda?
No more because I then paid another thirty  approximately for that two hundred and eighty nine  for that  that, that came to twenty seven and I had  there were two items inside it, I forget what they are.
There's another nearly thirty pound cheque on top of the  Marks and Spencer charge card.
Soon goes my darling.
What time did you get in from the shopping?
Mm weren't too bad.
About quarter to eight.
Mm.
Didn't start until about twenty to six.
Dad said you went out at four.
Yeah we went and had something to eat first then .
You wouldn't like to make me and Jean a nice cup of tea would you please, darling.
I'm not very well.
Why?
My throat hurts.
Well you've be alright going out tonight.
I haven't.
Well you've gone out so bloody well go and do one.


Move your butt.
And I've got  in the morning.
Well  yeah.
Nigel's been round.
Has he actually been round.
Yeah.
We've gotta keep an eye on the water.
Mm.
Does it work now then?
What does that radiator feel like?
Hot.
Very hot?
No that's alright.
Just hot?
Mm.
Seems alright.
It's alright.
You'll the turn the erm heating off when, when you go to bed won't you?
Oh yeah.
And I'll check the hot water and if it's really sort of 
Yes.
.
Come on make me a nice cup of tea.
We're doing our list now though.
Right so  that's Sid  slippers.
Go on, clear off.
Go to bed.
I'm not gonna go to bed.
Right so who's are these.
Eh?
I'm not going to bed.
Oh.
Cup of tea please.
Shirley.
They've got a padded stocking in here for comfort.
Isn't that nice.
I don't know how Jean has hers.
Little bit of sugar.
Mm.
Quite darkish.
Mm.
Not too much milk and a tiny bit of sugar.
Shirley  ?
Shirley  yes.
Oh I see Marge's book.
It's underneath the Christmas cards.
Well I'm blowed if I saw it on, on that receipt.
Probably came under the heading gifts.
Eight four o nine three six.
Yeah gifts.
Six ninety nine.
I suppose, yes.
Right so that's Marge.
Neil's  before he goes away.
Erm 
That's right, tape  for travel.
Travel pack.
Mm.
Mhm.
Travel pack.
Sweat top.
I must say, it does look gigantic.
Do you wanna get Lee to try it on?
Good idea.
Yes.
It's not big Jean.
I don't think that looks big.
Oh well I'll take it anyway.
I was thinking I might change it in Guildford tomorrow  I won't.
No.
I won't.
It's not very big.
I mean
Mm.
You are  more expert on this.
I mean 
Yeah.
I mean I even with Lee
I could, I could not have coped  with caring for Neil.
Taking care of Neil.
If I hadn't had you for advice 
Advice on it.
and help.
Lee I would, I mean I always buy Lee large or extra large.
Mm.
Mm.
Mm.
Because  but they don't, I mean Lee alright, I mean I know by just looking at him what he, like his T-shirts and everything
Mm.
how he, how he sort of wears them.
Mm.
Yeah.
And jog bottoms.
Did we buy both the same?
Think we did.
Are they both black?
Cos Neil only wears black.
Yeah.
They're both black.
Both mediums.
Both the same.
Just make sure  oh that's the .
Well we'll give Neil the slightly longer
Mm.
cos he's got longer legs then.
Mm.
Dave.
Mm.
So  that's, was that for Neil as well?
Yes.
Ooh.
So that will do Neil, what you've got him.
Oh yes.
Cos you got him a travel pack, body spray, sweat top, jog bottoms.
Mm.
Yeah.
Erm
I'll probably buy some sweets and probably a, a a paperback horror or something.
God that smell   smells nice dunnit?
How much was that then?
It wasn't one of the dearer versions of anything.
I think it was only about two ninety nine.
I'm not sure.
o three  one ninety nine.
Oh  it smells really nice.
Mm.
Yes.
It's a body spray isn't it?
Yeah.
Body spray.
Mm.
Mm.
So that's Neil.
And  oh what's this for?
Er son-in-law.
Son-in-law.
Mitch.
Mitch.
Right, sweat bottoms  top  dad.
Here are your  sloggi's 
Ta.
Right who's is this for?
Erm  what is it?
We've got  er  lotion  talc  soap  talc  shampoo  talc  soap  and lotion  aftershave  gel  oh no   aftershave showergel  deodorant talc shampoo   What about?
Now what .
What about Shelley's husband?
That's probably it.
Yes.
It might well have been ,might well have .
Cos it's, I mean even his  I mean have they got a shower?
Oh yes, yes.
All the houses along there have.
Yeah.
Yeah that would do.
Cos you were gonna get him something, you was gonna get him some slippers.
But I mean  Terry 
Mm.
What do you, what sort of money do you want to spend on Terry?
I mean what other men
How much was that?
Eight three six four 
Here's your tea.
Oh bless you.
Thank you lovey.
Ta.
Four ninety nine.
Do you know, I think that would do rather well for Ron .
Can you just pass me a mat love.
Yeah cos you don't wanna spend a lot do you?
No I don't.
Would you like a mat Jean?
Oh.
Do I need one?
Yeah.
On the floor.
Oh yes.
Yes.
So let's give that to  Ron.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Let's just see roughly
Right.
Night.
Night night dear.
So you don't want  you're  in the morning?
Night Jean.
Yeah  oh I'll get up about nine.
What time are you off out?
Oh I'll be out  nine thirty so  I expect I'll be up about half seven.
Well save me the bath water please.
You need to wake me up about half past eight
Alright then .
nine.
See you later.
Bye love.
See you in the morning love.
Quietly cos of
Yeah.
Right.
Let's just write roughly
Mm.
before we
Mm.
Let's leave that
Mm.
The toiletries.
Cos we've got some extra sort of men
Yes.
Yes.
Erm  leave that one cos that's what I bought as a spare.
You, that's yours is it?
That one?
Yes.
That's mine.
It's the one ninety nine one isn't it?
Mhm.
Erm.
That's for my sister-in-law Rosemary.
Now  there are two men's items.
Those  er tuxedos in  the boxes that look like tuxedos.
Who did I get those for?
One's mine and one's yours for Paul.
For Paul.
Of course.
What's Rosemary?
R O S E?
Er Rose that's right, R O S E.
And then Mary, M A R Y.
Night.
Night night dear.
Night.
See you in the morning.
Right, pot pourri?
Erm Peggy .
God you've got loads Jean.
seems a lot of money.
Oh I have got a lot of things.
Yes.
You've got a lot of presents.
Yes.
Er  now who's the other, that  I bought two pot pourri 
Yeah.
They're both yours.
Erm.
You said they can two have it.
Who's the other lady?
Who do you have a coffee morning with?
Jean .
I'm not gonna keep those knickers for me.
I'm gonna give them as Christmas presents.
I can't afford to keep them .
What's that love, you're muttering?
I got these for me
Aha.
but I'm gonna give them with them.
Yeah.
As Christmas presents yes.
Mm.
For the moment.
Yeah.
Ellie, Linda  pants  socks  nice box 
That's a jolly nice present.
Knickers and socks.
Then I might get a couple of little soaps or something.
Mm.
Or what I might do is make  a couple of these up but  fill them out a bit more.
Mm.
Cos these are just say for her teacher.
We've done them cheap.
Yeah.
Yeah.
But put say like   in the Body Shop and get a couple of animal soaps.
So they're  you know they'll be like that.
Mm.
And then obviously if you have more weight in it they'll be really bushy.
Mm.
Mm.
Mm.
I'm not doing that now.
And that's  Jane's little boxes.
Oh there's  sweets.
Now I, I bought those er corn dollies for both of them.
Yes.
I think, hang on  right er    one's Lee's  they're Lee's  er 
So that's all I've got for Paul is it?
What was in, what was in the tuxedos exactly?
Was it talc and  how much were they?
Two ninety nine.
Two ninety nine?
I think I should get him something else.
Got talc, shampoo  Yeah I think something to go with it.
Mm.
Why don't you give him
I was going to say get, make a pack 
that.
You, you're gonna get Neil something else aren't you?
Yes.
Of course I am.
So let's cut the body spray out of Neil.
Mm.
Yeah.
Paul erm  tut
Tuxedo box and body spray.
And then that's that's mine.
When I go home I'll take that  list with me.
Mm.
Might have to rewrite it.
Cos it's got my list and that on so we'll probably  
Well we'll tear it down the middle I mean, you know
Yeah.
you'll have half, I'll have half and we can see what we're doing.
Erm  so we're left with
Yeah, the dollies.
And you bought them too, both of them.
I did.
Both of them, yeah.
And I'm just trying to think what I had in mind.
Or did I buy them  as odd presents for people who might like them?
You know 
Cos we've got one of those each  one of those each  one of those each  they're all yours.
But they're all mine.
Yeah.
That's the odd one.
You, you bought that odd one didn't you?
They're my sweets.
That's my odd.
Yeah.
So you're left with four.
I think my dollies are odds.
What about this?
Bought that for me didn't I?
Oh is that for you.
For that, for when I move into my own bedroom again.
Alright.
So that's for you.
But it could always of course come in as an odd.
Write it down as an odd.
Yeah well   well that's what we've got.
What we've got so far is erm  okay.
You've got Mitch basket, toiletry and sponge.
Mary-Ann basket toiletries.
Mary-Ann  bottled fruit, biscuits, sweets 
No that's Marie, bottle
Marie I mean
Yeah.
Yeah.
Erm bottled fruit, biscuits, sweets.
Shirley  you got slippers.
Marge you got a cat box, book.
Neil you got travel pack, sweat top, jog bottoms.
Rosemary you got tissue box.
Peggy you got pot pourri.
Jean  you got pot pourri.
Paul tie box smellies and body spray.
We're left now 
Right I wonder who I who have I left out?
Let's go through.
Jean to get  right let's do  your son.
What's he having, money or a tie or?
I haven't got anything for him have I?
No.
Cos you was gonna buy that sweater in Marks weren't you?
Mm.
And then decided it  just wasn't right.
You see I can't afford to spend a great deal on anyone this year.
So I think I oughtn't to spend more than about  twelve or thirteen pounds on him.
You've spent more on the others.
Well how, how much have I spent?
I mean don't, don't count Neil because 
Oh no.
Neil is quite different, you know.
He's a special case.
I meant your three yeah but no I mean, I'm just talking about your three  main family.
No.
Mary-Ann is having  what's that erm  basket of toiletries?
About twelve ninety nine was it?
Mm.
And Marie  the  present of food?
Marie  mm  seven fifty  oh yeah.
It's all about thirteen
Yes.
I think I'm keeping it to under twenty.
Erm so what  shall I get him?
A tie?
Trouble is in the past I've given him Liberty silk ties.
Mm.
And anyway I can get them in the sale  if I choose to fight my way up to London I can get a Liberty tie for about  twelve pounds.
Mm.
I mean they're normally forty five or forty.
let's get the   book.
Aha.
And that's how  did it.
Mm.
What about a belt?
A leather belt.
Well there again you see, it's  you're talking about er  dinkies.
Double income no kids.
Er how about 
Oh.
I know what I was going to give John.
Wine.
Wine.
Of course.
Now I shan't buy that  
Right.
You can get that up your way can't you?
I can get that locally.
Yes of course that solves that one.
So wine.
Okay.
Erm  so Marie's got, John's got so that's family's gone.
Now who else is?
Right Mary-Ann you've got, Mitch you've got.
What about the grandchildren?
The grandchildren I think money.
Right.
So that's  what are the kids' names?
Matthew and Ruth.
Well I have in the past given them fifty each for Christmas but this year they're going to have to make do with twenty.
Oh yeah.
You see I know I haven't
Why don't you get Ruth, I mean   from Marks.
I don't  you see I don't know my granddaughter.
This is the sad thing in my life that  I have never been in contact with my grandchildren.
Mm.
The thing is they do get a lot from the daughter don't they?
I know.
Book token.
Yeah?
I think so.
For Ruth a book token.
And what about erm  a Smith's token for Matthew?
Mm.
Mm.
Because you can get records, books, stationery
Yeah.
videos, computer games.
I'll get a Smith's token for both of them.
Yeah.
They are better cos you
Yeah.
you can't go wrong.
No.
That's  sorted out.
So that's all  side.
Right, what about sisters and sister-in-laws or brother-in-laws?
Is there anybody left?
I shall just write to Wynn and Bill and send a Christmas card.
I  I mean poor Wynn  I haven't, haven't been in touch with them for weeks and months and the longer you leave it the worse you feel about it, you know?
Mm.
You get guilty.
And I can't send them a present.
Well you don't see them so there's not a lot of point is there?
No.
No.
Erm erm   okay.
So what about Rosemary?
Is she the only one  who's going to be around at Christmas?
You've got hers but is she the only one  to be at your  's?
Mm.
Yes.
Yeah.
What about Mary-Ann's parents?
Marie's parents?
I never bother with them.
No.
Erm  tut oh Mitch's parents oh erm 
No I don't bother with them.
They're probably away on yet another holiday.
They're forever gadding off on  expensive holidays.
Mm.
.
That's alright.
I shall just send them a card.
So  I think that's all down.
Mm.
Oh  was gonna get the  weren't you?
Oh yes.
Right.
That's all down in Surrey.
Er  right  right Ron .
Mm.
Now who in Ron's, what about his girlfriend?
Er 
Right .
Who's she?
Trudy.
So who goes for Trudy?
Sorry?
Who goes for Trudy?
Ron.
Ron.
So  is there not enough for Ron?
How much was that one?
Can you remember.
Four ninety nine.
See I've already got Ron a big tin of  Liquorice Allsorts.
Which I've hidden from him, of course.
I think I might just get a couple of nice   hankies to go with them.
One ninety nine, two ninety nine.
If we go and see them in Marks.
.
No Debenhams.
We're going to  
Debs?
Yeah.
Right.
Yeah.
I'm gonna do the list what you've gotta get and then I'm gonna do another list of what we've got to   before tomorrow.
Good.
Ron  erm hankies.
So
Two roughly.
Could
Erm right let's 
Could you write down on that that I've, in brackets that for Ron I've got  tin of Liquorice Allsorts.
It's a handsome tin.
And I might, I think I'll put in there, I'll make him up a basket of goodies  with erm  a few telephone stamps on a card and  ooh  I don't know what.
One or two items of biscuits or something like cos he's  Ron is often I think hungry.
Does he like, he likes sweets and things like that?
He does, yes.
He's got a very sweet tooth.
I'm just gonna put this in while erm  as we're going along.
What are you having to put down dear?
Erm  your name, your occupation, your age
Oh right.
and just you're   it's just to  say who's on  who's on this actual tape so they can recognize the voice.
Yes.
The age.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
So the want us to break it down  erm  so they know  oh I'm so stupid.
I've done it again.
I'm four B.
Right.
What did I get for Terry  in the end?
Oh you didn't.
You were gonna get him some  
Oh that's right.
I'm gonna guess at the size.
He's very tall so I'll guess at  nine.
That's what I've done with Dave's dad.
Mm.
Yeah.
Oh who's this Terry?
Mm?
Terry did you say?
Terry .
Yes.
And I've got Shirley slippers and I'm getting him slippers and  that's it, that's  the sensible thing to have done.
Yeah.
Oh and I know what.
I'll give that to Russell , the boy.
I was just gonna say what about the son?
Mm.
Russell's  box  smellies.


It's easier .
That's for Russell.
So in  Ron, Ron's family again so that's  all , Ron, Trudy and Russell.
Yeah?
When are you buying those three?
Ron?
Russell and Trudy.
Oh.
What did I say for Trudy?
The roses?
You got the roses for  Ron.
You got  for the daughters and you're gonna get them some, two hankies to go with it.
That's right.
Yes.
Erm  okay so it's  she, Shirley   you got slippers and Terry you're getting slippers.
Mhm.
Yeah?
Mm.
Erm  Marge  you've got.
Got erm the cat book.
I'd like to get her something else as well.
Marge er 
I wonder if Marge would like a corn dolly?
Let's give her the corn dolly.
Yeah they're  
that they were rather good ones.
Oh I don't know.
No this is perhaps not quite right for Marge but I tell you who I have left out, Jackie and .
Well  we'll sort them out in a minute.
Erm  we'll do all your friends first.
Mar so what else Marge?
Mm.
You've got her a book.
What about, does she like smellies?
Not too sure about what she'd want.
Hankies?
Ladies hankies?
Cos don't forget tomorrow you  you can get the bulk  cos you're getting that discount.
hosiery?
Erm think.
Oh I want something for Maureen in Leatherhead.
Hosiery reminds me.
I usually give her a pair of winter tights for walking the dog.
Yeah.
Who's that?
Maureen.
Maureen .
Extra large winter tights.
So, shall we just put a question mark?
Yes.
Put something small?
Mm.
For Jackie I'll try to pick up a paperback book.
Mm.
Yeah.
One.
Lee I'll get him  a bottle of something when I get back to Stowmarket.
Mhm.
And then there's erm 
You're not gonna buy all the kids this year are you?and all that lot.
No way.
We're not all meeting together so
You'll be meeting them all 
No.
No.
Can't.
Can't?
I just haven't got the time, the energy or the money.
Well the thing is you've gotta do the ones that you see in person haven't you?
Exactly.
Not  
Yeah.
Oh I'm gonna get you a biscuit barrel.
 

Brenda a biscuit barrel.
Er  what did I say for Lev?
A bottle of something  in Stowmarket.
We've got 
And what what about Maureen's husband??
Oh, yes.
I was going to say something for John.
Erm 
John .
He's passionately interested in, in his wild flower garden but I don't think I know enough about it  to buy him anything about that.
Er no.
I don't usually give him anything.
You don't?
Just Maureen?
No.
No.
I'll just stick with Maureen.
Right.
Er what about  ?
Sheila ?
Big tall with long blond hair.
split up.
Oh!
Shirley yes.
Shirley .
Er
Do you keep in touch?
We haven't actually in the last six months or so.
I'll write to her.
Erm put down
What about a calendar  
very pretty er calendar would be nice.
Yeah.
Yes I was gonna say either a very pretty thank you or calender.
Not a terribly expensive one but a calendar would do fine.
Oh my spelling is atrocious Jean.
Oh well.
Don't not matter.
Mm .
Right, let me just get back to  Marge is on her own.
She hasn't got a partner.
Ron  you don't buy a partner.
Jackie er Brenda.
Shirley  a calendar.
You said hasn't got a partner.
What can I get your Dave?
What  there's a  handbook  that he's after in the bookshop.
Get that in  bookshop then.
Mm.
Smiths.
. Gotta go in Smiths 
Mm.
Yeah.
Erm  now  Libby, Jean are friends.
Mm.
Right.
So what other, is there any other friends?
What about ?
I've given up my sewing.
Er I, I was going in the evening you know, doing the tailoring class but of course my  illnesses have stopped me doing all of that and made me realize I can't do it all.
Er, I've got too much to do with my lodgers.
Erm 
Well what about, don't you go to a morning coffee thing where you meet at someone's house?
That's dropped by the wayside.
That's dropped Right.
Mm.
Okay.
So is there any other friends you go out with?
Well there's Diane  the hairdresser's wife whom I  don't see a great deal of but she lives near.
We'll give her a corn dolly.
Hairdresser is she?
Mm.
Hairdresser's wife.
They're quite nice those little corn dollies .
They're lovely little
Mm.
And then  what other friends ?
Well I've got lots of acquaintances but I don't know that I necessarily want to put them on the erm
.
What about any close, like?
Ah.
Now what about my next-door neighbours?
I was gonna say what about neighbours.
Erm  Bob and Glynis.
I was saying, who's the one that had you over for the barbecue?
It was them.
Tin of biscuits.
Mm.
Who is it?
Erm.
Glynis and Bob.
And I think  I'd better get those  in Stowmarket because I'm not gonna be able to carry all this lot up
No.
And they will be heavy.
Mm.
And they're, they're probably the ones you got  Marie are too fancy.
Oh yes they are.
That, the family 
Just go into like Safeways or somewhere.
I mean he is out of work and he cannot get a job.
I tell you who's a good buy.
I bought some.
The one thing I have bought from  a tin of  biscuits.
A tin of?
biscuits.
Oh yes.
They're two pound thirty five
Mm.
for quite a biggish tin.
Yes.
Yes.
That's the sort of thing.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So that's Bob and Glynis, and who else?
Neighbours.
Tin of biscuits.
Just Bob and Glynis or any other neighbours?
No.
Ooh.
Richard .
I've already given him his Christmas presents.
I want something for his bicycle.
Erm  no I'm not gonna give Donna and Sally anything.
What about any of your  are you still ?
I haven't been in touch with the  's for ages.
I just think it's going to be kept down to a Christmas card.
Okay.
That's it.
That'll do.
If you don't want to 
I've, I've given him er  a present already.
Yeah?
Bought him something for his bicycle.
Special little wheel or something.
What about the other man then, that comes?
The, the total ass?
The one, the the the needlework woman's son?
That's who I was talking about, the dopey one.
Oh no.
No I'm not gonna bother to give him er a Christmas 
?
Mm?
Do you still have him?
No.
I I said to her that I couldn't cope.
I was not well enough.
Mm.
Er I mean if he were responsive and would work and would try things for himself  but it, it's, it's like hacking at concrete with a knife.
Mm.
Terrible.
Terribly hard work.
So I said until I feel a lot better I'm not, not resuming.
Alright.
Erm  just one thing.
You don't have Brenda any more do you?
No?
No.
Be a Christmas card.
Erm  what about your local hairdressers?
Do you go in there?
Mm.
Be nice to give her something.
Erm 
Is she a regular one?
Do you have her regular?
Oh yes I go to her constantly, I don't think  I'll give erm  how much are the, were the corn dollies?
Two ninety nine.
There are two of them.
There's Beverley and Gail.
Gail sometimes does my hair but she's a learner and I get her more cheaply.
I think a corn dolly for Gail.
Mm so that's corn dolly accounted for isn't it?
That's both corn dollies.
That's my lot.
And for Beverley 
Who's she then?
That's the main hairdresser, the one who  usually does my hair.
Beverley and Gail work together you see.
Mm.
Gail is her apprentice as it were.
Why don't you give that one to Beverley?
And just give something sma cos you're gonna .
Have a tin of, have a pack of my chocolates  and give them to  Gail, and give them to  that to Beverley.
Good idea.
Yeah?
Yeah.
Cos they're, I mean they're nice sort of wrapped up.
Yes.
Yes.
Cos it's silly to make a thing out more than what you need.
Mm.
Mm.
that's corn doll swiss chocolate.
Cos I, I only bought these as extras anyway.
So.
Mm.
Mm.
Yes I know.
Yeah.
Ah yes I, I, I  but I'm gonna get  aren't I?
Instead.
Right so that's your hairdressers.
That's about it isn't it?
I think so.
What about that other lodger ?
Oh I hope he'll be gone by Christmas.
I think he'll be, I think he'll be  moving out probably at the end of the, I told him I wanted a week's notice.
I, I asked him a couple of weeks or ten days back.
I said oh by the way when are you leav intending to move out?
And he said the  they were pressing him for completion  that very minute.
You see nowadays the solicitors are falling over themselves to do the conveyancing.
Whereas when you and I were buying houses it was  oh it's a long process and it can't be hurried.
Now they're just desperate.
And I, he said something about, muttering something about before Christmas.
I hope he is gone before Christmas.
We won't put him down anyway.
Who've you got for ?
I can't be bothered.
I really cannot be bothered.
left.
I tell you what I might do tomorrow.
I might buy a couple more odds from Marks.
You've got no odds left.
We've used all your odds.
Erm  for instance if I feel I've got to give Philip something  er a tin of sweets is acceptable to both  to both sexes isn't it?
Well what, what was that, what was the price of that red?
This?
No the red tin.
Two fifty.
No that'll do fine.
In fact I'll give my neighbours who live opposite, I don't see a lot of them but they  they are my opposite neighbours and of course the  's really  I'm on good terms with I ought to give them  I'll get them a tin of biscuits as well.
I'll get them in Stowmarket.
Mm??
Mm.
. Tin of biscuits.
Erm odds  I'll get a a  what are they?
Crystallised 
You've got a tin so you'll know what they are in Marks
Yeah.
cos you got a tin for Marie.
Crystallised fruit drops.
Yeah.
Crystallised fruit drops.
That's right.
Yes.
Yes.
Right.
For Jean to get, let me just write   I keep this as my, my scrapbook
Mm.
but I've kept it from all the years.
Mm.
So I've known what I've given people for like the year before.
Oh I know what I haven't given you, your Christmas card.
Oh.
I couldn't resist buying this one.
take your glasses off then 
.
I don't know where to put them.
Thank you .
Ooh  lovely big Christmas card.
My very first.
No my second.
The first one was from Jenny .
Oh!
Ah!
It's lovely.
That's beautiful.
Ah.
How nice.
Thank you very much.
Did you read what I wrote?
Yes I read what you've written.
Thank you very much.
That's lovely.
Mm.
Such a nice card.
Mm.
Beautiful card.
A little home, a little house.
Very nice.
six ninety nine   Ivy, now what did I get Ivy?sweets.
Er that's that lot   got that.
Erm  now Tracy  put her down.
Think I was gonna try, try and make her some .
What did I say Lynn, Lynn and Ellie?
Oh golly .
Knickers and socks didn't I?
Oh that's right.
A box with socks.
And I'm gonna get some smellies  soap didn't I?
Yes.
Soap to go with  just to put
And you were going to put  little animals soaps in a  in a bag.
Was that for the teacher?
You were going to make  one 
Lynn.
one of those with, with some little animal soaps in I thought you said.
Well what I might do is just put one soap in each cos it
Yes.
buy the biggish, I think they're thirty five pence from the Body, buy two or three.
Mm.
And make a couple of different fillings up
Mm.
and lay them around.
Mm.
Oh I've got Jean's present already.
 

Pete I'm gonna get some cigars but I'm gonna get them through Kim.
But she sells them to me for fifty pence a packet still.
Three pound cigars,ones.
Good ones.
Mm.
She sells them to me fifty pence a packet.
How does she manage that?
Cos Brian works for a cigar company.
Oh.
So he gets an allowance does he?
Or does he pinch them?
No he gets  I think he gets about fifty boxes given to him and of course he doesn't smoke  so he just
Oh right.
Right.
he normally gives them gifts but he's got so many left over.
And  I think some people she charges about one fifty but me I   teacher.
No, no  Laura.
She wants something .
He wants knitting.
Harry does  wants a knitting set.
Boy of nine.


Now Daniel, Scott and  I'm not getting.
Oh what did I say?
I said I weren't gonna bother didn't I?
You said you were going to spend about a pound fifty on each child.
Yeah.
Erm and what were you going to buy them that pound fifty?
You were going to put a pound coin in?
No.
Just put a pound coin in the card.
That's right.
The card was forty nine p weren't it?
Right.
Put the pound coins in.
Yeah.
That's right.
Oh.
Will you put on my list  Simon .
That's the little boy who can't see very well.
Oh that's great.
I've got  only one two three  I've only got  three main presents  and four bits.
I haven't got a lot more to get.
And some of it I can only get in Stowmarket anyway because it's heavy.
And I can go down to  the supermarket to get the biscuits.
Right.
Well what I'll do is this is mine, Brenda to get  so I'm giving you 
Oh could you could you put Simon  on my list?
To get.
Erm  erm put a note, ask Richard.
I'll ask Richard what Simon would like for Christmas.
Right.
So I, I'll put in what we're gonna get.
I'll give you both the lists now
Mm.
cos I, I've just crossed mine through.
Mm.
Erm  now  let's go through  done the list so Jean to get tomorrow.
To get  tomorrow.
Right so we've got to go to Smiths.
Smiths, and in Smiths we're going to get  Ruth and Matthew  they've got tokens  token.
We're going to get a Smith's token rather than a book aren't we?
Yes.
Smith's tokens  from Smiths.
Dave you're gonna get a book.
That's to do with canoeing?
Yeah.
That's in Smiths.
Right John, wine.
Stowmarket.
Definitely.
So I'm gonna write Stowmarket next to it.
Mm.
Mm.
Stowmarket.
Matthew and Ruth  .
Cara doll, Debenhams.
Mm.
Debs.
Doll  Er Ron, hankies.
Er  Debs innit?
Mm.
I won't get Ron white hankies because
Coloured.
Yeah I think you know he's such a er er he does, he he's very clean but he's not a good housewife.
So nothing white will come out dazzling.
Right.
Erm  so Ron, Terry slippers.
Marks and Sparks.
Are you gonna get them down here or up in Newmarket ?
Oh  down here.
I'm gonna get everything I possibly can down here.
Right so erm  M and S we'll put in  
Yes I'd love to think that I can struggle back with the tree.
But I'm not sure that I could.
With what?
I'm very tempted.
By the time everything is packed into that bag  that's going to be heavy but on the other hand I'm going to have taxis.
On Waterloo on Sunday I'll be able to get a taxi very easily  
yeah.
Erm  if they can tie a a handle on to the tree  If they're selling them in Guildford Marks.
If they're selling those imitation trees, and if they've got that wonderful one that looks like a real tree  if they can say to me yes, we can  rope it up for you in such a way that it's got a handle on it.
I could carry it back.
Well it has.
In the box it's got a handle.
It's one of those plastic  boxes.
Oh well, there.
Yeah.
And what I'll do is, I'll not only pack my Christmas presents into that.
I'll also pack everything that's in that little black  little black bag.
Everything I've brought with me.
You won't get it all in that.
Well I think that probably Neil's clothes will have to go back in a Marks and Spencers
Right.
one of those bags, don't you think?
Mm.
Well I think  see  cos you're gonna get, alright tomorrow they're all little things.
They're tiny.
Tiny things.
Erm  see how you pack it.
See what you get tomorrow.
I mean  the tree's not desperate to get .
You can get it  if you've got 
If the worst comes to the worst I can do without that.
I can er either buy one in Asda or somewhere or forget about it and have a fresh tree.
But I've had fresh trees since I've been in  in Stowmarket and I've, I've come to hate them.
They're, you know  you, you get the earth you, Richard  usually goes and gets the earth for me.
Drops half of it all over the carpet as he's bringing it in.
Yes.
Too much bloody mess .
And have you ever put a tree  a Christmas tree in a tub and packed earth round it and got the bloody thing to stand up straight?
No.
No.
Not on your nelly!
But that  I mean where do you  nearest M and S?
Norwich is the best.
Ipswich is the nearest.
Norwich is the better bet because Ipswich is being redeveloped  and only about  a third of the space at the moment is being used for the, for shopping.
I don't know whether they'll have managed by Christmas to get it all done.
They were  expanding.
The thing to do  perhaps  tomorrow morning  to phone Ipswich  Marks to see if they've got them in stock.
Good idea.
Yeah.
But I think you're gonna have enough to carry back
I think so.
without lugging that big box .
I I don't think I could manage it.
I can see   fits being had by  party.
presents than worry about the tree at the moment.
Mm.
Cos you've gotta, I mean  
I love that tree.
I fell in love with that  
I know you did dear.
But you can't even leave it down here and pick it up later
No.
because it'll be too late.
No.
I, I want it for Neil and  Paul and even for  
Well why don't you get him to, can't you go with, take Neil into Norwich?
Mm.
I can 
And get him to carry it.
I can get, you see Mark will  Mark will do anything at the moment cos he's quite interested in me.
Well phone, if it comes to it phone Mark at Norwich and ask him to deliver one.
Mm.
Alright might cost you an extra fiver.
Mm.
But it's worth it cos you, you wouldn't get there in petrol  and back would you?
No.
Right let's just go through the rest of this.
Jean to get.
Marks and Sparks slippers.
Erm  Marge, something small.
Shall we put down Marks, Debs or Smiths?
Oh I might look  I'll look along the paperbacks for Marge.
Put query paperback.
Er  Maureen  winter tights.
Debs?
Mm.
Actually, are we going in to Marks again tomorrow?
Yeah.
I think that Marks' winter tights will probably be better.
Okay.
Er  Jackie?
Smiths or bookshop?
Er yes.
Bookshop.
I've put book bookshoe.


Jackie.
Mm.
? Stowmarket wine.
Alcohol Mm.
When's Neil going to see his er heavy metal thing?
He's not going.
He's not going now?
No.
And I had  before I realized 
 
how tight Mike was going to be with  you know having to look after Paul and all the rest of it I promised I'd take him to  Snetterton market and he could have, he was going to buy some  records.
But er  oh yes I might still do that.
talk to him very seriously.
Talk to  myself very seriously.
No but there, there aren't any  there didn't seem to be any concerts  erm happening within the vicinity.
I mean they travel all over the world these people.
And I, I suspect that they're on their way out because the way they  leap and scream and bang and thump  I should think that they , most of them have been on drugs.
He has on, or had on his wall  a poster with the itinerary of their, of their tour.
This, this group that he's so fascinated by.
And I keep on forgetting the name of the group.
Right Sheila , calendar Smiths.
Oh.
What's the name of the group that he's so mad on.
Megadeath is one.
Right what about  
Well their itinerary was something like  er January the first Cologne.
January the second  Dusseldorf.
January the third  Berlin.
You know  they were 
 
Yes.
Punishing schedule of work.
There are stupid people that 
I suppose they're making the money.
Yeah aren't they?
Right Bob and Glynis, tin of biscuits.
The  tin of biscuits.
They're all Stowmarket?
Yes.
I couldn't contemplate hauling that lot back.
Simon ask Richard.
That's Stowmarket isn't it?
Mm.
Well you've got  all you've got left, you've got my presents to get tomorrow.
Mm.
And  that leaves you with just five in Stowmarket.
Wine and some biscuits.
That's not bad is it?
No
I mean they're going to be very easy to buy.
And you've bought eighteen presents today.
Oh my goodness!
Eighteen people.
I say!
. That's amazing isn't it?
So you had thirty four people this year to buy for.
Yes.
but I mean if you'd bought all the extras, last year you had about fifty.
Yes.
So tokens are small,, paperback will be small, calendar will be small.
So they're not major presents
No they're not.
No.
tomorrow.
They're not weighty ones.
Brenda  could you pass me up my, my box of, of er coloured ribbons and things.
I just want to love and admire it.
. It's so Christmassy!
. It's got gift tags hasn't it, as well as pretty.
Ah.
Incidentally I was glad that although I didn't feel  one hundred percent I was glad that I wandered round Liberties.
Because I went up to their fabric department  and  I want to  after Christmas I'm going to wash all the covers on the  er settees, you know er  the dralon.
And I want to make if I can a couple of  deeper coloured cushions and if I can  I want to make tie-backs for the curtains because everything in that room is so blooming pale.
Mm.
Well Liberties sell a fabric that they call  poult, P O U L T  for what was it?
Two fifty.
And they had acetate at four fifty.
And they had the most marvellous colours.
I think that they only intend them for linings.
Oh that's what I wanna get.
Some of that tomorrow.
Well I will get some too.
Put it down on my side as well.
Because I'm not going to buy any more tree decorations this year.
No.
I'm .
Either last year or the year before.
Mm.
Now shall we see what we can get in this bag?
Yes please.
Right.
Oh it's got a little padlock.
Yes.
Isn't it lovely!
Has it got a key though?
No.
No it's just a little neat  pretty thing.
Actually you have got a key.
Oh how nice .
I thought it was just a decoration.
No.
You've got two keys.
Well I never.
gonna love that.
Now if anybody pinches it  alright they can  break it, but
Mm.
I'd leave the two big baskets will probably, I think all the smaller things in here.
Mm.
Do you?
Yeah.
stand up.
That's it isn't it?
What about the erm  the baskets, the toiletries.
What do you think to do with those?
I think put them  in case in the Marks and Sparks bag.
Cos they're quite heavyish.
They are aren't they?
Yes.
Pack them very tight  in one bag.
Mm.
These are gonna be the most awkward things.
I wondered if they would go in there.
No.
See.
Mo.
Just won't.
Oh they do.
Well that's very clever Brenda.
No   Do you want the hangers?
Do you desperately need the hangers?
No.
Cos they're gonna be bulky.
No.
Hangers are a pain.
Even if you  had to after Christmas take it back  they won't know.
They don't worry about the hangers, no.
You just say you don't have the hangers don't you?
That's right.
Yes.
The hangers could in fact go, go in there because that looked to be rather a good hanger, frankly.
Mm.
No, that one's a nuisance.
That one's a nuisance.
That one's alright though.
That one's fine.
They're lovely 
They are beautiful.
It's not too heavy then.
And you've got room in there if you want 
Have a little hold  oh yes I can manage that for short distances.
I think perhaps that can be thrown out because otherwise it's going to scratch that that nice tin.
I can take the tin of biscuits out if you feel it's too heavy.
Oh we can try it tomorrow, thinking about it.
Yes.
No I can lift that.
I mean I couldn't walk for any great distance with it but  I'm going to have taxis.
and get them to carry it.
Yes.
Yes.
Yeah that's gonna scratch it.
Yeah.
That'll be easier for you anyway
Yeah.
so you've got a bit of padding there you can put 
Yes.
Yes.
Pack the biscuits along with your clothes.
Inside and it won't 
That's right.
It won't get scratched.
It's a lovely thing.
You've got two  
Yeah.
I'm wondering whether the things from that  will lie in the top of this.
Well we'll see when, when we get the things tomorrow.
They're all going to be small aren't we, aren't they?
They're going to be
All 
tiny things tomorrow.
Yeah.
Course you've got your tree as well.
Oh the tree!
That could go in with the er wrapping paper couldn't it?
They  to keep that separate.
I suppose so.
Yes.
It hasn't got it's own tree shaped bag has it?
A tall thin bag?
No.
No.
Cos
They were all big bags that we had?
Mm.
Yeah.
That's fine then.
I don't mind looking after it.
Yes.
Yes.
So it stays upright then.
No, none of them are heavy.
No.
Ooh.
Well  I spent today in Marks and Sparks or you spent.
Seventy four pound was mine  and a hundred and eighty five pound was yours.
Yes.
Yes.
So you've got another seventy really.
See there's a nice
That's a beauty.
That's better for your baskets.
Oh yes.
Cos they're a bit squashed in this one.
Yes.
What came in that, oh your bag.
Yes!
That's better.
Yes.
stuff out of that    That's a dinky little bag.
Yes.
Isn't it nice.
That can go in there.
Yeah.
I mean that's just little odd bits of underwear and such like.
put it in there and then fold that bag flat.
Yes.
Well I tell you what Brenda, I don't use this bag very much.
If you don't mind I'll leave it with you.
Leave it here and then  got it here for shopping here .
That's right.
Yeah.
a hundred pound.
Make no difference.
different 
No.
No.
No.
Because  by the time, it it's like Peter.
I mean the fact is  he's got so much money.
Erm I mean he he he's bought, I mean  the presents he's bought to be honest I mean I think oh my god what a waste.
Mm.
I mean he's bought like  bubble  kits.
Giant bub I know they were about twenty nine pound  I saw.
Mm.
And I thought well, I suppose he's got such rich friends
Mm.
Mm.
they'll like something like this.
I mean stupid
Mm.
but I mean  you don't think erm  cos he said to me he said oh I suppose I'd better buy you a Christmas present and I said yeah buy me something that I'd use.
He said what I said well if you're gonna me anything, buy me a tin of biscuits.
Mm quite.
He said  tin of biscuits?
I said
I think that's a most acceptable present.
It really is.
Because  you know it's stupid things like that
I know that Bob and Glynis will be delighted to have some because he's been out of work.
Alright, he invested the money that he received as a  gratuity from British Telecom when he was made redundant.
And he gets in about three thousand six hundred a year  on that.
It's a lot of money.
I think they paid him out  thirty thousand or something like that.
He'd been with them for twenty seven years.
God.
He joined when he was seventeen or sixteen.
Made redundant.
He cannot get another job.
We were saying that Ron in number four  he was a builder.
He had his own business, van, the whole lot he had staff working for him.
And he hurt his back last year and the doctor said well  you'll either be dead within six months.
You've gotta give up the building work.
He's only thirty odd  thirty seven, thirty eight.
Given it up and he said oh well  got no kids you know they live in this house, got no kids.
And they always have a holiday abroad and they go out a lot, good social life.
They eat out once a week, you know.
Mm.
And, because she can't have children  and er  this was what, last June it all happened?
He said oh alright, I'll do something you know, cement or milkman
Mm.
or something just casual, couple of hours.
Couldn't get nothing.
No.
No.
Absolutely nothing.
And say he's round about the fortyish  age and we spoke to him last week and  I said you got a job yet?
He said no and I'm getting worried now he said me, my wife works full time and we could cope on the money but  he said now we don't go out.
Mm.
You know, once a fortnight.
He said we're not getting the luxuries like we could when we were both working full time.
Mm.
Mm.
He said we're surviving.
Mm.
Oh yes.
Cos they've got a next to nothing mortgage.
Yeah.
Mm.
But er
Yeah it's like with me, I mean of course don't forget that I've got a good two hundred pounds to come  on about the fifth of December from the British Legion's savings.
Oh of course you have.
I've been saving five pounds a week  for practically the whole of the year.
And that will be chucked into the building society  so that I can, when I get my Marks and Spencers debt come through, I can pay a great wodge off.
Off that.
But I shall still have to draw on some capital Brenda, nevertheless.
You will.
I mean you have to Christmas time though don't you?
Well erm  I have thought now what shall I do after Christmas?
Because you know I like January.
I've achieved a Christmas.
I've made everybody happy.
That's right.
And  I thought that sewing machine is really going to get out to work.
And I'm not going to buy any fabric.
I'm going to make up the fabric I've got.
And it's, I'm going to do things for the house  like I want to make erm  Chris  has put back the rail over my windowsill.
I don't whether you remember I had a bamboo pole.
Mm.
And I made a, a thing and it looked awful
I know you said.
and I took it down.
But I bought some  beautiful crimson bias binding from Laura Ashley  don't laugh but I'm taking the valance of Paul's bed
I remember you saying.
because it's a white valance.
And I'm going to have this white  frill  sp er erm roll, and I'm going to roll the fabric  I'm going to leave all the pleating, not cut into that, but cut the valance platform and fold it over if you understand me and make it go over the  the pole.
That's a good idea.
Erm so that I'll have oh plenty of gathers you see but the pole will be smooth.
My mistake was to  to spread something through that went into horrid, nasty gathers on the pole.
Didn't look anything, just looked messy.
So I thought have it smooth over the pole and then all frilly underneath and this lovely line of  soft crimson.
And I thought you know I mean when, when erm Philip goes and I'm in the en suite in, in the en suite bedroom.
Everybody says it does pay you to have the house looking fresh.
That room  the paint to my eye has either faded or changed colour or something.
Now I noticed this with  in the sitting room this year I got John , friend of Nev's to repaint the walls because do you remember they were called soft peach?
Yeah.
And I looked at them and I thought, that isn't soft peach any more.
That's a glaring pink.
Mm.
I suspect that Dulux emulsion paint changes colour.
Oh yeah it does.
Tell you what I've got, it's a marvellous thing.
The decorators at Peter's works  cos they, they erm  tradesmen they've got a colour card.
Ah yes I've got that.
Have you  this is the tradesmen's card.
Which one is it?
It's a Dulux but you can't get it from the shop.
It's tradesmen.
No that's right.
Erm Anthony  Anthony got me that.
Got one, yeah?
Marvellous aren't they
Yeah.
cos you got every single
Which year is it?
Now.
This year.
Oh I haven't got the up to date one.
Let's have a quick gander through.
Erm  so I thought  what have I got?
I've actually got a great load still of gardenia and white mixed which is what  was put on the walls in the sitting room.
I thought I'll put that on the walls in the bedroom.
I'm not going to bother to go out and buy new paint when I've got a damn great tub
Mm.
of this lovely soft pale cream.
Erm  I don't know whether I was with you when I bought er rolls of 
Borders.
Borders.
I've got a very pale grey.
Remember that in Marks and Sparks a couple of months back they were selling borders off and I bought a beautiful aqua one.
And they were fifty p each on a background 
I wonder if they're still doing them?
No.
They were just, it was just a one day I went round there shopping and they had, and I bought some beige ones for the kitchen.
Mm.
Erm  and it cost me two quid I think for the four.
Mm.
And I mean I haven't put them up yet.
I thought I'll wait to, I sort of really, like the bathroom I want to  it's got the wallpaper starting to peel off.
Tal speaking of wallpaper, I am going to paper the en suite.
Er I only need two rolls.
Yeah.
Possibly even one.
So I'm going to look in the, in the bin.
And I shall make some more little cushions for the bedroom and I'm going to use this idea of  terribly ordinary cotton
Mm.
there's nothing wonderful about the cotton, but the cushions look absolutely superb because  there were just thin lines of the, you can tell it was when you looked at it quite cheap ribbon  but just arranged in a beautiful square and then a little bit of lace.
like those tissue boxes.
Now I've got a friend of mine that makes them.
Now that was seven ninety nine that you bought for Rosemary.
Now that was  Marks, they're nice ones.
Now she gets them and she sells them for ten quid.
I say.
And they're not, I mean they're pretty but they're not  that magnolia range in Marks is lovely.
That's lovely yes.
And  but she sells them.
Yeah.
You know she does parties as well, but
Yeah, yeah.
she said she  she's losing the profit  at selling them at ten pounds.
Yes.
Mm.
Because the lace, the time.
She said tissue
Do you remember when we tried to make fluffy dogs?
Yeah.
And we found we just  were were wasting our time.
Wasting our time .
You're up against the factory conveyor belt system of sewing when you, one person does only ears and the other does bodies and
That's right.
Yes.
Yes that is lovely.
It's good isn't it?
Yes.
I think we ought to get some kip.
I think so.
I hate to but erm 
talk  for tonight.
I must.
I wanna  in a minute.
No and we must.
It's quarter past twelve.
I don't like going up late, nor do you.
Right  
But we'll have plenty of sleep.
I mean I think five, six hour's sleep is absolutely enough.
Oh yeah.
I'll get Dave to set the alarm and then we can have breakfast before we sort of rush out.
Otherwise I'll sleep through.
Mm.
Well that's partly what did me today.
I was deter , you see I, I have to set a good example to Neil.
And I was determined that everywhere although not absolutely superbly glittering, everywhere was going to be tidy before I left.
So I went through every blessed room.
Tidy tidy tidy.
Throwing away rubbish  you know what it is.
Mm.
Bitsy bitsy bitsy of this and that and the other.
Came out without anything inside me and then had this ghastly experience of not, I was, I was banking on being able to get a hot cup of coffee on the train.
No coffee.
And then  this wretched journey.
Mm.
And I got thoroughly upset.
Oh you could tell right on the phone you were sort of all keyed up with it.
Yeah.
Do you need a drink of water or anything?
No thanks dear.
You're alright.
You might hear Dave switch that off in the morning.
Erm but he probably won't.
old ferry coming over from  erm Harwich to the Hook of Holland.
And I, I used to  sort of sit in er put  sit myself in my little erm bunk you know?
Yeah.
And the, the swaying of the ship and I used to sleep like a log.
Everybody else round me was being sick.
Not me.
.
I didn't sleep very well at all.
Up and down up and down  all night.
You have?
Mm.
Why?
Don't know.
I
Excitement?
I think, a lot of it, you know I was  burning a bit so I think a lot of it was sort of it thinking about that blooming boiler.
Yes.
Yes.
And then you know Dave I think drew  he was, he was ever so, ever so restless.
I don't know whether he was expecting the water to burst  or what it was .
Yeah I know.
Ooh I know.
Cos when I went to bed I mean, you know I tested it and it didn't seem too bad.
No.
No.
It seemed sort of hot  but er  I mean that's the trouble at the moment because  even if it's something minor thing, it seems so dramatic.
Exactly.
You know especially to me at the moment.
Yes.
I don't know why.
The smallest thing  I mean it seems such a 
Well I think  there must, this must be a very common feeling for a lot of people  that they feel that they're balanced on a knife edge.
There's so much  we've had to pay out so much  erm you've had to pay out so much on, on more mortgage than you expected.
Mm.
Did you, saying that, did you see that programme on  let me think  oh dear .
It was on repossession.
One day in the week or the week before.
It was on er channel four I think it was  and it was all about these people that had been, you know encouraged to buy this house and then repossessed.
Mm.
Mm.
And  did you watch it?
No I didn't see that one.
Oh it was horrible.
And it was how people you know didn't want to er  and they wouldn't.
And they were saying that you don't give, the local erm MP was saying you know people just give their kids up and walk away.
Mhm yes.
Mm.
And, but it was awful you know.
There was so many of them.
It should not happen.
I I mean I think it, somewhere somebody is being greedy.
It shouldn't happen.
And it seems to have happened because  thirty years ago everybody like Jerry and me had a repayment mortgage which meant there were very few endowment mortgages.
Mm?
Now a repayment mortgage  they will extend the term of the mortgage.
Yeah but when we had a when we had  
And the endowment you can't extend it.
Well I think they should make it so that you can extend it.
Yeah but when they 
I just don't think I just don't think repossessions should happen.
But repayment now is due as an endowment.
Well they should do something about it Brenda.
That's all I can say.
There should be some  certain fund for bailing out people who are in real, terrible difficulties.
Because you see 
Yeah because 
people  people are not being helped.
It's like my Neil.
Nobody was helping him.
Nobody wants to know, do they?
No they don't.
Not with things sort of going on there's  and now you think sort of it, it's time when people sort of would  club together.
Yes.
But it was saying, er this, this programme was saying that that  erm  that they were buying a house.
And it was telling you  you know say they were, for argument's sake they was buying this house that was sort of up north and that.
And they were buying this house and it was worth something like  I don't know, they were, they'd got a twenty five grand mortgage.
Mm.
They hadn't got  it it wasn't, I mean  you know to us it was qu , a cheap mortgage but sort of up there it was probably, you know sort of 
Mm.
Mm.
a lot of money to him cos there's not the work and that.
And they'd bought this mortgage and their repayment was something like about I dunno a hundred and eighty pound a month.
Mm.
And they said you know, and then all of a sudden it had sort of gone up six percent.
Yes.
That's right.
And it was five hundred quid.
Mm.
And there was no way, you know at a hundred and eighty they'd struggled.
Mm.
Mm.
And they thought, because  most people were, were sort of us.
We thought oh we'll go for it.
Yes.
Yes.
It's gonna be a struggle for a year.
But you go for it.
Yeah of course.
And you don't dream of it
No.
Nobody ever dreamed
going up.
Nobody ever dreamed of this.
I mean they reckon it's gonna go back up now don't they?
Yeah.
Probably will.
I, you see I think that instead of, instead of Lawson putting interest rates up to squeeze inflation out of the economy  he should have stopped all credit.
When Jerry and I  were young  if at the end of the month there was no money in the account  the bank used to write you a filthy letter if you were two pounds overdrawn.
And you had  if  it was no good you wanting something  and waving a bit of plastic at it.
There was no bit of plastic to wave then.
There wasn't?
Not a thing.
If you wanted to borrow money from the bank to, to buy anything there were two ways of getting money.
You could go to the bank and ask for a loan.
And mostly you got a dusty answer because if you hadn't got shares to put down as collateral, you didn't get your loan.
And the other way of doing it was to go on hire purchase.
And when you wanted to buy something like a three piece suite, you went to somewhere like Bentalls  and they took you into a little room, soon as you said to the man well I want to buy this on hire purchase and you went in to a little room  and the man sat down and you filled in a long form.
You told him what your husband earned.
Erm  what you, er what you  could manage in the way of repayments what, er er you had to put one third of the full price down.
Is that when you and Jerry were first married or
Yes.
Yeah you had to put one third of the full price.
So if a three piece suite cost say a hundred and fifty pounds, you had to put fifty pounds down.
And the, the hundred over over two years on, on interest.
So people couldn't get in that state could they?
You
You, you could not get into debt Brenda.
You were not allowed to.
What you could afford  you had.
Exactly.
Exactly.
Now when did the  I suppose the credit card they brought  but as to what you say I mean  the, these, these repossessions it's not the fact  they can't afford the mortgage.
It's the fact they can't afford  all the  the, the lifestyle to go with it, that's what Dave says.
I mean the fact is  you know there's blokes at work.
Same mortgage as us and earning the same as Dave.
I mean, you know they're in a dreadful state.
Mm.
I mean they spend their wages before
Mm.
And I think it's because they go out drinking and  you know
Mm.
They're always buying things for the home.
And the cars.
I mean  majority of blokes at Dave's firm have changed their cars three times.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I know.
People have come to expect that.
Now you could do it in the nineteen seventies and er  well  yes I would say from nineteen sixty eight onwards with  plastic card and  revolv , what's called revolving credit.
You could just run up the credit.
I mean my, all my efforts after Christmas will be to get rid of these card debts.
I promised  
Yeah but with you it's  I mean, alright you don't want it over you, but you will clear it.
Oh yes.
But thing is there's a lot of people that, that that don't.
No.
Quite.
Quite.
I mean I know I told you this 
I mean the only reason I'm I'm running up these debts is that now  I've got so little capital left, that I've got to keep the capital for sheer disasters like  the boiler.
Mm.
And because you've got to pay that in cash.
But there's people that  you know are still now spending them at Christmas.
It's like Jen, still spending them.
You know he's still got like two holidays left on them.
Mm.
But then still runs it up for Christmas.
Yeah.
I mean I, I now will do no spending  
Yeah but you you didn't have  thousands outstanding before you, you know by spending yours like yesterday.
You didn't think to yourself oh god I owe five hundred pound on  Marks and Sparks  I'll top it up .
No I had a fifty pound debt.
That's it.
And when the er and I've now got what?
Er three hundred.
Now that when, as soon as I get my cheque from the British Legion  for two hundred, roughly.
I won't wait for the card, for the bill to come in for the card.
I shall send that off to Marks.
I won't wait for them to send to me.
Oh can you send it off?
Yeah..
Yeah it's gonna be sort of six  well it's longer now isn't it?
Before you get the bills  it's about eight weeks they said now.
Seven 
I don't know.
But they'll, they'll get their money tout suite .
Cos you'll  you probably won't get the bill in anyway till after, well after Christmas will you now?
No.
But they'll get their money.
And then, when they send you the bill then will they just, you won't get so much interest on it?
No they'll just say payment, thank you.
And  won't be quite so much.
Mind you er and even easier, what annoys me  they've put the interest rate down on the cards.
Mm.
Mm.
Charging everybody
Mm.
Yeah.
A twelve pound  charge but putting their rates down on it.
Mm.
So it encourages people even more doesn't it?
Course it does.
Think, oh well  when we normally was paying you know, I think Jenny's is something like
Twenty three percent A P R.
It was, it was two  it was something like two percent a month.
Jenny's is something like about  eighty pound a month  interest.
She must have a colossal debt.
Mm.
And then I said, cos I said well how are you doing your Christmas shopping.
Mm flexi friends.


The majority of people  I mean
I, I mean my five hundred pound limit on Marks  was what I asked for.
I could have asked for far more.
They ask you 
When I talked to my mum, she had about a grand on, on debts.
Mm.
Yeah.
They ask you what you want.
And then she went in one day and she knew she'd had a thousand and said can I extend it?
Yeah.
That's right.
Yeah, course you can.
Well do you know what my, did I tell you what my extension is, what happened with the  Access.
When I got into money difficulties in Woking.
I simply phoned them and erm  they put, they put it up  so that I could buy things  on Access that I could get, well I mean those were the days when I knew that you could sell a house like
Yeah.
just like that.
I didn't know that I was going to have to sell my house for twenty five thousand less than all my neighbours were selling at.
Mm.
And I mean this is where you get caught.
Mind you, you think if you'd stayed in there now.
Well I don't know what would have happened to me.
You'd have just, well I mean
Couldn't have survived.
No.
They, they reckon they're going for about ninety five to a hundred and five down there.
Oh no.
Yeah!
Cos I tell you who's  not  Poo next door to Poo.
That was up for sale.
That hasn't gone still.
That's been on the market for  oh ages.
And the corner house is up for sale.
Next to you on the, the house on the  if you stand at your front door
Mm.
on the left.
Oh Heath, yes.
On Heathlands Drive.
Yeah.
On the corner that's for sale.
The 
Yeah.
Remember the ?
Musical girl?
Yeah.
Yeah.
And that is I think going for about ninety eight.
That's ridiculous Brenda .
Mm.
Mm.
I know that if I wanted to come back here  this is the time that I could do so.
Mm.
Oh well it's a buyer's market isn't it?
If you haven't got  have mortgages and that.
I'm waiting until, I'm not thinking about the prices of anywhere until I've sold.
Because 
And then you'll you'll get more value by selling yours up there, than you would down here.
Mm.
Yes.
Yes.
Much more because
Well.
Houses are selling there.
Very very slowly.
But you do see  the moving vans on the go.
Yeah.
I mean they're they're talk , you was talking about  a good year on the market round here.
Well  I put mine on the market about ten week's ago.
I haven't had a look, I haven't had a nibble yet.
No.
No it will be interesting, it will be interesting to see 
After Christmas it will.
Yes.
Interesting to see exactly where the prices settle down.
Where was it they, oh that was it erm this repossession programme, they also had a house auction.
And they had flats in London and there was like  sort of  guys like Peter  there.
And they interviewed them afterwards.
And one guy had bought three.
He'd bought two flats in London
Mm.
and they rated at  with the high, when the house boom was on
Mm.
they were going for about a hundred thousand.
Mm.
He picked two flats up there for forty five thousand.
You can, in Ipswich erm  Paul was looking at the, at the property you know because he'd like to meet a girl and the two of them, he'd like to buy  and he'd like to meet some girl who's already got perhaps er either a council flat or  something.
He said that he and Karen could have, he said at the present prices he and this Karen that he's, that left him  er they, they could have had erm a place together because  some one bedroom flats, two bedroom flats around are going at thirty five thousand, thirty one.
Prices like that up in the Ipswich area.
Mm.
But this was for two flats.
Mm.
And th it was like there was this couple and they were like I dunno  about  sixty, sixty five the pair of them.
And they had no mortgage and they had a  a little bungalow and everything.
And erm  th they went to an auction and she was saying how interesting it was.
And she could have a like four bedroom house for fifty five thousand.
Mm.
Mm.
Mm.
You know.
I mean they, and they were in good areas.
Yeah.
But what it was, they were like  it was like G A N do them er Man and Co And they had sort of like  a job like Dave's and a lot of them what they've done  is they've bought in this area, I mean probably most areas they've bought  the repossessed they've got about eight or nine houses  they're either renting them out or they're leaving them empty.
The majority of them are empty round here.
Mm.
And then they'll just hang on to them
Mm.
for about five or six years till the house goes up and then.
Mm.
Mm.
They, the building societies are worried about their repossessed houses.
They thought that it was going to be all easy.
I read this in the Telegraph.
Mm.
They thought oh, easy we're going to
Sell them at
parcel them out amongst the estate agents.
And the estate agents don't want to know.
Because people don't want to buy a repossessed house.
For one thing they think it's unlucky.
And the second thing is that repossessed houses very very quickly begin to look dirty and battered.
Mm.
And  I mean I remember myself when I was a young girl  that you used to walk along a road and you'd see houses that were going to rack and ruin.
And you see  it's the central heating and the women opening and shutting doors and running round and keep 
But they don't
It's people who keep the houses going.
But there was a house on this repossession and  it was sort of like  just a sort of young couple and they'd bought this house and it was like a two bedroom house  and they'd done up beautiful.
Ah.
Really nice.
Well they just fell behind you know I mean
Yeah.
they obviously  I mean, quite an expensive sort of social life and everything.
Yeah.
Whatever.
And they just couldn't, he lost his job which is the same old story and er  anyway they went back to visit and they kee they go back every two or three weeks to visit this house.
They've got a ki , no they've got kids.
They had got  three kiddies that's right, cos the council housed them.
And they were in this grotty council house now and they go back and they said  and you saw them going back and saying look at the state of the garden.
Yes.
Look at the state of the, the woodwork looks tatty and
That's right.
we spent all these years on this and
Yes, yes.
all the mail and junk letters all through the door and everything looked tatty.
Mm.
Mm.
Mm.
Mm.
And they said you know  th there should have been a way round it where they kept this couple in there.
There should.
There should.
It's now been empty six months.
Even if it's even if people had sold their houses to the local council  .
You see in in, on the continent they do not build  council ghettos.
Li you know, like you lived in.
Where you walk in and think oh these must be council houses as you're driving through.
Mm.
You, you find a house to rent  that seems right for your  about the price, perhaps a bit high but about right for your  level of income.
And you go to the local housing agency er the, the council housing agency, and you get a  grant to help you with your rent.
So that there aren't special council houses.
An any house could be a council house.
Mm.
And it means that
I don't think the council can afford to do it now can they?
No.
They can't but they, it should, it should have been possible for the councils to have  I don't know it, it  it seems  I, I put it down, I remember walking up and down on the beach with John  about eight weeks ago was it?
He came to see me, it was before I had this illness er these two illnesses.
Or was it after the diarrhoea but before the two lovely colds?
And we were walking up and down on the beach at Aldeburgh  and the most interesting part of our conversation was  that we were saying we both started out as  not conservatives, I've never voted conservative in my life, but we started out as very loyal people.
British justice was marvellous.
British parliament was wonderful.
The queen is great.
And John  said I now don't believe in anything.
I mean  you're talking, you're talking about old  middle class rather staid people.
Mm.
And, you should be taping this .


You are!
Don't mean any disloyalty.
Don't take me to the tower.
Erm  but erm  he was saying  he now sees the weaknesses in  and how, how pathetic are governments are.
Mm.
Well they reckon now I mean 
I mean the poll tax Brenda!
The poll tax!
But they make me die because  you, you you're a day, I mean we got this sort of letter the bailiffs were coming in   because we were a day late.
A day late
Ridiculous.
on it.
And I said  there's people out there that don't even pay it!
You know and  I mean cos Dave totally refuses on on the poll tax to have a standing order or direct debit.
I have to Brenda.
I have no option.
Yeah.
Well he just totally sort of because I think he knows 
I, I was 
so many people that don't pay it.
Well it makes me very bitter because the , this is the sort of thing that John  and I we were going over  one thing after the other.
We we were brought up to believe that if you didn't do the right thing you would be punished.
Mm.
And  people are getting away with it.
But what I can't understand, I mean majority of people I mean erm  you've gotta pay the debt in the end whatever.
Course you have.
Why keep putting it off?
People put it off and that is where they get in the trouble.
Well I don't know that it's that.
I think that people who are living in a fixed abode are paying  in the end.
They're being taken to court and made to pay.
But it's people like my lodger.
Yeah but they were saying now, it's like our, in the like local paper  the poll tax is gonna   prob , might be even go up double because of the non-payers.
Yes.
Because of not 
That makes me very angry.
not having to take them all, I mean having to take them to court.
And they said, just said in the end  again there was er an article or something and it was saying that  you know that er did did you eventually get the money?
And they said no they had to write it off.
Mm.
They never ever did pay it.
Well  they are spending a fortune on hounding Paul.
They don't  somebody
Cos he's at no fixed address is he?
Well  he, he left  he was with Karen  he came to me  he left me and went down to Gloucester  he dithered about running up and down the road between Gloucester  and here er Stowmarket.
Stowmarket.
Erm  not knowing where he was going to, to park his bottom.
And eventually, well I had a, I had a questionnaire  letters were coming to him which I sent back because I, Paul had never told me where he lived in Gloucester.
Mm.
And I  they were addressed to him and they were from the council and I simply said, er wrote on the outside  erm no longer here, address not known.
Which was true.
And then they sent me a questionnaire saying  they understood that he'd  he'd given my address, and was he res , was he still resident?
And I said no.
Did I know his address?
I said no.
Eventually an expensive chap, you're talking fifteen thousand a year, an expensive chap comes to interview me.
He said I thought I'd catch you out.
Didn't think you'd be up.
Oh indeed.
Trying to get rid of his second run so that he can get home by eleven.
Oh yes.
Yes.
Erm so he can go back on this  late.
Because he's been up, now he's used to it his body clock's telling him to get up.
I mean that's what this morning happened.
Yes.
Yes.
Quarter to one he said god is it time to get up Bren?
Ah!
I said no.
Course he's been on it for six weeks.
Yes, quite.
Hates the blooming hours but
Quite.
course now they're putting them on at half past four  you, your body clock's well out.
Yeah, yeah.
They said that, he's just phoned the firm.
He's up in  tut oh god where is it?
It's up er Landsford Park
Mm.
wherever that is.
London I think.
And he said that he'd phoned them and said could they change it and he'd finish at eleven then he can still start tomorrow night again at quarter to one .
Mm.
Mm.
Mm.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And he said if they can get someone else for the run they will.
Yeah.
Mm.
Mm.
But er  mm what else was we saying?
Well we were talking about the general  lack of faith in governments  
you was telling me about a suit.
This guy fifteen grand turned up for Paul.
Oh yeah, yeah.
Suit comes along  and sits there sipping coffee.
Takes about three quarters of an hour.
I, I don't say that it was like being grilled by the K G B he was  most polite and courteous.
But he was going to find out where Paul  was.
He was going to find out.
How did he get your address then?
Mm?
How did he get your address?
Well
When he worked in Safeways or something?
Yes er  somehow they, they'd, they'd got it, or was it  or did I have to fill in a  a census form just at the time when Paul was with me?
When he happened to be with me.
Right, yeah.
They knew anyway.
They knew that he'd been here.
Er and I mean Paul wasn't trying to dodge anything.
No.
Well that's what they say if there's, even people that come over here for a holiday for three months  have to pay it don't they?
Yes.
Sort of twice.
So  er  and god knows what it's costing them to collect.
Did Neil have to pay it?
Oh yes.
Not, not the full amount.
Mm.
He pays the small amount and in fact I keep on meaning at the back of my brain  to get hold of him and say has he been paying it.
Cos when, when he was down at Andy's Aerials I think he used to go on foot to the post office every week.
When he got his  giro I think he used to pay  then and there.
It's only about a pound eighty a week or something for him.
Mm.
He was paying it and I must make sure that he is paying it.
Yeah you'd better check it cos if, those one er pound eighty adds up don't they?
Oh yes if it, it will be moi who has to foot the bill.
There's no question on that one.
No.
No what about erm  your other friends.
What, what are they gonna do?
The ones that have got their, Shirley and Terry that have got their house on the market?
They're not sure whether they're going to sell because er 
Can they afford to stay?
Marginally, now that Shirley has got a job.
That  
So they just sort of put it on the market to see if it would sell?
Well at the time they put it on the market we, we all three thought that it would be a good idea if, if both families  sold up and moved into something smaller and perhaps moved  near to each other 
each other.
in Stowmarket.
But now I, I just don't think that's going to happen.
I, I don't, I honestly Brenda I don't know whether I'm going to come back down here.
Whether I'm going to move to Norwich.
Whether I'm going to stay in Stowmarket.
So to be truthful Brenda, I'm happier not thinking about it.
You've just gotta  what mood, the mood sort of takes you.
Exactly.
Er at the moment I'm, I mean I'm even thinking of, of redecorating  my bedroom.
Dave even came up with an idea we was talking about the other day.
And he said what, why doesn't Jean rent?
Put your money in the capital, rent and live on the capital.
Let the interest rent.
Well I have thought about that vaguely Brenda.
It'll all depend on what the situation is when I sell.
He said that cos then, you know he said she she would have no upkeep of the house.
Mm.
That's right.
That's right.
But I, I don't know whether Dave has, I mean  you see  my friend Pam  whose husband Steve is an airline pilot  she knows quite a bit about this because  Steve was an illegitimate child in London, in West Ham.
His mother was an office cleaner  and she conceived Steve by a married man.
Erm a poor, working class man.
No question of a divorce and marriage, she just had to get on with it.
She was able to keep Steve because where she lived  within the er there was a little coronet of little tatty houses that have since been pulled down  and she was related to fifteen  in fifteen out of the twenty two houses she had a relative.
Mm.
So she could always dump the baby on somebody.
Mm.
She'd got built-in babysitting facilities.
And  Steve knows a lot about being poor.
And Pam said that Steve said to her that when he was at West Ham grammar school, boys grammar school  everybody knew that the people who were best off were the council house people.
Mm.
If you were in private accommodation you were noth , you were nothing like so well off.
You see I have lived in private rented accommodation  with my mother in the late nineteen thirties.
I'll just open these doors cos it'll be too cold to go out there once we go out.
so cold with the glass
Mm.
and the trouble is if you don't have the   here
Yes .
to circulate and
And the trouble is that the, the, the English landlord has a name for being greedy.
And it, it wasn't very nice Brenda because  landlords are entitled to inspect where you live.
Or they were.
Yeah but you wouldn't b I mean like Dave said because er 
Because it wasn't very comfortable.
You can't do exactly what you want  in, in a rented place.
You can't go putting up shelves and things 
Yeah but in searching I mean  Sorry?
You can't go putting up shelves.
If you put shelves on the wall in a rented house  those those shelves immediately belong to the landlord.
Mm.
That was the law then.
It may not be so now.
No I was gonna say yeah because  I know Cheryl and Andy they, they had er erm  th they rented a four bedroom detached house.
And they even actually decorated.
The landlord said to him you know  she, she she sort of took a lease out for three years on it.
Yes.
But until recently  there hasn't been a lot of rented accommodation.
And  landlords have probably been quite pleased to get a decent tenant.
When my Mary-Ann had her rented rooms in Herne Hill  they had the top floor of a  of a three floor house.
And their landlord who was Polish was ever so delighted with them.
And he said, you know he talked to them and he said you can do whatever you like  because  Mary-Ann and Mitch were superior people.
They were going to keep the place clean.
They were going to keep it warm.
They weren't going to, to have wild parties.
Mm.
But, but her place she had  erm it was unfurnished erm  but it was fantastic.
Dave has got a point.
And the thought has crossed my mind.
And thank him very much for his idea and I will
He makes me laugh cos he often says some , when I, it's when I've spoken to you on the phone
Yeah.
and I'll come back and he'll say  has Jean thought about renting Bren?
I said she don't wanna rent and he said why?
He said if she then sold her house he said  put the capital he said  alright he said she  with not buying a you know, another house now  you know the fact is he said alright  if she got one in her area or wherever.
He said then she can put her capital he says and the interest on the capital
Mm.
that can pay the rent.
Mm.
But you see
And I said yeah but then she's got no house  to lead to a
Mm.
And you're at the mercy of the landlord putting the rent up Brenda.
I mean I know that people have been hit by the mortgage rise and of course in my lifetime  I've never known anything like this.
Nobody has.
Well like I mean I said to him I don't think, you know I mean  it was just ideas I think he said I'm not saying do it.
Yes.
And I'm glad of people's ideas because
But I said I don't think it's a good idea.
And  and I said he's got, you know she'd have nothing to leave.
And he said yeah but both her children are 
Well my children are not worried about that.
That's what he said.
He said they're both  you know 
No they're not.
They're not.
he said  he said not knowing her children he said but knowing what he sort of picked up about your kids
Mm.
Mm.
Mm.
he said.
You know to them he said it wouldn't be matter if there was nothing.
No it wouldn't.
Because they're both sort of comfortable and
Very.
you know and
Very.
their more concerned Jean's getting on with her life herself now
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
than worrying about her  you know sort of on, on the doorstep saying oh you've got to look after me.
Here's the money.
Quite.
Quite.
Look after me.
They don't want that.
They do not, no 
You know they don't want it.
Erm  different if you was really ill.
Oh yes.
But I mean, you know as it stands I mean you wouldn't want it and they wouldn't want it.
Mm.
No.
No.
They, they're quite happy you letting them get on with their life.
Yes.
Yes.
Erm  but then you haven't got the security of renting I don't think.
Like you say you're at the mercy.
Mm.
I mean the fact you can do things and, alright you haven't got the upkeep if repairs need doing  but I think that keeps you going.
You've got your house.
Yes it does.
It it gives me an interest you know?
I, I agree you don't need that great big house.
No I don't.
I'd be glad to get rid of the great ox  but I can't so there's an end of it.
And
Yeah but eventually you will.
I mean 
It will s , it will sell .
you  leave it on the market and I mean.
I mean it's not as though I've bought a house which has got anything  wrong with it.
It's not on top of a nuclear plant, it it's not next door to a pub.
It it hasn't got
Oh it's a very sellable house in the right 
It's a very sellable house yes.
but I mean, it's just ridiculous at the moment.
Because you know you would think near  Lacydere the houses are sellable.
But I mean they're not.
No.
No.
You know and  in this area, that's what the guy was saying  houses over a hundred thousand are not selling.
No.
We're both 
Ninety five.
Yeah.
But people want more the sixty  seventy thousand.
Yeah.
Yeah.
There's no way.
You know I mean, you know people have got these beautiful big houses like  Lacydere Well this is worth two hundred you know  hundred and eighty five it's gotta be.
say no.
A house a house is only worth er what people will give for it.
I read many years ago that houses are part of the  really the last true free market
Well
where a willing buyer meets a willing seller.
It's on a house is only worth what somebody will give.
But there was an , it's it's like Sylvie was telling me that, you know who works for the mortgage  she was saying, it was erm  for an incident  there was a house, you know The Grove, those great big Victorian houses?
Mm.
Now I don't know what they were worth and she was saying  they must have been worth quite a bit cos they're big detached solid houses aren't they?
The Grove is a mixture.
Some are semi's.
Yeah well this one was one of those big, four storeys.
I mean enormous it might have even been fi but it, it had bedrooms and bathrooms and
Mm.
and it had a big basement and everything on it.
And that she said was repossessed and it went for seventy five thousand.
And then she said on the, she said I looked at houses like this she said
Mm.
and they were about a hundred and twenty five
Mm.
in a state.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I could  I could buy at the moment
In Guildford I mean you can buy houses at Guildford at sixty  fifty five, from fifty five to seventy five.
And there was no way you could have done that three years ago.
No.
Erm erm I'm keeping, I'm keeping my  mind flexible.
The first  the first firm offer I get  now and let's put it like this.
I've put the, the estate agent has put a number on the house.
As far as he and I are concerned it's just a number.
And that is a hundred and two.
Mm.
If somebody comes along and offers me  ninety  I shall say well what about ninety two?
And they might say  alright.
Because people are being encouraged to offer you silly prices.
That's right.
But I shall say  what about, I shall say to the estate agent  how determined are these people to move?
What's the man's situation?
Has he got to move because of his job or
Mm.
whatever?
Having got a.
But you can't, you can't say well I'm gonna go there and I'm gonna go there.
You've got to 
You can't er you can't.
I I must say Brenda, all this knocks years off my age.
Because it's so funny.
I'm old, I know I'm old and I can't do all the things that I used to be able to do.
But by golly I'm living as though I were a young woman.
All the  erm imponderables, I mean when you're young you don't know quite where you're going to be or what you're going to do.
Mm.
No.
And I've got this  with Neil.
The moment I get er  over Christmas, I'm going to be finding out  where are the training courses.
That's it.
Cos people, I mean now I mean you can't sort of even think about that till mid January  or later.
Because thing is
Mm.
really between now and sort of Christmas  everybody's interested in Christmas.
Of course they are.
They've got to be.
There's nothing else going on.
They've got no option poor devils.
That's right.
There's just nothing, nothing else  I'm gonna get a bath otherwise we'll sit here chatting all morning.
And 
How strange
we'll be, we've gotta be out by half past nine.
Yes.
It's fresh out there.
It's lovely isn't it?
Oh isn't this nice.
Oh I do like this.
Oh I like those flowers.
Where's that?
Here.
Oh it was   bought it from the  Christmas, two ninety nine from .
Oh 
Two ninety nine.
Yeah.
still around.
Keeping my eyes open for that sort of thing.
Well what about this then?
You haven't seen this.
Ah!
Where did you get that from?
Ikea.
I didn't get it.
Me auntie got it up there and when she got up there  they were selling them for nineteen pounds.
Nineteen pounds!
And I said it was just what I wanted.
I'd love to go to Ikea.
I've got, oh.
I'll get that catalogue.
Mm.
I'll give it to you now.
Mm.
When I've got dressed  and tidied up I'll have a look at it.
Right.
I'll go and have a bath then.
Because I haven't  it's,y you're going to put that away for me aren't you?
That black bag?
Yeah put it in that bag.
That's a good idea .
On the top.
You've got your other bits and pieces in there.
Otherwise you'll forget it.
Well I won't forget it tonight because, no I won't be wearing it will I, here?
I shall wear it at Marge's.
No you're  at Marge's.
Yes.
Right so we'll take the voucher   
I like that outfit Brenda.
Yeah but look how it fitted me when I bought it.
Look at it.
Yeah, quite.
Yeah.
I live in it.
You can tell by the trousers.
They really get sort of 
It's a lovely colour.
I was gonna say, look at the socks.
Aren't they dreadful.
Ah, no.
Where's is erm  where's my handbag?
No.
It's not there.
Here it is Brenda.
No it's here.
Oh.
Oh I thought that was it 
That's yours.
that's mine, yeah tee hee..
Did I put the list  oh yeah, things to get  okay  Right, Jean presents for.
That's what you've got.
Do you want to take what you've got just in case you  think 
Mm.
I was gonna say 
ooh have I bought so and so.
Could change that.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Or change it.
Mm.
So I suppose what you do with Debs is er  tell them you want the whole discount  and I suppose they give you a card for each floor cos you can't walk around with it each floor can you?
No I er we, we'll have to start by asking as you say.
Find out what the system is.
Yes.
If you get, like you did at John Lewis you get a card 
That's right.
That'd be better.
Yes.
We could then leave it and say we'll pick it up in an hour or so
Yes.
Yes.
then go and do Marks and Smiths
Yes.
and drive the car round.
Mm.
Mm.
Mm.
Good idea.
Brekkypoos  still got ten more  I'll have to be careful this doesn't  oh it's hot in here Jean isn't it?
Yes isn't it?
What's this one?
That's er  that's 
.
Mind you I don't want that   too awkward.
What did I do with my glasses Brenda?
I had them in my hand a moment ago.
Oh there they are.
Oh look at the marks on this carpet.
Atrocious.
We're pulling this carpet up after Christmas.
Aha.
We're going back to the woodblock flooring.
How nice.
Oh I love it Brenda.
Well I mean  we've, those biscuits are stale now  see.
You know the biscuit tin?
Mm.
Mm.
Yeah.
Quite.
You end up throwing them out  .
I don't like to throw them away without asking you.
No.
But I  I wouldn't leave them
No.
I'm going to have a little quick look at Ikea.
Oh oh.
Course you can.
The decorator  that are in at Peter's at the moment  erm  they do everything.
They're fantastic.
And he was saying he said oh you've been good you've been feeding us with cups of teas.
They charge seventy pound a day per person and he said oh we'll charge you next to nothing.
He said in fact we'll come down  and he said, cos the er it's cracked round the outside.
He said and we'll take it up and repair it for you.
He said we might sort of say to you right we want fifty quid.
Mm.
Mm.
But he said we won't charge you the daily rate, we'll just charge you for the job.
No.
No.
No.
Yeah.
Lovely.
And he said if it's that bad we'll strip it for you.
Oh good.
And re-, sort of d do it.
Re-, re-sand yeah.
You'll love it.
You'll love it.
Well it's all in the hall and Dave said the kids are older now.
We're fed up with carpets and stain.
Yes.
Yes.
I mean this carpet's three years old.
I mean it's
I know.
I know.
it's even going here now.
Mm.
And you keep washing it.
Yeah.
Oh
And it just doesn't does it?
No.
Does nothing happens.
Yeah.
So  two there.
I give you your lipstick didn't I?
Mm.
Yeah.
Why have we got so many cushions?
I said well don't worry, we're gonna have more.


I said they even fight then, there's not enough.
Yeah.
I know.
Ah I wish I could lift my carpet up.
I hate it.
But I must say the carpet looks better in the sitting room since
Look at this lovely stuff Dave doesn't like it 
we took the colour down.
but I love it.
That's a normal skirting.
Mm.
This is what the decorators  
Oh yes.
That's what I've got.
Yeah it's lovely.
Yes.
But Dave don't like it and he said the room's too small.
And Peter's had that and he's had dado, and the dado bars!
Ah!
They look so nice.
What a lot of people are doing is  they're not putting up rails but they're putting up a  erm a border  halfway up aren't they, or just not quite halfway up the wall.
Have you seen that?
Yeah.
And perhaps with a different wallpaper below and above.
Below and  above .
That's right.
Yes.
Right.
Let's just sort this out.
That's not very elegant, the milk on  but never mind.
I don't think that elegance is the main thing in my mind at the moment.
Oh it's really cold out there.
We need it.
Take your book out there Jean.
Yes I shall.
Carla.
Breakfast .
We'll have eaten it all by the time you get in here.
I've put the kettle on and then we'll have  another cup of tea in a minute.
Oh it's nice to get cool isn't it?
Isn't it?
Yes.
These were the things.
I don't know if you've tried them.
Oh.
No I haven't.
And then with my  tongue the way it is.
They're the only ones that I can have.
they've got.
Try one.
Mm.
And then they've got like iron and
Nice.
It's got recommend , it's got the recommended daily amount of vitamins in it.
Oh.
And the recommended daily amount of iron in it.
Mm.
That's what I mean with that Jean you probably won't need   vitamins .
No you see I don't think normally people do.
But they do say as you grow older yes.
Mm.
Cos your body isn't so efficient at processing the food you take in.
No but I might, I won't 
No but  
keep it up for ever more.
But I thought I might have a  a course of it.
A month's vitamins perhaps.
Just to  top, make sure I'm topped up.
But this is a good idea.
What's that?
These, these flakes.
Yeah because there's a lot, I mean cereals have got a lot of vitamins and iron in ain't they?
Well they're they're made  that way aren't they?
Mm.
They put them in.
Ain't it funny this time of year, the garden always looks bare and scruffy and 
Mm.
Mm.
Got all cuttings in the bowls down there I took.
I don't know if, I mean one's not surviving, I don't know if the others are gonna survive.
Mm.
At people's houses I've taken cuttings of and
Mm.
Mm.
Cos Jenny is marvellous she, I mean  next door she er  she very rarely buys.
She takes cuttings from everything she's got and
Does she?
Mm and grows sort of everything in the garden.
Mm.
So I said  wouldn't some lights look nice in here?
Mm.
Christmas lights.
Mm.
They would.
Oh what else did Jenny get me?
Oh she got me this from Ikea.
Mm.
One twenty five.
Oh no!
And I said to them they're but they're quite, quite expensive, the cats.
Erm  these are Ikea.
They were erm  what'd she say they were?
Two twenty five.
She said she just bought me a mixture of things she thought I would like.
Mm.
Mm.
Mm.
Mm.
And she said if you don't want them  you know I'll have them.
Mm.
Mm.
Nice.
But that I thought was really good for three pound.
Mm.
Marvellous.
I've got the shade round the wrong way.
I said to Dave now I wonder how we ever  lived without this.
I know.
I know.
Cos it's such er a light room.
Mm.
The only thing is with that radiator it still, it does get very cold in here.
Because of all the glass.
Mm.
Now what double glazing have you got?
Is any of it double glazed?
All of it.
All of it?
Mm.
Mm.
So why  why does it go down to very cold?
Because  we shut the doors.
Ah.
We don't let any air sort of circulate.
And you haven't got a radiator in here of course?
Yeah!
Have you?
I suppose it's too small 
Double one.
That let's off more power than one of mine in the lounge.
Mm.
That's a double one.
Mm.
And yet you get cold?
Mm.
Mm.
Mind you I mean Dave and I, he never says it's cold out here.
He said your, it's you that's always cold.
Cos I obviously feel the cold.
Mm.
Christmas cards.
Mm?
It's a Christmas card.
Mm.
You look nice.
Yes.
Who's that from your   society?
They always remember don't they?
 
No it's .
And if they're young 
Yeah super .
Oh that's nice.
Oh great.
Isn't that lovely?
Isn't that lovely?
Mm.
Got a .
Mm.
Erm dot to dot.
Who are they?
What are they?
Penguins.
Oh.
You can cut them out.
Mm.
you got ten  and you can cut them out then.
Oh.
Mm.
Look, lots of love from Alleycat and Digger.
There are lots of games on that aren't there?
And did I see a er a game where you join things?
Listen to this.
Alleycat and Digger were looking up at the stars in the sky.
Let's make a wish said Alleycat.
And they both wished a happy new year to all of the  club members .
Look.
Mm.
What nice  
Ah.
Oh look at the penguin!
Mm.
Spot the difference.
Which balloon.
Dot to dot  puzzle.
wheee
What are all those then?
Discount vou vouchers.
Chessington  Thorpe Park  museums.
Oh that's good.
Oh that's good.
That goes with that.
That goes with that.
That goes with that.
That goes with that.
That goes with that.
Mm.
And then you just er  
got a little 
Mm.
Mm.
It's good ideas isn't it?
Oh yes.
That's what I want for Neil.
Well I did want it.
At a time when he was  lounging about in bed most of the time I would have loved a bed tray but I not think, I don't think I'm going to bother with one now.
For one thing he's gone off breakfast.
And I've gone off making it  in the morning.
But that's an ideal thing that.
Mm.
Only nine fifty.
What Ikea?
Oh that's what we were gonna look at today, trays.
Yes.
Yes.
Cos you want, oh no you've got some.
No I mustn't, I mustn't buy any anyway.
Still going to  Guildford, why don't you go to Ikea?
Oh no dear, no.
Oh no cos cos you can't get shop , Christmas shopping there.
Brenda.
I have got in my diary that I'm coming down to you on the twenty third of December?
Is that right?
You well you asked us said you could break the journey.
Is that so?
Mm.
Cos you said you're going to your sisters erm  your sons on the twenty fourth.
And you said cos it'll be so busy could you stop over, you wasn't coming down to me till sort of like after threeish.
Right.
Is that okay with you?
Yeah.
Fine, fine.
Right.
Right.
And then you've only got this travel
Mm.
That's right.
Yeah it won't be quite so  I hope it won't be quite so bad on the M twenty five on the twenty third.
I know but the twenty fourth if you came down cos you 
Ooh 
Well because everybody finishes around 
All the last minute merchants will be on.
Mm.
Mm.
Sorry.
I'll make some tea.
Mm.
You'll have to keep talking Carla.
Ha.
Oh yes.
I'm trying to find presents.
What presents?
The one on the card.
Yeah presents you've got to find in there.
Erm  oh 
I need the milk 
Oh.
Oh that's a good one to do?
What's that love?
Look.
which balloon has the mouse let go off and you have to follow them.
Oh yes.
There it is.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Mm.
Ooh ah!
Messy pup  down me trousers.
Oh.
Thank you darling.
Parties.
Ah.
glasses out there Jean?
I've got them here dear.
Mum can you bring me a pen in?
What you doing?
I was just taking these out to go and get some  tissue for my nose I've
Oh.
Alright then.
got sniffles.
Mum.
Can I have a pen?
A pen?
What, the one out your pencil case?
Yeah any one.
early  your brother.
Dunno.
I dunno.
Well we hope so cos we wanna get off  get off pretty early me and Jean.
. I can't get over how this bedroom looks.
Mm.
Have you seen them?
Yeah.
Like something in a fairy tale.
Oh that  got from Ikea.
The mirrors.
And it was eight pound for the whole pack and all the spacers.
And they're ideal in  kids room we're gonna, we got, if we can get up after Christmas get them for Lee
Yes.
Mm.
because she wanted a mirror in her bedroom.
Well we couldn't get one under twenty five quid.
No.
That's right.
And I said to Dave put that on the wall
Mm.
I said because then  there it is the four you can see her standing on it.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
She can still, she can see her whole body in it.
Yes.
Yes.
I know what this is, this is Rudolph.
I could have done with that on the wall in, on my landing.
Upstairs.
yes.
As you go up.
Because that is 
And people can 
is eight pound for four packs and all the spacers and everything.
Mm.
Erm so if you had, a lot of people had like two packs
Mm.
Mm.
Mm.
so they sort of had it floor to ceiling.
Mm.
Mm.
Oh look isn't that a lovely one?
Yes.
With her trolls
Yes.
But don't the house look lovely
Mm.
Mm.
when you take pictures.
Well your house does look lovely.
Erm you see you're used to it.
You don't see it.
See that looks effective.
Yeah.
Very.
I took it on the lamp .
Yeah.
Oh no you were taking all these Carla weren't you?
Mm.
You did them very well.
That was of Lee's hair wasn't it?
Mm.
Mm.
He was so engrossed studying.
Mm.
That looks like a moustache!
Mm.
I mean his bedroom looks enormous.
Yes.
She is a character.
Look at her face.
Yes.
These are marvellous this company because
Mm.
for three ninety nine you get three sets of prints.
Erm plus a free film.
Mm.
Cos I was gonna to take it into Boots and they wanted five ninety nine just to have them developed .
Oh yes.
Oh yes.
mm.
You've got a  bone stuck in your throat.
I don't usually cough.
This is quite a novelty for me.
I think it was cos it was so hot in there Jean to be honest.
Mm.
Mm.
I was starting to feel quite whoow.
Mm.
And then it's cool in here.
It's
Yeah.
it's the right temperature in here now.
It just got so hot in there.
Right.
Yes.
But I suppose sitting there you just didn't realize.
No.
No.
You're sleeping at er Leanne's tonight Carla.
I know.
Did you see Jenny yesterday?
Mm.
What'd she say?
She's got a new car.
Another one.
What's she got now?
White one.
I know.
She was having so much trouble with that Volvo.
Paid twenty one grand they have, just have.
For a new Volvo.
Mm.
Mm.
I mean ridiculous innit?
Well.
And it's been in and out.
In and out.
Mm.
And they keep giving her a courtesy car so I should think so  after spending twenty one grand !
mm mm mm mm mm mm Mm I should think it would.
What did she, when did she say she ?
Dunno.
Dad was talking to her.
Oh was he?
You wanna ask dad.
I was doing my canoe then.
Was you good for dad?
Don't need to slop do you?
Schlurp.
Mm.
Rather a noticeable slurp.
Mm.
I know they're yum.
Mm.


Did you get all your homework done?
That is my homework.
The canoe.
That's good innit?
Oh yes.
Mm.
Mm.
Mm.
Mm.
Mm.
Mm.
Mm.
Mm.
Mm.
Mm.
That's what's good about her.
She's so enthusiastic.
She, she gets it done.
She never lea where Lee leaves it  and then Sunday he says oh god I've got  
I thought I'd leave this one now cos I need some Playdoh to carry on with it really.
yeah but you've done the worst of it haven't you?
What's the Playdoh for?
Well that was good fun doing that.
What's the Playdoh for?
Banks.
How are you gonna make grass then?
Get some grass.
That's a good idea I was gonna say 
Mm.
Mm.
At the last minute so that it doesn't go brown.
No if I have a box  and like dad said put that thing in there.
A shoe box would do it.
Yes.
Mm.
That's right and surround it with  grass.
Mm.
Mm.
And put dirt
Tell you what.
Moss is the answer.
Moss looks like miniature grass.
If you can find some moss and  dig it up and it lasts longer.
It'll last.
Yeah.
I don't know where you can find it though.
No I haven't noticed any round here.
Don't think we get any.
No.
Perhaps you don't.
Send you some from East Anglia.
Yeah  yeah.
Moss through the post.
Mm.
I'm gonna have some dirt and grass in there 
Soil.
Oh soil then.
Gonna erm put that in there.
And I'll have the two  lot's of plasticine in there  and the banks.
It's funny I was laying in bed last night thinking of, of the different levels in, in Debenhams.
All  the floors.
Oh yes.
Yes.
They have erm  I bet father Christmas is in his grotto there now.
Is he, he is late in his  grotto in shops?
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
He was really early in what do you call it?
When we went.
Yeah cos when did we go to London?
Cos he was there.
Half term week.
October.
Yes.
He was there then.
You went to see him didn't you?
Mm.
Mm that's right.
It's been a rum old Christmas.
I've never known a Christmas  like this Brenda .
Mm.
You could tell that wasn't a real Father Christmas though.
I bet Guildford though .
I mean I haven't been to Guildford for  oh god I don't know when I think probably with you the last time I went to Guildford.
Mm.
I dunno when that was.
Ages ago.
Mm.
I could tell that wasn't a real father Christmas at that  thing.
Cos he didn't have a beard.
No.
Told you dad went to see the real father Christmas at 
he didn't have a beard on the one I went to see.
Mm.
Well they have to have lots of pretends cos there's so many children.
Mm
Ha.
And for good children the real father Christmas doesn't go.
Like I told you.
No quite.
Quite.
So you have all these father Christmases in the shops  for children that they can't miss out on Christmas but are sometimes naughty children.
Cos you imagine the thousands of children there are.
Mm.
Children?


Children.
Children.
Kiddies.
Kiddies.
Beg your pardon.
Sorry.
Erm  and father Christmas couldn't go to every single child.
No.
Some years ago in, in New York I think it was  the stores were taking on father Christmases.
And they felt they were being exploited.
You know they were only being taken on for a couple of months and  they, they wanted to form a trade union but quite a lot of the tra er father Christmases wouldn't join a trade union.
And eleven of them  got involved in a fist fight in the middle of one of those  New York streets .
 
It must have been a lovely sight.
Lovely.
Yes.
Have you watched any good videos lately?
Tapes.
Er  let me think.
Now what was the last thing I saw?
I don't, I haven't watched many videos.
Erm  I say that but of course Neil borrows Arnold Schwarzenegger videos and I watch a bit of those .
He's lethal.
Mm.
He's very good.
He is excellent.
But erm
See that's another thing you could have got Neil.
The, the new erm kickboxer out.
How much is that?
Ten ninety nine.
It's brilliant.
Might consider it.
Lee, Lee said about it didn't he?
Yes.
Might consider that.
Mm.
Yes.
Erm but  I haven't really watched any serious videos.
The last  erm  quality 
What is it you want?
Oh Home Alone you want don't you?
Oh yes.
No Three Men and a Little Lady as well.
The last the last quality entertainment video that I watched was Pretty Woman but I didn't like it.
Oh that is brilliant.
Oh no I liked that.
Did you?
Yeah.
Mm.
I don't know why.
I mean it was 
kwa kwa kwa  
Yeah that's what it  .
Erm I don't know what it was.
I can't say
Well she has a marvellously engaging  personality.
Yes.
That is what I think I liked about her.
Yes.
Mm.
Mm.
I mean the fact  and it, that it was, half of it was so true.
I mean it's like when 
Some of it was.
she went into the  the store.
That was perfect.
They didn't want to know.
But then when she went back!
And when she went back and she said er  you didn't serve me yesterday.
No.
You made a mistake.
A big mistake.
Huge.
And she's got this enormous hat box do you remember ?
Yeah  .
Yeah.
Yeah no I, I don't know what, I quite liked that.
It irritated me a bit because  what it  what it was saying 
dirty but  
what it, what it was saying was  in effect that the woman  er so long as she's free and and open sexually then she can have whatever she wants.
And of course A this is true 
Mm.
and we don't like it.
And B it isn't actually true at all because most, most men would simply exploit that in the situation she was in.
I say they wouldn't sort of spend like he did.
No.
No.
But I, I like you say I mean half of me 
There was something 
I liked it.
Yeah.
Yeah.
But the other half it was crude.
Yes.
Oh yes.
Yes it was crude but 
What?
in my book we have to make a bit like that look.
Two lines.
You have to put large there and little there.
I could stick these, one of these there and put the big one there.
In my book.
What, for your homework?
No.
Cos you gotta  well haven't you got to write on that project?
What, Japan?
No it's not Japan is it?
It's a museum?
This was visions of Japan.
Oh are there?
It's all about Japan.
It's a Japan place.
Is that the museum you went to the other week?
Yeah.
Oh I didn't realize it was on Japan.
Yeah.
Yeah cos look.
I like that 
It's the it's the Toshiba gallery.
It's wonderful Brenda you ought to go there.
I thought that was  
I don't think it was .
Yeah and there's that.
I like that one of all your school chums.
You ought to keep that cos it's a nice memento to keep.
Mm.
Mm.
I'm sticking it in my book.
That's a kimono 
Oh yeah.
Aren't they lovely?
I couldn't get all of them.
They're the  
 
What are they?
Days of the months.
Mm.
The months and the days when they  
They're good aren't they?
Mm.
Mm.
This one  
You'd better go up to you're yeah it's good.
But go up to your room and get your  bag packed for what you, ready for  you're not going straight to Leanne's you're coming back  for half hour or so?
Alright.
Jean I'll show you my boyfriend.
Mm.
Boyfriend!
Which one it is.
That's James.
He's the one  breaking his thumb but he's not, that's him.
But he's the one that's been round isn't it?
That's him.
Yeah that's the one.
Yeah, he's handsome.
Who?
The blond one.
Bobby.
Is that Bobby?
That's Theresa's boyfriend.
Mm.
 
like him?
Yeah he's sweet.
He reminds me of Dennis the Menace.
Ah!
That was my boyfriend but he's hurt his thumb and he don't like me any more.
Oh!
That one there.
He's, that's who I like now.
Oh he looks nice.
Yes.
him.
Mm.
Oh yeah lovely.
That's Theresa's boyfriend.
I see.
That is a nice photo isn't it of youngsters?
It's nice to keep.
Very and a n and a nice occasion when they're  
Do you know what you ought to do?
On the back 
Yeah  as well.
Yes.
But on the back  you ought to write all the children's names.
And their dates of birth and the day that you took the photo and where it was.
Because in ten years time you it's surprising how you forget.
You'll forget.
Because I mean I
That's a very good memento.
That's my teacher at school but that's just a lady.
Yes and that's a helper yes.
The mother of somebody I expect.
I've got one picture of in my, in the netball.
I know.
And there's three girls in this netball  and do you think I can think their names of us?
I know.
You know I mean it's so annoying and I wish now I'd done at the time, wrote their names down.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Isn't it funny?
I mean  you don't see any school chu , I mean I haven't seen hardly any  the odd one or two since I left school all those years ago .
Mm.
Mm.
And I st when I started this aerobic class there was four girls up there that I went to school with in my class at school.
Oh.
Isn't it amazing?
Yes.
Yeah.
Amazing.
Well at various times in my life I've come back to Kingston  and I first of all used to see peo girls who were at school with me.
And now I see girls  women  who are obviously the daughters who er  of girls who were at school with me .


I'm just waiting until I see the granddaughters dear and then I shall say right!
Ready for the old ladies home.
 
Yeah.
So that's like Mr .
I mean it's a sort of standard joke when we go to Lee's school.
And it's funny Jenny, you know me auntie she went er  cos she wanted to go round, Laura goes up not next September, September after
Mm.
cos you know it's the new erm  the intake where they're taking the younger children.
The younger again now.
Oh yeah, yeah mm.
So they're taki it's  I think it's daft because they're introducing it in nineteen ninety three and they're taking two age groups  instead of taking one.
So they've got that great big intake.
Oh gosh.
Anyway she's gone round all the schools in  you know the area.
And she's come up with you know, Haweswell she likes best, she was most impressed with.
Mm.
Mm.
Mm.
And she said I couldn't believe Bren.
I walked in there into the er geography room  and erm  this chap turned round and said hello Miss .
She said and I turned round and she said  it was Mr  she said!
I died she said of embarrassment!
Oh no.
I said why she said  er she, he said ooh, she said oh hallo and he said erm hallo how are you?
And she said I'm fine.
And she said I got out the door as quick as I could.
 
So then about a week later I was going to the open evening and he said oh ask him how he remembers.
And I said oh Miss  wants to know  was she a little bugger


I said or was she a little sweetie.
Mm.
And he said she was a real sweetie he said.
Mm.
And Jenny said all those years I had a crush on that teacher she said and I thought he never noticed me.
Yeah.
Yeah yeah yeah.
Ah funny.
Yes.
And she said   cos she said you know she she said I was madly in love with him.
Ah.
You know how you do, you get your crushes on your teachers?
Ooh yes!
Ah.
And er she said, and he must of noticed me.
It was so funny.
And he said no she was real you know  he said really good.
He said you!
I said what, well I was good wasn't I?
No he said you were a little horror.
I said thank you very much .
 
He said you'd ne , I used to say to you  get on with your work he said and you'd have a pencil in your mouth he said and you'd be gazing out the window.
Yeah.
He said never been  and I used to be going like this to you.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And I said well I I don't remember, he said I remember.
And I thought all the kids that has passed through him
Mm.
Yeah.
how they remember.
I mean  he knew me as Brenda, my first name.
Mm.
And that was it.
And Jenny he knew as Miss .
Well no cos I said to him Miss  he said oh you mean Jenny?
Mm.
Mm.
Mm.
And he he he knew and he said, and I said you amaze me.
Cos I mean he must have had thousand kids in that sort of
Mm.
seventeen years.
Oh yes.
Yes.
You know, sort of going through.
Mm.
And er  and he and he remembered.
Mm.
It was quite sweet actually that he  that that he actually did sort of remember.
Mind you I suppose you can  certain pupils you remember  their names.
Oh yes.
Oh yes.
You do.
And faces.
Well it's like Fay.
She re she recognized didn't she?
Mm.
Mm.
Yeah.
Hello Mrs , I'll never forget it  hello Mrs .
I thought  god you know.


And she said how do you know Mrs  she said to me.
Mm.
Mm.
God.
Unbelievable.
Mm.
I must give Kim a ring.
I haven't spoken, well I've spoken to her.
How's Marisa?
Ooh!
Dreadful!
And she phoned me, I saw her about three weeks ago, she asked to come down.
I said she I think she's heading for a nervous breakdown.
Erm  she had to erm  she's got the social worker in now, involved in it
Mm.
Mm.
and the police.
Erm  she goes off on a Friday and you hear or see nothing till sort of Monday night.
Mm.
Erm  and she just, she's just at her wits.
Mm.
And apparently she phoned her the other night at half past twelve and said can you come and pick me up?said no.
No 
No.
Quite right.
No.
No.
And she said but I'm too frightened to walk and she was crying.
And she said I don't care.
Mm.
You should have phoned me at ten o'clock, I would have picked you up.
I'm not coming out this time of night.
Mm.
Mm.
And she finally got in at quarter to and she's, oh  Kim said she was in a dreadful state.
She said but I don't care any more.
It's past  past 
No.
Course not.
Course not.
She didn't want it to go to social workers but  the police 
Oh she did the wise thing.
Well the police said now 
For Marisa's sake.
any more  any more trouble  even though she's not getting into  bad trouble as such it's  going off and coming home
Mm.
Mm.
and among  they put it down as the parents er can't control her.
That's right.
Yes.
Mm.
So now they're saying if she doesn't, if she goes off again without her mother's consent  then they'll take her into care.
Mm.
Mm.
Mm.
And she, she just said sooner the better she said cos I can't 
Yes I think so.
I think so.
She doesn't, deep down she doesn't, well you don't do you, I suppose you don't want it  but  you know 
 
I mean it's the last fortnight she's meant to be studying and she's been out with her boyfriends and
Mm.
Mm.
Mm.
Mm.
Do you want me to do your hair?
You know, she just, just don't   Oh god bless me!
Mm.
You having it in a plait?
Yeah.
Sit on the chair there.
You're getting so tall now.
Mm.
How old are you now, Carla?
Eleven.
Ah.
Amazing.
Nearly twelve.
Twelve in February now aren't you?
So you're nearer twelve than you are eleven.
Goodness.
Oh.
You've got such lovely hair.
  

Do you wanna bet Tracy hasn't got the results again?
She might have.
Do you remember last time?
She had it, she got it early one Sa Saturday.
Oh yeah.
I think though this time here the post is a bit 
Yeah but it's not cos I, well I want it before the first of December.
I wonder if they've come?
If she has I'm not gonna ask her.
Or ask her a bit later.
You've got your ballet chap  haven't you?
Yeah.
What's his name?
Can I tell you what he does?
Oh Kelly's coming isn't she  to see about  I think Tracy's gotta put in for the exam hasn't she?
Er.
See if he's ready.
Yeah?
Thank you very much.
Brenda I've probably done it all wrong.
I've just shoved the pots into the dishwasher.
That's alright.
I'll sort it out.
 

already?
Carla can you clear your pencils and that from the  table please?
Well go up and do it Carla.
I'm going to do it when I get back.
You've got no time we'll be round  n and we'll 
It'll only take me five minutes.
You got them?
Truth?
No?
No.
take them up to the bathroom or something you big daft nut.
She picked them up 
Yes.
Well they were definitely
I've found them Jean
Oh thank you dear.
Thank you saved my poor old face oh ho ho.
Here they are.
Oh we've got them thank you very much Carla  where were they love?
Here.
Oh God!on the floor?
Oh that  
Oh hurry up then.
Why
I bet you didn't realise he was there 
What time are we leaving Brenda?
Half past nine.
Oh right  few minutes then.
Do you want some more tea?
Are you going to have some more tea?
No I won't bother.
I have 
Hello baby  n Two boys go across one boy comes back.
One man's got to cross the other boy comes back.
Two boys going to cross 
Go and read your book Jean
Hm.
Back the man goes across the comes back 
Have you got something to do to help you Brenda?
No  erm what have I got to do?
Loads of washing.
Clean my teeth brush my hair 


What about your sandwiches?
Some crisps or something?
Carla have you got you use your money then.
I'm not giving you no money.
If you want to buy food up there then you use your pocket.
Cause I'm sorry I'm not giving you money after that.
You got pefec you got sandwiches you got the turkey I bought you.
It's in the bag.
Or your marmite.
You got crisps in there and you've got the five alive drinks for your container.
So go and do it please.
Or you're not going to Lee Ann's.
There's no reason to
I won't go to Lee Ann's then.
Well don't then.
Don't.
Don't got that attitude.
Got everything organised?
I put your stuff out there cause I thought it'd be a bit cooler out there.
You know the chocolates and  and all that.
Good idea.
But I have got two pounds for car pack change  What are you ready Carla?
You got everything?
Oh great.
You taking that coat?
Oh yes I'm going to wear it.
I'll get it somewhere.
Papers reduced in price  I would quite like to paper my bedroom .
Hm funny.
?See that's just being sampled sold.
Yes yes.
This one's been sold.
They do they do 
By an old lady 
things do sell 
That's sold.
That's been on the market for a long time.
Hm. things 
go Carla?
Who is it?
Is that Nathan?
That's a lovely name wasn't it?
he's in your class isn't he?
Yeah.
Gosh he looks so old.
He's growing up too quickly.
Hm.
They do my dear .
They're don't stay little babies any more.
No they don't.
So if we see Father Christmas Carla you know that head band you wanted for Christmas dancing.
If we if Father Christmas only saw one with dancing on it would that be better ?
What bag is that ?
No you'd rather have the head one?
Rather needn't have dances on it and it's sort of black little dancers on it?
Which one?
Head.
That'll be better?
. I can't bear these bible bashers that push in like that.
No no.
So hot.
Don't aren't this this the first cast?
Yours is  I didn't realise this.
It's the fourth 
Bye bye dear.
It's got to be 
a little this weird this morning
Well she feels she's being left out or something 
Come on  
Oh you!
See that's what it is.
Yeah
She thinks she's missing out because I'm going to Guildford .
Missing something yeah yes .
Are you going to do
Well one of the great lessons of life is of course you can't have everything you want all at the same time  it took me about sixty years to learn that.
Yeah.
I'm not sure that I actually learnt it all yet.
I've only got my G C S C and not my degree.
I shall  A levels.
No.
Any other any other Saturday I cannot get her up there quick enough.
Quite quite .
I'm normally in bed and she says Mum I'll walk I'll walk.
I don't want to be late I wanna be there .
Yeah.
Hm.
Mm .
But this Saturday she obviously decided.
Is it running?
You got it going?
Yeah.
Absolutely  Ha ha ha ha ha.
Me and that clip 
Mm.
up in there.
Got it.
But I can't  Oh ooh!through  Can you imagine if this was on the superstore sites.
All these houses you got nothing.
Oh that one's sold now.
Yes  they'll be on the market up to a year.
Hm mm 
But they're erm  don't  make funny noises.
Yes.
Squeak and erm  
Isn't it?
Nasty.
gone with that?
Only just really and I never liked just only just.
Can't just sort judge 
No you can't.
That's the thing I wanted.
Hm.
I don't think I'd want to come back to Woking.
With I don't think so.
No.
For one thing I don't want to pick up with people like Joe  again or Jean .
They're part of a life that's completely over.
Different isn't it?
And totally different outlook interests.
No I think either Guildford .
I think Guildford .
Ideal for me.
Cause it's got the University and evening classes and all the rest of it.
Well it's a city well isn't actually is it?
It's a town and Neil would get more chance 
Neil would get more chance in working.
Yeah.
Because you know there's a lot more going on in Guildford.
Mind you I mean what I think Woking's going to be a lot more for youngsters.
We've got the bowling alley opening in in February.
Yes 
I don't know what kids would be able to afford it.
So what age what age is it going to apply.
You see this business of Neil staying in bed all day.
Part of it is that   interests.
Except his karate but then he hasn't got the money to follow things up anyway.
No  I always think I mean it it just annoys me though I think  I get well I just get I just think it's a waste of the day.
Well it is but I musn't let it annoy me Brenda because in a way he must know what he's doing.
Well that's it.
I mean 
He's probably used staying in bed as his escape.
Oh that's it cause you won't be so bored will you.
Got away from your mother and
The fact you're sleeping you're not thinking about it.
That's right.
That's right.
And you know you try and sort of block things out.
It's just a sort of mental
Yes yes
escape really.
It's a sort of block out 
I know that Pam Palmer said of one of her friends whose husband who's having he didn't like his work.
He's not happy.
And she said er Angela said to her oh poor Neil has to stays in bed until one o'clock every Saturday and then on Sunday he has a  he gets up late and then he has a long rest in the afternoon and Pam said to me he's copping out.
Mm.
As you see Jerry who was at ease with  when he  like everybody and there were times when his job got him down.
But his attitude  he'd been taught to get on and do things so that he would be painting the back of the house or going on with his hobby or doing jobs on the car.
He would just do them.
Well you've got to get on with it haven't you?
Yes.
You can't you know.
I'd be interested to know whether Neil did that list of things I asked him to do.
Like what?
Well I asked him to bring the dust bins in.
Empty the dishwasher erm  with Paul's help to re-hang the curtains.
You know that my big the curtains to the patio?
You know they're on brown rings with little little tiny screw screwed in metal rings in the brown things?
Hm.
And you thread them on the curtains through this little metal ring.
Well those have started to come away.
Now you can't just replace them.
You've got to take the whole down.
You've got to lift the whole lot off the wall and unthread the curtains and put back the right number of rings and hooks and it's a palaver and I haven't done it.
I took the thing down but I haven't put it back.
So I said the rings are in the top drawer of the bureau in the garage.
If you go and get them get Paul to help you to remount the whole thing.
It needs somebody with  or whatever you see.
Mm.
There's that to do.
And what else was there?
Oh I asked him to go to the insurance company and find out whether I'm covered with them for having my aerial replaced and I wrote a letter asking if he could be empowered to sign the claim form for me 
Now I wonder whether he managed to do it?
Did you leave him a note?
Or did you just ask him to do it?
I wrote it down.
I wrote it all down I asked him as I wrote it down.
What did he say?
Well because he was half at the time it was just before I left at about nine to come down here you see.
Mm.
Having said that you don't know whether
You don't know
How he's feeling at the moment.
No no.
Oh I do know how he's feeling.
He's feeling he's feeling defeated.
Well now 
That's it.
I mean the thing is.
You try not to you know I mean.
You think to yourself oh well.
You know things will get better you just feel  Oh God!
I've been through this
That's right.
Every slightest thing is very dramatic to me.
Yes yes at the moment.
Where you know I would just take things in my stride.
But the slightest thing is so stupid .
When I went to that stress management course we were told to use physical resources like deep breathing and actually making yourself sit down and making yourself go floppy.
and let every muscle let it relax.
That was a power   .
That's  a week or so.
Oh marvellous.
When I first when I was first driving in the early 1970's you could park in the quarry car park any time you fancied except the few days before Christmas.
Don't they charge you?
Oh you you you paid but you could always get a place there  I could remember a lot of parking time when I wasn't driving.
As near enough all three parks were full.
Yes those days are over.
again.
They're meant to last three  two.
Oh.
Trees are lovely in that little  
There are a lot Carla she is so tired.
Yes.
Cause on a Friday night  all week she's in and Thursday night Friday night Saturday and Sunday it's all like rehearsals for the Sound of Music.
Yes yes  Are you going to slacken down the dancing a bit when she's in secondary school?
Er well we'll see how she goes.
The thing is I mean.
Like when she's in the first two classes it won't matter so but as she'll approach the G C S C
Yeah but I think now as she's so advanced in her dance
She is she's well on.
The fact is now I mean where like two years ago she was taking two and three exams at a time.
Now  it's just one sort of a year.
Yes yes.
Where it was twice or three times in a year.
But now I think they don't many so it's not you know  this up to sort of like thirteen they've been taught  constantly once to that age.
I mean she's still you know less bothered about the older ones but it's very sort of because of the school work and Saturday jobs and
Mm yes
and all that I mean you know they're not hav they don't have to be as committed
No no.
When they're sort of younger
Mm mm.
Well she'll she'll I mean.
I always find I say to Kim you know I mean you have all these you know it's like Shaun's giving up he's giving up his karate and his football and I said well you know I'm sorry but she shouldn't have let him.
No.
I think
No.
I mean it's about I mean you know I mean it's like today I mean Jeannie  said oh well you come with us shopping if you don't want to go dancing.
You know I gave her the ultimatum like you can come with us but damn well I wouldn't have let her come.
No no.
You know I mean I sort 
You  yes
But I mean the fact is there's no way she's got she gets the idea
You didn't hear me saying oh golly I'd love to have her come with us?
No that's it because 
No I mean  
The fact is she's she's dedicated to her dancing.
So
Mm she must be at this stage.
you know there's no ifs and buts skiving off because she wants to do something else.
I mean the other week she wanted to go to a school disco and I said look hang on  n get your priorities right.
And I said okay and I said to her dance teacher in front of her she wants to go to a disco.
And she said to her  she said er her teacher said to her oh you know do you  what you were doing.
She said well I'd like to go because it's my last year and her her teacher said to her well I'm sorry she said but no I'm not happy with you taking time off.
No no no 
You've got exams coming up and I'd rather you 
Quite quite yes yes.
be here.
Yes yes.
And then she said okay fair enough.
I will.
Hm mm mm.
But erm
God that tape can't have finished.
Hm.  turn itself off actually.
It's being blooming awkward.
It's like being 
  

It's so hot in my head.
It certainly was very hot in that house.
These shops never change in here do they?
No.
For years  I bet that mind you it looks quite a newish one that one and son.
Chinese hot 
I know it says the car park's full but I'm going to try it.
Yes.
Doopsey doopsey.
Normally you sit in er you know the trouble is as long as the police aren't here.
If the police are here they make you go right round and sit and wait.
Oh I'll bet.
This is sometimes it's a pain though it does Oh my God!
Blimey!
The trouble is if it's like this here it's like this in all of them.
That's the only thing.
What shall what what do you think of doing?
Well I'll wait here for a bit I mean you'll queue at the others if I turn round.
You see you get them.
See we're moving
What what about the Quarry one?
Where's that down at Debenhams?
I don't know erm.
It's a bit out of the Town.
It's where we've just come up er  but you turn left.
I think this will move Jean.
I mean I'm mean
It seems to be moving pretty fast.
There's some movement.
No it's cause it's it's it's only if the police come they'll they'll move you on.
Yes yeah.
A bit of excitement there.
Didn't shut up.
Moving.
See it normally does
Mm
move but  sometimes the police will come on and say I'm sorry but you've got to
You're not allowed
You know you've got to sort of move on.
Yeah.
On the whole    I mean there's only three cars in front so  .
What are those then?
Are they flats or are they to do with car parks or what?
Above the 
That's flats home  I wouldn't like to live above a car park.
Would you?
No  Normally see I mean I'm surprised this early before ten o'clock 
Everybody else had the same idea.
Christmas shopping.
You're right.
Imagine in December it would be absolutely murder.
Oh erm totally.
Totally out of the question.
Normally see as people as the cars come out the lights change.
Hm mm mm.
Obviously this early is that's actually come out.
No no no.
And the size of it I can't see it being full up.
No.
Mention  ten o'clock she's got bags.
Yes yes.
I suppose a lot of people come in and they know exactly what want.
Yes yes .
I mean I can't even know what shops we want.
Yeah
Rather than the 
And especially if they planned to go somewhere else today.
There's a car coming out so they should change colour.
 

No it's on the outside.
No it's not on the outside.
Yes that's changed see?
One's gone in.
Two's gone in.
Oh ha ha ha.
No the police won't move us in on until we're halfway here.
Right.
Yeah 
It's when you're sort of there.
Hm hm mm.
She's caused more problems backing out from here he's naughty behind me
Yeah yeah.
cause he's come right across the
The keep clear space yes yeah yeah 
Keep clear sign which he shouldn't have done.
No.
Even though they're coming out on the inside.
It's the outside they're coming out.
That's when the light changes.
It's like a magnet obviously see?
On the outside?
I wonder.
It's normally erm 
Yeah
Bit bit.
Normally there's load down stairs but obviously it's it works on the basis erm
How do you get to the downstairs bit Brenda?
Do you know?
Virtually it'll change now he's coming out.
You go up round then you come down yes you can through but people queue and wait for one on the top.
Oh I know.
I know.
So annoying.
Yeah.
If you look down there you will see
On this floor now you might somebody's just coming out you might be lucky but nine times out of ten it's it's 
I'm keeping my head swivelling from side to side to see if I can spot a space  
on there.
Yeah.
We're going 
Hm mm mm mm.
No.
Going to be murder about eleven o'clock.
Oh my goodness me yes  
It's just spotting someone coming out
Mm mm
Unless those mind you those lights to change there must be an empty space.
Oh yes.
Well you think so anyway.
Well er yeah.
Where are these people going?
Is there anybody behind us?
Yeah.
is coming out.
You going out?
Oh goodness the window's stuck.
Still I think she gave you the sign for we are going out.
That's great!
Yes.
Then he comes in and pinches the 
They won't   
Thank you 
They won't Brenda because if they did I would be opening the window or  door and telling them exactly their fortune.
Yeah 
It's  angle.
Hm    That's beautifully done Brenda.
Lovely lovely parking.
I've got two pounds in change.
Have you got any?
Because it might be odds David's coming back.
Yeah
Let's just have a look.
Let's let's have plenty.
Oh you've got change yeah.
Yeah.
What do you think it comes to?
No.
Give us the odd the odd tens or twenties.
I've got enough  I think it's thirty pence an hour.
It is as I remember it yes.
Have a have a another twenty.
Right.
Have another twenty.
Yeah
Sorry that's a one er  a ten
Right that will do.
You think so?
Yep that'll do.
Be a little devil why not 
Mm.
Here they got  put it all out there.
That's all very nice isn't it?
Hm hm.
Oh.
Look at that decoration behind you Jean.
 

God can't you see ?
Mm.
You know I've done it again.
After all that I've left ciggies in the car.
Yes yes.
Brenda!
Nip down and get some 
I am so useless it's unbelievable.
When you're trying to keep track of so many things aren't you?
Keys I get them out I still lost those ones that I got with the matches.
Somewhere in my house I've lost a twenty pound note.
That's even more and more .
Mm 
The matches  matches.
Oh God  coming down.
Tip it all out on the table Brenda.
Oh you're joking Jean.
No.
er.
God you'd die of shock.
Er
The trouble is I'm trying to keep everything  in order that we need.
Mm.
Shall I take some of it?
No.
That's that's all what?
Got my lighter and the matches but cigarettes I've left in the car  Never mind I can't let .
She says.
I'm so thirsty.
Mm.
Oh it's a  shop.
I was wondering what's that up there.?
There's Cornflakes that have filled me up.
Mm  I don't think I ate a lot of them.
No   
Very .
I suppose we get out of line then 
When you're expecting jam and it turns out to be marmalade it's quite a shock.
It's marmalade.


I think it is.
It's very sharp  Yeah thick cut marmalade.
Mm.
my mother for oh God for thirty years forty years.
I mean she doesn't doesn't see a lot of her erm you know and but she and she was talking to her the other day because she doesn't like to get involved or say a lot but
No.
she was saying that you know mother is  very evil and wicked.
She knows?
Oh yes she soon learnt.
She didn't want to say it but then in the end
No.
It came out.
It came out and she said you know she very the way she treats you
Mm mm.
She's just unbelievable.
Mm mm.
She just couldn't believe that's the way
I mean your mother tries to torment you.
It just doesn't sink in any more.
I mean it's just you know that  gone wrong and it doesn't
Yeah.
I could do with a couple of those.
I like those stands with the marble tops.
Hm hm 
a lot 
Hm mm.
And they've got ever 
Hm.
Hm.  's furniture is very much more practical than a lot of the traditional stuff that's sold in the shops at vast expense isn't it?
Mm   it's dished up in that 
Mm mm..
This tea and that little bit gives you any inclination how to go about that  Oh I see look.
Department numbers and how you spend it so you must have to fill this card in I should think  The only the only department is the cosmetics that's not  we'll ask when we get there.
Mm mm.
It's not half past ten already is it?
Hm.
I was just thinking.
Returning from Stone Market.
I had a taxi at twenty past nine.
I arrived at the station in good time for the train but I didn't have to wait more than three or four minutes and I was in London at ten to eleven.
That's not bad going is it?
No.
At Liverpool Street.
Leave the  from the journey.
That was the next bit.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Journeys are funny.
You'd think because we live on you know Woking is on top of us but it's but it I notice that it was quite you know a time.
By the time we sat down here I thought well considering that we came in by car door to door practically and that when the driving wasn't  public transport it it's taken quite a time to get into 
It's we actually got car locked didn't we?
We left home at half past nine.
So it's taken an hour just to drop her off, Get parked and get in here.
It's taken an hour.
Mm mm mm.
Like you say you could sort of travel into London in that hour couldn't you?
Yes yes strange isn't it?
Strange how it works.
Mm.
Interesting to see people's bags  
Hm .
Inside of that everything else.
There's some  the baby in the highchair smashed it 
Mm mm.
Now unless you're out with your husband I can't see the point of bringing your baby out on Christmas shopping 
It's too crowded for the kid isn't it?
Mm.
mm mm.
Mind you some people I suppose have got no option.
That they have to.
Yeah  My preferred option would be to leave the chap at home with the baby.
That's what I did when Ann was small  But then Jerry wasn't interested in shopping anyway.
He quite liked to leave it to me.
No.
Rather be home and let you get on with it.
Hm hm hm.
I think you get you get either a man who really likes shopping don't you?
Mm.
Or ones that always just totally dislike it.
Yes  That's  engaged to.
He loved shopping.
Really?
Woolworths Marks and Spencers  Discount Stores  all the absolutely.
What about the guy that she's seeing at the moment?
Oh I don't know.
Don't know?
I have only met him twice.
By the operation of sod's law I wouldn't mind betting that this nice old man will turn out to be a lovely companion and will treat me as I like men to treat me.
With great respect and kindness and fun and then I will sell the house and the great
And they'll say that's a good scoop.
Getting a  out isn't it?
Mm 
Sausage roll.
just a bit sort of all right.
Dave's coming over this afternoon.
I don't think he'll .
No.
What was he coming over for?
For the suit for Liz.
Oh yes of course.
The  in all satin.
Mm.
But I should think knowing him he'll know what it's like.
He normally parks down by the old A A.
Oh yes
And walks in  Do you ever sort this coronation soup at home.
Yes I have made it.
It's easy.
Is it just like a mayonnaise sauce.
Hm.
Yeah 
Number ten?
Her.
Number ten?
What time did you tell Marge?
Or did you not tell her a time?
I said fivish.
Oh.
That was right wasn't it?
Hm.
Blimey that's 
Hm.
That's  you got Debenhams receipt there.
Mm.
I'd like to see what less we got off.
Mm.
It is in in there.
Yes I in with the Debs card yes.
When you pick your Debs card up.
You'll find your Debs Card.
That's it.
Oh no their till receipt 
This is the one isn't it?
Connect Card ha ha ha ha.
It's my ability to leave lose these things is is wonderful.
Matchless.
Sorry.
That black top.
That sweatshirt top that I got  which was seventeen ninety nine.
You got that for
Thirteen pounds fifty five  erm 
Yes please.
Thirty two pounds off.
Mm.
That's marvellous 
So it should would have been a hundred and forty five.
Yes.
God there's a hell of a difference isn't there?
Yes it is.
But the only thing awkward I suppose about that is the fact you've got to erm carry it around.
Mm.
All right I mean all right she did so that one of the guys would perhaps carry it around for you.
You don't like to ask them 
But you don't like to because of the fact  you know he'll be erm sort of lugging it around and you'd feel you'd actually have to sort of hurry him up wouldn't you?
You know hurry up
Yes yes
because 
When I  have been entertaining Shirley and Terry Jones doing an evening meal on a Saturday or a Sunday and sometimes both to help Shirley when she was getting into the run of going back to work  I found that one of the cheapest of dinner party deserts was lemon meringue pie.
Mm.
And everybody likes it.
It always goes down well doesn't it?
Mm.
Christmas time whenever.
Mm.
And to take the hex off it  I  grate the lemons the day before and wrap the grated rind in cling film.
Yeah you do that don't you?
Mm.
I know that one you made last time you were down.
There's no waste in our house .
That's right I No.
What's  having.
Having turkey for Christmas or?
Hm?
They having turkey at Christmas or don't they let you know?
I don't know what they'll have.
You see Mary Ann and Mitch are vegetarian 
Are they going for dinner as well at Richard?
Oh I think so.
Yes I think it's going to be a proper family Christmas.
The trouble with that if you turn it down
Then that would be awful.
Even this is probably this one year you could probably done with
I could have done with saving some.
I would've liked to have looked after me and kept an eye on the rest with Paul.
Yes.
Everybody.
Yes.
It's fairly typical though isn't it?
One year you could do with 
Mm mm mm .
staying around 
You mean as it is?
I think that Neil was a bit of a sensitive area.
Hm.
You know I'm I'm spending money and time on him that really I suppose in theory I would be spending on my own grandchildren.
However I take the attitude that in modern times people don't people are not obliged
The thing is who else
All right?
to feel by duty as it were that they ought to take notice of their immediate family.
John and Maryanne are capable of financially supporting themselves.
So I don't worry about the money aspect.
And in every other way psychologically emotionally morally they are able to look after themselves.
Neil isn't.
I think  and I think that's that's saying  you can't pick your families.
You can pick your friends.
Mm.
It is true.
So true.
Mm.
Because
You found it so.
You can do without that hassle and at least if you've a good relationship you got a good .
Mm mm.
At least there's not a lot of chance to have hassles.
No no.
But that's how relationships should be.
Mm mm.
It is one of the great arguments for the old fashioned sort of religion.
Which you could turn you could legitimately turn to people and say  why are you leaning on me so hard for all this support?
You ought to be reading your bible saying your prayers going to church and getting in touch with the boss.
That's why I laughed when they were said Terry Waite would need counselling.
I bet that Terry Waite was praying his head off and he'd memorised masses of the bible which he would be reciting to himself probably said he thought two o'clock every afternoon I'll remember what I can of Book of Isaiah you know.
I don't suppose he needed any counselling.
He'd do better counselling other people.
That's right.
Yes.
Because I mean he's he's er needs it all.
Even though he's been to a prison I mean.
He's seen what's going on and  five years is it?
Yes yes.
voluntary bit.
Thank you.
It's delicious.
Beautiful stuff isn't it?
I really want another.
In East Anglia people either in the on their pub lunches they either throw themselves on to that or on to treacle pudding.
Yeah but often it's a bit heavy though isn't it?
Sometimes it
Or
It's nice
only bread and butter pudding with custard or  chocolate ho ho!
We've really eaten East Anglia  
Don't often see an older man in white white jumpers.
No.
He looks nice.
Mm.
they have got some nice men's clothes.
Yes.
They do I mean the women usually buy men's clothes 
Yes Hm mm 
Do you buy Dave's clothes for him?
No I mean women buy them to wear.
Oh yes.
these coats erm from men's department.
They just like to sort of I don't know why but they just seem to sort of 
Well men's the fabrics of men's clothing is better stronger.
Hm.
Because men feel cold more.
I mean they can wear if you think about it they wear suits in the middle of summer where we're into sleeveless linen dresses.
Mm.
Erm and er the colours for men by tradition are much I think they're much subtler  Hm.
My I hope they reopen at Bernie.
This isn't too bad actually but and I hope you know
It's quite nice.
It's done done as well enough but I do prefer a Bernie.
Do you remember that girl?
She was always 
Oh yes.
Lovely person .
She was very cheerful very very nice.
I wonder if they have come up against a rapacity of the of the rates.
But don't you remember they kept kept saying they were going to shut us down shut us down and then six months later we went there and then ah no they're not shut us down and
No no.
Yes.
Goodness there's a great sort of burden off isn't it all this sort of shopping er you got to go  we finished all the shop and that's it.
Mm.
What have we got to do next?
Smiths 
And I must make a real effort to find one of these machines that's working.
Outside the post office.
Mm.
Er We've got to get Smiths and we've got to get.
Dave's  book paper back for Marge.
Calendar for Shirley.
Because they weren't good in
They were miserable in Debenhams.
Erm Debs we've completed.
mm.
Bookshop Jackie paper back  erm Marks and Sparks slippers and March Marg Boots for tights.
We'll have skip back Maureen winter tights.
Should be more than a bit but I got Marg.
Maureen isn't it?
Mm.
Jumpy bits in my pocket is a lot easier 
Finished with it?
Thank you yes.
Super
And that.
And that one.
You can have them all.
The heavy  doing them justice.
isn't it?
So is Jackie spending Christmas on her own or you don't know?
No I think that they'll probably go down to the Mum and 
Have they made any sort of new friends where they are?
No.
No?
There aren't any people where they are.
Aren't they?
No.
They are next door neighbours who I think are very nice but I don't think that Jackie and Nev have a lot in common with.
That's one house that adjoins them and then a little further on it's a lane.
It's about as wide as this Brenda.
Well what do they need?
What what area is it?
It's called Fenn Lane
How much is it?
And it's in between St Mary and Needham market.
And how far is it from you?
About a between ten and fifteen minutes drive I suppose.
Ten minutes perhaps.
Oh it's not far.
No.
Still doing her kitchen job?
Yes and she phoned me and she said I feel as though I dropped out of the bottom of the world she said.
You know I just don't see anybody.
Well of course you're working on Monday.
You see she used to have Mondays to herself and I would often go round on a Monday afternoon and we could we could talk.
But that's gone and I said I can't run in at half past five when you get home from school and chat to you because Nev will be coming at six and I don't want to be there all that often when he's there erm  it's just you know it's just happened.
And I also thought to myself and I'm probably going to move a lot further away than Fenn Lane.
She doesn't I mean she doesn't bother that much now does she?
No.
I mean I think  been up 
She can with a true friend.
I'm very sorry for her because I think she and Nev have made a really a quite ferocious mess of their lives.
Nev never intended to be slaving away doing kitchen fitting.
He wanted to wood sculpture that was his idea in
And slow down a bit didn't he ?
Yes yes.
Cause he's almost 
He's on the gallop and he looks very old and worn.
Does he?
Mm.
And she never wanted to return to full time teaching.
It's providential for her that she's got a job that she's very good at and that she enjoys.
In an extremely nice school.
And my handkerchief such as it is if she is  no.
I'll have to go to the loo or something to get some paper I shan't worry about.
Such a perishing bore  Oh bless you thank you very much.
Knew I had a   I hope to get it.
Hm mm.
And Jackie's
That's right and who knows.
When we go into Smith's in Woking I've got myself 
Busy 
I might see something for Jackie.
Mm.
Yeah.
It's only two o'clock.
I'm amazed.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And I really feel like going back putting my feet up and chatting to you a bit more because we haven't chatted enough have we?
we have always got the bulk  we are only going to be in Woking an hour.
Yes.
We haven't chatted enough 
will you  the er tapes .
You really feel that we've really put into it and really done well haven't we?
Oh I couldn't have done a quarter of it.
And I think I'm left with two people and that's it.
I couldn't have a quarter of it.
No.
I'd have dithered and I'd have got tired and I'd gone off of 
Oh well I think I well I'll come back off holiday
That's right I'll do it again and I'll have another go at it.
Well I could have spent the whole week.
I just I just I could have spent five afternoons and it was finished.
I could have done more .
I don't think I would have done.
Cause I work at  cause a couple of weeks ago I thought I God I'll make an effort.
I thought
I think it makes a very big difference knowing that 
Yeah  without having to think too hard.
And still you make sure I mean you know for that what I've spent.
Oh it was well worth
Oh it was well C
It's got everybody.
Yeah it was within you budget and you've done the lot.
I went over budget but then I expected I would.
Cause for one thing I was buying for more.
Yes.
You know did you I mean none of us realised you had thirty odd to buy 
But I remember when you said that that last year
Fifty odd.
I think fifty three.
Yeah
And I think the year before years before I've had something like forty or thirty five.
In what you might call quiet years.
Funny those  in Smiths for two pounds off are lovely.
Mm.
And the ones we saw in Marks and all that were nothing were they?
And it pays to travel about  You see the problem with Jackie and Nev is always been that they can't believe that you can get things in a place like W H Smiths that will that will do very nicely as a Christmas present.
They tend to go always to the top of the
But it doesn't pay
Oh yes yes.
They go a a Medici shop or Athena or whatever and they're looking at the best.
Well you can't afford to 
See Mary Ann and Mitch are giving up on erm buying Christmas presents because she says you're buying things for people and they  everybody's  therefore I think that tokeny things are the best.
And that's what I've bought this year.
Tokeny things 
And is that is that what she's doing?
They're buying disposable presents like giving theatre vouchers and erm I don't know what else but she said disposable things that people can have some fun with .
Good idea isn't it ?
Mm.
And what I'm giving is just something nice in the spirit of Christmas but it hasn't broken my bank or my back.
Things done in one.
How these people go week after week after week looking for bargain I mean Chris I mean we picked up some bargains today but how you can go week I mean it's okay yes  but when you're Christmas shopping you can't go for  because it's just 
No no you can't 
Because it's just so I mean that C and A is so busy all the it gets it gets so claustrophobic .
Mm mm yeah .
Look at this traffic coming in now.
And I think the way we did it we marked down the three shops we wanted to do and make sure you do those three shops.
I don't think that even though by  next year I would be a bit better of in the sense that I should have sold my house bought something cheaper and have some capital invested so that I have a little extra monthly income.
I should be living in some where that's cheaper to run.
You don't know you might end up with this this little old chap you're with.
Oh I wouldn't mind but I wouldn't marry anybody 
You might live with him.
Mm mm on and off.
You don't know do you?
You don't know.
I mean then yes you can buy a smaller even more so then.
Well I would.
I I mean I intend to keep my own roof whatever.
Neil can be in it and look after it.
Yes erm  but I don't think I'll ever again buy expensive Christmas presents in the way that I did in the past.
Spending forty and fifty pounds a head on
A head?
for mm
Isn't it?
Like the gents' track suits and
Yes.
No I can't er I can't think of myself as doing that again.
I think it's it's like those candies there's lots of little things you know which people are buying.
It's like those bags I mean le I mean I'd go  if they bought me one of those bags.
Yes.
You know if er people don't oh no they're only one twenty five and you can't buy someone that.
Mm.
But it's not not not the issue of it is it?
No no it isn't.
Huge 
Mm.
home people Brenda and I thought Guildford between us.
Yesterday we bought Camberley.
Yeah.
Oh yes.
thing we got so many of each  yes.
A bit cold.
Mm  Oh ooh  
Well I think that's a good idea though that he's got boxes from Marks.
I bet they'll be a real seller  those boxes which  No wonder they call them underwear boxes.
Oh yes!
If you had to buy a box then the tissue paper then the bow 
Oh I know .
The time consumed in getting it all in.
All I would do with it just to fancy it up you know to buy some of that pink sheering stuff
Yes.
and curl it.
Mm.
and just tie it on the top.
Yeah  You've saved on wrapping paper
Yes.
I've got to get some petrol  I have to get at   When did you ask me in Guildford  B H S now?
You said it was for a B H S .
That's right.
Erm  I can't  It'll come to me 
I like how many of those tops you got on?
I've only got this one.
I had a cream one and it got wrecked by going I think Neil put it in the wash with one of his black T-shirts.
It came out all 
Really it's really flattering top.
It is.
It's very soft and easy to wear and
Yeah.
Erm 
Well I don't know erm they're warm.
They are warm and but it's colour I don't know whether I  perhaps if I saw cream again this year I might buy it but erm I'm not sure that I want to when this deep orangy colour.
I bought a red one in a different style but the same sort of fabric in Benthalls.
Do you remember?
When I bought that black and white check skirt
Oh yeah .
I bought a red blouse 
You worn that ?
Yes but the sleeve  the wrong side.
I'm picking the sleeve head and trying to get it together.
And I would have got it together if I'd had time  had gone out to work instead of for days on end being unemployed and sitting and telling me about Karen.
Honestly Brenda you pay for being nice.
Oh but he he said the same things  He goes on and 
Of course he does.
He goes over and over yeah.
Doesn't listen to a word I say.
Like the woman's no good   Of course I told  some things about Wendy.
But it really made yet more hair fall off the top of his bald head.
I said fairly bluntly.
I said look a working woman needs a working man to help support herself and her children.
I said no nobody is going to be able these days woman not be able to support herself on twenty hours a week which is what Karen does putting out bread in the Asda.
Is she the original one then.
She's the original one.
She's not the one that was coming around with the baby?
No.
It was Michelle who was coming around with the baby.
That's right.
And I found two pairs of Michelle's knickers after that and I didn't know what I shou .
Now I don't know how they managed this dear because  she was coming round in the day with little Donna with her and I was around and there you are you see.
Indeed love will find a way.
Anyway erm I said to him look.
A women needs a man to support her.
I said mark the chap that she's got at the moment is taking her out to discos and things and she'll find that he doesn't really want to kick in and help to support her.
I said she she might well come back to you.
I said she's tried to keep you on a string just in case she didn't land the next fish.
He looked horrified.
You know as far as he's concerned it's all love and glamour.
How come she took him back then?
She didn't want .
Well I think that she was trying to keep him dangling so that she'd have somebody to fall back on if she didn't land another man.
But wasn't she sort of playing around with another man?
She is now.
She is now yes.
She's now carrying on.
What did he say?
Erm he's seen the man going in and out of the house.
She's told him that she's got this other man.
Cause I can remember him saying before he used to drive round to spy.
Yes.
Well there is another man and she has told Paul that frankly she's lapping up the attention.
He's taking her out for meals and they're having a good time together you know.
Quite strange but as soon as he's paid for for the goods and got the goods the chap's going to go off looking for another.
Yes.
Cause he doesn't want to stay with her.
But I've told Paul that if he goes back to Karen and  you know takes some his things out.
Then he takes all of his things out and himself and he never comes back.
Is he is he 
I've had this twice and each time it's been upheaval because he's got a lot of goods which had to moved in shoe horned in moved peoples belongings out of one cupboard into another.
And the second time round it's been perfect for him because he bought from Karen's house the Hoover and the saucepans and everything that was his.
Everything that belonged to him.
But he said that before  I said why was Michelle able to come in between you and Karen.
He said well Karen had been getting moody.
He said Karen is getting .
Paul is boring.
She's told Paul that he's boring.
What Paul needs is this little girl who doesn't care whether a man's a bit boring.
Yes.
Because I can imagine Paul being sort of a homely chap.
He is.
If he gets the right sort
He is.
league with someone who can put up with his sort of 
quietness and 
conversation cause he likes to chat and this.
But I mean 
Yes yes yes He's a pleasant enough chap.
He is isn't he?
Yes.
But he is not erm a playboy.
He's not going to spend money on  like Pete  was forever buying Pam  cheap jewellery from Ratners and erm things of that nature.
Did he ever get back with her?
Well she tells me that she's going to throw Shaun out because Shaun is boring er dun put er Shaun she has no respect for she says because he hasn't got a job.
He won't get a job he won't work.
And she said to me what did I think of the idea of taking Pete back.
Once they were properly divorced taking him back just as er a lover.
And I said that sounds to me to be a very good idea.
I said then you're not at his mercy because anybody to whose at Pete's mercy will suffer.
He's got a very nasty streak.
He's got a nasty snide way of putting things.
Has he?
Oh yes nasty.
But he's he's quite fond of her isn't he?
Oh he adores her.
Oh yes he wants her back.
And I said she said I you see I know him.
I said there's a lot to be said for a chap that you inside out know his ways and how to cope with them but never ever put yourself at his mercy  by marrying him.
And the house will be hers you see when they're properly divorced.
It will be in her name.
So if he starts coming the old soldier she can bung him out.
Did she bail herself out in the end with over her money situation.
Oh yeah I went guarantor for that.
Oh you had did you have to pay the money?
Because you
No no she managed I told her on pain of death not to tell Pete that I was backing
Mm
erm cause otherwise he would of sat back and said oh Jean  can pay that.
That's right.
But she knew that in the last resort that if he did win  that I would do it but he's he's paid off now.
As soon as he paid off he went on the dole again.
He's quite a gypsy you know he looks like a gypsy.
Did you meet him?
No never met him.
Oh!
Plausible rogue.
My God!
Look at the queue to get into the car park.
Is it?
No?
Yeah.
Oh you're going right oh yes you haven't got your right no.
I thought perhaps that the hooting was
What's he  He don't need to .
No.
Something  .
No I've never sort of come across him.
You might yet.
You said he was sort of looked gypsified.
Oh yes 
See this is the new orders.
Mm 
should have gone to the one the offices that are by Woolworths 
Is that a Bernard  or one that you happen to know of?
Well it's just er office car park and I normally use it.
We don't come into the I just thought as we want Smiths and Intersports
Mm mm.
it's this end
Yeah
rather than walk all the way from Woolworths.
Yeah.
I think a cup of tea don't you?
Erm if you want one.
We'll see how
Well we'll see how we go.
I don't think I've got anything more to get actually except er
Book.
That's all.
And for Jackie if I see it.
And Dave's book.
Dave's book.
Yes I'm sure that's going to be straight forward.
Book for Jackie not quite so straight forward.
I don't know though.
I mean 
I'd actually I don't think I'll get a book for Jackie because I will be honest with you she has so much reading to do for her English teaching and drama.
Oh I've got to take you in the Chinese shop.
Ah-h-h!
Remember you haven't been in there yet have you?
No.
The Japanese shop.
Ah-h-h!
It's fantastic.
I bet you buy something in there.
Ah-h-h!
They just do it's only round the corner and I remember last time I said I'd take you and I didn't.
No.
That's right.
Oh it's lovely cause the girls in there wear the kimon 
Oh the.
That's Chinese isn't it?
And kimono for the Japanese.
What's the 
And a sash round the middle 
Yes.
The obi.
Yes and they wear a sort of like a back thing on the back.
Is that Chinese.
Oh yes That's Japanese.
Yes Japanese shop then it is.
Oh but they do some beautiful things in there.
And my other  favourite shop I love in Woking is the birthday shop.
Ooh!
They do like erm ever so unusual things.
You know lovely pencil sharpeners and rubbers.
And they're all so like ten 
Mm 
and twenty p things but ever so unusual.
Like there might be an ice cream co all fun things.
It's a real
Oh how nice.
Real lovely shop.
Doesn't pay you to go back you can only go forward.
No, no that's right.
Unlike you say, I mean, have you ever heard what's happened to Jo and her husband, her husband was ill wasn't he?
Yes, he's alright, well I don't suppose he's alright, but he's, he's staggering on you know in the way that  
, yeah.
Yeah.
Marg  keeps me informed, she said she meets Jo in the town and they exchange a few words with them 
Well what's Marg doing now then?
She's writing a children's book, erm, well she's written one, and it's going around to the publishers and she's written or she's writing a second.
Nice.
She is a, a fanatical gardener  she goes and visits friends throughout the year, Marg has got her life well settled, yes.
Has she still got all that weight?
It's falling off.
It is falling off .
Just as I predicted it would, it's falling off.
She's happy you see.
Mm.
Is she still seeing that chap?
I think so, yes.
Doesn't say much about him cos he lives in Barnslow and only comes over occasionally that he can sort things out on the .
I rather think that he still lives in and as Marg said coyly to me one year, he had given her a lovely little candle in a special little bowl with, with water
Mm.
safety candle, but it was very pretty, it's from Marks & Spencers and she said  er your candle has, has just give up the rights of  last night  .
.
Oh  yes cos she was rather large wasn't she?
Yes 
Are these taken?.
No.
No 
Do you want one or two?
Two.
I'll move round 
We won't be very long  .
Were going it won't be long before we go anyway.
.
Yeah, quite, quite, yes.
Where do you come from then?
Er this part of .
Oh yes, yes.
That's an effort.
Trouble is where ever where you go at the moment, I mean all the cafe's you've got to wait and no seats is there, we tried another one before we came here.
Yes.
I must admit  this town short of cafe's for reason.
Mm, there used to be the Cardoma  almost opposite here, it was an enormous cafe downstairs and an upstairs, and when that went there was nothing to replace it 
Are you ready to go?
Yes, I'm just, just scrobbling about Brenda to see where I've put my purse.
Don't worry I'll get this, Ray gave me some money, I've got ten pounds so
You sure?
Yeah, I'll go and sort this out.
Right, and I, I must get to the Nationwide.
Yum.
Mm .
Good isn't it?
Mm, mm.
.
Mm  mm, mm 
Looks nice doesn't it?
Mm, it is nice 
That's nice isn't it, that was a mince pie with  cream.
Mm.
Don't often er  get things like that do you?
No  I've always liked the  in Woking, I've always liked that for a little snack.
I've never been in there.
Mm  they were different now but I always used to like it.
Mm, where's .
Obviously  
Oh its nice .
I knew you'd like it 
Mm 
Number eleven 
So how's it, Neil's getting on with his karate then, he's still  
He's enjoying it his karate.
He's still serious about it?
Mm 
He's been doing it for quite a while now hasn't he?
Oh yes 
It must be nearly a year.
Is it?
Mm  what about  green or orange or yellow?
He's an orange belt I think at the moment.
I think its white, yellow, orange, green, I think he's orange, I think he's next one is green, I can't quite remember.
Is he, is he going to go for his black?
Oh yes, he wants eventually to have his own group and I'm encouraging him.
It's like erm that leisure, I mean he's obviously learned his lesson when he did that competition that time didn't he and he, he went in and he passed didn't he?
Mm, mm 
Has he done competition since that?
Yes, he did reasonably well, he hasn't done anything outstanding but he, he's, he's done better.
Does he keep his cool though?
Mm, mm.
Probably learnt hasn't he?
Mm  Neil found the 
But he, he, he enjoys it doesn't he?
Oh yes  and they said that's a good school for 
Get him a  out in it?
Mm 
Sausage roll 
Restaurant's just  oh if Dave, Dave's coming over this afternoon, I don't think .
No.
If we leave the phone .
Mm, what was he coming over for?
Erm, for the suit for Len.
Oh yes of course.
He hates shopping on a Saturday.
Mm.
But I should think knowing he'll know what's it like, he normally parks down by the old A A
Oh yes.
and walks in.
Mm, mm 
Do you ever cook, this coronation chicken at home?
Yes I have made it, mm, its easy.
Is it just like a, a mayonnaise sauce?
Mm, yeah 
What time did you tell Marg, or did you not tell her a time?
I said fiveish, that was right wasn't it?
Crikey that's .
Mm 
That's what I was  said, have you got your, that's Debenhams receipt there?
Mm.
I'd like to see what the  got off.
Mm 
It isn't in there.
Yes I
Put it 
Yes 
in with the  card?
I did, yes.
As long as you've picked your Debs card up.
Its a question of finding  card 
What's that?oh no, no till receipt.
This is the bill isn't it? can I have the card ha, ha, ha, ha,, my ability to leave, loose these things is, is wonderful,
So  that black top that sweatshirt top that I'd got for Lee, it was seventeen ninety nine, you got that for thirteen pounds, forty five  erm  thirty two pound off.
Mm, that's marvellous, so it should of been a hundred and forty five .
Yeah, there's a hell of a difference ain't there?
Yes, it is.
But the only thing awkward I suppose about that is the fact you've got to erm, carry it around.
Mm.
Why, I mean alright should you so that one of the  would, is that, carry it around for you.
You don't like to ask do you?
But you don't like to because of that  you know, you'll be erm, sort of lugging it around and
Mm.
and you'd feel you'd actually have to sort of hurry him up wouldn't you, you know hurry up because 
Yes, yes  When I have, have been entertaining Shirley and Terry , doing an evening meal on a Saturday or a Sunday, sometimes both to help Shirley when she's getting into the run of going back to work  I found that one of the cheapest of dinner party deserts is lemon meringue pie
Mm.
everybody likes it.
It always goes down well, don't they 
Mm .
Christmas time, whatever.
Mm  and to take the   I  grate the lemon the day before and wrapped the grated rind in cling film.
Yeah you do that didn't you?
Mm.
I know that one you made last time you were down was a
That's right darling .
no waste in our house.
No, hope not  
What's Ken and Marg having turkey at Christmas or
Mm?
are they having turkey at Christmas or don't they, don't you know?
I don't know what there'll have, you see Naomi and Mitch are vegetarian 
Are they going for dinner as well at  Simon's?
Oh I think so, yes, I think it's going to be a proper family Christmas 
Probably like you say, if you turn it down
Oh that would be awful.
Before 
Number eleven .
even this, it's probably this one year you could probably eat a  
I could of done the same at home, I would of liked to have looked after Neil  and kept my own electric  
.
Yes, everybody, yes.
It's fairly typical though isn't it one year you 
Mm, mm .
could do with
Mm.
staying around  you mean .
I think that Neil is a bit of a sensitive area.
Mm.
You know, cos I'm, I'm spending money and time on him that really has those in theory I would be spending on my own grand children, however, I take the attitude that in modern times, people don't, people are not obliged
The thing is today our 
To feel , by duty as it were, that they ought to take notice of their immediate family, John and Maryann are capable of financially supporting themselves, so I don't worry about the money aspect and in every other way physiologically, emotionally, immorally they, they are able to look after themselves Neil isn't .
But I think, yeah, and I think that, that, saying  you can't pick your families, you can pick your friends.
Mm, this is true.
So true
Mm.
because nine times out of ten
You found it so?
well you can do without without that hassle, I mean, with  a relationship you've got a good 
Mm, mm.
at least, there's not a lot of types that have hassle's.
No, no.
But that's how relationships should be.
Mm, mm  its one of the great arguments from the old fashioned sort of religion, that you could turn, you could definitely turn to people and say  why are you leaning on me so hard, for all this to fought, you ought to be reading your bible, saying your prayers, going to church and getting in touch with the boss  why I laughed when they were saying that Terry Waite would need counselling, I bet that Terry Waite was praying his head off and he'd memorised masses of the bible which he would be reciting to himself probably set himself two o'clock every afternoon, I remember what I can, book of  you know  I don't suppose he'd needed any counselling, he'd probably do better counselling other people.
That's right, yeah, cos I mean he's, he's certainly sort of, even though he's been sort of prisoner, I mean, he's seen what's going on and, and he's had what five years of it?
Yes, yeah.
and he's sort of life sort of gone.
.
Oh thank you  This is delicious.
Beautiful stuff isn't it?
Mm .
Really have some more 
In East Anglia, people either in, eh, on their pub lunches there, how they throw themselves onto that, all on too treacle pudding.
Yeah, but, oh, eh, it a bit heavy though in it?, sometimes it
Or home made 
It's nice .
bread and butter pudding with custard or death by chocolate .
.
We really eat in East Anglia  
Obviously  in white jumpers.
No, she looks nice.
Mm, yes  where do you think they look, they have got some nice mens   .
Yes .
I mean 
Mm 
half the women I think buy men clothes
Mm, mm  do you buy Dave's clothes for him?
No, I meant women buy them to wear.
Oh yes, they 
Women , erm from men's departments, cos they just, like she said they, I don't know why, but they just seemed to sort of 
Well, men, the fabrics of men's  usually better, stronger
mm.
because men feel cold more, I mean they can wear, if you think about it they were suits in the middle of summer where were into sleeveless  
Yeah .
Erm, and, er, the colours for men by tradition are much, I think are much subtler  mm .
Well I hope they re-open the Bernie, this isn't too bad actually, but, I like, you know 
This is quite nice .
it's done, done us well enough, but I do prefer a Bernie.
Mm  that was  do you remember that girl she was always
Oh yeah
Sweet wasn't she 
Lovely, girl 
very cheerful
yes.
very, very nice.
I wonder if they have, come up against the rapacity of the, of the rates.
Don't you remember they kept saying, they kept saying there gonna shut it down, shut it down, and then six months later we went round there, oh no there no shut 
No, yes , yeah  yes 
God its a great, a great sort of burden off isn't it all this sort of shopping erm, just got to go in Smiths and, we, I 
Paynes 
goodness knows the .
What have we got to do next?
Smiths, we'll go in there next.
And I must make a real effort to find one of these machines that's working.
Try the Post Office.
Mm 
Smiths, we've got to get tokens, Dave's  book, paperback for my aunt, calendar for Shirley
Mm .
cos there weren't much good in
They were miserable in Debenhams.
erm, Debs been completed.
Mm.
Bookshop Jackie, paperback, erm, Marks & Sparks slippers and Marg, Marg  tights.
Mm.
Biscuit barrel 
Maureen winter tights 
did Maureen is it?,
I've got Marg, it's Maureen isn't it?
Mm 
Shall I keep it in my pocket, its a lot easier 
Is this finished with?
Thank you, yes.
.
And that, thank you.
And that one, look, you can have them all.
A heavy cold will stop me doing them justice 
It is really busy though   So is Jackie spending Christmas on her own or  you don't know?
No, I think that there'll probably go down to the mum and slept there  
I was gonna say that , was they made, have they made friends where they are?
No.
No.
There aren't any people where they are.
Aren't there?
Well, there are next door neighbours, who I think are very nice, but I don't think that Jackie and Ned got a lot in common with them  that's,tha that's one house that adjoins them and then a little further on, its a lane, its about as wide as this Brenda.
Oh, well why'd they moved?
What, what area is it?
Its called Fen, Fen Lane
.
and its in between Creeping St. Mary and .
And how far is it from you?
About erm, between ten and fifteen minutes drive I suppose, ten minutes perhaps.
Oh it's not far
No.
does she still do her kitchen job?
Yes, and she phoned me and she said I feel as though I dropped out of the bottom of the world she said, you know, I just don't see anybody, I said well of course you were working on Mondays, you see she used to have Mondays to herself and I would often go round on a Monday afternoon and, we, we could talk, but that's gone and I said I can't run in at half past five when you get home from school and chat to you because Ned will be coming home at six and I don't want to be there all that often when he's there  erm  its  you know, its just happened and I also thought to myself and I'm probably going to move a lot further away then Fen Lane.
But she doesn't, I mean she doesn't bother that much now does she?
No.
I mean I think it counts that she's not 
To tell you the truth Brenda, I'm very sorry for her because I think that she and Ned have made a  really a quite ferocious mess of their life, they've never intended to be slaving away to be doing kitchen fitting, he wanted to do wood sculpture that was he's idea in
And slow down a bit you  was 
yes, yes , he's on the gallop and looks very old and worn
Does he?
Mm  and she never wanted to return to full time teaching, its, its  for her that she's got a job that she's very good at and she enjoy, in an extremely nice school.
.
such as it is  if she is , no, I have to go to the  a loo or something get some paper, I shan't worry about them, such a .
.
Oh bless you, thank you very much, I knew I had a
I don't forget
Mm, mm.
and Jackie's
that's right, and who knows that when we go into Smiths in Woking it might not be so busy 
Busy 
we might see something for 
Yeah 
Jackie, mm 
Got your seat belt on?
Yeah.
It's only two o'clock.
Amazing.
Yeah.
No, but I really feel like going back and putting my feet up and chatting to you a bit more, cos we haven't chatted enough have we?
No, well we've got the bulk, we were only going to be in Woking an hour.
Yes, we haven't chatted enough .
Well you try telling the, the er tape deck.
, oh.
You really feel, I mean with really sort of put into it and really done well haven't we?
Oh, I couldn't have done a quarter of it.
And I get on less than two people
Yeah.
and that's it.
I think I've done a quarter of it
I 
I'd dithered, and I'd got tired and I'd gone off and been 
Think oh well I come back I can't  .
That's right do it again, oh I have another go at it.
Oh I could have spent the whole week, I just, I just, I could of spent five afternoons in Ipswich, would of done or Norwich 
Mm, I think I would of done cos I, I work at the, cos a couple of weeks ago I thought I'd go, I'll make an effort, I thought
I think it makes a very big difference knowing that the 
Yeah  
without having to think too hard.
and you still you make sure you, I mean, you know, all, that what I've spent
Oh it was well  
It's got everybody.
Yeah, its within your budget and you've done well, I went over budget, but then I expected I would, because for one thing I was buying for more.
Yeah, cos you had, you, I mean none of us realised you had thirty to odd to buy 
No .
I don't think you really realised really did you?
I didn't, but I remember when you said that, that last year when I counted up 
Its fifty odd , I think fifty three 
With the er , erm, was it  years before that I've had something like forty or thirty five 
Yep 
in, what you might call quite years 
But those, some of those calendars in Smith with two pounds off were lovely
Mm.
and the ones we saw at Marks and all that, were nothing were they?
Well it pays to tramp around  you see the problem with Jackie and Len has always been that they cannot believe that you can get things in a place like W H Smith that will, that will do very nicely as a Christmas present, they tend to go 
 
always to the top of the
Well it doesn't pay just,queue up doing anything 
You know, they, they  yes, yes  they go to the Madechie shops and Athena or whatever and there looking at the best, and you can't afford it   See Maryann and Richard are given up on erm buying Christmas presents because she says  your buying things for people they don't really want, everybody , therefore I think tokeny things are the best, and that's what I've bought this year.
And is that what you 
Tokeny things 
is that what she's doing?
there buying disposable presents, like giving theatre vouchers and erm I don't know what else, but she said disposable's things that people can have some fun with 
Good idea isn't it ?
Mm  and what I'm giving is just something nice in the spirit of Christmas, but it hasn't broken my bank or my back 
Thing is the  how these people go week after week after week looking  for a bargain, I mean,Christm , I mean we picked up some bargains today, but how you can go week, I mean its ok, yes, why your  but when your Christmas shopping you can't  
No , no you can't 
Because its just so, I mean that C & A it was the same as the  it was 
Mm, mm, mm 
it so claustrophobic
yeah 
look at this traffic coming in now   I think the way we did it, we marked down the three shops we wanted to do
Mm
and you make, we just do those three shops 
Yes , yes  I don't think that on our next buy, what with the  next year I would be a bit better off in the sense that I should have sold my house, bought something cheaper and have some capital invested so I have a little extra monthly income, I should be living in somewhere that's cheaper to run
You don't know, you might end up with this  chap your with.
Oh I wouldn't marry him Bre , I wouldn't marry anybody Brenda 
No, but you might live with him 
Don't know 
 
don't know  don't know 
and then yes you can buy a smaller house even more so then.
Well I would I, I mean I kept to keep my own 
But 
whatever your , your  in it, and look after it, yes, erm  well I don't think I'll ever again buy expensive Christmas presents in the way that I did in the past.
No.
Spending forty and fifty pounds ahead on 
don't it?
Mm, yeah.
Like your just tracksuits and 
Yes , no I can't erm, I can't think of myself as doing that again.
I agree, its, its like those  their lovely little things, don't think of buying, it's not very fair cos I mean,Mar , I mean I'd be over the moon if someone bought me one of those bags.
Yeah.
You know, but, people don't, they think oh know there only one twenty five and they can't buy someone that
Mm.
cos its not wro not the issue of it is it?
No , no it isn't 
go home  
Yesterday we bought , yeah  
And that  .
Where?, my goodness 
 

 

I think that's a good idea there isn't a  bet there be a real seller  those boxes  they, I know they call them the 
Oh yes.
You had to buy a box then the tissue paper
Oh no 
then the bow 
the time consuming, getting it all in.
I think all I would do is just to wrap it up bow, yeah, buy some of that cheap  stuff
Yes.
and curl it
Mm.
display it on the top   she saved on wrapping papers and the bows  want to get some petrol, have to get some  get some   what did you ask in Guilford to what, why you asked for B H S about?
, erm do you think  erm 
It'll come to me 
I don't know how many of those tops you've got on?
Green one 
I've only got this one, I had a cream one and it got wrecked by going, I think Neil put it in the wash with one of his black tee shirts, and 
Did 
it came out all purple bluey 
Its really  top.
it is, its very soft and easy to wear and.
Now, erm, should buy a couple more of them if you see them.
Well I don't know, erm,
They warm?
they are warm, er, but its colour, I don't know whether I  perhaps I, if I saw cream again this year I might buy it, but erm, I'm not sure that I want erm there's this deep red, because I've, I've bought a red one in a different style, same sort of fabric, its very  do you remember?, when I bought that black and white checked skirt I bought a red 
Oh yeah 
blouse
yes, but the sleeve, the sleeve 
trying to get it together and I would of got it together if I   for being nice 
Of course he does
 
 
Doesn't listen to a word I say, like, the women's no good   cos I told  some things about  which would really made yet more of his hair fall of the top of his bald head, I said  I said look, a working women needs a working man to help support herself and her children, I said, er no, nobody is going to be able these days, a woman not going to be able to support herself on twenty hours a week, which is what Karen does, putting out bread in the Asda.
Is she the original one then?
She's the original one
She's not the one that was coming round with the baby?
no, it was Michelle that was coming round with the baby
right
and I found two pairs of Michelle's knickers after that, I didn't know what  , now I don't know how they manage this year  because, she was coming round in the day with little Donna with her and I was around, there you are, you see, these, they, they will love and find a way, anyway, erm, I said dear look, a woman needs a man to support her I said  mark my words when the chap that she's got at the moment is taken her out to disco's and things, she'll find that he doesn't really want to kick in and help to support her.
I said she, she might well come back to you I said she's tried to keep you on a string  just in case she didn't land the next dish  he looked horrified, you know, as far as he's concerned its all love and glamour.
How come she took him back then, they didn't want ?
Well I think that she was trying to keep him dangling so that she had somebody to fall back on if she didn't land another man.
He wasn't 
Why she's landed 
was she playing around with another man  
She is now , she is now yes, she's now carrying on.
What did he do?
Erm his sleeping  she's told him that she's got this other man
Cos I can remember him saying before he used to drive round to spy
Yes, well there is another man and she's told Paul frankly she's lapping up the attention, he's taking her out for meals and their having a good time together you know, why its great, but as soon as he's paid for, for the goods and got, got the goods, the chaps going to go off looking for another.
 
yes, he doesn't want to stay with her, but I've told Paul that if he goes back to Karen and  take some of his things out, then he takes all of his things out and himself and he never comes back
Just er, he can't keep on 
I've had this twice and each time its been, its been other people, because his got a lot of goods  people's belongings out of one cupboard into another and the second time round there's been purgatory because he brought Karen's house, her hoover and the saucepans and everything that was his, everything that belonged to him  but he said that before, I said why was Michelle able to jumped in between him and Karen, he said well Karen had been getting moody, and he said Karen was getting bored, Paul is boring, she's told Paul that his boring   boring.
No, cos I could imagine Paul sort of being quite a homely chap
He is.
if he gets the right sort of 
he is 
if someone that could put up with his sort of quite reservation
yes
cos he likes to chat 
yeah 
and
yes.
but I mean
He's a pleasant enough chap
he is, that's it
yes, but he is not erm a playboy, he's not going to spend money on  like Pete  was forever buying Pam  cheap jewellery from Ratners and rubbish from that nature.
Did he ever get back with her?
Well, she tells me that she is going to throw Shaun out because Shaun is boring, er, Don put her, Shaun she has no respect for she says because he hasn't got a job, he won't get a job, he won't work, and she said to Lee what did I think of the idea of taking Pete back, once they were properly divorced take Pete back just as a lover and I said that sounds to me to be a very good idea, I said then your not at his mercy because anybody who's at Pete's mercy will suffer, his got a very nasty streak, his got a nasty snide way of putting things.
Has he?
Oh yes, nasty.
But his, he, is he, he's quite fond of her isn't he?
Oh he adores her, oh yes he wants her back, and I said, she said, I, you see, I know him, I said there's a lot to be said for a chap that you know inside , know his ways and know how to cope with them, but I said never ever put yourself at his mercy, I'm marrying him, and the house will be hers, you see, when there properly divorced it'll be in her name so if he starts coming the old soldier, she can bung him out.
Did she bail herself out in the end with over her money situation?
Well I, I went guarantor for that.
Oh you hate, did you have to pay the money, cos you had
No, no she managed, I told her on pain of death not to tell Pete that I was backing
Mm
erm cos otherwise he would of sat back and said oh Jean  can pay that.
that's right.
But she knew that in the last resort if he did  I would do it, but he's, he's paid off now  as soon as he'd paid off he went on the dole again 
I don't think quite 
He's quite a gipsy you know, he looks like a gipsy, did you meet him?
No, we never met him.
Oh  plausible rogue.
My god, look at the queue to get in the car park.
Forward, is it?, no.
There
Oh your going right 
 
oh yes you haven't got, your right, no, I thought perhaps that hooting was er
What's he waiting? you don't need to wait.
No, somebody got  
No I've met, I've never sort of come across him.
You might yet.
But you said he was sort of gypsyfied.
Oh yes.
See this is the new Alders.
Mm 
, should of gone to the one the offices up by Woolworths 
Is that a  or, or one that you happen to know off?
Well it's just that  office of car park, I normally use it
Oh.
I usually don't come into the
Mm, mm .
But I just thought as we want Smiths and Intersports 
Mm, mm 
its this end rather 
Yeah 
than walking all the way from Woolworths.
Yeah  I think a cup of tea don't you?
Mm, do you want one?
We'll see how
Well we'll see how we go.
I don't think I've got anything more to get actually except a 
Book that's all for Jackie.
If I see it.
Dave's book.
Dave's book, yes I'm sure that's going to be straight forward, book for Jackie not quite so straight forward .
I don't know though, I mean 
I'd, actually I don't think I'd get a book for Jackie because I will be honest with you she has so much reading to do for her English teaching and drama
Oh, I've got to take you in the Chinese shop
Ah
remember you haven't been in there yet have you?
No.
The Japanese shop.
Ah .
Oh its fantastic, I bet you buy something in there.
Ah .
They , they just do, its only round the corner and I remember last time I said I'd take you and I didn't.
No, that's right, that's right 
Oh its lovely cos the girls in there 
Mm 
with her 
that's Chinese isn't it and the kimono for the Japanese and her a a sash 
Was the 
round the middle?
yes, it's
yes and they wear a sort of like a back thing on the back, is that Chinese?
Oh yes , that's, that's Japanese.
Yeah Japanese shop I think it is.
Mm.
Oh, but they do some beautiful things in there.
Mm 
And my, my other favourite shop I love in Woking is the Birthday Shop
Ooh.
they do like, erm, ever so unusual thing, you know, lovely pencil sharpeners and rubbers and there all sort of like 
Mm 
ten and twenty p things, but ever so unusual like there might be an ice cream co , all fun things there all 
How nice 
there all, lovely shop  white envelope
No upside down you got it, that bit goes underneath the lip.
That goes underneath the lip, I though I'd done that.
No, no.
Ah that bit goes under, ah.
.
 

Be curious to see what this like when it's all finished though   Oh could of gone there, didn't see that one.
Yes.
God it's so dark and miserable isn't it now?.
Yes  .
Just gonna wait for that space  Normally I'm lucky to get round here.
Mm 
Oh,there must be  coming  come on love, shut the door  I'm a bit dubious because of her
Mm, mm.
being there.
Mm  Where do you want to put that?
I need some
How much do we need,got a pound .
.
Right, good idea.
It's easier.
Yeah.
Well, the thing I mainly notice when last week when Paul was home, not last week, the week before last I had Paul solidly at home, he moved himself entirely in lock, stock and barrel at the weekend, he was then with me waiting for his job  and he went out every day and did little bit's of shopping for me, got him from under my feet, saved me money, cos I was only buying what I absolutely needed, and the amount of time that I had, I mean I was able to go out for the whole day with Peggy on Wednesday, I was able to get food prepared and, admittedly I didn't manage to get as much done as I thought I was going to do, but then I think that's with most people in life,
Mm.
but, not to have to drag out in the car to the solar and buy food in the supermarkets 
Oh it's wonderful .
Oh it was glorious  I made a note to myself actually, that I'm only going to go out once a week for a proper shop, from a list, in the solar and the rest of the time I'm going to go to the quite expensive little Robber's Roe, round the corner from me.
Mm, I haven't been shopping this weekend.
You can't.
We go one, you know, if I  I just make do with what we've got.
Well yes, I do a lot of that, mm, yes.
I'm booked tomorrow because I'm going to Blackbush at seven o'clock in the morning
Mm.
Oh my god, there's remembering things, erm  I'm hoping to , ok I don't, I don't want to go you know it's too early
Mm, mm.
cos I'm going as a favour to give her a lift really.
Yeah, yeah  I hate people who park on the ramp and causes to put yourself to a hill start, they are a  
Joy of a, joy of a
The automatic, yeah.
automatic, yes.
Yes.
Neil of course is doing the male macho bit, oh yes it's, all very nice driving the automatic, but I like gears really, yeah.
I like the automatic when it's a, your on hill's like this.
Oh yes.
Gerry was taught to drive in nineteen forty six in the States, where they, they gone, they'd gone over to total automatic, and he despised manual gears, thought they were a ridiculous waste of time and effort, said you want to concentrate on the, on the road, not on the car, but then you see Gerry improved himself, he was a 
Look at the queue to get in there now.
yeah, he was a Squadron Leader he was  Squadron Leader, being engaged in combat he done the lot, he didn't need to prove that he was male.
with our parking and  aren't we?
Trouble with  .
Yeah.
I've gotta, I think people are so un-organised with Christmas, you've got to be organised, you've got to say like, you know, I'm only going to those shops, you know, if like like now, say  so we went in Boots
Like  , yeah.
for ten minutes.
Yeah, erm, also, erm,
But I think we could of gone down to British Home Stores, but we both probably would have spent more, than,
Oh, but we did get everything .
But we got , we got what was on our list.
Got something for everybody now.
And that's it, you've done your bit.
And once you've done that, you've got spare time and spare money you can buy extra, but come, come down to it Brenda, once the Christmas Day is over
That's it.
does anybody remember particularly what they were given, or make a great deal about it, of a meal of it, unless you've given them something absolutely outstanding like a fur coat, I remember the fur coat I was given in 
Or a car .
Well exactly.
That's it.
Oh god that money gone right on 
some old man, they are the worse you know .
Young  pulled right the way across and the traffic lights were obviously red.
Ah, perhaps a beginner 
No, I think it's just, look,down there
Mm.
No, now look at that lot, in that trolley that  us  .
God in heaven 
Get some petrol, go home and have a cup of tea, that gives us about an hour
Mm.
Sort out and
Mm.
to have a chat 
Yeah.
that's all and, alright,.
We've only gone through six tapes today.
Yeah.
, it's quite good.
Marvellous, it's 
When we went to John Lewis's in, in High Wycombe, they got some cheap fabrics on in lace or, or fine  material, and you know I very much now regret not getting some, because I want to dress up, remember I had a, a lace cover, a fitted lace cover on my kitchen  table
Mm.
in one of the bedrooms a lacy  do you remember that?
Erm.
Had a fitted cupboard full.
Sneezing like an oar
Mm 
Four star petrol, fifteen quid that costs.
I know.
I only blooming put ten quid in it on Wednesday.
Yes, oh.
.
That's why I'm so thankful that I'm on the reading and that I like sewing, I like walking and I've made some very nice friends within easy walking distance, I can go out and have a coffee with them, because I, while I'm recovering from the agony's of from the finance
That's right.
I can do all those nice things in Jan, Feb and March, and not to mention when I get home tearing my garden to pieces, that's gone to pot , which is as well, because it doesn't make it, see, see one thing I find about coming down here, I see the really smarter shops than I would unless I were in Norwich and it makes me realise still after this , I don't crave for the things in  shops.
No  thing is you know the shop's don't you?
And you can normally get what you want
Yes, yes , yes  .
I won't be the only person from East Anglian that's come down to London over the weekend to shop,to stay with relatives or friends and take advantage of London's shopping.
Were the trains busy coming down?
Oh yes, it's a busy line, always.
Oh 
There's an extra  
Yeah a lot of people do that, they, I mean, go on the train shopping don't they, I know a lot of people who are  and I would rather sit ten minutes or twenty minutes .
Yes, I, I mean you can't carry all
You can't keep carrying the shopping
that's right.
I mean, that was getting heavy what we had.
Oh yes it was .
You know , imagine it if you had to carry it all around,going, doing the shopping doing the lot
Mm.
like we did
Mm.
I mean you've got to stop and think I can't carry any more .
And when  that's right , but when, when we went on our clothes buying jaunt, we could go back to the car
We could go back to the car that's it 
in the boot .
you can't go, you know I mean  lugging that around, I this is what put's me off London this really
Yes, yes.
.
Well the only, my next visit to London will be for fabric from Liberties
Liberties, you like to go up there for that don't you?
Yes, yes 
That always , twenty pounds a week
.
But I say to .
Perhaps it's got an unhappy go line, you know, a lot of people do jobs like that to get away from under the heat of a task .
Not me   on my shopping trip.
Could be .
I bet they don't .
No, I don't like that, mm so you obviously help each other 
Yeah.
sort of what you want and what you don't want
Yeah.
which is really sort of really sort of Bet you organise your bag, see what else you've got to put in.
Mm.
Did you, have you find that bag?
Oh it's perfectly all right, oh no problem.
.
Oh, I think you've still got some room haven't you?
Some what dear?
Some room on the top.
Oh plenty, plenty.
Right that's got to go on top then, if you'll un-zip it, that's right , didn't I?
Oh this has got two zips.
Oh that's good.
Mm 
Bought a .
How heavy is it?
Oh, it's not the, not the heaviness I can hardly  somehow.
I can see the point of the second zip now, I think, I think it's where you padlock it.
The keys are inside aren't they?
Yes, I mean I'm not going to bother, but I think, I think you padlock the one, the end of that zip is, I'm not sure, er Neil will know 
It saves you having a holdall , organise it more  to heavy if we put that in there, right, what about, will they fit in the bag?
Yeah, I think  there's  isn't there in there really?plain white bag I'm going to hopefully put out in there to protect that, those groups  I don't know why that suddenly can fall up side down, but it's alright.
, right, hold them then, stand up, put .
yes.
Christmas tree.
There's no weight to that, I mean I've got my
That bag.
handbag and that bag, Christmas tree can go there, that can go there  and I just about be able to make it Brenda, just about be able to make it 
Bag and your nightie.
Yeah, yeah  tea, tea.
Actually there's not a lot, of weight, of weight there is there, there is
No it's bulk.
it's bulk,, it's on the window sill on the 
Mm, mm, oh, oh right, ah , oh there it is yes fine, yes thank you dear.
Erm 
Yes, I want to leave early tomorrow, because I'm, I'm not going to rush for a train, I don't want to be caught thinking oh the last train to Stow Market goes at four o'clock and I've got to run for it  I got to be prepared to miss the train.
That's right, you can't, you've got to go
No rushing.
So, you, will  take you to the st oh she don't drive does she?
Well I can get a taxi easy enough, there's plenty of them god knows.
The only thing your gonna have, you might find a bit awkward if you've got to car stair, carry up stairs.
Mm, yeah, well, there again, if I leave early I can take it all in my stride can't I?
Just ask the porter would you help me carry it over to the next platform.
Mm, yeah, yeah  I think there more willing to do that than they used to.
I think they will, the fact, you know, your in the train and you know it's ,
Mmm 
they see you sort of struggling so you can just do it can't you ?
Mm, mm, mm, mm  ah tea.
I'm shattered aren't you?
.
You go to bed as soon as, I don't know where they are, because Dave is meant to be getting home at eleven o'clock this morning.
is he?
Unless there still  out, he's probably  fare up by now.
Mm 
I think you did good timing today.
Excellent.
Brilliant.
Mm, mm, we seemed to have wasted no time.
We haven't, I mean we  .
We didn't have to queue for food we waited five minutes to get into the car, we didn't have to queue for food or coffee, we ke , we didn't even get into very long lines too pay.
No.
But what's it going to be like next weekend Brenda?
It'll be murder.
Mm.
Absolute murder, and I just thank god I haven't got to go amongst it.
Quite.
Because er  we've done sort of I must   Where did I write that  if I've lost that list, I  suppose to keep  Erm, Ron, tin  and then you've got  hankies didn't you?
Mm 
and who else did you get the two hankies for?
Erm, one, one set for Paul and one for Neil, P for Paul and the coloured's for Neil.
 

Where'd you get paper rope from?
Erm, shop like the birthday shop in Woking they do it, the birthday shop erm, not expensive, I know in Kingston that shop next door, what's that then
The Christmas tree decorated only with silver stars cut out and bows made out of paper rope, you cut the paper rope and just tie up the bows.
Mm.
What could be more quicker and easier and more effective than that?
That's it, yeah  what else did you get today?
You got Shirley
I got the calendars,
and Marg wasn't it,book plus the calendar  Erm,who was the other calendar for?
Marg wasn't it?
Yes, cats.
Marg and  didn't I get cats for both Shirley and Marg?
Yes.
Kittens 
Calendar, erm  no, what about you were going to get the thick tights, but what did you get her?
Book.
Maureen.
Mm.
Maureen, book  the only thing you didn't get today
Mm.
was the slippers for Terry.
Right, well I'll have one  upon er Norwich Mark's and try to get the Christmas tree, Terry's slippers, tins of biscuits, no I'll go into Ipswich with you for the biscuits, I'll see if that what Ipswich Mark's has produced.
Have erm  that was the list  Marg, Maureen   you got, Dave you got, yeah you'll, I'll give you the list of what you've got, you gonna get, three tins of biscuits, your son and neph a bottle of booze, and Terry's slippers, that's all
Mm, mm.
and the two grand children, whatever, oh the money.
Mm, mm, yeah.
Or erm, tokens.
Mm, yeah.
And there all sort of things you can just go in and get, isn't it there's no bulk.
No problems, no.
Let me write those lists cos there be hard to, hard to read .
Wha wh are you gonna, are you gonna give Marg's present now or?
I don't know, no.
You haven't made up your mind yet, see how you feel  you might decide to just, you've got to hump through it all
Mm, quite.
Might be bit of a pain, might'n it?
Might  oh dear, dear, dear, dear  too much to take in huh.
I know there advertising it on the T V
Mm.
that's why they were getting all that brochure, that's what you want to do next time, you wanna get er, all the different Christmas brochure's
Mm.
and then you sit down and go through all what books are out and
Mm, mm 
Cos I think it's got everything possible, cos I want, say I want a door reef
Mm.
But I, I want to make it  but I'm, I haven't a clue how to make it.
No do I, but .
Yeah.
so much here.
I think it's a book that just last's for life in it?
Yeah.
Do you ever get, find out who had your book with those sleeping bags in?that was naughty wasn't it?
It was, it was very bad because it was a distinctive book, somebody knows that it's my book.
Yeah.
Cos you even leant, those days had your labels you put on yours.
Mm, yeah, yeah.
I wouldn't have thought there was  honestly not.
I think that is a lot of infection about and I know what brought on my cold, it was going out with Mark to Lathenham, and instead of wearing my anorak I only wore my lambs wool throw over, and I got jolly chilled coming out of the car and going into Lathenham church.
You do, you got, Lee the other night, it's like Lee last Monday, went on the work experience and Monday night it all came down  it's pouring, oh it's alright he says, were only going to go to the Woking
Mm.
that's what I just register, that's why he want's the cash point.
Oh yes.
He went with James to get the cash point
Mm, mm.
and erm, James said you not going out in this surely, yeah, yeah, it's only a bit of rain and he come home and he was drenched right the way through top to bottom
Oh , mm, mm.
and Dave said, and there you are, that's why you've got a cold.
Mm, mm.
No it's not, he says  but, they can't be told.
Well there's a shirt and tie in the bag in Lee's bedroom
Mm.
but that's it.
Mm.
No, no suit or, or anything else, unusual that Dave didn't leave me a note.
Mm, mm, yeah  there you are my dear, really interesting.
I'll have a look at it later when you've gone .
Oh, oh, oh, oh,
Can't sleep at Marg's?
Oh.
How many cats has she got?
Well she's only got two, but she entertains about five others.
Does she?
Mm, they all come and visit.
Is she, is she gonna move or does sh , cos she was thinking of moving
She's talked about going to Yorkshire, but, not at the moment, there's nothing much doing in the market, er.
Who is, is there, got a family at Yorkshire or?
Mm.
Got family  Marg has got is eh, in Rotheram, she's got an aunt and a cousin 
That she keeps in touch with?
Oh yes, yes she does, but, that's about all  she's got two cousins, that's right, and one of them's married and got children  and she used to have in the north, the great friend Sylvia from school days and Sylvia would of been one of the first Anglican Deacons to be ordained as a, as a priest
Yeah.
she was doing so well in the church and she died of cancer.
She had cancer and it was cured and they, you know, they said, well were pretty certain that your clear but I'm afraid you've got to wait five years, four years and six months after they said that, it hit her again and she died.
Oh god, it's awful in it?
Mm, mm, it is.
And is it Marg the one who had the friend in America, or was that Jacky?
That's right,
That's her,
who killed, who killed herself, yes, committed suicide .
That's right , god.
Yes.
So what erm, so what does she do at Christmas then?
Goes up to this aunt.
Oh goes up to this aunt.
Yes.
Oh, how does she get up there,
Train, train and taxi's.
Does she come up to you?
Yes, she comes up by train.
Has she never wanted to learn to drive then?
No 
I can't understand women that haven't learnt to drive, can you?
No, I can't, I really can't .
Because there's always been an opport , I mean even if your sort of poor, there's always the opportunity, I mean I learnt to drive and then the driving instructor erm, lived next door to my mother saying, it, at the time it should of been three pound and erm, he let us have it for two pound
Mm, mm.
I mean that was what, twenty one I was, so, thirteen years ago
Mm, mm.
erm, and it's about what twelve pound now, eleven pound?
Er I paid thirteen pounds, ninety.
Yeah, god.
You might well say.
How many years, I mean, that's in thirteen, that's a pound a year, it's gone up.
Mm, mm.
Good god it's a lot of money in it?
It is.
But even the test is dear isn't it now on the actual day.
Seventeen I think it is, seventeen, I'm not sure.
I thought it was more than that.
Maybe, maybe more, perhaps it's seventeen with the provisional licence.
But you may reckon that anything to do with 
But that was a pound .
I know.
, but wasn't it free when you had it?
Was it
No.
No, it wasn't, you had to pay.
Mm.
I know with mine it was a pound and, I renewed mine for two years, well three years I think I never drove, I just wanted to have a provisional, but now, I think like if someone said it was fifteen or seventeen
Mm, mm, mm , yes I think it's seventeen.
I don't know if that's, what's that to stop encouraging the children just to buy it.
No, it's the general audacity of the tax system, which was to, to ripe money of us so that it can give us  we can spend our money on rubbishing layabouts.
Mm.
I mean, deserving cases like Neil who as he says only want to be taught, get next to nothing, but it seems to me that people like your sister Jane and Trevor get given the earth.
Well it, well something's wrong somewhere isn't it?
I think so.
And then
They shall never know what.
There's the systems  oh I, I told you didn't I Jane got eh reported.
No.
Cos erm, apparently erm Trevor was working for Bettaware for Avon and they had the Social Services round to say that I hear that your working and they do toy parties  and they said no, I mean there not making a living out of it, it's was just
No.
you know  .
The odd few pounds yes.
And erm they said well you've got to come off it, you know, were not going to do you this time, but you've got to come straight, stop doing it all, erm, cos you've been reported and your on the Social Security.
Hard pushed, well she said she went through all the books on the Council, and there wasn't one in the South
Mm, mm.
Want's a transfer, there was hundred's of people on the list to try and get this way, I mean it's like this women who took Jane's house, to swop Jane, she didn't even come and look at Jane, she said yes I'll have it
Oh.
in the south, whatever it is, I don't care what it is.
Oh.
She had this big house Jane's got and she went down to Jane's small house
Mm.
She just wanted to get in this area.
Mm, well I can quite see that this maybe the only way that I can help Neil.
Peterborough, I mean is nice, certain parts,
Mm.
but this part Jane's in I mean it's just the pits
Oh.
you know, I mean, the kid's haven't got a, oh it's just like a glorified Council estate it's like
Oh dear.
, but twenty size bigger.
Oh gosh, can't bear think of that.
I know, it, you know rot cars set alight, oh
Mm, mm.
dreadful it is, and there's no erm, I mean no hope for the kids
Mm.
and she said er, and I said, I said Dave said you were a bloody fool to go up there, you let mother talk you into going, Terry had a job here, he, alright you had your house, you had your ups and downs, it was a bit small, you persevere with it, I said your kids are nearly going to school all of them, so I said, you don't need a big house
No, no.
and I said alright so what you've got to struggle for five or six years, everybody else, join the club
Quite .
and erm, but they can't, they just can't except it
Mm, mm.
and erm, she said oh well you know, were gonna try, and then, and then, I said well what about Elly she said, well she, she, I said swop with Elly, but she's only got like a two bedroom
Mm.
and I said yeah, but then if you swop you might be able to swop with somebody else
Mm, mm.
erm, but I said there again Elly's not going wanna be stuck up there on her own if your down here.
No, no, quite, ah.
And it's like a viscous circle all the time between us  my, I don't know what all become, apparently erm, mother is erm, cos I said you know, you all going to mother's at Christmas and they said oh no she's talking about going away.
Oh.
I said yeah, nobody bloody want's us do they, that's why.
.
They all realised they've got there own life to lead
Mm and that she will not let them call their soul their own.
well it's like Elly, you know, I mean even she said she's, I can really see, she said I even said it in an argument the other day, cos none of them could see at the time
Mm.
why have you broke fre free
Mm.
she said, I, she said she never spoke to me last week, for four days
Mm, mm, mm.
I said well she's got you up there now that's why, I said and they fact now do wrong she's fed up looking after your kid.
Mm, mm.
And she said, but I didn't realise how somebody erm, could change that much
Mm, mm.
must oh she's like Jekyll, Jekyll and Hyde.
Mm 
But I don't know, I honestly don't know what become of, become of that women  I honestly don't, I mean she's sixty now.
Mm 
She know that and she just seems to be like a vicious circle all the time, I mean she doesn't, I mean just getting deeper, deeper into debt.
Yes.
What's the extent of her indebtedness now?
Bloody lot.
Is it, erm
Bloody lot, I mean she's got every, I think credit card out that she can possibly have
Mm.
and well over the, yeah I mean your talking about not four or five hundred pound, your talking about thou thousand, fifteen hundred limit
Mm, mm.
erm, cos she's sort of gone, like she would of gone today gone in there
Mm.
gone, say she had a limit of eight hundred and think oh well I'll do some more shopping oh can you up it another three or four hundred
Mm.
of course you might of done that two or three times in a week.
Mm, mm.
Thing is like that when you spend money like that, your unhappy.
Oh yes.
Very unhappy.
Oh yes, no question of.
Because the fact is there's no, no cause or need for the , for the trips
No , no, no.
I mean my car trips are sort of special trip
Yes, absolutely.
but I mean  to say, to do it everyday
Oh pointless, get no pleasure from it 
Worth, well you, you get no pleasure out of it 
no
erm, well it just, it just, you know, with her, I mean, she can't sit still, I mean to have, I mean I, the last four Saturdays, admittedly I haven't been well, but I've just been totally indoors sewing.
Yes, yes exactly.
you know
Yes.
and that's, what I wanna do next, take them, to take me old curtains down and gonna re-make them for Lee's bedroom.
Mm, mm.
Those black one's fit?
No, erm, they weren't quite right.
They weren't quite right for the room.
No, but, there lovely black, there's one pair of black and white curtains that's hardly been used, there jet black with a white stripe, I thought I would make Ron , a lovely, cook's apron, hello
Hello,
Hello Jean
alright?
Hello Jean how are you?
Alright.
Where've you been?
Oh you've got it, did you get the suit?
Yeah.
.
No.
.
Have you been to the hospital?
No, I left him over there.
Erm.
I didn't drop him off till about twenty past, twenty five past ten.
Oh, well where's the suit then?
.
Is he charging you?
Yeah.
I could of
No you couldn't right, see
Why?
You
Why what .
I'm talking.
Where did you buy it from?
Erm Profile.
Yeah, where is Profile then?
I saw the bag on his bed.
Erm
Must be a new shop in it?
Do you know, I'm trying to think, is it up on the hill?
.
In Guilford?
Yes  .
on that corner?
Mm.
That Bernie shut down?
That's next door to him in he?
Yes.
Right on the corner?
Yes.
Oh, I thought it was Mr Howard's.
It was, but .
Did .
Well we were  start off there and , he wanted that one, he tried it on.
What's he look like?
Quite nice.
What colour is it?
Er a light green colour, colour .
Green, didn't he want to go for grey?
Sorry?
Didn't he want to go for grey?
No, it looked quite nice actually.
Is it a double one or?
Double breasted.
Double breasted, mm, how much?
No, I ain't telling ya.
No, don't.
.
Have you had a Christmas day .
Wonderful.
Yes, very good.
Still, still stuff in the shops, go to Guilford or ?
No , erm
We went to Guilford.
.
Yeah, we went in three shops and cleared the shops out.
Yeah, yes, got the lot.
believe that.
Everything what we needed.
Almost everything.
And we were back in Woking by quarter past, twenty past two, we did two shop's, video shop for Jean, the  for Neil and Boot's and then to sports and then back home, we got home about quarter too four.
Mm.
All done, were having a cup of tea before I drop Jean at Marg's.
.
Nigel just been round.
How is he?
It's alright.
I said to him it's all alright, he said oh I thought it would be, it's that sort of, sort of if you find that temperature's too hot you just turn it down.
I think that's alright though any thing  too hot .
Yeah, no it was fine.
What do they all .
But that's how it goes on and off, it clicks on and off all the time.
I know the heat is, but why the water weren't coming out.
Mm, perhaps it was a slight block blockage in the  .
Had a good day at Tesco?
 

Bet he didn't pay eight nine pounds for that suit in that Profile
No.
.
 

When's the suit gonna be ready then?
Er, would be ready for this Wednesday, but I said it'll probably be Saturday that we pick it up.
When's it gotta be, what the jacket or the trouser's got to be altered?
Little bit of the trouser's taken in the waist.
Taken in?
Only a little bit yeah, and a little bit on the bottom and also a slight bit on the cuff's of the coat  but er, it looked quite nice it did.
He's trousers were actually to long?
Not a lot, but
He likes it long.
you can't tell, he wouldn't wear a shoe would he?
So I said to the bloke in the shop have you got some shoes he can put , so they had to do it with his trainers on, but he's made them extra long cos he's trainer's is that much bulkier, so er, I said to , he can't do it .
Did he get any shoes?
No, I said if he waits till he get's the suit,pick it up I said then he can put the trousers on pop round to one of the .
But he's gotta have shoes that cos, that he can wear with the suit and wear to school, cos he needs that school shoes, I saw the shirt and the tie.
in it?
Rather dear the shirt.
I bet it was.
Quite nice, I like that tie cos I said it .
You share it.
Yeah, I, I, even the shirt I'll fit me, tie .
If you ever needed, needed a suit, you did that once before, but that's what you said if you could get a suit, would you wear it though?
Yeah, it's nice 
Bet it's  
Even if he had shirt and tie on  tee shirt on and a pair of trainers .
Why didn't he wear shoes?
Well you know what there like, try telling he's  not to wear a coat,
.
Was there quite a queue, did you walk in or park in?
Mm, I'll go back with him and he'll wear his bloody shoes when I go back with him, how much they charging you for the repairs?
Twelve quid.
That's the usual fee.
That's not bad then.
Not bad at all.
That's hemming it,
Mm.
and the jacket.
Take the trouser's up, take the trouser's in .
Oh that's not bad is it, no.
You know I've got a straight navy coat that I've hardly ever wore, I've discovered that it'll only cost eleven pounds fifty to have it shortened at Sketchley's, and it's all done .
I mean you couldn't alter it , I mean you could, but the time it'll take you to get it right .
Oh yes, I'd never get a professional job on that heavy cloth and all the  so at some point that'll .
So, is it quite big though the suit?
Oh yes, thirty  three and thirty eight, he tried thirty six
That's not  fitting.
He's, he's not .
I wasn't too sure at first if it'll fit him, but when he put the trousers on, when he put the trousers on first, I thought no, no way, but then when  pinned them, you know, they  I thought, I thought , but .
Told him to go to grey though, cos grey won't date, green will.
No, that , nice with a black jumper.
Just a, the thing wear just a black sweater with it, the thing is now, he's gonna need it for the football matches in he, a suit?
.
Why didn't he go to, they've got a lovely Burton's in the precinct over there now.
Didn't get that far.
Yeah, there's a new one over there.
I said we'll try this shop, I said at least have a look and I said we'll go round to the other's, I said he made he's mind up when he walked in,.
I bet he had to get it from out the back did he?
No.
.
.
Just you remember when you get your Access at the end of the month then.
.
What time did you finish then?
Er 
Oh what your both going to work at quarter to one tomorrow?has anything exciting happened today?
No not really, short drivers 
Of course there all working now, it's in the paper's in it?.
Oh yes, yes .
There's a big sign at Camberley's, I don't know if you've noticed it, when we went to the cafe last night, big sign outside with big black writing, we are now open for trading ten till four on Sundays.
Oh.
Outside Camberley
Oh is it?
Yeah, great, great big like board.
No, I didn't notice that  .
Didn't you see that , when we went to the restaur , no I went and got the cigarettes, that's where I saw it , yes, cos I, yeah.
Oh that's where you see it , yes, yes.
Great big sign on it, because people will, you know, I mean Tesco's when we went last night it was packed, no you probably didn't see it
No, I didn't.
but it was packed 
Is that because of the food price war?
Are they still doing that, are they still trying to keep there prices down?
They say they are Jean .
Oh I dunno, they are  .
They, they put, we go to er, a little shop in , only a little shop and they have to got into er one at Croydon every Thursday, and he get's, the manager, he get's the er, driver's to come out of head office, and  what staff, and he always buys it in bulk and he, he still buys say it's coca cola  say it was ten pence a can
Mm.
He'll buy probably about a thousand cans
Mm, mm.
and then, that week, he sell's ten pence a can, then the following week he still bought it ten pence, following week it goes up to eighteen pence, but he's still selling what , so I don't think it, I think .
But I still think Tesco's is the cheapest supermarket, I do, Waitrose is way over the top.
.
Yeah I know  working, but I'm just saying there food.
how do you think their Sunday trading?
Got to 
Your joking.
Seven days, thirty nine hours, thirty seven and a half hours .
But it's chronic, it's not allowed.
He's, he's a, he's a kid.
About eighteen years old, and how they get round it, he's 
Supervisor.
warehouse assistant manager
Mm.
so as soon as he comes, soon as 
Mm, mm.
then he works the hours required.
Mm.
work seven days.
That is, it is so wrong.
Yeah, I mean it's alright for people like my son John, who's got a  good salary.
I was gonna say he's on about thirty thousands ain't he?
Oh it must be probably more than that .
Probably more than that , but that, he wouldn't mind if he had to do it.
Well he does, he goes in on Saturdays very often, he goes in on Sundays very often, you know, goes up to have a look at a site or goes into the office to look over something in peace without the phone ringing all that's sort of thing, he puts in a lot of time that's not strictly accounted for, Gerry did, I did as a teacher, but then we were well paid.
People who are on six and a half thousand a year.
Mm, it .
It, it, it's  in the office.
Roll on the common market day when the social dimension will stop that, it'll stop it in it's tracks, sheer exploitation that is.
about the, what is, what  the, the ladies, I told you, women who work nights at
Mm.
Tesco's, they sent a letter out to them, and er, cos there open over Christmas period, er I think some of the stores  and the letter says we all get two days off, cos , and then like, they, they won't Christmas day , twelve o'clock new, Christmas Eve and twelve o'clock new Christmas Day, they  twelve o'clock 
Disgusting.
Disgraceful.
Otherwise they said , I mean even with, they gotta do it .
if they don't turn up they don't get paid for the Christmas and Boxing Day.
Well .
Sacked.
Mm, mm.
I mean most of them are only there cos there finding it hard with the mortgage.
Quite, quite.
Got them over, they, they said, they said they know they've got them over a barrel.
Mm, mm.
They, Tesco's is one of  a lot of the firms, but you said there dreadful the way they treat their staff .
Yeah , well Tesco's, Sainsbury's, Waitrose, all the same.
Mm.
When, when you walk in the front of the shop, it all look's nice, got out the back.
Mm, mm 
But Neil he was gonna go down to Tesco's but he is, Ipswich, can't get down here,so he can't sort of travel  and you know what the hassle of having to take him and pick him up.
Can't, I can't do it.
When he was first with me I could belt up about seven in the morning, but, recently I've noticed that I feel unwell if I get up and rush out .
Yeah, but he could probably do a two till ten shift, but the two would be alright , but you wouldn't want to go out ten o'clock at night and pick him up.
But, I, physically I can't do it, I, I've aged up in the last few years.
Mm.
My, my years have caught up with me you know.
It's all very well keeping mentally flexible and all the rest of the who-har, but if you, er, my, my mother stopped and said to her many years ago, she said, you don't look your age, you don't act your age, you don't sound your age, you don't think your age, but you are your age, and this is absolutely true, as you grow older, nothing will stop the fact that your arteries get a little harder, so that, you know, that you get raised blood pressure quite easily if your agitated and you are, for some reason you, you have to puff a lot more, I was reading about this just recently, and these are changes that take place whatever you do, you can exercise, and you can take vitamins and you can keep your weight down, but you age.
Age, I'll fight it .
Well you can fight it, I do, but you don't win all hands down .
Cos you see I've act .
Yes, yes, but erm, you know, I have had to say to the chaps, one of them came in and he said he'd been spoiled down at the cedar  and I said oh well, I, I've been cooking a breakfast for Neil of course by the operation of sods law, Neil suddenly goes off the idea of having breakfast, so I find myself cooking breakfast for this other lump, who is as idol and selfish as anybody ever met in all the born days, and I said to him just recently, I said, I, I can't get up and do breakfast's in the morning any more, well he says he come's down and does he's own,you see they can when they feel that they want too.
Yeah, especially when it's cold and dark you don't want it, you can have an extra half hour in bed,.
Well, it's, it's simple that if I got up at half past six, and took him up a cup of tea at quarter too seven, and when he was around at seven o'clock, I was grilling bacon and I was frying eggs, and I hope, I don't know whether perhaps it's my cold, but, I, I just used to feel terribly unwell after he'd gone, for about two hours and my legs were so wobbly, I was sitting down on the sofa, I may go back yet to cooking him breakfast if I feel like it, but, the, I mean if I can say to these chaps that, there are times when I don't feel like doing things, well, I reckon Dave that they are so glad to be in that house with the central heating, with the twenty four hour er, er a day water, and the comfort, there not going to argue.
Yeah, that's right.
Brenda
Yeah.
can I phone Marg?
Yeah.
Warn hear .
How .
Er, over on number seven 'B',.
.
No,.
When you got to pick Carla up?
Half five, I've got to do Jenny's ironing, oh there's loads of things I've gotta do  never .
They doom is upon the.
What's he cooking?
Chicken casserole.
Ooh,.
Very nice too.
This is mine isn't it?
Yes, that's your dish.
This is my dish, yes.
I leave it another ten minutes Jean, cos I 
yes ,
can drop you and then go 
yes ,
and pick Carla up save coming back 
unclear ,
and then going back
fit it all in as they say.
That's right.
Yeah, I didn't finish my tea, I never do, so I'll, I'm going to do that now 
So you drop him at the actual hospital?
Erm, this Jill, who is this, is this  girl friend?
Vicky's his girl friend and Jill the mum.
Oh I see.
But Vicky's now, she had erm anorexia the girl friend, she sort of got over it but then er hos , her mum and, oh it's all very confusing, mum and the boy friend been together for years, they've now split up, Vicky's now, it's all been sort of everything on top of her
Mm.
she's now got an ulcer, and there's some.
Surely, can you, I mean.
She's only fifteen, I mean I can't believe it, I .
It's terrible.
And erm, so of course, she's, you know, not been well for a couple of weeks and she's gone down from nine four, to seven stone.
Lord.
So they said last week there having her in and she's in till Christmas.
Why can't people be happy.
Why can't they be contented with what they've got?
That's right, well I said to Lee, you don't half pick your blooming girl friends, he had that neurotic one up the road, didn't he?
Mm.
But this one I think he's not
.
He, it, it is, he gets on very well with her, I mean he only sees each other 
Yes,
on a 
having ,
Saturday.
having been through that experience with Helen, he'll be a lot more weary.
Yeah cos he realise I mean, he often says oh well, you know, she made me turn against my family and be horrible and he says I haven't had time, he says I realise how wrong I was.
Neil, Neil now says, that when he meets a girl, he, he waits to see if she's got any characteristics in common with the dreadful Vicky , the girl that he eventually fetch her much deserved slosh on the chops and was pulled into Ipswich Magistrates Court, you know, oh I shouldn't laugh, but erm, he says he looks for those characteristics, and the moment he sees that the girl is going to be this sort of neurotic, excitable, hysterical creature he walks away.
I don't blame him.
Yeah.
Well I think Lee, he, he just realise, I mean  I mean he only sees her once a week any way, doesn't he?but you know, she is, she is a lovely girl
Good.
but erm, it's like now, I mean there's no way she'll visit cos he's got too much homework in the work
Mm, mm.
and I mean he's tied up tomorrow.
Mm, yeah.
Erm,I said did you say your mum phoned up?
No, I phoned her last night, she .
bet that's Lee.
She said to remember you to her.
Oh how nice .
.
Why?
Eh, she's not going now.
You know what she's like, she's not go.
I bet they've had beer all afternoon.
She sounded as if she's had a few .
What, what, where was she going to go tomorrow then?
She's, doing one of these
Bet .
He get's so cross.
Mm, yeah I know.
He get's so cross 
, yes.
I got a track suit today, cos he was so cross the other day when she come, but that's what, they've got the money, they've got no, no mortgage, there both work full time, she's got a brilliant job ain't she?
They won't go sho , they do everything together
Mm.
but they, they won't, they took two days off last week and they sat indoors for two days, they've got a love , you know there fantastic couple, really fantastic , they'll do anything for you, but it's like Dave, Dave's always saying take up golf, go swimming
Oh it's so sad , yes.
you know, and, if like, she, she'll take all the grand children to the pantomime, but Dave won't go he's er, over at his dad, you know, he'll stay and have a sleep.
Oh.
You know, or, or potter about indoors, decorating or whatever won't he?
But like Dave said you know, there's no, I said to her you gonna go out on those two days, I said got all your Christmas shopping, no, everybody will get money.
It's .
Yes, oh.
That's what Dave said what we could do if we  money, you know, all get a , you know you, like you, if you had a partner to do it, you wouldn't be stuck at home.
Good god, no, well even without a partner, I  stay stuck at home .
.
They've got no hobbies, no interests .
I was , I was off on, on Sunday, I mean I've joined yet another marriage agency, off on last Sunday to Latherham, with another nice old chap, you know, erm, I, I go out with erm, women friends, we, I've arranged, er there's one very, very good place that does lunches, run by a couple of homosexuals and erm, old age pensioners on Tuesday get, get a lunch, an eight pound lunch, for four pounds, so four friends, three friends and myself are going for a special Christmas lunch that they do, fortnight ago we went for a lunch with the group of the town's women's guild and friends, erm, my women's group that I belong to over at the village of  which is run by the television actress er Helen Fraser
Mm, you get around you do .
oh I do, it's , it's very humble it's very old ladyish, but it's, it's around, it is.
There, there going tomorrow, what was it for?
What is it tomorrow?
He's coming over here tomorrow on a Sunday.
Yeah, well they  well they go up the Legion and have a couple of pints, go to the bookie and put some horses on, go home and sit in front of the telly watching horses like .
It's not much is it?
I mean alright, you can see mum's point in one respect, because she works nine till six every day.
Yeah.
No she doesn't have to work, but she, she chooses to work nine till six, I mean she just got her pension thing out didn't she?
Mm.
for sixteen, seventeen grand in a lump sum, put it straight in the bank
Mm, mm.
you know it's, they don't need the money.
No.
I mean, you know they could do, alright they have their holidays abroad don't they?
They  they could.
, you know they don't, tomorrow, what was that in aid off?
Jack's birthday.
Yeah, and that was his brother who lives in London and they've invited him up, but she said she had a bad cold last night and wasn't feeling too good, she said I'm fine today, but she said we put them off.
I say.
You know they were going to have a meal out and
Then they moan, they come over here and they moan oh .
Same as the decorating though in it?
Mm.
Done nothing at all in their house, but since we've been here in doing this and that, every things been changed now in it?
Mm, mm.
He just sits g , he, he just, you know, it's, it's a waste Dave just sees it at because it's different if they were hard up 
Totally different.
You know, but there not, there lovely, lovely people and they're do anything for you, but we say to them, you know, oh well life's boring and your know sort of, and, but, life hasn't got to be boring, when you've got no money wor worries life shouldn't be boring.
Even when you've got money worries, life isn't boring.
No.
My poor old friend Ron , is worried about money up to his, up to his arm pits, but he manages to get out and play his violin, you know, two Saturday's ago I went up with him to Norwich to stay with his nice lady Trudy, and in the evening, Saturday evening, I went to the gorgeous old church in Norwich where he and the other's were all working away playing the Mozart Symphony or two.
Mm, yeah, but the thing is I mean with Dave's mum and dad, I mean it's like, think, they have the odd weekend away don't they?
Erm but I mean they went away a couple of weeks ago down to where Dave's brother was buried in Isle of Wight
Mm.
now they came back early cos the weather was a bit cold
.
You know, they stay, it was quite sweet really I suppose, but I mean, and Dave said that they
I just wonder how many more people there are like them.
They look, I mean talk about well, Dave dies, what about the security then?
Bolt themselves in.
Bolt themselves in, if someone knocks on the door, you know, it's sort of who is it
Yes.
and all the bolts and chains come off, you know.
Yes.
She lives sort of on a knife edge doesn't she?
Mm.
But they sort of, I mean I say, they love the kids and they love, you know, doing anything with them, but, they won't, and Dave said why don't you take, oh I'd love to do golf, and Dave says well bloody well do it, what's stopping you?
That's right.
Oh and we'd love to do swimming, erm, because we'd done as a surprise for Carla for Christmas cos I mean we said the kids are getting older now, Dave heard it on the radio, erm, for one fifty a head, erm they were opening Guildford's swimming pool erm, from ten till twe twelve?
Yeah.
On Christmas day.
How nice.
So Dave said well let's, you know, you sit and eat, and eat, he said let's get up Christmas present, have a couple of Christmas presents, going swimming ten till twelve, perhaps go for a walk over the common or something,
Yeah, yeah.
Put the dinner on low
Mm.
then come back and have dinner
Yeah, lovely.
which should be grate, because, he's mum, I mean we love her dearly, but she has to go to Lenny's in, dinner time and us in the evening every year
Oh yes.
so
Yes.
We've gotta sort of sit here, and I mean
Mm, mm.
you, you know, last year I invited Kim round, cos she, she didn't have, and this year I'm gonna ask her if she'd liked to come
Yes, of course.
Brian wouldn't come, did last year, I mean I don't know if the kids will come this year but I'll ask Kim, because the single fact it breaks up the conversation a bit, doesn't it, I mean
Oh it helps, yes, yes.
You know, but that is what Dave said, there highlight is every, like can we come over at six o'clock tomorrow.
Yeah, yeah.
That is there highlight, but and Dave, it's his only day off, he, he would rather, I mean he wouldn't say no, it's not, no
Of course not.
I mean the thing, they should know, I mean like Dave said every couple of weeks, but ev 
It's nice to see, it's like Christmas , when our kids are older we'll see  pop in and visit them, but we won't ever year rang.
We've got to come to you, like you do .
Yeah, yeah .
You know, like,cos it's,used to say now, I mean I'd like to, I would like to go away at Christmas
Yes of course.
work all year and if you can afford it, can't have a holiday in the year, say well come on kids your a bit older now
Mm.
let's go somewhere, where you can swim and that, but me mum,it's nice to have your family around you .
You fill obliged.
You are obliged.
Yeah, yeah, I know, well my daughter in law, was practically down on the phone kissing me last year when I said look Myrie, wouldn't you like it this year if I didn't come to you, you know, she's done Christmas's for me, year in year out  
.
she said, John and I would love to have a Christmas on our own, I think it
.
I think it effect they, I think they in fact invited there
Their friends.
her parents, but they, they don't have their friends, in fact I'm not sure that they did very much at all, I think that Myrie meant it when she said that what they wanted was the most peaceful sort of Christmas that you could possibly imagine, with no big teas, big meals or anything
Or entertaining.
Exactly wondering about what to eat .
, six days a week, I mean it's like this year I mean he's going to be working, I'm working as well right up to Christmas Eve, so are you, his gonna have the Christmas Day and they want him back at work on the Boxing Night.
Yes, quite.
See he get's a day and a half off, I mean it's like we, I mean well this is why Dave said, he said do you fancy he said
Said John, well, we've got other ideas we'd like you to come to us for Christmas, so I thought, as I said to Brenda, you don't turn down an invitation from your own children 
That's right, yeah.
But, actually I was  
You don't go every year .
I certainly am not.
I was looking forward actually to looking after Neil
It was one year she could of done without the invitation though isn't it?, if she, if she wanted her other friends and Neil.
Definitely , yes, and you, you and Dave could have come up and er Carla, perhaps not Lee , but, you know, he may have wanted to go off somewhere else, erm, we could all have bunked down on what spare space there was and I was going to do a very primitive almost medieval, middle ages sort of Christmas
Well that's what we said, but , right.
I wasn't going to rush around buying horribly expensive things like smoke salmon that I couldn't afford, I was going to do a big family feast and I was going to get in a few games like the monopoly or  lotto or you know , I just, I haven't worked it out but I thought oh what fun
That's right.
and then, invited to be a good, to be a good mum and a good .
No, I mean, that's what it's all about, I mean the fact is
I shall enjoy it and I, I very touched that they  
Well one year it used to be that she come to us at dinner time
Mm.
and then go to Lenny's in, in the evening.
Mm, mm
You know
yeah, yeah.
and I mean it used to be the fact, oh god well we've got to sort of have dinner at twelve o'clock, we've got to be round there by four.
Well do you know, when I met, I, I'm meeting old chaps through this very excellent marriage agency, I've never expected any thing like it, they are marvellous, and the sent me a nice old lad, but I knew I was onto a looser when he said, of course I go to my daughter-in-law every Saturday for lunch, she absolutely insists because she says, she wants to make sure that I'm eating properly, now this is a very healthy old man with a very good income who could afford to buy any food he wants and the fact of the matter is his that he's son is probably not, he doesn't want to upset his old dad, and it's handy to have him to come on Saturday for lunch and be done with it as it were, but I thought surely Bernard  your own sense would tell you that nobody want's their old father and father-in-law every Saturday of their life, for lunch oh  .
Honestly  do all the time .
Oh no.
Terrible, it's a problem in it?
.
My watch.
Took the watch to repair it.
it didn't get repaired.
Didn't get repaired.
We, we felt we had a lot of talking to do.
You know, that's why we thought we'd come back cos we thought we hadn't talked much.
.
.
Oh very handy why?
That be.
No th she's going to her sons Christmas Eve and she doesn't want to travel down the M twenty five, M twenty four.
Yeah, so she's going to come to me on the bus on the twenty third.
stay the month, you go early 
I mentioned to her about renting, she said that she hadn't, you know, took that idea out the window but she said the only thing is your at the beck and call of the landlord.
You can't sort of like you wanna put shelves up and do things to the house, that's what keeps her going,wanna put the rent up  it's  got a lot of disadvantages.
She said she was going to but then she thought about me told Jean last week  and she's baby sitting that's why Jim isn't staying tonight so she thought she better not  Jean asked why and she said come over if you ,.
That's better  yeah but in    in  shop I was quite surprised , I've seen a , looks quite promising  the bags  Marks & Sparks.
Flick?it works so far.
.
Your .
.
Four quid.
Yeah , how much is it?
Three ninety nine.
One ninety nine?
Three ninety nine.
Bloody hell 
Why is it called Flicks?.
Lick it, lick it up.
..
practice ,wow.
Well yeah,.
, that's why  up there, all sit around out  .
Yeah, but.
,
I was gonna .
.
That's , well I thought I was expected him .
.
Mm.
.
In it, they gotta, that's what I thought, but the thing is, well that's what we normally get.
they probably enjoyed it, cos they probably setting it up on the market stalls up there and there  afford it.
So I thought that's two, erm  and I  a couple of quid didn't I, in the card, then I thought no I won't put it in the card I'll
all there .
Exactly , ah, I did .
See,
Linda.
Oh.
 

.
body stocking.
What is it .
It's a tee shirt and he likes  don't he?
He's .
Mm,body stockings.
.
.
.
Lynn's track suit  where was it then?
.
Like Benetton isn't it?
.
.
Yes it is..
.
I didn't know there was a market called Benetton.
.
Yes, that's the trouble  .
Strawberry shades, just trying to find the tee shirt  Benetton and  lady .
.
, it's .
.
.
This is what you call a tee shirt.
I get two for 
Thirteen ninety nine.
Pay a fortune.
Where you .
.
.
Look at the size of that, can't believe it.
.
You can't , thirteen quid.
It's all one size.
What size is that then?
,..
tucked in their baggy, yeah  .
.
You  who are they bought?
Laura.
Laura.
What these?
.
.
No, I've got her a box of things, I did a little box up with bits in  all some for fifty p and a pound, doing that up and hair bands for her, giving her, given a little box with all little bits and pieces in it 
.
Yeah,.
Good grief.
Mum said.
.
I haven't got to buy Vicky something.
You've got to buy Vicky something though.
Why?
Cos she's .
.
.
She's eating now, she can't wait  that chocolate.
I could then  .
.
sitting in the drive, last week she came over to, I said .
.
No.
.
Got Jim's, where she works .
.
Oh er, sandwich .
Yeah, and then dad's got a , what's that?
I got these.
.
So when she moved out then?
Well he settled .
Etam label they were fourteen quid.
Where, where did you go the other day?.
Did I what?
Why didn't you go, she said .
You weren't  it's your daughter, it's your kid.
.
Yeah, and even when she was in the  no I'm hungry , you've had a bacon
Just one  ,.
No.
Please what's the point in going then.
she did like them.
She had to go to hospital, she never did like it.
.
I remember when she was  , she said .
Ah?
.
I see how I feel, I'm tired.
You've got your homework to do.
.
your gonna be home from football until four, you gonna have your dinner, want a bath.
Yeah, but I might not go to school tomorrow.
Why?
Cos of my cough.
How can you play football and not go to school then?
Cos I was going out in the fresh air, I'm alright when I'm out in the fresh air.
So why aren't you going to school then?
I'm in the class room all day dad.
What's the difference between being in  and being in all day?
I cough in there.
at school?
Yeah,.
die, you'll die here on your own won't you?
That's what I said I'm, I'll see .
.
.
.
.
I don't care if you go , all I think of you  you get out .
come in and stay in that's it, stay in and do your own whatever, and then we'll go, when I go and get the  cos dad's on late, we'll go to the hospital then  she's got John and Claire and erm the other pair are going this afternoon 
suppose.
.
staying there all day, she's staying there till nine o'clock tonight.
.
have to wait till then to come out.
tell  I weren't going to about half past six, seven.
Yeah and by the time you got home, it'll be about half past three 
I, I said to Neil I don't , I see how dad is and she just said she felt  told you have .
.
You can .
But the idea of given you that money is to  homework,.
I've been at work all week.
twice a day, go and do your football.
I wouldn't get it all done tonight any way.
So, at least your in out of the damp cold, it's so damp out there.
.
never your washing, no ironing.
Think you  ended up with a cough and a cold and she's gonna catch it, I caught it off you.
I haven't had time  .
I think I've got it coming.
.
Cos I bleeding look ill..
I might get them jeans .
Yeah.
I might get those jeans .
Save your money .
Same as .
.
.
, I've got to find .
, jeans go nice with this top.
Yeah, they would.
You've got blue jeans, black jeans,
Do you want, do you want my opinion Lee?
Mm.
If you leave your jeans possible a week before Christmas, now people are buying  sale, but I tell you what, but you can, before, a week before Christmas .
You could of got this dark  green suit over the market today for forty five quid.
Yeah, I bet that was really good.
.
Lovely.
Yeah, I bet.
Wasn't lined.
But you wait,a week before Christmas  if they've got stock
.
Clothes and that will be just slashed..
They are now aren't now.
No, but I bet after  cos they know people are buying now.
It's .
Yeah but he, he ain't gonna be wearing jeans out there is he?
Yeah, that's what he just said.
You know what Lee's like.
And if for some reason it doesn't fit and you go back to them
 
Picked a few parcels and wrappers  to Marks and Sparks .
Couldn't you?
Yeah.
If you do  go back there again  you must  to match the tie  must have a white shirt.
But I haven't  white shirts.
You must, don't buy a stripy one cos a stripy one won't go with the shirt, the tie.
nothing else.
No I'm saying  if the shirt doesn't fit you can .
What size is the shirt?
It's a small.
But he said they are very
What collar?
Well .
With a shirt like that you gotta have it, he he said it's
Open.
it's gotta be a
a tie with that.
Well you see it's gotta be a reasonable fit.
You can't have a  great big baggy shirt underneath a slim suit type of thing.
Was he helpful?
He seemed alright didn't he?
Yeah.
The only thing I  was him with his poxy trainers on and no shoes.
When he turns up next week his trousers'll be about three inches above his shoes.
Might get your shoes on Wednesday.
But make sure he's got his trousers on!
Why does he have to have his trousers on?
Well he has to put the suit on, try it on in the shop, to make sure it, wear his shoes there  cos even, the shoes he's got might be alright with it.
But they they've got holes in.
He needs new school shoes.
Yes but if they  are alright you know the type of shoes you want.
All he's gonna wear are shoes that day.
Er?
Are they, are they quite similar to his  school trousers?
Oh yeah.
The cut?
Yeah.
Cos they look, be okay with those shoes.
Yeah but the length.
It's the length you, the trousers'll be alright.
Have you gone for the longer length?
Like with your school trousers or short short?
You couldn't te , they were long
Short.
Eh?
you can't tell because he had trainers on.
Short.
We may, he measured, we  the leg he had trainers on.
And matey done them a little bit longer.
He added a bit.
He done down to the top of the trainer
Have they got turn-ups on?
Yeah.
and then down a bit more.
they'll cut them.
Well I should imagine they'll cut them yeah.
They, they will they won't  they won't just turn them up they'll actually cut them.
 
So  he picked it up and he  shoes.
I'll give you the receipt actually so you've got it in case.
Go and get your Benolin.
Or the other one.
How many  has the other one got?
Four at a time?
No.
So how many ti times do you take it?
One spoonful or one ?
two teaspoons.
My pension.
Getting old mate.
.
Here you are.
If I was to pop my clogs at work or any time  you'd get fifty five thousand eight hundred eighty pounds.
Quick, knock him off then.
. We'll knock him off quick.
Plus  you get your three and a half grand back.
Plus you would get five thousand six hundred and six pounds  a year pension.
Plus the insurance on the house would pay up so you'd have, ha bloody hell, so you'd have about sixty grand in the bank.
Must be worth twenty five grand then.
No mortgage.


Think how many shirts with that you could buy then.
And at the moment  you know when I'm gonna retire Bren?
When?
When is it?
This ain't far away.
With that fifty five, yeah?
Fifty five grand.
What if you don't  if you don't die before?
You don't get it, do you.
You don't get it?
I retire  I'm sixty five right  this is not far away


when you say it like this.
On the fourth of July two thousand and nineteen.
Is that ?
That ain't far away is it?
What's that?
At sixty five?
Mm.
You're sixty five in that year.
And if I, if I stayed with Tescos and got me pension and that.
But I don't think it's with the A V C's it's just the pension.
I could, if I retire at sixty five I can have twenty  this is the best bit, twenty one thousand  pound in a lump sum.
And then I could have a pension which would be seven thousand six hundred and seventy three pounds a year which is  about a hundred and  twenty pounds
A month.
a week.
No a week.
Plus you would have that month's salary.
What would you go  you wouldn't have a lump sum?
Oh yeah, yeah.
You'd have the lump sum as well?
Oh I'd have the lump, no  you can  it would be more than that.
My pension, if I didn't have it  if I say I don't want the lump sum, the twenty one grand.
Yeah.
It would probably be fourteen thousand pound a year you'd work it on  two hundred and fifty pound a week.
But  if you're sixty five you haven't got much longer to go have you?
You know what  
If you took the lump sum and 
Yeah.
If you get your lump sum out  if you want a new car you get a new car.
Because you get your state pension as well.
Which is for a couple would be eighty three pounds.
So you'd be on  you'd have twenty one grand which you could put away.
Live on the interest.
No you couldn't live on the interest.
But see the way I, the way I assume, see this  the endowment on the house is paid   
 
So that goes  fifteen thousand.
So you'd have like twenty, well so they  about twenty grand so you get twenty grand there.
By that time we should have about  I would say at least another ten thousand pounds in that account of yours.
So you'd have thirty grand there which  
And those family assurance things.
Yeah.
Plus the shares  which will be on my side.
Plus this pension so you'd be, you'd have your house paid for so you'd get a nice
A nice nest egg.
a nice lump you can  draw for a holiday and plus have a good living between.
That's why that, at the moment I don't see it  well I don't see it  a necessity  you to get a pension.
Mm.
But I think
You got that family assurance thing haven't you?
And I've got my TESSA.
That's what I mean, yeah.
That's why I say to you, you say oh we've got this we've got that we want that we want this but   er  I tell you two thousand nineteen and you're at nineteen ninety two.
That ain't far away though.
And plus the fact there's, I don't wanna work till I'm sixty five  I wanna pack up about 
What about that pension if you want to pack up before?
No it's, it is quite  reducing.
That's why you've gotta be er  put all your things together now.
See even that there  If for some reason you go back there and you're not happy with the suit


right?
I shall cha , you know me.
.
No let him try it on.
Don't take the suit away.
Alright?
Listening?
Right.
Well what if he says well, it's alright you take it away and then bring it back?
No.
Well it's no good to you.
Alright?
Don't take the suit away, the only thing I'm a bit dubious  well he said well take the suit home and try it  if it's not he said come back with it, he said and  we'll exchange it down here.
He said there's no problem with the exchange.
I came out that shop and I thought  and why the fucking hell didn't he let us try it on there and then?
And if it ain't the right size he can take the one that is.
So I thought perhaps matey only had a small and large.
Not a medium so he's given him the small so he's thinking if  if it doesn't fit  he's still made the sale.
If you see what I mean.
So you have to go back and have another shirt.
I mean he had about four or five different shirts there.
But it has to be white.
What, did you think it would be too small?
Well no cos matey, I don't think so cos matey said he is a small.
Cos I said to him I said well look, he likes his shirts baggy  he said yeah but you can't have a shirt too baggy with a suit.
So 
But that shirt's okay cos it, I mean he can wear that to school can't he?
The rest of
Oh yeah.
But he's gotta try it on and make sure it's not, if it's all tight he ain't gonna be happy in it is he?
That's if 
he said today he said I don't know when I'm gonna wear the suit.
Well you said he could wear it  well like you said most people  mm  I'll wear it.
Have a night out at the .
Have a night out at .
What?
Put the old suit on.
Here comes  love her.
to wear.
Oh fucking hell!oh 
Better get something in that's stronger than that Dave.
So what time are you er  picking  up at one.
Where's .
What time are you going?
Two o'clock kick off.
Forty five minutes  quarter to four.
Round about no good  
 
about  quarter past four.
And what time have we got  coming over?
Six.
I'll tell you there's no way when my kids get older, I don't care how boring my life is, I will never ever go round their house every week.
I reckon she had a few last .
I think once a month is nice.
You've got something to talk about.
you've got something to chat about.
sit here don't we and  nothing to say to each other.
We talk about
last night?
I did  as well though.
What time did they leave?
I should think erm long after.
?
Oh.
seems a bit expensive.
Oh no.
Not really Dave.
Yeah I know but I was thinking  it's alright but where you gonna put it?
.
At the end of her bed.
It's not, it's not like they said.
Innit?
Cos the stand's only that size.
She could have it out and she'd have a lot of fun with it and  on it.
I mean Argos does, do one.
Three hundred and sixty nine with the drum  and everything.
And if the bloke can tape from it.
I mean you can't, it's not, I mean you couldn't have it in like 
What she want it for then?
Er?
What she want it for?
Who?
Carla.
Well she can either sing in it  play the organ, sing in it and tape it as well.
You can have a lot of fun with them.
Can't erm like  the one she's got upstairs is like  all she was quite happy with is a seventy pound one.
Like that but a bigger version with full keys.
Mm.
But this one this bloke's got is a full key like a piano.
Oh is it?
And you've got all the tunes.
You've got all the  you've got I think a hundred voices.
You've got jazz, ballet, all different things on it.
Oh.
I mean it's  it's good to play .
Well I think that's quite  I mean I'd probably knock him down to a hundred anyway.
I said to him if if, last night I said I probably .
I said I want to try it out first.
Leave it at your house and I'll try it out  and erm  but Nick wouldn't sell it to you if he thought it was 
Oh no.
not worth it.
But he, I mean that one from Argos  seventy quid.
And it's not the full size keys or anything.
What's he flogging it for?
Been made redundant.
It's 
Where did he work?
it's er  she did say.
It's Pete's erm, Pete!
Nick's sister's boyfriend.
Dunno who it is
Oh well we've got the cash.
The money's, like I said to you  
Oh yeah but the thing is it's something, it's the main, it's something she, it's like  said to her last night 
Well if she wants that you let her have it.
what do you want?
She said I want an organ but mum would never let me have one.
And it's worth
The only thing I don't like about it is the noise.
Ah yeah but it's not noisy noisy are they?
Aren't they?
And the fact, what I like about it, it can be battery or mains.
Oh 
Plug it in.
And I mean  she's, you've got room out there to have it if it just stands.
And then that
I was gonna say, tell you something.
You .
That's .
Someone had an intruder.
I'm not sure  but I think it was Mrs Turner.
Well funny enough she's, she's got a light to put on now.
Yeah.
I see the bloke putting them up.
Because it was an old age woman, they ain't give anyone's names  old age woman was  er  it was in the paper sort of  met up with an intruder in her house like.
and I dunno went screaming, went crackers.
But then he said a neighbour  who had a dress , just wearing a dressing gown  and he was married with three kids which is next door  heard what going, been going on and he  they were chasing, were chasing all through the common.
Virtually all the way out to   park but they didn't give his name either.
Must be her.
That's what I thought when I see her put her lights up.
I didn't see, I just saw them lit up last, all last night lit up.
Yeah.
Yeah I just assumed I thought oh hallo.
I was reading it in the paper I thought oh I wonder if is.
And she had that paint didn't she?
That iffy painter?
Mm.
Trouble is they know she lives there on her own.
Mm.
That's what I mean.
We don't wanna put a lot of valuable stuff out here.
Cos at any time I mean, if we're here I mean   there's always someone in cos I'm working nights so I'm here in the days.
So easy to break that 
I'm glad I've got, broke the back of it.
All I've got now is I haven't gotta go out for a main, if I'm out  just pick up a couple of bits for him when  from Woking.
But I can go to Woking and get whatever
Yeah.
And that's like Carla.
I might, what you got from Argos the other day, I might keep one of the things back for her birthday.
Trouble is if they get so much  they don't use it.
I mean it's different if it's clothes they need, good.
Mm.
But if it's toys.
They get all the toys and they  
She needs  .
She's got nothing up there what we brought.
Alright that  but nothing  one game  she can actually play with.
It's like Lee I mean he'll have all his stuff and that, he's got nothing to do.
hasn't he?
But she does still.
Mm.
God  that'd be a nightmare.
She's got fifty presents to buy.
Where she going for Christmas then?
Well if Vicky's in hospital she said they're going for the day there.
Are they?
But if, how does ?
she's not well enough .
But  I mean I think Gill sort of worries the fact I think she's, I mean nobody said she'd be in there till Christmas.
The doctor just said
No well if she's eating  they aren't going to let her out.
Well she's down to six stone eleven.
She was nine four  before this started.
No she's lost four stone, she was ten stone four.
And then she's been average on the last three or four months she's been on eight stone.
But now it's gone down, but there's no ulcer she had a laparotomy on Friday   the tube.
And there's nothing wrong with her  it was just sort of it's just nerves isn't it?
Strain and nerves.
I keep thinking, I mean I can  when I first met her .
She  I mean she's got all the facilities about her but she don't seem
She's ever so, I mean she's very quiet and sort of sweet but she's got no
Got no idea.
I mean I said to her today  I mean there was this costume there and I said here get that one there I said  french maid outfit, nurse's outfit.
I said get  that then.
And she went no I wouldn't wear that!
I said oh Dave would like that.
There was no  you know no, no sort of sense of humour there  at all.
But erm  you know I've, I've  but she said he's been right sort of 
Well you would be wouldn't you?
Tying all that money up in the house.
Now if he's gotta make out himself there'll be a possibility he might be losing it.
But you don't know how bad he is.
I mean he wouldn't sack his ex wife.
She still works with him in the shop.
And Gill gave her job to go and work in the shop  and he wouldn't let her go and work in it.
I said I thought it was you?
She said no he kept saying oh  we'll start you in a month, start you in a month  if I get rid of her.
And he wouldn't get rid of her.
And that's where a lot of it  and she still think's that he's
Yeah.
I mean he was married for quite a long time to her apparently.
And she only lives two doors from the shop.
Goes round there for his lunch.
Does he?
Yeah!
I mean  you know he's made the break.
And she said he's just so  you know 
it was one beer and that was it.
I couldn't believe 
Yeah.
how come you're back in?
It's just   different people aren't they?
Just sort of a bit 
Oh well so all we've really gotta do now then is just get out and do a shop  for Christmas.
. We ain't gonna be doing a lot anyway are we?
I've got all that.
Yeah all we want is a turkey.
Bit of turkey and some  drink.
Get a few nibbles sort of like couple of days before like er cos if Kim comes I'll do like I did last year, just a little buffet tea.
But I'm not buying  biscuits and sweets and 
Gateaux.
Yeah.
I don't know.
I might get one gateau.
Well  eat things like that won't she?
Yeah.
Well I might tell her to bring it.
But  that's it, I'm not buying  I've got a couple of boxes of chocolates we bought from Tescos didn't we?
Those Suchard things.
Jean's bought me a tin of biscuits and a tin of  of  tin of biscuits so there's ample biscuits.
Erm and it's just  bits of crisps.
Mm.
There's nothing really.
And a couple of bottles of wine.
 
No.
And that's it.
So it hasn't really.
I mean today I've I paid all this cash.
Just sit there in a 
Well I just think of the fact and I know it's sort of miserable but  Christmas night I think well, if you've gotta sort of something like you've got to put up with your mum and dad  and I think well just the more the merrier.
Because just sort of go for it and it's all done and then
visit.
You let them visit you on that night and that's it.
diet and you'll end up having his dinner .
Well we'll just say no.
are we?
We'll tell him .
We're, we're not around.
 
we know they're gonna be around we'll just say you know we're not gonna be around.
Cos we might feel when we come out there  we'll look at the turkey, might go for a walk or  go 
Er don't think so!
Are the pubs open?
Yeah I reckon the pubs open.
Yeah.
Christmas?
If you go   Ten till twelve.
I mean if you have a good hour in there you're not gonna get in smack on ten  be there about  twenty past ten, probably get in about twenty to eleven that's just right.
Get out at twelve  By the time you've had an hour in there swimming  you know how busy  when you're swimming lengths what with the  diving in.
You then you  want to get home and get your dinner.
Cos it makes you hungry dunnit, swimming?
Mm.
So you wanna have it going  cos like I say  turkey  night before .
Lob everything in  if you can.
Put it on a very low one so when you come back about  twenty past two  whack it up and by sort of say three o'clock, quarter past three you can sit down and eat your grub   dinner.
Be nice if you could get it, get it  then if you felt like it afterwards  about half past four or something you could just  get out to get fresh to  quick walk.
Fresh air or something.
That's it.
Walk a bit of dinner off so you can come back and sit down and  .
I reckon Christmas is cracked up a lot more than it  it's made out to be.
I personally think.
kids .
If it's no
That's what Jean was saying yesterday.
She said  you she said when I think she said I normally pay sort of fifty sixty pound a head present she said.
. And she said who really is bothered how much you spend on them?
As long as there's something
You open it up and you look at it and say oh thanks.
It's lovely.
She said unless it, like with, with that doll she's bought Carla she said  they're a good thing for collectors for her.
She said you know she, them and her trolls she collects.
She said alright it's twenty five quid, it's an expense but she said but it's something  that she'll keep.
Yeah.
She said but to  these people that buy these kids motorbikes and big cars for two hundred quid.
It's crazy.
Yeah they use  well mum and dad's got time oh we'll share it with the kids
They shove it under the bed.
Then we, well  just sits in the cupboard,.
Now, he's had it what  eighteen months and it's too small for him.
She's going to  ain't she?
I don't know.
She don't know does she?
Cos it obviously she wouldn't be able to sell, spend it down here.
It's funny though innit?
Every, every year  four weeks about, well even before that but you always have to s every year 
I know, if we ever fall out  it's always about family at Christmas.
All year you don't see them  
I don't think you will this year cos, cos you haven't  I'm having to say oh come on we've got to go and visit her.
Mm.
And I mean I wouldn't  I mean  it's no way, even   Sid says I wouldn't drive all the way up there to see them.
Mm.
Even though if  Beryl wasn't sort of around.
Because  I mean it's like, you know it it's like with Jane kids.
I mean the fact is  half her 
If you went up there you wouldn't be, you wouldn't be happy up there.
I mean it's like Jane I mean I was thinking the other day.
I mean alright she, we haven't phoned  each other but I mean the thing is half of her she's just so  naive with mother.
She doesn't want any up , she wants to be happy with, I mean Jane out of all them  I mean normally I mean she's, she would do anything for you.
You know if you sort of said to her look I need someone to have the kids for a week.
She wouldn't hesitate.
Yeah.
But I can't see that  I can't her not having  for Christmas.
Well she's not   is she?
She's coming down to  Sally and Jane.
It's Trevor.
Apparently he's really, Annie was saying he really put his foot down.
Annie?
Yeah!
Really sort of like  and she, she walked out and left him and the kids.
She didn't?
Yeah.
She left him.
And he weren't gonna have her back.
Oh ain't he?
No!
Apparently he really has
Where did she go then?
To your mums?
No  to her mates.
What, with her?
Yeah she wouldn't tell mother apparently.
No.
Oh no, no!
She was just got so depressed.
Oh has she?
Yeah.
With these  problems she's having and they don't know what's wrong with her.
And it's it's  it's nerves.
You got a couple of little bones there Carla.
Have I?
Alright?
Eh?
There's a plate for your bones.
Was there just the kids down ?
Just seems to be kids and .
What?
Is there no more in the cast?
What?
It just seems to have the kids .
Is that all that's in the cast?
Where's that Chris then?
He never turns up.
He knows his own parts though doesn't he?
He goes and 
No.
He doesn't know anything.
Doesn't he?
?
Oh maybe.
Oh.
Bit dry  innit?
of dad's cooking.
So it was a bit of a hard match today then mate?
Yeah.
Was it!
Right cocky team they are, aren't they?
Oh my god.
We deserved to win.
No we don't deserve to win.
Oh I thought we did.
So what are they called?
Town?
.
  
They haven't got a clue about football.
Dad.
They haven't got a clue about football.
They're good though.
They're good but it's just because they're rough.
No they're just aggressive.
That's why I mean  in the score  today.
cos he throws them off.
Mm?
And that's why they've got to fight to keep their place haven't they?
I mean he ain't a hundred percent fit.
Who?
Him.
You could hear his chest pumping  can't you?
That's what I said to you down the doctors, that it's obviously on his chest.
Have a day off school tomorrow.
I am.
Mm.
You can tell mum's tired.
Got the hump.
Gotta do the ironing yet.
Have you?
Got no school clothes.
Nothing much  
.
Come out the bath.
Bet there's no hot water left now then.
Yeah.
Come out and had a nice can of beer.
Really nice it was.
You've had a nice lazy day today.
Who, dad?
Yeah.
Every day's a lazy day for him.
get you breakfast tomorrow then.
lazy.
You could get dad breakfast .
What time are you going work tomorrow dad?
Or have you got a day off?
Dunno.
 

If you don't want it all don't eat it.
I do.
just put it back in the oven.
Mm?
I said if he doesn't fancy it all just put it back in the oven.
Or leave it till later.
Are you not hungry?
I won't eat all of it though.
Gives him all those fish and potatoes.
Mm thanks.
Well have a bath.
And when you come back down put it in the oven.


Might fancy it then.
Mm.
suit?
Brentford this morning.
straight from Brentford
Eh?
to our match.
Mm?
.
Mum.
You know erm  Paul?
He's got this suit, yeah?
Yeah he's got a nice suit.
Yeah I know and  have you seen his tie?
It's cards, he's got a tie made of cards.
big black red hearts erm  really good.
Yeah?
Put a little drop of gravy on it.
Erm  you know  Sharn 
So it don't dry up  
Yeah?
He's got a Benetton watch I like.
eat yours .
twenty minutes.
Put it over your chicken so it don't dry up.
He showed me it's lovely.
Just pour it on there.
Don't be frightened of it.
It won't bite you.
There you are.
Stick it back in the oven.
So is that the first time you've done that new, that song today 
Oh!
Bone.
Ugh.
Yeah.
Is it?
Eh?
Is that the first time you've done that song?
What?
Mm.
Was  the only one there that didn't turn up?
Mm mm.
Yeah.
She's getting pretty annoyed.
Did she tell him?
Did somebody ask where she was?
Mm.
said she  do you know where she is.
who?
.
How did he know?
Mm?
How did he know?
Was she there at ballet?
So what did you do yesterday then Carla?
Leanne's 
No I meant last night at Leanne's.
Watched the God of Revenge.
Wasn't very good.
She was starving though.
She didn't get any
I thought it was brilliant.
She only give her two bits of toast.
Oh yeah?
Dad.
Have you told  I'll ask her.
I told you that you were starving.
I had two pieces of toast and an apple.
Well you look well on it anyway.
Didn't she say do you want anything to eat Carla?
No.
Who got you the toast?
Leanne?
We both had toast and we both had apples.
And she was still hungry and she had dinner already.
but Sue weren't feeling very well was she?
Last night.
Was she better this morning?
Really horrible today mum.
Why?
saying to Leanne go over there and she goes  and Leanne goes why?
And she goes cos you're annoying Mark and she goes, over there.
And she goes  no, if you're so worried about it why don't you move?
What did Sue do?
Nothing.
She should get a smack then, shouldn't she?
Leanne's never been hit.
She might have when she was a baby but not  like now.
What's the maths revision then?
What's the maths revision?
He's been given the  today in maths.
Here you are.
Spit that Locket out and have that  better.
Have this one.
Sorry could you get it Carla it's gone behind.
It's a lot stronger.
Here you are, Carla.


That's 


Spit that out.
first.
Yeah.
What's the maths?
revision paper .
has he got one for ?
No, he  this one.
So did you miss much?
Did you get any homework?
Mm.


Carla, have you brought your creative book home?
Your book with all your Christmas things.
Christmas  at school.
That's why I wanted to cover it with .
wrapping paper.
Cover what?
That book!
You know I got some wrapping paper  that one?
Yeah.
That was the paper to cover my Christmas book.
Oh.
I haven't started it yet that's why.
What Christmas book?
What you're on about.
With all the different things to make in it?
Mm.
That we bought?
When I was swimming I went to change and I found a swimming costume.
It's a good one.
Yeah.
Somebody had obviously left it in the cubicle.
I I brought it home.
I don't know whether you  can wash it out and see if you like it.
It's a nice one.


Oh.
Was it any better ?
No .
As much there as yesterday?
Mm?
As much ?
Ooh good.
I had to  get him going.
Meant to be resting though, isn't he?
Why?
I bet he  a lot tomorrow .
Why?
only got thirty bob left.
Do you have to buy  swimming?


What's this you're watching?
got this from the shop.
Who did?
Me.
You went to the video shop?
Mm.
When did you go to the video shop then?
What?
He's not meant to be out!
video.
But you're not at school.
You should be indoors.


It's not one for Carla.
It's not?
Well it's quite, it's quite  it is in parts but
Well you had t time to watch it.
Eh?
What have you got for Carla?
What?
What have you got for Ca , oh it's not one for Carla?
Well this  I would think, the beginning's not, no.
Why, what's   a lot of swearing?
The kids  the kids can actually talk.
The parents  
 
but the kids are talking like we talk.
nursery and that.
It's quite funny.
See?
The parents don't know .
Did James set a job for you?
Yeah.
starting in the bedroom now, so  decorators said they, and of course they're doing the downstairs cloakroom so there's two upstairs, one downstairs and they're making so much mess everywhere.
So do you think you're ?
You are.


Did you take a cough capsule.
This morning.
So are you gonna take a dose of this?
Well go on.
You go and do it in the kitchen.
 

Well what about your DayNurse?
Eh?
Take your DayNurse?
No.
Well get it down you as well.
Well I'm taking  Cough Caps  Nurofin the other blue thing and this  
only that one in between you mustn't take that.
You should take a wallop of that before you go to bed.
That don't half make you sleep.
One more to go.
spare batteries for that?
Eh?
Got any more spare batteries in there?
You can keep them.
No cos they know.
You got two more to put in for the next tape.
Mhm.
Have you nearly finished  have you finished the first ten yet?
No.
This is number nine and you've got the last one.
There's one more tape after that.
And you've got to do both sides.
What we'll do is stick that up when he's up there with .
Yeah?
 

Well there'll be some stories when we play that one back.
It'll be you 
Well maybe that's a good idea really and then we'll get rid of one.
Who I'd like to roger
Oi.
or who I have rogered.
We'd just be talking about maths and that's it.
Yeah!
That's alright.
That's all they want..
Just talking about maths!
won't listen to it.
I can't be bothered to listen to it.
Can you do that?
And then it fills one side up then.
It won't.
It will!
Because I've got to get that other one done.
Yeah.
It will just be left blank for the whole of the time.
Why?
Don't you talk much then?
No.
We listen to music mostly.
Well is it  is this near the beginning?
What?
Isn't it near the beginning then?
This is, yeah.
But I can't find those  damn  stupid
You had any phone calls today?
.
Have I had any what?
Phone calls.
Have you slept at all?


What've you been doing?
Watched the telly.
Haven't you done any more homework?
I haven't got any more to do.
Thought you said you had french and maths?
Maths  been done.
french  
Eh?
revision.
Oh is it.


And did James ask you when you was going back to school?
No.
I'm not gonna go, I doubt if I'll go back tomorrow.
He's definitely not going back tomorrow.
So you might have another week off yet.
I mean it's not worth going back until er it's gone completely.
This is the beginning.
No it's before .
When did you, what time did you go and get this then?
About ten past  nine.
What time do they want you to start then?
I dunno.
Suppose probably about midnight or something.
They just said is Dave there.
It's Tescos and Lee said no, he's not here.
And put the phone down and that was it and I said well you'd better go dad cos  case he wanted to speak to anybody.
And they didn't call back.
They were gonna phone up 
Eh?
.
Unless someone told you.
Yeah.
Well I'd just say 
to change your start time.
I'd say no, sorry, he's in bed.
change your start time.
And then I wouldn't ask him .
And I'd say no I couldn't wake you, I wouldn't wake him.
.
belly!
Who?
 Pete 
What, he's put on weight?
Cor, has he!
I couldn't believe it.
Who, dad?
Cor he is  
David.
No.
Do you remember Leslie and David?
Debbie and Nickie's dad  that used to be, before they split up.
Is he fat?
Yeah!belly.
Did you say to him?
What?
That he'd put on weight.
I said to him the other day, well   four weeks ago.
I said you're putting some on.
.
Is it all over he's put it on?
 
He hasn't got to  and all that now has he?
So I suppose he  
He  Saturday.
Eh?
He was doing some  on Saturday.
Who with?
What's her name?
Denise?
Still, she got a clean five pound note.
Oh you got her fiver?
.
Still right  in her black jeans you know  lucky black didn't go all over it.
At least I'm going Christmas shopping tomorrow.
Tomorrow?
Who with?
You!take me 
Yeah, if I'm better.
Thursday.
What?
It's late night on Thursday innit?
Yeah.
But she's out Thursday Friday.
That's what I said you've only got this last Saturday and then  like next Thursday next week is your last  weeks and then you've got  still two weeks clear before Christmas.
Before you finish, Carla.
What?
You've still got two weeks anyway, three weeks.
Before what?
It's your last dance on Saturday.
Well I know but I don't wanna go out on a Saturday.
Well late night's on Thursday and you're not here Thursday.
I don't know if I'm going tomorrow night.
I'll see how I feel.
Did you get your homework done?
Eh?
Did you get your homework done in the lunchtime?
Homework?
You said you hadn't done your homework.
I know I haven't.
I only got it today.
 
Yeah but yesterday you said you was
French.
this morning you said you was gonna do your homework
French.
Oh was it?
Yeah I've done it.
Mm?
I've done it.
What have you got tonight then?
Well it's a competition really.
And it's homework.
but you gotta do  two hundred words or less that you wanna be when you're older.
Mm look  in the future.
Mm.
And  if you win, you come second or third or fourth you get  a big, you know them cameras, look like them.
Camcorder.
Yeah.
A camera, a telly, computer, a video recorder  yeah?
Oh blimey.
That's good.
And you get five hundred pound for yourself  and for your family.
Who's the camcorder and that all for the school?
Yeah.
Mm that's good then innit?
But we'll get five hundred quid if we come  anywhere.
two schools that enter.
What, and all the kids get into it?
On , only the top year  from each school.
Not bad is it?
Blimey.
Do you want 
gorgeous!
Mm!
Getting quite low ain't we?
In the freezer now.
Pizza's are a little bit burnt I'm afraid.
Can I swap  do you want the piece of chicken mum?
Yes I will.
Oh.
We all had the biggest bits actually.
Me and Clive er  me and Jane had the small bit.
I was gonna swap pizza for chicken.
Cos that's nice that.
Nice nice nice nice nice nice.
Mm!
Are you gonna take your Christmas cards ?
I told you there were mini roast potatoes.
Mm.
potatoes.
onion ring?
Mm?
Onion ring?
No I just  all mine.


Were they really busy at work Dave?
Mm  not so bad really.
do they have to work?
I know you only have to work so many Saturdays but because it's sort of Christmas do they  like everybody to work?
No.
They don't have to?
No.
So is  gonna buy that house  or not?
To be quite honest I haven't seen  to talk to.
I saw him this morning  but  he was sitting on another table.
when I had some breakfast.
But I haven't seen  to talk to for
Why didn't you sit at his table then?
Well it was all full up.
What is the shift he on then?
What shift?
Mm.
He's just doing the day shift.
It's all supposed to take effect from next week.
What?
The  well actually they start   this Thursday.
What, funny hours?
Yeah cos the shops, it's every Sunday now innit?
Yeah.
Is that all of them?
Or just 
No.
Some can't open.
Guildford can't open.
Catterick can't open.
Guildford can't?
Why?
That's part and parcel  how the council  about that site.
What that they didn't trade on a Sunday?
Mm.
So they can't do it.
So I should imagine they must be really upset.
Cos it was how much, on that family ?
Hundred and sixty six.
?
Mm.
It's a lot of money innit?
But if you  people are not gonna do more shopping are they?
If you go and do your shopping then you're not gonna do it on Friday.
So the shop ain't gonna take a lot more money really.
No.
I mean you, you're not gonna go out and spend eighty quid on groceries that you've already had on Friday just cos the shop's open on Sunday are you?
Yeah a lot of people just didn't go probably on Friday.
And the fact, I don't think there'll be that big  on Sundays.
I mean being Christmas, yes.
But I don't think
They're all frightened that one of them's gonna  sell a tin of baked beans more than the other one on a Sunday.
That's all there is to it.
Stupid innit?
Mhm.
Who's this?
Tescos.
Dad hasn't been to bed yet Carla.
Eh?
He hasn't been to bed yet.
Who hasn't?
The battery's going.
What?
Is it?
Yeah.
Mm?
Battery's flat.
I'll have to put another battery in.
Yeah, but what did you say about bed?
Dad hasn't been to bed yet.
Why not?
Where've you been?
Swimming.
Mm.
Bit of exercising.
Do your favourite ones.
What've I done then?
Won't take me Christmas shopping.
But I will!
She will.
Tomorrow?
She'll see how she's feeling.
I'll see how I feel Carla.
I don't, I'm going to hospital Friday, I don't wanna go tomorrow do I?
Racing round.
For god's sake.
Then I'll get really cold.
For god's sake.
I slept like a baby down here.
Mm?
That , it's so comfortable.
missing.
more comfortable than my bed at home.
And you sort of sink in it.
At three o'clock this morning I went upstairs.
If I say so myself that weren't bad.
I must have used up four different bags of potatoes in the  down there.
Ain't got a spud left in the house.
Not one in the whole house.
You know why?
Cos I went shopping early last week didn't I?
I went Wednesday.
So it's over a week.
We got no chicken left.
We've got  one pizza  that's about it.
Mm not a lot ?
just about.
We got sausages and burgers.
No.
I used them sausages didn't I,.
I dunno.
And the burgers.
Last night .
Should have a stock up really.
flower.
Straight after Christmas that flowers.
Well I reckon it might come before.
So mild innit?
Gotta put the bulbs in ain't I?
We're getting no frosts or anything.
That's what, that's what  some really bad hard frosts.
That's the trouble.
And half of it why everybody's got coughs and colds.
Not killing the germs are they?
That's it.
Because it's, it's so mild.
I mean I can't remember when we last had a frost.
That's what we want innit?
A good week of really good hard frosts.
That's like what the decorator said really  knocking it out they're on erm   
 
Pete, well Pete can't see why it's taking so long  the hall.
So he's put them back on instead of hourly,work.
Well it has it's   it's the only way to deal with that lot .
But they said like  they will get his room done.
They've given him a price just for painting the walls.
No putting a  up and all the extras he wants.
Because it's like you say  in the hallway.
  

 
What?
Better put down, having meal.
that's the second one out I should think.
Well she's coming about half past three  Friday.
Who?
They're coming about half past three on Friday.
Are they?


.
Think that's about it .
Surprised Jenny hasn't come round  
garage.
Thought  been and picked hers up.
I thought Jenny had picked hers up.
work Saturday.
No  oh 
No.
crazy because I mean  he knows it's not done by  
Hallo!
What did you shout out then?
Thank you very much.
Are you gonna watch the rest of that video?
Why?
What  got enough light in there.
Is it alright if I have a  Mac please.
and all if he wants.
Pardon?
You can have an umbrella and all if you want.
Mac  rain mac.
No.
Did you do any maths?
Mhm.
You got maths and  .
All we're doing tonight is maths.
Oh.
Don't forget I'll be coming to bed .
And when the workmen start   no sounds I'm afraid unless they're very very low.
Yeah.
Thank you.
You don't hear them though, do you?
I was putting the spuds on, I dunno  twenty past two I think.
I was sat on the couch  and when I woke up, ten to three.
Fuck me they'll be burnt.
Well I thought today at work  thought there's no way he's gonna last out.
I thought I bet he's fighting it.
It's alright if you keep busy but it's  when you stop and stand innit?
Yeah I know.
That's what I mean, when I go to bed I should in theory  .
But I say I  went all day without nothing to eat   bloody starved.
I got in there and I thought  cos I wanted bacon and eggs  but I thought if I have breakfast I'm gonna think well  .
So I went in, I just had an egg on toast  really nice.
And that's when you bought your meat pies?
Yeah I thought well he's sitting home I can't .
I said to the girl give us two meat pies wrapped up.
She probably thought blinking pig!
come in he was like a little big kid.
I said come on get your breakfast.
He said what you got then?
I said  it's in my coat.
He said  .
I said do you want it I said, get out here I said fucking get it.
He got out here, when he unwraps it he  beaming like a little ki .
Did he put them in the microwave?
No he went off.
What stuck, just from Tesco ?
Yeah.
They was wrapped up.
I shoved them in me coat and .
He was sitting there eating pie sandwiches .
Like a great big baby.
I thought you .
twenty past eight.
Yeah.
Well when he, I said where do you get that from?
He said oh I been .
I thought well, you must have rode him up there thinking  you know, get him something to watch.
I thought you'd gone up there and got it.
I didn't realize he'd gone up and got it himself.
ten past nine .
That tree  budding there .
Yeah.
That's  middle , that's coming up innit?
It's growing up nice.
This first one's not doing much is it?
I think it was suffocated by those others.
Yeah.
That's like that little one over there, that's  
Or unless it's  that's the height.
No .
Your trees are growing now aren't they?
Yeah.
They've shot up actually.
This time next year you you'll have a good  you'll have a nice little hedge there then.
That'll be up   be up at least another s ooh foot probably.
Probably be a  a lot higher than the sticks but they won't have bushed out.
Don't you have to  do you  no cos if you trim them at the top to bush out
Yeah you do.
Oh you do.
When it's finished 
Not  not until you get to the height that you want.
You want.
Mm.
Where you gonna go?
Just like er 
That's  just about the same height as the fence you see.
Not the  pointed bit but the  gutter level.
I shall be glad when that privet hedge g privet hedge grows.
And hides his bit of shed.
Dunno where Mike and Barbara's gone .
 
.
They're going away Saturday for a week or something.
Oh are they?
She does that  shift doesn't she?
Twelve weeks on eight weeks off.
She's semi-retired.
would you?
That's what I mean.
Why don't she have decent car.
Travel round Britain  Scotland and that.
Have a nice bed and breakfast.
There's so many places they haven't seen or haven't been.
They just don't  
They're gonna buy a new car aren't they?
Eh?
They're gonna buy a new car at Christmas, after Christmas.
Who?
!
Yeah.
I remember he said when you, mum got that money.
No.
I dunno he said he's got this one fixed now..
He's got it fixed?
fixed it didn't he?
What's the matter with him?
They wanna get themselves something like a one point eight hatchback, so it's got a little, nice sized engine
Automatic.
Yeah.
Get like they are, semi-retired and why they're putting that great lump on the end of their house I just don't know.
But that's up to them.
Beats me.
Cos there's never more than about two of them  is there?
And then he goes out doesn't he?
Occasionally.
That's what I mean.
They're gonna have a great big lump stuck on the house.
I mean that ten grand, that's their car.
They could keep their house.
Use it as a base  and travel.
They could shoot off on a Tuesday or something.
Take their time going up to Scotland.
You could have a week up  two weeks up there.
You could come back, do a bit more work.
. By the time they pack up work they'll be so decrepit they won't be able to do anything.
I think your mum'll probably retire when your dad does won't she?
aren't they?
I dunno.
Mind you,criticize and say should buy this should buy that.
You don't really know what sort of money they have got do you?
Haven't got a clue.
Must have a fair bit thought mustn't they?
I mean I I .
When you think they're earn both earning a full wage.
No mortgage.
Haven't got no rates.
They've got the poll tax  and their gas and electric  and the phone bill.
That's all that comes out.
They probably  about twelve hundred, thirteen hundred .
got a lot of money.
Oh I don't know.
Well she gets, how much does she get from her pension a week?
Oh  that's without the pensions.
That's just their wages.
So they get about  twelve  thirteen hundred.
And probably picking up another  hundred pound  hundred and twenty pound between them a week.
We'll say another five.
No they're probably  they're probably clearing every month about seventeen hundred quid.
And what have they got to pay out?
Poll tax.
Food.
That's basically it really.
Think, they've got no mortgage.
And the bills aren't that high are they?
Think they've actually bought the T V now haven't they?
Oh yeah.
T V and the video.
Mind you when you think of it like that when you  when you say that you've got no mortgage and your kids grow up they don't need your money and that  and if you're both in good jobs  it is  you do tend to think to yourself well at least lot  lot longer than.
Sort of, you've got your health  knock out  sixty seventy, right we can do it for another year.
I mean  got no mortgage to pay out you can  you can bank eight hundred pound of that  every month.
Well they probably do but  I mean  right they can go and  I mean what do they spend their money on?
Presumably perhaps they're just saving it up until they get to a certain  certain age and they're gonna say right that's it let's  just go.
But I can't see it either .
no sort of well they don't do anything do they?
I reckon she must be, by the time they get home from work she don't wanna do a lot.
I thought she  but I'm trying to think what she phoned me up for.
Yeah, she phoned me up to ask me  what she should do about Beryl.
What she should do ?
Mm.
What do you mean what she should do about Beryl?
For Christmas presents.
.
See if  makes contact with her  your mum'll start on her then.
Well I said to her  er your mum asked me last night.
She said  I, will I get a bottle of wine and that?
And I said well  And she, well to be honest Bren she said, she hasn't really done anything to me and Sid has she?
I said well no, you know
I told her I said as soon as you receive gifts like that  I said she knows you're a soft touch mate.
She'll be  she'll be 
Yeah but she does it  like she said though  I mean if I was your mum, I said to her if I was, I would just give it to her.
I said because the fact is
How's she gonna see her anyway?
Well she'll just give it to Ellie to give her.
And send it up there and she said, and I mean all she, she buys Linda a tin of biscuits, Jane a tin of biscuits and Ellie.
And she said well thing is if I don't do it Bren I don't want, you know she's bound to sort of say.
I said well no cos she probably do expects you not to bother.
Yeah.
I said just do it and I said thing is if she just ignores you  I said you know not to bother next year.
I said just get her a bottle of  you know
Table wine.
One ninety nine Sainsbury's wine.
I said just get something cheap, and a card.
And she said well you know I thought we'd better.
But she said obviously you and Dave asked me, us not to we won't.
I said well it's nothing to do with me Pam.
Oh s .
I just couldn't go into it and I said you know  it'll only, I mean the fact is she's, was buying Ellie and Jane  Ellie and Linda.
And should she leave Jane out?
And I said well she  Jane hasn't done nothing to you really Pam to be honest.
I said the argument's between me not you.
Well this is what me and Sid said.
No.
He's at work.
She's starting the old  ain't she?
Can you imagine that?
Oh god!
She's having a  I told you she's having a Christmas party now  Sunday straight after Christmas.
I said we've got the pantomime on the Saturday.
She said well the following Sunday Lee's away so
Does that mean we've gotta go down there?
Well she's having her party so Christmas day is the Wednesday  boxing day is the Thursday  and she  and she having her party on the Saturday, Sunday.
That would be a chance, when's new year?
The following Wednesday.
Christmas day is what?
Wednesday?
Wednesday.
Er boxing day Thursday
So then I go back to work Friday.
I'll have to work Friday Saturday Sunday  Tuesday.
Wednesday's new year's day?
Yeah.
So I'll be at work that Sunday.
all against it.
Are you?
Why's that then?
So they might, they might work us.
Well they might, it depends how busy they are obviously.
So we might be able to swing something that we can work Saturday and Sunday.
Cos there won't be no overtime after Christmas will there?
Saturdays.
We'll be back to what we usually are won't we?
Yeah but then you're gonna next year cut down on Saturdays aren't you?
Oh yeah.
shares.
When does that one stop?
March?
February I think.
The last payment the end of February.
Then you've only got two actually payments of the new one.
But then can you start another one in February?
If I want to but I won't cos I'll be on a hundred and fifty a month anyway.
Cos you've got, what will you have then, two fifty at the moment?
Just from January and February it will be two fifty.
Possibly March, cos one doesn't finish till March.
Is that five years you've been there?
God.
It just goes so quick the time doesn't it?
I remember starting that .
Yeah.
I never thought I'd even see the day we finished it.
Still there.
Do you still think they'll go over to ?
depending what they want .
They sorted it out with Kevin and that other one?
Are they still being smartarses?
No  st still the same as ever.
Managed to sort it out?
Well it don't really affect me.
I, I've got nothing to hide.
They can check up on me any time really .
Is he still being funny with you though?
That other bloke.
No.
He talks to me now.
He talks to you now?
Mm.
When I first went back he told me  on Saturday.
You know I had that crappy start time?
Mm.
Apparently they tried to phone me on Friday afternoon but I was out swimming.
To see if I could do an early .
Oh.
So that's why .
And I said to him I'm sorry I was swimming.
I said it was in the book that I was available 
And he was alright then?
Yeah.
Like you say you've got to watch them cos they'll stab you in the back won't they?
isn't he?
Where's he ?
In the warehouse.
The warehouse .
Really?
Why's that then?
Because he didn't get that promotion?
Well  no.
they go in there.
So what will he be in the warehouse then?
Same as he is at the moment.
A clerk.
And you don't wanna upset them cos they're worse than the drivers aren't they?
Mind you they haven't had a strike lately have they, the warehouse?
We've had some.
Have you?
Yeah.
We've had two or three.
What about that other  is that  Kitty's son still there?
Yeah.
. See him quite often.
Has he still got his long hair?
Yeah.
He's never married has he?
He's got some bird hasn't he?
Polly  Polly.
sob story.
.
I wonder if Polly's back at work yet.
Doubt it cos it was  convalescing for quite a while.
See Len's bought a new car.
He's got a Metro.
Has he?
Not  Lennie next door.
No, Len.
new car.
What, new one?
Well
Newish.
I don't know what reg it is.
Looked quite nice.
Mind you 
He had the Golf didn't he, last time?
The white golf.
Something else he's put that teak door on.
Oh what's it like?
That wood 
Quite like quite like the colour of it.
Mm.
It's quite nice.
But he's  he hasn't put brass handles on it, he's put silver handles on it.
He hasn't.
It looks really, I felt like saying to him, Sid you should have made that brass then I thought no, I won't.
Oh what, a brass lock and all that?
Erm silver lock and all that?
Yeah.
Has he fitted it quite well?
Door  fits.
Mind you I expect people could come round here and say  
The actual door's alright?
Oh yeah.
Get him to fit
When I'm older I'd love to be a dancer.
Pass a few exams and I'd do lots of shows and festivals when I've won money for my dance school.
In the future I'd like  to have my very own normal house with a husband and two children.
I would like to have a Golf G T I car not too simple and not too flashy.
I'd like to be a  dance teacher  
Mum where are them  Contax 
when I grow up.
And in my spare time  
You're taking Benolin as well aren't you?
I would like to do dancing and swimming .
No.
Can I take Contax then?.
I suppose it won't hurt, one.
I said where are they?
In the cupboard.
Did you hear all that.
Next to the, where the cups are near the 
Shall I start again?
Put the kettle on.
Mum shall I start again?
Go on then .
When I'm older I'd like to have a dancer  no I'd like, no  when I'm older I'd love to be a dancer.
I'd pass a few ex a few exams and I'd do lots of shows and festivals and I've won money for my dance school.
In the future I'd like to have my very own  no  very own normal house, husband and two children.
I would like to have a Golf G T I car not too simple not too flashy.
I would  I'd like to be a dance teacher when I grow up and in my spare time I would  do  I would like to do  dancing and swimming .
Mm.
That's very good.
Then what else you gonna write?
Dancing and swimming.
two three four five six seven eight nine ten  
There's over fifty there.
Six.
Eighty six.
How many you gotta have?
How, would G T I be one word?
G and one word T
And I.
Oh that's seven  eighty nine then.
So how many have you got to have?
Hundred.
Erm.
It's got  you need to write a hundred words or less  what you want to be older and plans for the future.
Yeah, hundred words or less.
That's enough then.
And how can you finish it?
Er what's the last line?
Read the last line.
In my spare  in my spare time I'd like to be, like to do dancing and swimming .
And I also enjoy  lots of other sports.
Erm 
And I also enjoy, E N J O Y.
I know how to spell it.
Oh.
Lots of other sports.
I've done say  eighty  
We was on eighty seven weren't we?
Five.
Eighty five words.
That should be enough.
So do you feel okay about those results then?
Bit disappointed?


Know you might feel a bit disappointed.
That's what Tracey said.
That's why she  to say to you that she's on your side.
Why?
But what did you think I'd get?
I thought you'd get highly commended or honours.
What's that?
A calculator .
Oh.
Dad gave me that ages ago didn't he?
Dad did?
Nice one.
Dad got that better one from
Yeah.
that Mothercare but I use this as a spare one.
That's why she phoned you up.
All the ones that she'd got, that got low like Hannah and all that she's phoned up first.
In case the o other ones they're sort of nasty to them.
Jenny's been nasty  to me.
she won't.
I know she won't be there but she, I bet she will.
what will she say?
She says what do you get?
And I'd go highly commended and I'll go, I'll go what do you get?
And she goes  honours and  I go we well done and she goes 
What, with her lips?
Yeah.
Yeah she will but I said to Tracey I said one day Carla will beat her and she said I know she will.
And I'll do that.
What?
I'll do that.
I mean I'm  Tracey's surprised that Jenny got honours.
So am I.
Tracey's very surprised.
Cos she didn't think she would.
And like well I said to her I said well then Sandy would have put it down to the fact  she did that bad in her ballet.
Has to be a reason .
But it's, I mean  like Tracey said are you disappointed?
I said well no I cos I said I expected a co I think she deserved a more than a commended.
But I said it's always the way when you think it's a good examiner she or  she, she gives you bad results and when it's a bad, think oh an awful examiner  I mean look at that one where you got that really tough examiner and you and Jenny was the only two that got honours.
But I didn't that Michelle  
Yeah and I know that but then  when I get the same as Jenny she goes to Leanne if we beat her yeah?
She go she goes up to Leanne.
Yeah but it's like Leanne.
I don't know how Leanne always gets  it must be the fact she's slim.
But Tracey said they obvious this examiner  has obviously looked 
Got any scissors?
for slim people.
Which is wrong.
But that's not very nice though, is it?
No.
But that's what Tracey said.
That's what happened with her.
She went in with sl slim girls and they all fa fail passed, and Tracey failed.
Because Tracey was 
But that's not a very nice thing to do though.
Because as they shouldn't fail  you if you're fat.
I'm not exactly fat.
No, you're not fat.
It's just that I'm big build.
That's right.
Mum can I have one of these?
Can I use one of these?
What is it?
No they're yours aren't they?
Where's your toys?
Upstairs?
Dunno.
Oh  back.


Look at this!
Nineteen eighty six.
Oh 
But she said  you know, and what annoyed her really she kno , she knows how much  how hard you've worked for this exam.
I know.
I tried to do it really well because it was my last grade.
But she, but she even said to me while you was in there  she said Carla's got the advantage of the fact that she's so good at .
But that's not the point really.
No but  yeah but the thing is Carla, be honest with you  if you'd got honours again  I mean, you imagine I mean thing is I'm happy for you for what you've done.
You've done well to get that.
It's like Jennifer you've got to look at it  she's gotta keep up now all the time, honours.
You've got honours for your tap.
Yes y I think you'd be more disappointed if you, if you'd taken the tap this time and you'd come out with a commended.
But Tracey just very cross with her marks.
It don't look  good on her does it?
Only just passes.
This last results she only got one pass.
I won't get the award will I?
No.
But  award anyway  medal.
Junior tap, yeah but you'll get the junior tap.
Got the junior tap and the senior tap.
Yeah but you'll get that next year again.
Why?
Because you got honours didn't you?
In grade three.
No cos junior tap was for grade three.
Have you done grade four tap?
Yeah but you won't take it by July will you?
Or would you take it in May?
You take gold in May don't you?
But Tracey thought Lisa was good.
She thought she'd get a good mark.
She said she does stretch her body.
She has come on Lisa hasn't she?
She's better than Emma.
Mm by a long way.
I said what annoys me I said er but Emma and Lisa haven't even practised.
I said, I said thing is I said  last time everybody thought Carla was gonna get highly commended or honours  do you remember?
Everybody said you were the best.
They all said oh you'll do it, you'll get the best.
And you never got the award last year for it.
All of them got highly commended didn't they?
Hannah and all that lot.
Annabelle.
Mm.
And you think the drop on Hannah.
Grade three she got highly commended.
And grade four she got a pass.
So look at the big drop on that one.
Least you, that's what I said to Tracey, at least you haven't dropped your mark.
If you stay on the same mark or higher it's good.
Don't wanna take this exam again.
It's poor old Stephanie I feel sorry for.
Why?
She, I mean I don't think she's that bad and she only ever 
She goes to pot in exams.
Does she?
She always only ever gets a pass.
Highest, guess what her highest mark is?
Pass plus.
Is it?
That must be horr she must feel 
And that was 
horrible.
Every time, well she only got a pass.
Mm?
She only got a pass.
Where you o where you going?
James?
Has he gone?
No.
Oh.
upstairs for half hour.
why do you want the kettle boiling anyway?
I wanted a cup of tea.
When we gonna do the Christmas tree then?
Eh?
When we gonna do the Christmas tree?
At the weekend.
I found, I told you I found a bag of  didn't I?
I showed you.
Ow!
What's the matter?
You got something in your eye?
It's just .
Shall we have a cup of tea?
What do you say you're never gonna do exams again?
Yeah.
Don't be stupid.
That's what Tracey said.
You mustn't get a downer cos of it.
Downer?
Because she said she's  you know  it's not your fault.
You deserved more.
Examiner don't think think so, do they?
Mm stupid examiner.
It's like Tracey said  the morning marks were all the bad ones.
Worse in the morning.
She said erm her marks were all over the place.
The worst marks she'd ever got from an examiner.
Of course Tracey  why she's upset  is because she said that she had this examiner 
That's alright.
See you soon.
Bye.
Bye.
Oh!
He's made me a cup of tea!
Little darling.
Thank you.
Spoilt.
Why you got Jean's shoes on mum?
Because I've had my slippers on   to wear.
You were saying?
What was I saying?
I dunno.
Yeah cos don't you remember Tracey on the day of the exam?we'll do alright here, she likes my style.
And that's, Tracey's really upset.
Cos she thinks now  because she got passes  just mainly passes  she thinks that her school's, looks bad on her school.
She only normally, she said all I ever get normally is Elizabeth  on a pass  and she got more passes than anything.
And I said well I suppose it does look bad on you.
She said well at least I , you know she said if I thought they'd get only pass I wouldn't put them in.
Cos she pulled two, two  out didn't she?
What if she'd put them in!
What did you think Helen would get then?
Pass or fail.
?
She didn't put no effort in it.
She kept .
What about Marie?
She worked really hard.
She deserves that commended or highly commended.
Michelle?
Commended or pass plus.
Sara ?
Commended or highly commended.
Yeah cos she's coming on.
Cos she don't normally get a high mark does she?
Oh gross!
What about Stephanie?
Oh.
Eh?
What about Stephanie?
Commended.
You think she deserved that?
Mm.
It's like she weren't good.
She really worked 
She tried.
She really worked hard.
Yeah but Tracey said it's all the ones that have worked hard and tried  have got low marks.
And the ones that haven't really bothered and weren't that good at it
Who, Jenny?
Yeah.
She thought she'd only get commended or highly commended.
She's just  she  she she's just said on the phone, I was so shocked she got honours.
So shocked.
That Jenny did.
Lisa yes.
She thought Lisa would have done.
Emma  pass plus or or pass.
No.
She thought Emma might have got a commended or highly commended.
She  put no effort into it in the exam.
She, she was 
Yes but 
talking.
She might have put me down for talking.
I weren't talking.
Emma was talking to Lisa and she looked at me.
She could have put me down for talking
Mm.
and I didn't talk.
Cos I was in the middle of Emma and Lisa and they were chatting.
Right Lisa was there I was there and Emma was there and them two were leaning over.
And when she looked  and she looked at me.
Perhaps she thought it was you chatting.
perhaps she thought, that's it, I bet  she writes it down chatting  in the exam.
Eh?
And Emma wouldn't say would she?
Mm?
Emma wouldn't say would she?
Emma's like    
?
Father Christmas what you doing with a father Christmas?
Where do you get that from then?
    

That's Paul Daniels innit?
Yeah.
He  well ugly.
Auntie Linda was saying that Auntie Jane's been in hospital again.
God!
She ain't had another baby has she?
No.
They reckon she's got a hernia or something now.
That's what you had.
Yeah, no.
This is a different one.
Who's are the  first?
Well I dunno.
Tracey then  Linda.
And she said that she keeps her dog indoors now because she won't  You know their big alsatian?
Who?
Auntie Linda and Rob's dog.
She keeps their  dog inside?
Because she said because he won't let the postman come round the back so she has to keep him inside.
Then when she was talking to me someone knocked at the door  then Auntie Linda was saying he won't bite you, he's alright.
he's so big though.
I think she was frightened that she was gonna get  be bitten.
What present have you got left?
I've gotta get  you another one  dad two  and Lisa.
Is that all?
Got Tracey 
Mm?
Eh?
Got Tracey and Avril's present.
Only Avril's.
Tracey was getting her that brooch.
No  it's horrible.
I thought we'd give her that .
Avril said she loves Marks and Spencer things.
She loves those lacy things you know by  and do you remember I I bought  for them for Christmas I bought her a tissue box with that beautiful lace cover?
Well Tracey can have that.
I don't want a tissue box.
Want er coat hangers.
Or the make-up bag if you want.
Make-up bag.
You can choose which one.
What've you got Avril then?
One of them things you make.
Oh yeah.
Pincushion.
I'll give her one of them.
One of what?
Those things.
I'm gonna try one of these round ones.
Can I have that ?
No cos they're right at the bottom now.
Please!
Mm!
Shortbread!
What are you doing out there?
See how many
?
Mm mm mm mm mm mm mm mm mm mm mm mm
See how many teddies you can spot.
One two  five.
That's it.
Look good don't they?
Oh no come here then I can talk to you.
at the table there.
I was just thinking  I bet that Helen was pleased then cos she must have passed mustn't she?
That who?
Helen.
Who always fails.
She doesn't.
She's only failed once.
Oh has she?
Yeah.
She's got highly commended  once.
Oh has she?
Yeah.
She hasn't got honours though.
Oh that's good for her cos she tries doesn't she?
Mm.
You know Tracey said Angela, her friend that  taking  exams.
She said what?
Tracey said to you that you know Angela who runs around with Helen?
Oh yeah.
She won't be taking her exams.
I'm surprised!
Has her mum pulled her out?
Or does she still go?
She still goes.
St she still goes?
I kept thinking like did you definitely didn't talk in that exam?
You swear on it?
Swear on my life.
Emma was talking to Lisa.
What was she saying then?
I, actually I did say something.
I said to Jennifer erm under my breath I said  go and tell her.
Oh yeah about her foot.
Mm.
So what was Emma and Lisa saying then?
I didn't take no notice.
I was watching Jennifer dance.
Think it was  it weren't on , weren't on that one.
I think it was on the jazz.
That    and that goes, that music's  loud.
She didn't hear them?
I wouldn't have thought she'd hear them would she?
She turned round and looked at them.
She looked at you she said, you said.
I know, she looked at me then.
Yeah I don't think she she would have  that because  see what the report says when it comes through.
I shouldn't say to anything to Miss  cos we don't know what she got.
Cos there was only, there was only three grade ones weren't there?
Oh no there was loads weren't there.
We only saw Helen and that lot didn't we?
Mm.
And Elizabeth.
And who was the other girl?
Helen.
That's who I thought  did well.
Was she good?
She's the best one.
Perhaps she did.
Perhaps she's the one that got honours.
She never took an exam before though.
Ooh probably not then.
She does with her other dance school.
She gets honours.
But is, is  not good at tap?
She's just beginning.
She can't get the taps.
What did she get an honours in then?
Ballet?
Modern.
And bare necessities.
Good facial expressions.
Oh.
Like she sort of goes erm  like you know you do that?
Most of them just keep, just go like that  yeah and she sort of goes  mm mm mm mm she sort of sways.
Oh I didn't know she  she really   when she said give it some.
Who?
Your examiner.
She didn't say give it some.
Well she said something and you said something, you really sort of 
Oh yeah the ribbon.
The ribbon.
 

gonna be lost tomorrow innit?
Quarter pa you're gonna have to have your dinner at seven when you come home.
Wouldn't do me a sandwich?
I'll take that with me.
And a drink.
I'll get you, I'll go shopping.
Take that with you.
Well it's not, if you  I'll pick you up at quarter past four.
Well we don't leave till sort of ten to five do we?
Mm.
Five to five.
I've got the rest of these to make.
Gotta set them up in the machine room.
Yeah they're all done.
I think they look quite good don't you?
Mm.
Hanging up like that.
The best one is
The Christmas tree?
You opened your calendars yet?
The best one is that train one.
And then I've got the big soldier.
Another father Christmas.
Cos you've got one haven't you?
Eh?
You've got one sort of father Christmas in your bedroom.
on him.
Yes you have.
No I've just got a plain teddy bear and 
The one you made, father Christmas.
Yeah a big   like that but nothing  just have a plain one, and  two little kids.
God knows where they are up in my bedroom.
You know the father Christmas I've just found and it's on your  white bookcase.
Oh that.
Oh yeah they  I know what you was talking about, what you made, yeah.
No you made that.
The father Christmas.
Yeah.
No, did I?
No you did it and stuffed it and all that.
I stuffed it all and sewed it up.
And you put it together.
That's right.
Must get the tree down and we can do it at the weekend .
 

What time's  on a Saturday then?
They stay till five o'clock.
Oh do they?
They don't do nothing.
They're meant to go home at four thirty.
And they just hang around till five?
What and Amy and that?
Oh yeah Amy has to stay until half past cos her mum picks them up then.
Oh picks them all up together.
How  do their ballet at ?
Get honours every time.
Do they?
  

You might be still asleep then.
Just
Don't wanna go to school today.
Why?
Sick.
Tough.
You don't wanna miss now.
You haven't got much more to go.


You got your pantomimes you're going to.
What's your pantomime then, Jack and the Beanstalk?
Is it?
I think so.
I'm gonna go and see two anyway.
Yeah I know she's got two.
Nan said about a father Christmas.
She wants to take you over to  Debenhams or somewhere and go and have tea.
And I said well Carla will show you where to go cos she said is there anywhere to get to eat?
I said there's two nice restaurants isn't there?
Yeah.
In Debenhams.
Mm.
That er I, there's no lists is there?
Cos I  oh yes there is.
Yeah and don't you, now in  in Debenham they've got a special lift.
It's all got lights.
Sparkling.
And it's called  erm father Christmas grotto and toyland.
That's right at the top innit?
It's at the top but the lift you pick up at the bottom now.
Put an extra lift in.
And, or it's one of the two lifts they had and they've made it er  toylands.
And it's all got Christmas lights and
And one of their  floors  have they made into toyland?
Yeah right at the top.
That's right at the top.
I've been in there.
It's wicked!
Is it good?
They've got Nintendos you can play on.
Gameboys, Segas  Linx.
What's Linx?
It's a game.
It's called Linx.
It's just like Gameboy but it's longer and it's got better games on it you know.
It's like  ninety nine pounds ninety nine p.
Ooh.
But it's worth it.
batteries.
I blowed my nose.
Don't look at it!
What!
Mum.
What?
Just give it a little tap.
It should just stop buzzing then.
Did you hear there was a bomb at Littlewoods?
No.
Littlewoods?
You know in Guildford.
No London.
London or Kingston's Littlewoods.
London.
That was the big one we used to go.
Yeah London that one's had a bomb in it.
Did it?
Exploded.
Did it explode or?
Exploded.
Was anybody hurt?
Annie was twenty minutes away from there.
Who?
Anna-Marie.
Was she?
She saw it.
Oh.
When you got rugby then?
Today  Friday.
Do you like it?
Yeah it's brilliant!
New im , it's new image.
What do you mean?
New image.
It's better.
Who does it then?
Better.
Two blokes come in.
Oh two chaps actually come in?
Yeah they're professionals.
They played  before.
They played for England.
. And I could join a new image club if I wanted to.
It's brilliant cos you get well dirty.
That's what I like about it.
What, getting dirty?
Yeah cos you touch you gotta touch your hips.
You're allowed to  if you got the ball and you run to try and get a try.
Which a try's gotta cross the line, you have to throw it.
No you can't throw it you have to like jump on it like that and you go weee  and it, and if, and if someone gets you on the hips you have to throw it to  everybody.
And you can't throw it frontwards you have to throw it behind.
Do you mix?
Boys and girls?
Yeah.
It's both sexes.
So it's alright.
Martin, he's faster than  the bloke .
Is he?
Yeah.
What Martin ?
yeah.
He's fastest.
He'd be faster than me  at long distance, by a long way.
You know Martin?
He comes first in all his races.
Oh him.
Yeah.
The skinny little chap.
Him.
Oh he's a fast runner.
Is he gonna  I expect he is isn't he?
Cos Louise does.
Yeah.
What girls are going to ?
Helen  Katie 
Helen is?
Yeah.
Katie  Sarah  Selina, think Selina is anyway.
Erm  I don't if there's anybody else.
Elizabeth  's going there.
No she's not, she's going to Winston.
Norah's going to Winston.
What Elizabeth  's going to ??
Oh she's going to that other one ain't she?
 
Isn't she?
What?
Elizabeth  's going to
do my hair?
Used any of that side?
No I  and then the other side a gotta be
And that's it?
And how much do you get?
What time do you leave work?
Twenty past three.
shopping?
Car broke down on the  
Eh?
The what?
I sat about forty minutes in the  traffic jam.
then?
  
I thought I'd go to Sunningdale.
I thought it'd be quicker cos it's there it's  shop.
Waitrose there.
There's Waitrose at erm
Was the actual shop empty?
It was!
Empty, not a soul.
Mind you I got a right dipstick decided  wanna talk about how she cooks her frozen s cauliflower.
Who's this?
Woman on the desk.
  
depressed by the time I got home.
Thought  want me to go and do my shopping.
How much do you spend?
Eh?
Do you spend quite a bit?
No I just  it just, I'm normally in and out aren't I?
In half an hour.
Yeah.
The shop, I mean there must have only been about five or six people in the shop.
Cheers dad.
Any news on the Tesco front?
No.
Not really.
Same old thing.
No letters or anything.
Did you sleep right through then last night?
From five till one?
Yeah.
Got up for a wee in the night.
That's about all.
phoned up yesterday.
She's  Tracey phoned up.
She's written off  and complained about the  judge.
She just weren't happy with the results.
Very disappointed with them.
And she, she never has any fails.
Majority  more than  over half  just got passes.
Had three she went into erm  Tracey placed that she come out honours  and Lisa highly commended.
And the other two commended.
And they three came out with honours and she came out  with a commended.
She said that she penalized her cos of her weight.
She wasn't a slim little tiny girl.
She says it's all wrong.
So she said I've written, I shouldn't do she said but  that she'd written and complained about it.
Lose a bit of weight .
This is it see.
If if you're tiny and  skinny and petite.
You, it's like Leanne I mean she's not a  as good dancer.
It's like Jenny, like Tracey said  Carla was the best at  She even said apparently to the big girls on a Monday  there's gonna be a lot of heads turning  a lot of chat going on when Carla comes out.
We're looking at honours this time and she just said last night she, she said that's why I phoned you she said cos I just can't believe it.
She said cos she was absolutely brilliant .
You couldn't fault her out there.
And even the  woman in the  examination  the pianist  she actually tells Tracey if some of them are bad or whatever.
And she came out and she said that Carla she said, she said will get honours.
She said she's absolutely brilliant she said you couldn't fault her at all.
And Tracey said that's the only thing she can think is the fact they were tiny, cos Emma and that all are, tiny little  skinny things and Jennifer.
And she said it's the fact that she's carrying the extra 
How come I get honours in tap then?
With the top major examiner.
Dunno.
I honestly don't know.
It's just ce yeah but certain, like she said isn't it?
Certain judges.
I mean look at the adjudicator at .
Oh he's ridiculous.
Mm.
Some you win some you lose.
Mm.
That's what I said to her I mean  and Tracey wanted her because  she didn't want her to feel upset.
When she goes in tomorrow night and all three of them have got honours and she never.
But I said to her she never gets higher than a commended cos, she knows it's cos of her weight.
Yeah but they should .
Yeah but they, there's people like that Carla.
But I said there was a lot lower than you got only passes  in your grade.
But it's the same in the tap weren't?
I was thinking today  you and Jennifer got honours  Emma got highly commended and Lisa got commended.
Weren't it?
I suppose sh and we all thought Lisa was better than Emma.
She is.
But evidently it's what, what the actual  you know examiner's looking for.
God I don't believe it.
He's got a  and slippers on.
Right I'm gonna go and love you and leave you I'm afraid.
See you tomorrow.
Good life innit?
Do you see our teddies we made?
Yeah.
Take it easy .
See you tomorrow morning.
We'll be having our tea.
Did we have meat pies today?
Yes.
See you later.
Time did he get home?
Didn't Jenny phone?
No.
Taken all your medicine today then?
What?
What are you due left to take?
Erm  take er doctors capsules at seven.
Yeah.
And another Benolin at eight and that's it.
You didn't take nothing else?
I take these, I've started on today.
What are you taking, how many ?
There's a mixture of all of them  there.
mixing 
They just help the cold.
Cos I wanna try and sort mine out cos after tomorrow I can't take any more.
I can't take them on Friday.
I didn't think he'd be cooking tonight cos I knew they weren't shutting the 
I nearly forgot to tell him  
didn't he wonder where I was?
That's what 
No cos I told him you'd gone out.
Gone out and not coming back?
How many Benolin you had today?
Three.
You gonna take one more?
Do you take it four times a day or
Eh?
Four times a day innit?
Yeah.
Only had three.
Taking one more at eight and another  
You done any revision today?
Not really, no.
Ooh.
You must try and get down to it tomorrow Lee.
Yeah.
If you ask James though if there's anything you need to know.
Or anything you need for Monday he could let him kn , he could let you know.
Mm.
Cos they won't stand  if you sort of say oh well I was away last week they won't  take that as an excuse.
Yeah but  there's nothing else that I need.
I've got everything.
And what about that maths then?
Did he give you that?
And Italian thing?


So maybe he's playing with Tom all day today?
Not   been a boring day really.
I went to sleep so 
What you been doing then?
You asleep when dad come in?
No I was awake at  just before one.
You asleep when he was here?
Yeah.
Well didn't he wake you up?
No.
Because he went out and he kept, when he went  to do his exercises.
Where was you then?
Upstairs?
When?
Asleep?
Yeah.
What, not on the couch?
No cos he was doing his exercises.
Yeah?
But I left you on the couch.
Yeah I weren't asleep on the couch though.
Oh did you?
No, I said I wasn't asleep.
Oh.
You were just resting then.
Then you went upstairs did you?
When  no.
When dad went to do his exercises I did.
Oh I see.
Cos he wanted to do them in here.
And then you woke up about one o'clock?
Mhm.
How long did he come in then after I phoned?
Dunno.
Don't know what time you phoned.
About ten past one.
Dunno.
Might have even been in then.
Oh no 
Did you have your 
he weren't actually in then.
No he weren't.
He said he'd gone .
Yeah.
got in about half an hour after you phoned.
Can I watch it?
Put it back on now.
What the London ?
Mm.
I wanna watch that.
You can't cos I'm taping Big over it.
What time's Big on?
It's stupid that London .
All it is is talking because
We haven't got it on tape any more anyway.
You looking forward to Greece?
Yeah.
Who's going then?
Just  year seven?
Carla?
Yeah.
Carla.
Can you talk.
I am talking.
Is it just year seven.
Yeah.
Haven't you got any then?
I've done it.
When?
At school.
How come you do it at school now then and not bring it home any more?
Carla.
Carla.
I'll turn the T V off.
What?
I said how come you do it at school now and you don't bring it home any more?
Because I did  
Ugh!
So what did she erm  say about your canoe thing you made.
Alright.
Oh did you bring it home?
No.
When are you seeing James next then Lee?
Dunno.
He wants me to sleep round his Friday night.
Oh I very much doubt it.
I said.
and yeah I will.
I can't see your dad letting you.
Not after you haven't been in school all week.
Why?
He said I could go out Friday.
Friday when?
This week.
Friday night?
Yeah.
When did he say that?
Yesterday.
What did he say then?
Well no he said it the other day didn't he?
He said probably going out until  friends .
But he thought you was going back to school  didn't he?
You might have to phone Gill tonight won't you?
No you speak to her.
Why?
I'm not in the mood for speaking to her .
Well she'll probably phone anyway won't she?
 

That's what I mean.
As we haven't so she might
She won't have time though.
Half past nine.
lucky to catch her in.
That's what I mean.
We won't catch her in.
She might phone about half past nine when she comes back from the hospital.
Well you never know, Vic might even phone if she can get near a phone.
I mean they've got those tr , phone trolleys.
I bet James gets your cough.
Do you?
She said , she said she's gonna have a go at you  I beat you.
And she said erm  and she said do you know the best thing to say?
Say yeah, yeah.
Like I said to you  
Yeah.
What you've gotta do is you've gotta let Tracey   you say  oh yeah I got commended!
Brilliant innit?
And she goes to me   like a silver plate and they just turn it into gold as soon as they walk in there.
And she goes   you just go in there and our plate gets turned to stone.
That's what she said.
The thing is you do, you go through life and  you think life's not fair.
You think, god why aren't they doing it?
Why am I doing it?
Why have I gotta work and they haven't?
But they don't, I mean they just don't  some kids  have gotta sort of work at it and you're one child, like Lee.
I mean look at James.
He don't do no studying and he gets A's for maths.
Lee's done all that studying.
Weeks and weeks and weeks and he gets a C.
James just  I mean like now you say to James are you studying?
No.
But he'll come out with an A in maths.
And Lee will have done all that revision and he won't come out with an A.
She's, I was saying to her  she's too upset.
She won't talk to you.
Just put her, put the phone to her ear so she can hear my voice.
She said you wait till she's in the  she said.
She said she's gonna knock them dead.
Because 
Who?
You are.
She said I know she's gonna shine in that.
She said you just tell her to carry on.
She said she's great being my teacher she said for my little ones.
She said the other night .
I didn't do it last week.
What?
Cos my, I I  I like this, you know .
I do all the new ones.
Mm.
Don't bother to turn up?
Yeah it's only the good ones.
Who were going in for the exam and I weren't allowed to help them.
Well yeah but you will this week?
Yeah.
That's what she said, don't  she's not giving up.
She's the dedicated one your Carla.
She said I know she worked hard.
She said people won't be nasty she said because everybody's  upset .
She said not only Carla.
Jennifer's not though.
Oh Clair,Cl Clair?
Yeah but she's got an honours that she hasn't deserved.
And like Tracey said 
How does Jennifer know that?
Tracey wouldn't tell her would she?
Oh Tracey will talk to her, yeah.
Will she tell her?
She she'll talk.
No she won't s , she'll just say.
The marks are very bad.
She .
I don't think Jenny will Carla.
She's not that  I think she'll know how upset she is.
Tracey said you just tell Carla  and you let me hear anyone say anything.
She thinks the world of you.
Tracey does.
And she said I'm really glad she talked to me now she said.
She said I thought oh my god she's not gonna talk to me!
And I said well she wasn't.
I said she wanted to but you  you didn't know what to say and you   yes  mm  mm  yeah


Yes  .
But don't you feel better it's off your chest now?
one!
Can I have one more?
No.
You're not meant to, they've got antiseptic in them.
They'll knock you out.
Saturday.
I said to you you gotta get these Christmas presents wrapped up for the party.
Who for?
You've got your Christmas party.
Jenny's horrible to me.
She's not having hers.
Just ignore her.
I mean why don't you just if she says why  I mean she'll obviously have Sandy there and Sandy'll say  why isn't Carla speaking to you?
I shall say  because your daughter's being nasty.
 
She won't.
She won't  I guarantee it.
Cos Tracey will say 
 
look  you three got honours.
I don't want you bragging and being bigheaded because the other marks are low.
Ooh look at him!
Do you get your homework done?
No you didn't.
Don't tell lies.
I've done it!
When?
I swear to god.
You'd better have.
Yeah I have.
I don't like lies.
I was in a really bad mood at school.
You've been in a bad mood all day.
I know.
Why?
Dunno.
Now what did I tell, see part of growing up, right  if you've got problems  specially   you talk.
I mean you look at, see I I've had, I felt like  when I was coughing at work I felt like sitting there  and I thought  I can't believe this.
Why me?
Why  why is god being horrible to me?
Six weeks I've been ill.
Why?
He's gi given me this, given me that.
I get everything that's going and now god's given them to me.
It's not fair.
But it's life.
You have your ups and downs.
But look at Jennifer.
Have you gotta wear glasses?
Have you gotta wear a brace?
No!
You're lucky.
What side's Specials.
Where's the dials?
The dials .
There.
I'm gonna tape The Specials.
I've got the tape in.
I'm gonna watch Special, oh no.
Oh we're watching Specials and we're taping Tom Hanks.
Oh is it?
Tom who?
Hate this music.
Goes doo doo doo doo doo do do doo.
Very annoying.
Ugh.
you'd better not tell Elizabeth tomorrow.
Is she good at her tap?
But look at that.
What does sh , what grade is she in?
Grade one tap.
At  at nearly twelve?
So I should think she should get honours shouldn't she?
If she started being funny saying oh I got honours and you got commended just say yeah let's see what you get at grade three tap then.
Just say I'm not in a babies class at twelve.
That's all you've gotta say.
But you just  go in there mate.
Sod them all.
That's what Tracey said didn't she?
What did she say?
Mm  What she say?
Told me just sod them all and just  don't say sod off to them but just say  sod them all.
Just ignore them.
Turn your back  they're talking to you  say they've been nasty and then they come back and talk to you.
Just turn your back half way through it.
Yeah.
And you're good at that.


Well.
You're good at doing that aren't you?
Oh!
Oh!
Hasn't started yet.
Shh.
What is he doing up there mum?
He's got
Taking his medicine I think.
  

That's Cliff innit?
Yeah.
doesn't even go with the music.
Does it?
Stupid.
Listen.
he goes ooh at the end.
He goes ooh at the end.
Listen.
     

That's me.
That's me.
Hallo!
Hallo.
How are you?
Alright.
What have you been doing?
Been upstairs.
Have you had a little snooze?
No.
He's getting better aren't you?
Why lie?
Cos you're not upstairs.
This is Specials here  
Oh just leave it .
Let's play it now mum.
Yeah but dad wouldn't let me  upstairs .
tomorrow.
I take it that was the tape wasn't it?
That was there?
It had those coloured people on it.
Mm.
You've got all red eyes there where you've been crying.
Look at them.
Great big red blotches.
Why's she been crying?
Just  been talking to Tracey.
Over these marks.
Marks that she has 
Tracey said that she's just gonna be one of these  the judge either likes you or he don't like you.
And like I said to her it's like James.
He'll go in for his maths, won't study, go in for his maths and get an A.
You'll study like mad  revise like mad and come out with a C.
If I'm lucky.
If you're lucky.
And like she said  two  and Jennifer's walked in there and they're halfway there already cos they liked the look of them.
They're just like  James.
They'll go into that exam without doing, alright they  dance the same as you
They haven't practised or anything but they don't need to.
They just go in there and they come out with it.
But they'll come unstuck later on.
His family  it's like dad  if he wants to better himself at running  he's not a natural at it.
He's gotta work at it.
We all have.
His family, everyone in it, we have to work at what we do.
It don't come easy to us.
Like Tracy said they're b born with a silver spoon in their mouth.
We're not 
 
That's it.
Part of life and growing up.
But Tracey knows you're dedicated and it's silly giving it up.
I'm not giving it up.
No.
But saying right, I'm not going tomorrow night.
Go and show them.
Like Tracy said  sod them all.
If they're nasty to you  ignore them.
It's like Tracey said with you're  I mean she did her gold star  she was waiting for the letter to come through, Tracey.
Thinking she got honours.
Opened the letter and she failed.
Who?
Tracey.
She couldn't believe it.
Tracey?
Yeah.
She'd give it everything she's got.
She said I worked for weeks and months on that exam.
And she failed it.
And do you know what age she took grade four?
And got a commended?
She said she didn't start getting erm  high marks and a commended when she, when she was fifteen.
Fifteen sixteen before she got a highly 
And how old are you?
Eleven?
Exactly.
Eleven years old and you're in elementary now!
Pre-elementary.
Pre-element yeah!
Look at Vicky.
You're not much lower than Vicky.
And Vicky's nearly fifteen.
Yeah.
You'll get better than all of them.
You'll be teaching them all soon.
You, like Tracey said she had to
I'm teaching already.
Out of the school, how many of them got in at Sound of Music out of those hundred kids?
Did Jennifer get in?
Did Emma get in?
Think how Emma must have felt.
How many of them Carla can dance 
Her two sisters got in and not Emma.
Oi.
How many of them can dance sing and act?
Exactly.
That's what exactly what Tracey tells her.
Lisa.
One.
She's this is the first time she's got honours for an exam Carla.
She's always gets a commended for tap and modern.
That's what Tracey said.
Emma gets away with it but Lisa doesn't.
Taken all my medicine now.
Had your Benolin?
Can't have much more to take.
Have you?
About two  
Just keep er  go now.
What 
Yeah.
And then that's it now.
What about the other 
No it's all done then.
You look hundred percent now.
 

You going tomorrow?
Are you going up  are you going away again?
Got to go to Greece.
 
Don't you wanna go to Greece?
Greased lightning.
Oh greased lightning .
No but I wish we could go in the morning so
Why?
Cos I, I want 
Want what?
I wanna be home.
I'm gonna pick you up at quarter past four at the school.
at ten past.
Well I'll probably be there at four and I'll go in the village.
And then  come home here  if you've got any homework do it  take a sandwich.
We've got food out there now.
We've got satay sticks.
I can't take my homework with me.
Don't chew that sweater please.
Mm.
Then I've only got half an hour and I wanna go through my tap.
Eh?
Go through my tap .
You don't need to go through your tap.
No I mean  
Oh yeah.
I do  that new bit cos it's hard that  I go through it  about eight times.
Jenny just sits there and Leanne.
Well that's alright.
That, Tracey knows, why, who, who's got picked to help teaching.
They haven't.
Have they?
It's you the one that's been picked.
God, is that short or what?
Bends over.
If she bends over .
I've got  know that I'm going to do both the maths  
Eh?
at high level and general level.
On what?
advised me  revision 
Yeah.
So I'm going through all of them doing all the exercises.
Both levels?
What just in case they put you down on maths.
Well I'm only gonna get  erm half of the general level book done by my marks  for maths.
Gone through two chapters tonight.
Did he say anything about, anything about the geography?
James?
No.
And what about the french?
What about it?
And you not had no revision for that?
No.
You ought to, you can help each other on that.
her talk it.
She had a conversation with Jean the other day.
What?
french, didn't you?
Jean loved it because, mind you she forgot a lot of the words didn't she?
But then she seemed in the end  she she picked it up.
But she was as , we were quite surprised  how much she could say.
What was that one asking if you'd got an animal?
asking.
Do you hear her?
And I'll tell you  he says I'm not telling you what to do.
It's entirely  your decision.
Do you wanna swap round and have that little one?
Pass me the butter please?
big one.
This one?
Yeah.
Should have  
Thanks.
Any phone calls today?
No.
None whatsoever.
Right bear in mind  you are getting over a cold.
Yeah.
Getting over a cold, right?
Mhm.
And you've been far from very well.
And  you are going to be going skiing January the fourth which is not many days away.
Right?
Now  my opinion if any   I would say don't sleep round James's house for one.
Right?
For the simple reason  that you won't go to bed till  late in the morning or whatever which would knock you back.
Right?
Mm.
The other one is  phone Pete up and tell him that you've been off sick for a week  can't play football this week.
Right?
Then next week, have the weekend off.
Still go out.
Don't stay in, I'm not saying stay indoors, you can still go out  and next week get yourself  you decide in yourself to do your own  training.
Go to football training by all means.
But how can I cos I've got
Exams every day.
Yeah.
School work.
But I've got work every day.
But I still come home and do it.
I don't wanna do it.
It's if you want to do something.
I'm I'm I'm  it's like I said to you I'm not telling you to do it.
But I tell you something now  when you go skiing on January the fourth  I've never skied but I can assure you this  James I know for a fact is going to special lessons.
Now if you're not fit and you're just getting over a cold now so there's no way your fit  you're gonna be  well an absolute disaster out there.
And yet I tell you what and if you go and play football on Sunday and you're not a hundred percent fit from this cold  you've lost all next week as well.
But er I mean that's, that's your decision.
I was  you're old enough to   I'm just .
Whether it's a hard match or what it's up to you.
It is isn't it?
Tell me something then.
If it, if it was a   match on a Tuesday this week, would you have played?
No.
So all I'm saying is try and get rid of the whole  not  your tablets will finish up about Saturday or Sunday.
Tomorrow.
Get, and I mean like I said to you today you've still got your cough.
So is it gonna do you any good really?
No.
Alright it's gonna upset Pete.
And you probably ain't gonna wanna leave your friends standing around on a football field.
I'm not trying to, don't get me wrong I'm not trying to say pack this in and do that.
All I want to see you better  back to school and back to your fitness again.
I'm not being a  you do as I say dad.
It's up to you mate.
If you think that you, if you feel that you're alright to do it, by all means do it.
And you can say well look I told you so dad.
If you've still got that cough and that it's just
Do you think you'll be fit enough, you're fit enough to play Lee?
No.
I know for a fact I'm not cos all I've done all week is sit on my bum and watch telly and eat a lot.
But by Sunday do you think you will be?
But  training .
Yeah.
How can I get myself fit for Sunday?
You can't, it's like if I went out swimming and that on Saturday  or even to ride.
Couple of swimming lessons ain't gonna get me fit for Sunday.
It's not the football that I'm worried about.
It's the skiing.
No but I'm saying  I'm not gonna be able to run around for eighty minutes  being .
Alright I'll get through it  I won't be running about as much as what I usually do.
And next week you'll be off again.
Possibly, yeah.
You're doing Pete no favours.
Cos Pete  putting out a good, alright  Pete might say   if say  you, you just rung up to say look Pete I'm sorry .
He won't tell the players and he'll say alright I haven't got a team so he can cancel the match.
I'd give him a ring tonight Lee and get, then he might have time to ge chance to get some players.
Will they?
You've gotta get your  think  but if you don't get yourself right you're gonna be in a right two and eight.
The difference last week  sit down  getting up to go to Blackbushe.
Then standing out on that football pitch.
Didn't do us a lot of good did it?
No.
The other thing we've gotta find out about is er  while we're on the subject  is what insurance has he got for skiing?
Not taking the fact that he's gonna have an injury or anything but I'm just saying in case something does happen.
Mm.
If he could speak to Gill
Mm.
to find out from her  if it comes to it we can perhaps ask the old lady  if she can set something up where 
I know what we've gotta do this week, or next week.
What?
Your passport.
Yeah that's  yeah.
Otherwise you're not gonna get it done.
Thought it was already done.
Eh?
I said I thought it was already done and the form was sent away.
We can't, you've gotta go and do it in person.
We can't get it.
You've gotta be there and sign .
At a local post office.
I'll phone Pete up tonight and  tell him.
I don't think he will be well enough.
I, I'd love to see him play football.
But he'd be a complete idiot to do it.
He's doing Pete no favours.
He's doing himself no favours.
Next week, get him  like I said to you Lee, you've got to train  doesn't matter, it's no good having me
He might put, cos I mean Craig's out isn't he?
He's banned now till February.
So he's got to try and get some other players hasn't he?
No he'd have enough players.
Who?
How many?
Well he's got Stevie  hasn't he?
He plays and .
He'll play those two instead of you and Craig.
See the weekend out on your tablets.
And when your back to school  get back and do it in a serious way.
It's only for three weeks till you get your skiing over with.
Then you drop back into your usual slot but I tell you what if you go skiing and your not hundred percent fit or as fit as you can be  from what I've, what I've read about it and that your gonna be in a right two and eight out there.
usual things.
other ones.
It's like James, if you imagine  what time do you have to get up this morning?
Quarter to two?
what?
Your tablet.
Oh I was awake at quarter to two.
You won't be going to bed till three o'clock round James's house.
We will though.
We did last time, we were in bed by half ten, no eleven.
twelve.
Only I've heard it all before.
Anyhow I, I saw to you I'm not, I don't care what you do.
You can go and play football.
And what was you going to sleep round there for then?
Probably gonna spend a night revising.
Cos we're, we're not gonna do much revision Saturday, alright Saturday night maybe.
But Saturday during the day  we'll probably be out.
All we're gonna do is just revise maths.
Maths and physics.
Cos we both wanna do well in them.
But I need his help more in maths.
Alright I can revise still in maths  but  it's not the same cos when he was round here the other night he's like  in a way like the teacher.


He seems to know what he's doing on everything.
Even if I loo look back over my work and I still can't understand it  he'll explain it.
Well see how you feel.
If you, I mean if you're only going round there and you're gonna go to bed at a reasonable hour.
Well I'll see how I am tomorrow.
I'm not saying anything.
As long as you're not going up the village
No.
and hanging around the street cos then that will
I know.
We'll have to try and get this suit organized.
Mm.
What about you're, you don't, no I suppose you don't feel like, will you be too tired to  take him down tomorrow when you finish?
No cos that'll muck his keep fit up and that then.
Couldn't he do his keep fit first?
Why don't you go
And then you could go for a swim over, go and do his suit and you could have a swim at Guildford.
bring him back then.
He don't wanna go swimming.
Why?
Well cos he's got a cold now!
Yeah I was gonna say we could pick it up
He can go in a cafe.
in the morning.
Are you going to Guildford tomorrow in the lorry?
You gotta go in.
You gotta try that suit on.
Yeah I know.


See how you feel tomorrow.
If you feel  I'll
You wanna get your school shoes too don't you?
Well if not you can come with me Saturday look.
If you sleep round James's I'll be going about half past nine 
It's alright 
otherwise you won't .
No but  there's late night shopping after school.
When?
Next week.
We've gotta get this suit sorted out.
Yeah I know the suit.
Oh what, for the shoes?
Yeah.
Mm.
Excuse me.
cos I've gotta take Carla one night next week.
I promised her I would.
If you can find me out  Vicky's I'll ask her how what the insurance is.
Mm.
It's like you say your mum'll be able to get  won't she?
Well of course for a week.
So  if you gotta have someone  on a skiing accident they've gotta be helicopter lifted off  you'll end up with thousand, four hundred thousand