

erm  you wouldn't believe the computer Nasha's got, it's absolutely amazing.
I mean 
Mm.
They've got 
Thank you.
and they've got everything from like
I might eat, no I'm not eating that's 
That was wonderful Jemma.
Absolutely wonderful.
They've got so many c like he said it is really like   science and all that   
We've got my old one.
Is this your old one?
No it's both of them   Visa.
Is that you?
That was er I'd just got back from work.
What, what work?
I was working in the British High Commission  in er Nigeria.
Really?
You look so different.
You look like a 
I just look very smart.
You look like a very different person very 
Why?
You just do, your your hair's different 
 
and it makes you look completely different.
You want to see mine, you wouldn't even recognize me on my passport, I've got two pictures right
I think I've seen it.
Look at my old pictures when I was thirteen  and I was er  I refused to cut my fringe.
I used to hide behind my fringe.
Who's that, Lisa?
Yeah.
You're gonna die!


You've seen that loads of times.
Yeah I know but it's so funny.
Your hair's really dark.
Yeah.
Where was that one taken, in Nigeria?
No that was in, that was when I was at home, in Essex.
and you would be f I can  I can remember 
You've lost a lot of weight haven't you?
that photo being taken.
Me and my dad went to 
You've lost a lot of weight.
Southend airport to get it done.
Really?
Yeah.
You look like somebody I know there,
I love the way that pass both passports are sealed together, look at the seal, I think it's brilliant.
Well look in the insi on the inside of the front cover, no the inside of the other cover  no of  that one 
Oh.
Oh yeah  ooh really nice, it's real authentic isn't it?
Really British, I'm pissed off about the European passports 
Oh I know.
I'm gonna have to get one next time, a Europeaney one.
Yeah mine, mine runs out 
 
in nineteen ninety seven.
Well luckily, oh mine's, mine's not gonna run out  
Two thousand and one yours runs out.
Yeah.
You're older than my sister  
Really?
My sister was born er  thirteenth of June sixty nine.
That looks a lot like you there.
That's Dave's birthday, thirteenth of June.
Really?
Have you got any stamps?
No cos I only got it this summer cos my other one was nicked, my other one which had all my really nice visas in it, which I was really  
I ordered mine from Nigeria.
And a few others.
I love that passport.
This passport is just fucking excellent, I love it.
Well yeah, just because of the  stamps in it and stuff, like real memories and s things.
 
 
Oh shit you've lost yours totally?
Yeah it was nicked.
Stolen.
Gone.
Oh you would have thought though they'd send it back.
Do you know what I mean?
I mean that's so stupid not to send it back.
Where was it stolen from?
Well these, these these are the kind of people who nicked my address book which was sitting on my seat and which looked quite nice which wasn't in my bag, they nicked that.
Where was it stolen from?
But that's so pointless cos it's got all the addresses, your addresses in it.
Yeah.
It's such a tossy, you sure it wasn't in the bag?
Yeah I'm absolutely positive, I remember leaving it on the seat.
It was stolen from my car, my car was broken into  
How long did you actually leave the er  how long were you away from the car for?
Erm well it happened some time between about  two and six 
It was a bit silly to leave your bag on the front seat though.
Yeah but we were sitting in a er we were in a cul-de-sac in a nice area
Yeah you don't think do you?
You don't think at all.
Mind you, my mum was telling me, on Christmas day, right, Christmas day!
Erm  you know that Georgian house on my road on th my side of the road, up the road?
Looks way out of place.
Well not as way out of place as a British Telecom building would look but, it looks quite  erm looks quite out of place , but erm this massive great obnoxious Georgian building  erm  was broken into on Christmas morning right?
They picked the lock  on the house, the front fucking door .
All the people were in bed in the house, woke up in the morning, the front door was wide open, the video and T V had gone, and the stereo.
And so they pi they we came into the house when everyone was asleep.
That would freak me out so much, you just wouldn't feel safe in your house ever again would you?
Cos equally a rapist could pick the lock and come in and, and  do you know what I mean?
Er you'd just feel  I couldn't believe that, thought fucking hell.
So my dad's having all the locks changed.
Stepped up the security in our house.
Outrageous.
stepdad?
No stepped up the security  in the house .
Oh 
Hey Nance, Nance, Nance, Nance, you know you were telling me that you thought someone had died  at work?
I, I  sort of heard  Debbie and Chris talking the other day, and I might have got it totally mixed up, but I reckon, I heard Chris saying  that, well basically what I gathered was that Andy might have a different father to Chris and it was Andy's father that's died, right?
Cos Chris was saying things like oh his, yeah he's been to the funeral and erm he's all of a sudden found that he's got loads of cousins he didn't even know about.
What, so he did, he didn't  
But I wonder if I wonder if Chris and Andy, cos Chris and Andy's half brother is Steven who's Debbie's husband, I'm wondering if they knew that  they had different fathers.
Cos they don't call each other they're half brothers.
Maybe  yeah.
Well Andy's, look how Andy's got ginger hair.
Mm.
Chris is dark and sort of like totally, doesn't look anything like Andy.
Not even one similarity.
Totally like
And what, they're supposed to be half brothers are they?
No they're supposed to be brothers.
But I reckon they've probably lived like brothers from a young age.
Cos look how much 
Yeah, oh yeah.
older Chris is than Andy as well.
Well he isn't that much but he's a good nine years.
Nine, ten, eleven years older than Andy.
So maybe they did know.
Yeah I reckon they did.
And just sort of like did, just called people 
Or Andy may er Andy, Andy may be adopted or something like that.
Yeah maybe.
But it's just strange that Steven's called their half brother and they're called brothers.
Do you know what I mean?
Well maybe, yeah, but maybe Steven  is er is a half brother through a third marriage erm  at a later stage to when they  his mum er they're er Chris' mum may have remarried, who Andy calls mum, erm remarried when Andy was  you know, fifteen and Chris was twenty five and then they, and Steve was o old as well, Steve was quite  however o however how old Steve is, he  
So then he'd be a stepbrother.
Oh.
mixed up.
Maybe we don't know.
Maybe we're just gossiping.
Maybe we're just damn fucking nosy.




It was funny cos I could hear them talking and I was really sort of like
So obviously then, I reckon it must be his dad  and that's obviously why Andy  saying oh look your dad's died  
Yeah.
Cos Chris doesn't seem that bothered really, does he?
Maybe he wouldn't know him.
Mm.
Maybe Andy didn't know him.
And he just went because it was  his father's funeral.
But then why would he have to go to the morgue for an identification, he wouldn't know what he looked like.
Maybe he's next of kin.
 





Stop it .
Aren't we nosy though?
Aren't I nosy I mean.
I better go 
Right, good luck.
Yeah.
You bloody lay into them.
Yeah I will, I'm gonna stand my ground.
Yeah, definitely.
I will, yeah.
Well it is, it's money innit, we're talking about now?
Don't forget about the deposit.
Yeah, right.
Yeah, right .
I love this song.
I haven't listened to it for ages.
what I've nicked today?
Oh yeah.
Not bad eh?
 

Well
He said I'm not fighting for you any more and the queen as she seen his face some days before  
Jane wants me to send her a postcard.
up here on the hill  
lot of people I work with actually.
Who er so who's this Jane person then?
Jane's like another  she's really nice  
Who you just got on with.
really, really friendly with me, yeah.
The thing is though there's so many people who are sending postcards won't send her one.
See you later.
See you Nance.
I'll be back soon  hour and a half  relax  
Right.
Alright  
Bye.
See you later.
Good luck.
Good luck.
I'm having real problems with things like  people asking me what accents people have got.
Cos what'll  fug people out, I mean what's your accent?
What would you say your accent was?
Southern.
That's what I put.
No it's Je Jersey.
I put south.
But it's not Jersey, Jersey is all 
No.
like this innit ?
Well it's not, it's just like  er I dunno, I can't do it.
I've said I've got Essex, I've said Frank's Oxford 
alright my cocky  
Oh really?
Yeah.
A bit countrified though.
Very countrified, that's a real rural thick Jersey accent though.
Alright my cocky.
How you doing eh 
like a fan  secret planet    Wonder if I'll fill up a whole book, there's no chance I will.
 
 

to do tomorrow.
Right.
Driving 
Right.
Bank.
I tell you what you could do, which would be useful for me as well 
Erm 
and you are never revealed  on your battle field   would be to erm phone up Trailfinders  or S T A, I think I might've asked S T A, and find out which would be the best card, which would be the best card to have.
Right.
You know whether it'd be Visa, Access or whatever.
as an honest man   You know some time we've got to decide what we're gonna do when, as soon as we get to Thailand and where we wanna go first.
Cos we won't wanna stay in Bangkok for that long.
No, no, we don't want to stay in Bangkok for  any time at all, no.
Get out straight away 
Erm
after a day or two.
I reckon we should head up to actually.
Or shall, we could ask Jim about it.
The thing about  thing about if you go down the south of the islands they're so nice, it's very hard.
No I think we should do the north first, then go down to the south to meet Frank and Dave.
Yeah, yeah I, I reckon that's a good idea.
order was heard  still waiting for her word  
And what was it  asked  to do?
Mm 
Yeah.
I'll get mine done er after work tomorrow.
We need quite a few don't we?
Three.
Three for each don't we?
Oh I don't know, I think, I don't know.
Well three for the  application forms, that's one  oh right, making three.
Not a bad little list to do is it?
I might do some shopping as well, get some food.
It's a bit stupid to have all these doors open you know?
Thing is we want to listen to, shall we go in my room?


I'm really, really, really changed dramatically from not eating very much to scoffing my face at every single available opportunity.
Really?
Mm.
I'm alright 
It might just be today though.
Can I have a light?left it all   Do you still wanna go to the pub later?
I think, yeah,
Twenty to nine now, shall we just go for last orders or something?
Go about ten or something.
Yeah Judy seems to be finding her job very boring actually.
. Apparently she's just pumping in er  like addresses and stuff into a computer.
They're graduates.


quite good today actually, we've got erm Pat  who is like erm  who is, I think she's like the personnel in charge of I know that she's in charge of personnel there
Yeah.
she's quite good and she said well you're intelligent, you can do this for me and she had me doing this like  phone calls ringing people up and
Mm.
and
Brilliant.
And I, it was good, I was actually  
Actually recognized.
that I did have a brain and I was capable of doing things even though it was 
Yeah.
very, anyone could do it, you know
Well thing is that I mean a lot of these jobs, I mean er yeah  they recognize that, I mean a lot of them  yo they think you're as thick as shit and treat you like you're as thick as shit just because you're doing a thick as shit job  but you know they can't necessarily give you more
Yeah I  
more er 
they can't necessarily give you more er  erm   don't suppose you want to get me a cloth do you ?
More erm responsibility cos you have to be trained for it.
Or know what you're talking about on the phone maybe.
Lovely, thank you sweetheart.
Ah!
the fact that she's, she's intelligent as well erm she, you know, she's gonna s she knew that I didn't know what I was talking about so she said right you look,yo you look er you, you ask them about this, this, this and this and they might say this to you, so I knew what, if they asked me, I knew what I was talking about rather than 
Yeah.
being completely lost.
Mm.
Yes she's gone, gone, gone  
The only thing is my back has started to go.
Why?
Slouching around?
Sitting at a desk.
It really is hurting a lot.
Never mind.
So how much money will you get for the three days' work you've done?
Erm  I'm not sure really.
Wait and see.
Yeah.
going to cash my giro today as well you can only cash it at one of your local  
How much is it?
Sixty three quid.
But that's for two weeks.
Oh yeah, yeah I suppose so.
Cos it comes in, it seems a lot cos it always comes in one big lump.
Did you sort out Housing Benefit ever?
I sent it off but I haven't had anything back.
I sent my rent book off as proof of the fact that I was  of what the rent was
Cos you might get a big fat juicy cheque for that.
The thing is, I was thinking right, is it'll probably happen when I'm, if  come through, it'll probably happen while I'm away.
Yeah but what you could do, Nancy will be really responsible about things like that, you can say to her if a big fat Housing Benefit cheque comes for me cash it and put it in my bank.
But will she be able to do that?
Won't I have to countersign it or something first?
No.
Yeah but I think on the back of the  giro there's a thing where you have to countersign it saying I authorize so and so
Mm.
Get her to forge it.
They won't ask for any, any  do you know did you, were you there when Darrel was talking about that woman in the Post Office?
Cos I w he was, he was in the Post Office one day and he saw this old woman and she'd just cashed all her giros and this bloke just nicked it  in the Post Office.
Just grabbed her handbag and ran off with it.
Sort of stood there watching her cash the giros and then nicked her money.
An old woman.
I mean she's probably not got any money.
I think that's outrageous.
Well I don't mind, well I mean this is a horrible thing to say but I don't necessarily mind people robbing from the rich  but when it's poor people robbing from the poor, it's a really wank off, really wanky thing to do, you know, I just think it's disgusting.
Well you can understand it when somebody poor robs someone who's rich, but when someone who's poor robs someone else who's poor it's just 
I've written Darrel a letter you know and er
Have you posted it?
No it's down there, and in it  er I wrote it last night actually when I was feeling pretty fucked off so it's probably a bit out of order but I wrote to him and said erm  tt Josh has been round this evening asking questions about what's happened with his money  erm  and I think you're really out of order.
Thing is that he's in er he's in such a pickle, he's doing what  I can understand him doing it cos I'd do it, he's kind of just putting it off  having to sort it out.
But I said to him look Josh isn't exactly well off at the moment, he needs the money or  what he bought so  
cos I mean I get   er talked about it and I know about it and that kind of thing and I  that Darrel 
I'm not saying anything because it's none of my business as far as I'm concerned
No.
it's between them.
Yeah.
No.
I mean Josh is alright, I mean Josh will understand, if Darrel said to him look, this is the situation, Josh would understand  to a certain extent.
Yeah.
I'd quite like to know how much  like how,wheth what Darrel actually ran away from, I mean he owes so many people money.
Yeah.
Well not,n actually that's not necessarily true, he owes his land he owed his landlord loads of money, I'm not sure whether he actually got round to paying him off.
What would you feel like listening to?
Erm 
Something in the same vein?
Yeah.
I know what I feel like listening to, it's just whether or not I can find it.
I quite lis like  Tapestry.
Carole King.
Yeah.
Mm it's a case of remembering what it's on the side o aha!
Have you done that, I, I saw a tape in your room the other day, erm  lovingly compiled in Berkshire   it was like a  it was like a tape in a box like 
That's Josh's.
Oh what, who taped him that?
Erm oh I dunno, a friend of his.
Erm Martin  
What sort of music is it?
Oh really?
He's the one that got busted at the 
erm  it's, it's a kind of  dancey kind of  hate the word but raveish type music but a bit mellower.
Mm.
Bit like that System Seven tape?
Of Simon's.
Yes, yeah.
Oh did you, you recorded that did you?
Mm.
It's good actually, very good.
I really like it.
Yeah.
I'm, I'm gonna go up and see him before we go.
Simon?
Mm.
I am wondering actually what I should do about Helen.
See now I, I would like to speak to her to check she's alright.
But in doing so I'd be telling her that I knew that it had happened and therefore that Simon had talked to me.
Or that I would have to say oh Simon told me, and I don't think that is a very good thing to do really.
Cos she'd ask me how I'd know.
It wouldn't be a case of oh Si Helen I've heard on the grapevine  would it?
Tell you who I might phone up in a minute 
Yeah?
Vanessa.
And not 
Vanessa and Dangerous?
And Dangerous yeah .
And not tell her that I know and wait for her to tell me.
That  what are, are they, what are the, the you know
They're fucking engaged  
Oh she didn't!
What  
That's what I mean.
But if she says something to me about it  I mean if she says something to me about it I'm not gonna act surprised I'll say oh yeah I've heard.
Who told you?
Liz.
What should I s er what should, would you be honest?
I mean I'm not gonna say look I hate Dangerous, I think he's an absolute wanker and how can you marry someone who's
uses the nickname Dangerous for fuck's sake.
cos you could, I mean if if she asked you about it, you know, you could just say well  honestly I'm quite, I didn't think you were the kind of person who'd go for  I know, I know that  thing is I mean I can see, I can see that she's going for him because 
What I might actually do is say well I re if she does actually a I mean what she'll probably do is say  oh have you heard about me and Dangerous, and I'll say yes.
And she'll say  and that's all I'll say.
And I'll say yeah, yeah I've heard.
And then if she says something like well what do you think I might just say well  I haven't really talked to you very much about the way that you feel about Dangerous so I don't really know  erm  Dangerous, what a fucking stupid name!
And then if she says well  and, and then I might say but I just would imagine that you'd have a lot more to do with your life before you thought about settling down and getting engaged to someone.
And also someone like him because I mean, I mean er obviously he, he seemed like a, I mean I'm sure he's a nice guy  er I mean when it comes down to it he probably is a nice guy, he's probably nice to her but it's just the fact that he is so restricted in his views and 
It's also the fact that I know for a fact, I know for a fact that she's very frightened of his temper when it happens.
I know she is.
Cos she's talked to me about it.
I mean there's been a couple of times that he's really lost his temper with her and erm  and, and really flown off the handle, badly.
And I reckon that he's the sort of person who would turn into someone that would hit someo hit his  his woman, because he takes her for granted enough as it is, and that, I reckon that's how wife battering starts because the husband starts taking the woman for granted so much
Mm.
that, then starts taking their anger out on her
Yeah.
and, and  if she's already scared of his temper and they've not even  lived together, well they have lived together for quite a while actually  so I mean it's not like they don't know each other but  once they're married and they've been married for a couple of years I reckon, and he starts thinking of her more as a possession sort of thing  I can, I can really imagine 
I can just imagine 
him starting hitting her.
I can imagine him being one of these, these, these er husbands who just want, who want, who will want to go out with the lads  on his night out and will get, you know, he's a, he's ste I can imagine him being one of these stereotypical husbands who goes out , gets pissed, comes back , who wants the dinner on the table and
Mm.
I can imagine it going in that dir yeah that way.
It won't be like it for a couple of years.
But he's not the sort of person that'll say ah  yeah we've been doing this for a little while, why don't we just take off and go somewhere and fuck it, fuck it, let's just go and do something together  he's the sort of person that they would settle down into this safe little life and, which wouldn't actually be that safe for Vanessa, it'd be very  very  you know, much what Dangerous wants to do.
But I, I can understand why she'd want to marry, why she'd want to do that, cos she hasn't ha well had an awful lot of  brilliant times in her life since she left Nigeria.
Nigeria was what kept her alive.
She hated living in England.
But I don't understand why she hasn't just earned the money and gone off somewhere.
Yeah but they're gonna, it's such a hard thing to do.
I mean 
Especially by yourself, she doesn't know anyone she could do it with.
Yeah and, and if you could, I mean the thing is, if you're, if er, if we didn't have each other to go off with  erm it would have made everything for us a lot different, I mean okay we're lucky we're in a situation where we do know a lot of people who are, who are like- minded
Mm.
and we could maybe find someone else to go off and do it with
Though it would be a case of finding someone else to go off with and not just sort of like, I mean we mentioned it years ago.
Well I remember when we first met we wanted to go and do a dissertation together didn't we?
Yeah!
Oh can you remember  walking around the streets of France  saying yeah let's go and do our dissertation somewhere.
 
Yeah.
Funny isn't it how we meet people, how you can know them for ages then you just sort of talk to them, or once you start talking to them you realize that you've got
An awful lot in common, yeah.
in common.
So much in common.
Yeah.
Yeah.
You know I'm, in some ways you know I'm so glad I've never had like  well before you know it used to bother me that I'd never had a long-term relationship and that 
Yeah.
erm  because it's something other people have and now, now I'm quite happy with myself and  feel a lot more sure about the way I think and what I want
Mm.
erm it doesn't bother me in the slightest because I know that  I would prefer maybe to be on my own  than to be  restricted by someone.
Yeah because the other thing is that although  erm  you might have all these sort of high flying ideas about what you wanna do and you don't actually feel tied down by a relationship, actually  you do live your life thinking well  can't really do that because I wanna be with him.
Mm.
It's just a different choice.
You might not necessarily feel stuck in it, but it does make you stick around.
You can get, you get yeah you can get tied into it without realizing it.
Yeah.
Yeah definitely.
It just makes leaving that much harder.
Yeah.
It makes  like doing anything that much harder.
Yeah.
Definitely.
Mm.
What ?
No I was just worrying that I always thought that I would never ever like  come across anyone who I thought that I can even vaguely click with but I just realized that I can  and it's just quite a nice feeling.
Have you er have you spoken to Pete yet?
No I've been thinking about that actually, I must 
You've been saying it for so long .
Well I know, I b I, I was thinking before I'll wr I, I should write to him but now I, I'm  I'm getting towards the stage where I want to write to him.
Yeah.
Cos you can't just write to someone, you have to want to write to them really.
Yeah.
Cos I'm thinking about it now, I mean  it was totally my fault, it was, cos I wanted a relationship  he seemed, he seemed
Alright.
he seemed like, he, he, I looked at him, right, and I looked at everything about him and I thought  that is the kind of guy I want, which is true, but it wasn't the guy.
Yeah.
And he never, we never really  we never, we never discussed things, you know, we talked, we never discussed things really.
Mm.
I never felt like  I never felt animated talking to him, you know if you talk to someone you get really, you really get animated and  
Yeah.
we always, we always get like, you know, a buzz off it or whatever but 
Oh you do get a total buzz off it 
Yeah 
I reckon.
Especially if it, especially if it's someone that you're snogging  as well.
I do love this tape, I really love it.
Janet gave it to Frank for Christmas.
Ha!make it  and I just can't take it 
No I'm so, I'm so lucky I've met the people I've met, you know, so lucky.
I really am.
Yeah, I often think that actually.
I really am realizing it now.
And if I hadn't met the people I've met, I think I'd've been a very frustrated person  cos erm, even though you can think of something,un unless, if you have other people you can go, if you say to somebody you could say, oh God, you know let's do this and this and this, or I think, really think this or this and someone else goes  yes I do 
Yeah.
as well, I agree with you 
Yeah.
you're like  I am right, even though you know you are it's like reinforcing your ideas.
Also it's kind of er  even if you er sort of different people don't, I mean a lot of people don't discuss as much as we do.
I've really, really, really realized that.
Most people don't actually  go into things as deeply as we do.
We've er oh it's, it's all to do with this sort of special thing that we found.
It is, it is true though.
Definitely.
I don't, I don't know anybody  that I, I've  I mean I've never seen a group, I mean you see it on films every  now and then you know , a group of people that really, really spark one another off, like in The Big Chill and all the things like that  but erm  I've never seen it before.
Not, not to the extent of what we've got.
Not as permanent.
My brother actually, Michael has been very good  he still sees erm   cos he's always friends with   and they're really good friends.
I mean it's not, it's not the same kind of thing that we've got, it's a different kind of relationship cos he's a different kind of person
Yeah.
but erm it's good that he kept up with everyone, they are really good friends and he can really rely on them, they're all really decent
Mm.
really decent people, all, all decent blokes.
That's a really lovely jumper, is it new?
Erm
Have I seen it before?
I don't think I have.
I got it in the summer  erm but then for some reason I decided I didn't like it.
I it's nice but it's a bit, it's a bit erm impractical, it looks, it look it's not as thick as it looks,
Oh really?
I mean
It looks very thick.
Well feel it, it's not.
Oh it's cos it's this new velvety stuff isn't it?
Yeah.
Oh this new velvety stuff .
talking about things and things like  everything from  the universe erm


we, because we covered it, and er 
He's fucking mad, Simon, he always makes people think and talk about these mad things that they probably wouldn't talk about that often.
Yeah.
He's fucking excellent, he sparked me off   erm  shit what was I saying?
Oh I don't know, I can't really remember.
Rewind the tape.
Rewind the tape  rewind the tape, let me hear it  I'll remember 
Erm  no I went away for the weekend this weekend and er  made four ta tapes of me and Frank in the car driving around from er we went to erm  Oxford first  then we went to Bournemouth, then we went to Winchester and then we went to Cheltenham,.
And  there's all these 
Cheltenham's nice isn't it?
Yeah.
We went to see this bloke called Tom  he wasn't there, he was  erm 
A bloke called Tom 
Er er
Do you know this bloke called Tom?
Oh yeah, he's lovely.
I know a bloke called Tom who lives in Cheltenham, he's called Tom .
Oh no, mine's called 
No?
Tom .
Oh.
But you must have met him, he's been up here a couple of times.
You might have met him vaguely.
Erm  but er
It sounds like a very familiar name, ask him if erm  ask him if er any of his relations went to Cheltenham Junior School cos there was a bloke with that surname at my school and it's not a very
What school did you go to?
Cheltenham Junior School, the junior school at the college, and it's not a very erm  common name  
Did you know a bloke called er  you didn't go to the kind of big school though?
No, but I might have known him because he might have been a junior.
What big school did you go to?
Do you know a bloke called Nick  ?
Yeah, yeah 
You do?
Yeah.
Really?
I thought that was him on the photo, was it?
Is there a photo of him in there somewhere?
There's a photo of him in there.
Yeah, I thought that was him.
I looked at it the other day and I thought I must remember to ask.
I didn't know him very well but, yeah, anyway   he erm 
Oh!
Yeah he and I, he, he 
That's two people that I know that you know.
he, we shagged the same bird me and Nick , not on the same times but oh  I went out with her after he went out with her.
Oh what at school?
This, this man-eating girl.
What was her name?
Helena .
I can't er I dunno actually, I'm not sure if it was him, he had a friend called Rob  and he was a blond beautiful boy as well and they were both blond beautiful boys together sort of thing
Yeah.
so it might've been Rob that went out with her,but I dunno.
But I didn't know him very well but er he was, you know, seemed alright like  I've got nothing bad to say about him.
Yeah.
Yeah I know he was alr I, I only knew hi I knew him in Nigeria.
And er 
That's right he always used to come back with kaftans and stuff
Yeah.
not kaftans,
Yeah I think he lived in Kenya before he 
Yeah.
and er  yeah what were we talking about before we found out ?
.
Oh before ?
We were talking about Tom?
About  being a surname of someone who went to  my junior school.
Oh right.
Er
It could've been him, you never know.
like, oh it might have been!
I mean 
his parents live in Cheltenham so it could've been.
He went to Rugby after that though.
it's a very 
 

it's a very erm  uncommon name so it must have been him or one of his relations.
And he doesn't have any brothers.
Cousins.
Ask, just ask him, it might've been him.
Mhm.
dunno.
Yeah cos you know erm   as well.
yeah I must do.
Ha ha  ha ha  ha ha  erm
he's got a fucking limp as well, what's he gonna   
You're joking?
Is that a 
I thought he was a  collector or something.
Yeah I didn't know he was head of 
   
Well he's, he's not very, oh he's alright, he's not very chatty though is he?
The other guy was really friendly actually, he was alright the other guy.
He was  
what, the new one is?
No the old  tall, that tall one.
Yeah.
Bit like Dirty Den, a bit 
Yeah.
  

Yeah.
That's why you saw him so often.
Yeah    I'm glad you're having a party.
Yeah I am as well.
Something to look forward to.
 

Don't you have to  can you get it back ?
I hope so, I don't know.
I'm su well I'm sure you can.
Yeah.
Did you erm put down, you know it says purpose  of proposed address?
Did you put down my olds' address or did you ?
 

And so your occupation profession is, is student is it?
I put graduate


and then I put, in fact I put erm office clerk cos that's what I am.
Bit better than saying filing clerk.
 

Yeah.
I put waitress.
busy at lunch time.
Oh it was mad time.
I earned quite a lot of money though so  Oh I was in a really good mood, I woke up this morning in a really good mood, so I kind of danced into work


and then er  had quite a nice time.
And what was it like working for stockbroker ?
It was alright actually, I was surprised I thought they would be complete jerks but they are okay.
They're erm yeah alright people.
Yeah.
Yeah.
It wasn't, it was not like  quite quiet time, you know, but they said  and apparently it can get  
 
no cos it can, apparently it can get like that, sort of all yelling and shouting and  and the first day I was there I was s sitting there  sitting  and stuffing envelopes


and then suddenly from the other end there's this like, cos we, it's like a big room, it's  the other end of the room all the dealers there, and er  anyway  and er and suddenly I hear, and then someone's like saying  talking, they're all, somebody's like  mi microphone and starts talking to them about er what's happening in the market, things like that  blah blah blah blah blah, and this means blah blah blah blah so watch out for blah blah blah and I thought it's like living in a different world, it's amazing.
Are they all really young?
No they're a real mix actually.
Most of them aren't er there's, there's a couple of young guys and they look a bit like, you know,bi bit like jerks really
Yeah I know.
but er  the ol the other guys seem alright.
I worked for a, for a like a, it's a money brokers in, in London but exactly the same  stockbroking , and it was exactly like the film, you know, they had this, they had this room, like they had one of those long rooms as well you know with all the desks and computers and stuff but they had this one enclosed off room where all the dealers sat round this massive like circular console type table, and like they were all under thirty but like overweight, all c driving Porsches and taking coke and shit like this and right they just, they got into the office at something like six in the morning  like I'd get in at nine and I'd be, be wandering around they'd just have their trousers open, shoes off,
 
and stuff and they'd be shouting down  they were all like, they were all real East End barrow boys  and, and just, it was exactly like the film, just talking talking talking all the time on two phones and like, and like  I was just so scared to go in there  because I, if you do anything wrong they just shout immediately.


You know, and they're like swivelling around on their chairs, it's unr unreal.
Ah this isn't, isn't at all like that.
But erm 


Yeah th but I must admit it wasn't like that all hours of the day, they had, they just had massive lulls when they all just sort of sat there and playing like computer games and just did nothing.
Yeah.
I think also where I was wasn't like the main trading bit, I think it's
Yeah.
like the research department.
Yeah.
I should imagine it could get quite frantic anyway.
Yeah, I know th th th there's three floors of it and I was, I was on like the bottom floor so 
It's quite interesting though sort of thinking 
Yeah 
that all the stuff's being broked around, whatever it  
 
Yeah I know, that was when I went out 
 



Erm do you have to have a membership?
Gill
What ?
to get to get into the s You wouldn't know.
I'm never sure, I don't, I don't know.
Phone them up.
Cos I was gonna ask you about that, I wondered like, I wonder if your sister could like  find out for us.
Cos like I mean how did, is your sister a member of ?
I don't really, I don't think so.
I think
Cos I presume you must be able to get an application form from somewhere  
Oh yeah yeah I would imagine so but I w er maybe it's  maybe you become a member if you go to a few of their  and they get to know your faces or something and then you apply but I don't really know.
I would imagine that you'd go in with, you know, a member.
Yeah 
I imagine that if you were a member you can, you can get in a lot easier and a lot cheaper.
Yeah.
Yeah.
There was quite a good ?
Yeah 
Yeah.
institute, I heard that erm  that John Taylor out of Duran Duran had bought the institute
Yeah he did.
and that er he was er  cos er  last week there was supposed to be one of these big like rave things on and it was cancelled at the last minute.
shut down by the 
What the institute has?
Yeah.
Really?
What, because of what?
Because of drugs?
 
It's just that, it's just that night though, the actual   was still open but  
 
Yeah but I heard that John Taylor was  he wanted to get rid of the raves in there but 
 
And er the all-nighters have been stopped because of it.
Oh it may have been all-nighters but this 
It was.
this club 
Yeah.
Yeah he told us
He, he told us that they've 
 

Either that or they're gonna shut down.
Shame.
 

Yeah are you going ?
Yeah, definitely.
Are you going to go to the erm  one?
Yeah.
Craig is really  isn't he?
Yeah.
And tell Craig that erm , excellent.
Yeah they're quite, they're doing quite well these people, I dunno who they are but they're doing quite well.
Got good, good guest DJs anyway.
Yeah.
Oh right oh what do these people do it all week?
Yeah.
sort of thing?
Mm.
Thing is I never know where one person stopped and another person's started, I've got no idea.
Well if you are, I mean like on, on the er 


And that's what happened when we went 
 
when we went to that other  one, went to, you know with Janet and Frank
They didn't a actually I must admit nothing very sexy happened at all.
But I didn't mean that 
but I was in bed with two men though.
Well I, I slept with  two men once and nothing happened.
Was that on my birthday by any chance?
That was on your birthday, yeah.
Yeah.
I remember it was slightly uncomfortable  actually .
And then you started living with them.
Yeah.
Yeah   
Oh we don't have milk in coffee.
Oh yeah
Oh now why didn't you say so beforehand!
you didn't ask did you?
No well normal people do have milky coffee 
got these little beetles in her flat and she thinks they're cockroaches and she's absolutely having a freak out.
You don't get cockroaches in England do you?
No exactly.
 

I'm gonna da da da da da   da da da da da da da da da da  
Gill we've got a problem.
What?
You've only got half  a mug of coffee .
Oh!
Well look share mine 
We can, we can boil the kettle again,
Andy's being really horrible to you, he, he poured the coff specially for washing up  
 
but it was alright because I knew he was doing it  didn't piss me off really.
Oh is that why you're still going on about it then?
Yeah 
coffee.
Give us a fag.
They're on the table.


Look at it.
Look at the mess he made making a cup of tea.
I know, can't wait till they move out.


She doesn't have black coffee, she's .
Does that mean if you ea drink your  coffee black  you're not nice any more?
No.
It just means that when I put milk in your coffee and then you then tell me you've got black, that you want black coffee
I just sort of assumed you knew.
I think that probably makes you a slag


in fact.
A what?
A slag .
I don't think I care to be classified as a slag, you have to sleep around to be a slag.
And er
But you would if you could, it's just no one wants to sl 
Yeah let's face it  yeah.


Cheers Andy.
You just know how to make me feel special don't you?
Can I borrow that cloth?
Look me in the eye and tell me you don't love it!
Ow!
That was fucking hot.
Erm  yeah did you see David then?
He came round?
Yeah!
God I forgot about that,thought he'd drop in.
Oh I, I was really pleased cos I was a bit worried that he wouldn't do that.
Oh what, what, what  what was he like?
What did he do?
He was lovely.
He was really happy and he, he, he's sorting himself out.
He hasn't smoked, he's given up smoking hasn't he?
Oh has he?
Cigarettes, yeah.
Erm 
Ah!
Yeah, no, no he wasn't smoking.
Oh.
Yeah and it was really nice to see him, I gave him a massive hug.
Apparently he's had a m a couple of  mellies on Frank.
Really?
What about?
Just sort of er  telling Frank he hasn't been a very good friend and things.
Really?
Erm 
Tt blimey.
Don't know, I think he's probably feeling a bit insecure.
You know those, these people that get, if they actually do have people employed to analyze these tapes and sit and listen to them they're gonna have such a laugh.
Or no they're gonna think we're all st totally stupid.
me and Frank singing Country Roads.
Talking about how we need a shit.
lovely music.
What?
music.
What is it?music to me.
It's hippy shit.
Hip yeah it's hippy, hippy nonsense.
Well you can just listen to it cos you're living in my house.
That was  Bob Dylan actually, was Bob Dylan 
No  
 
Did you play every single one of your erm your, your records Gill, how many have you got, about ten, twelve?
I have a solution, I have headphones.
I just put my headphones on and I'm happy.
Have you got any erm heavy metal as well?
I have actually 
Do you know what I recorded?
from my Glam Rock time.
Do you know what I recorded  
Gill are these yours?
I, I recorded  
Yeah, help yourself.
I said to her why didn't you say something and she said oh well it's not up to me, it's nothing to do with me and I said well, it's more to do with you than  
 
Do you know what, then?
Gill listen to this, right, Gill who, who's this girl I live with, right, got a knock on the door the other week and this guy come to the door with a Wa a Sony Walkman, yeah, and a microphone  
 
that like fixes on to her T-shirt, and twenty tapes and she's gotta make twenty recordings' worth, twenty tapes' worth
I've just gotta record all my conversation  
Yeah, conversations all of them cos they're updating the er Oxford dictionary 
 
Andy did you put any coffee in this?
What?
Can you make coffee or what?
No I don't like coffee, I don't know how to make it at all.
Why what's he done?
Anyway I'd better put  some more in yours   
is it is it piss  
It's cat's piss.
Urgh.
Yeah so Ben's coming to stay, you'll meet Ben.
Oh right.
He's coming to stay in a couple of weeks.
Oh good.
Good.
Yeah but they, Ben and this bloke Phil that I used to s be seeing, the one that  yeah, that one  erm have got this 
someone entertaining.
have got this cottage  and they're moving into this cottage in the middle of the countryside.
Pretend you're a cowboy or, or a bank robber, okay   
Really?
Yeah they're moving into this beautiful little cottage, yeah.
Oh how, how did they manage that?
Has he been working for a long time?
Well yes Philip's a student but they're just sort of paying, it's just rented sort of thing  but erm 
That'd be nice if they did.
Oh I wish  
But it sounds absolutely beautiful so we're gonna have to go and visit.
Shall we do that when we come back?
Yeah.
I don't see why not.
I think we should as well.
But I mean I'm gonna go and visit them as well.
 

We should keep the door closed.
Oh we can't really cos we've got music on.
Yeah, a very concerted effort to remember the bin, there's about sixty out there, it's like when we moved in.
Not quite though, did you see the bins outside when we moved in?
No.
All the way up, the whole passageway was just bin bags.
Fucking  disgusting.
Was that er well did you speak to your sister then?
No.
One of her friends, Darren.
This house  is so much warmer isn't it?
That was great, yeah.
It's so nice.
So much nicer and
My radiator is working, I think it just takes longer than the others to heat up.
Yeah.
What?
washing up  
Yeah but   
That, that kind of er  that kind of alienates us from  
J J er whatsit  as well.
We did fight for it though.
Yeah 
I was fighting very,wanted to do it.


Did you see it this morning?
What?
You made life horrible for me cos I was doing the washing up, you horrible horrible horrible person.
Urgh!


I think I might feel a bit sick now.
Yeah.
I wish I hadn't stuffed it down so quick.
Yeah you wolfed yours down, you fat pig.
I was starving though.
Mm.
I started eating my dinner about fifteen minutes before Andy and he'd finished before me.
Did you?
What did you do in  then?
What did you do?
Went out  
And lost lots of dogs.
And lost lots of dogs  
You went walking the dogs?
like
Pathetic.
on top of a hill thinking he was gonna get blown off.
So you we you went to the countryside  Andy.


Yeah he was actually.
What?
You know er you were hippyish in the countryside  breathing in the country air and that.
That's not hippyish.
Hippies sit down round camp fires and  smoke nasty substances.
No they don't, they eat lots of mushrooms.


Don't like mushrooms.
No I don't either.
had a big dinner
Which means that I'm not a hippy.
Your, your mum cooked a big dinner, your mum cooked a dinner?
Roast.
Lovely it was.
Ooh nice.
Did you sit there and be, did you sit there and be, be I'm 
And my lovely, my lovely lovely gravy we had.
in parents' house therefore I've got to be nice?
Did she get polite?
I'm polite anyway.
My mother?
No did Na Nancy go all polite?
No she just talked the bollocks off everyone including my grandmother, it was really worthwhile.
I was chatting to his nan, his nan's amazing you know, she's a right traveller.
She's a pain in the arse.
She's been to every country you can imagine, Far East, Middle East
Africa, she likes Africa the best.
What now she travels?
Or when she was younger she did?
I dunno.
now 
Really?
Yeah?
Her husband died what, tt thirty year ago
She's really 
and she's travelled for about six months of every year since.
She's got such a good personality 
Really?
she said look  
 
you know.
She don't keep her house up, she goes I'm not gonna like get old, grey and old in a house surrounded by all these antiques that  like all these memorabilia around me she said I'm just gonna go out and see the world.
Brilliant!
So is she really healthy and stuff?
She looks healthy doesn't she?
She's alcoholic.
Ah she's not an alcoholic!
So what does she just sort of does she how does she travel then?
She is  
She wasn't drinking.
She was!
She was pissed as a fart.
She wasn't.
She was, cos it's free.
So she, she, how, where's she got all the money to travel from?
She can drink a bottle of gin seriously, a bottle of gin every time she comes to our house.
And then drives home  usually through the wall.
he don't like his nan.
I don't like her at all.
He doesn't like his nan .
She's horrible.
She, she's obnoxious.
I'd better phone Katie hadn't I?
Really, really obnoxious.
No she's just smart  I think.
I think she's really clued up and he  
I think she's horrible 
he   
she's really like 
being a sweet old granny.
She's getting really old, she's really horrible to my mother.
Oh wh what, you, really you don't like her?
No I really don't like her.
shine on   
Yeah my mum hates my gran actually, well she doesn't hate her, she loves her  
try to love one another right now  come on baby now, shine on me brother, everybody get to together, try to love one another right now  
I've got wo I've got about two earrings, and that's it.
This is beautiful this song, it's all about everyone loving each other and 
Such a hippy girl  
Katie .
Yeah.
Mind you half of these  all about loving 
Yeah .
Yeah but yours is drug induced, this is just beauty and, and love your neighbour.
Oh no this isn't drug induced at all is it!
No!
No maybe not.
We were listening to the Woodstock tape today 
to love each Andy  
You know that Woodstock tape?
Have you ever listened to it?
I know  
Oh so funny, cracking me up.
Hi is Katie there please.
Cheers .
to you.
Git.
turn it off for telephone conversations 
Well I mean
Ah ah!
Well there's not a lot of point having it now 
Really?
really cos there's such a cross section of conversation going on, it's really funny there's this bit in the car when we went outside with the mike and  on a  at Claire's party and er  erm like there's me talking to Claire really loudly like across the car and Frank talking to Nigel across the front and he speakers were up here and there's just a whaaaaaaa this massive rabble going on.
Really funny.
I told you  anyway cos I got, I got a bloody  Erm so we were talking to Cath today, Cath's thinking about coming down and like me, Chris and John are gonna go to this place in London so you're very welcome to 
mad enough 
Mm.
Oh when are they gonna collect it?
Next Friday.
Friday evening.
This Friday coming up, yeah.
Yeah.
It'll be quite funny.
Mm.
Can you imagine listening to all the tapes?
It can't be that much of a great thing because I've got, I've got to go to a twenty first on Saturday.
Do you wanna come?
Yeah.
Erm  some girl.
Well the, the first ones that we made going down from here, the car's making a racket, the stereo's like on full  blast  you can't hear anything we're saying at all.
Really.
I mean occasionally there's a break where we'd sort of get this stupid laughter and stuff but most of it most of it is just sort of like 
No but it'll be quite funny.
It means we can get really pissed and you can charm them all .


So do you think you're go you're  tomorrow after ten ?
asleep by his side  Erm  how's he affording to go to?
I would imagine that he's getting help off his parents, to be honest.
I don't know.
I think he's da oh his dad's paying for everything first.
What's the date today, the thirteenth?
Yeah.
Erm  I think he's got his dad to pay off his  
I suppose if you think about it his parents probably think it's probably good to get him out of London and get him doing something.
Yes because at the moment he's just, I mean he's  I mean he hasn't, I mean he had that job in Debenhams and that's it isn't it really?
Yeah.
So I guess I have done better than some people.
Mm Erm  yes so he was just saying that, you know, the only night he's really been out since New Year's Eve was last Wednesday, he's just been in the whole time.
Well
He hasn't got any money or anything.
I feel a bit, you know, sad.
 
Yeah, and also he lives so far out and he was saying you know, Julie's up in er in Birmingham, Andy  's up in Birmingham, he's had no one to see, Eileen's come back up to Birmingham   he sees quite a lot of and er I think he's just a bit lonely.
Mm.
Erm  but I think it cheered him up saying oh do you wanna come to a party at the weekend sort of thing.
That's gonna be really nice I think.
I think I might come down actually.
Yeah do that.
I can't 
Mm.
so I may as well.
It should be quite a, I mean it'll be a funny party and it'll just be  it'll be good music.
Well it would be nice, be nice to meet different meeting different people as well 
Yeah.
and having, it's a scene, it's a crowd and
And also it'll be good to go to a party in London where it isn't like totally drug oriented, there won't be any drugs 
Yeah.
there at all, it'll be just drinks and
Really?
I'm 
Yeah.
cos I'm, I'm, I think I'm going through a bit of a a slight 
Off it?
Yeah.
I don't want anything to do with it really at the moment.
like a bit not pointless, well it, it's just that I don't really, I'm not getting anything from it at the moment so
Yeah, same here.
But I mean that's just the way it goes, you know, and it's good to have, you've got to have breaks.
You can't just 
You'd have to be mad  
Yeah.
really.
But I s I know what you mean, I'm quite happy not to at the moment as well.
Erm  but I think it'll be a nice party and the music will be brilliant.
This guy called Mark that erm  tt that Frank and Janet  know very well, he's a really very good D J indeed, you know he's, Janet's got a tape that he's made and he's got, using three decks at a time and stuff, he's very good.
And it'll be really good sort of like funk  go with, you know, sort of soully music and so it'll be really nice I think.
Think it'll end up a bop?
Yeah.
And also my friend  is gonna come.
I invited her last  oh it was the last time I spoke to her.
Good.
And that'll be good for her as well cos it'll mean that she'll meet  and Craig
Yeah.
and maybe she'll have someone to visit in London cos she hasn't really got any friends in London.
Whereabouts does she live in London?
Tt I think she lives in  Clapham or something.
the rain cries a little pity  of one more forgotten hero 
Was Nancy gonna come down do you think?
Or is she gonna stay here?
I don't know, I haven't asked her if she wants to come yet really I don't think.
Oh no her sister and all her mates are coming up this weekend.
and say for you  It'd be quite good, it'd be quite good to be here actually but  just to meet them but  tt nah   show you something 
Yeah 
Mm.
Simon's just brilliant isn't he really?
He just  he can talk to anybody.
Yeah.
Like this girl Tracey that he got on with really well, I mean I, I'd really disliked her, this girl that Claire knows.
And when I arrived at this party, she is totally unsubtle  and sometimes very rude, you know, and er 
Yeah well the thing about Simon that's excellent is that he just accepts people for what they are and he doesn't judge people 
Yeah.
Yeah.
which means if you don't judge people then, you know  it's just so much easier.
Mm.
Yeah.
I wonder how he's gonna find it not being with her.
He's gonna find it hard as well I think, but on the other hand they haven't been communicating at all, you know, it's not like 
No it's not as if it happened suddenly.
Mm.
Yeah.
I think Helen's gonna find it very difficult though.
Just because even though they don't talk very much any more and stuff and he probably hasn't been spending much time with her,
That he's been  
the thought that he's been there and it's  yeah.
Well I mean they're engaged for God's sake, you know.
She thought they were gonna get married.
Yeah.
In the jingle jangle   Yeah.
Is Andy gone out?
He's gone up to smoke I think.
Oh has he?
Shall we sit in my room?
Music.
And that way you don't have to just sort of 
Do you know whose button this is?
No.
Yeah I think, I think Dave was, I think Dave felt a bit nostalgic coming back actually.
Do you?
Yeah.
What, a bit sad?
Well he, he did when he came in here, he picked up his  and he looked round and it was all very different and then 
What in here?
In this room?
Yeah.
Yeah.
I think maybe he's just come to realize  that   
Yeah.
I'll come following you   He d yeah it was odd when Frank said that cos apparently what happened, he just sort of started saying that he didn't think that Frank had really been there for him and that he was being a bit sort of selfish and stuff  which I mean maybe he has been but the thing is if  you know if Frank's making this massive effort to like fit in and meet new people and stuff then
Yeah.
you know, Dave's bound to feel a bit neglected.
It's a bit stupid to have all this in front of a  bloody radiator innit?
Whoops.
We've gotta get a, we've gotta   that thing .
 

play a song for me 
I did wonder what er like when I saw Ben I did wonder what he'd  how he'd think, if I'd changed and stuff.
You know?
I'll tell you what, the bed that me and Frank slept in was  so gorgeous .


It was so nice, it was like erm   feather thing, feather, feather mattress.
Feather mattress?
Yeah.
I think it was feather, or down or something.
So it wasn't bouncy but the way that it fitted, or the way that you lay on it, it was just so comfortable, yeah, gorgeous.
And I realized it was the first time I actually slept in a bed with Frank ever.
Yeah?
I've ever, I've only slept with him once.
Or like I've, I've slept with him in tents and stuff but not in a bed.
Yeah.
And Ben like  when we were sort of there Ben sort of we'd been sitting around for a while and he said it's very embarrassing to have to ask this but you're staying the night and stuff  erm are you two a couple  or are you just friends   so no, just friends but it's alright, if you don't have any spare rooms we'll be perfectly happy to sleep together, don't worry.
It was just funny  having him asking me.
Yeah it was a good weekend it was, it was a very good weekend but packed  so much packed in.
You know I was only away for two nights, it felt like about a week.
You saw a lot of people, went a lot of places.
Yeah.
Shame Tom wasn't in.
We were like ringing the bell and both of us were desperate for a crap, absolutely desperate, and desperate for a cup of tea cos we got up at ei er half seven.
Oh well  missed him.
What a shame.
It might have been easier actually to say she's not coming.
Are you into going to a pub tonight?
I want to  wash my hair and
I should stay in, I'm stupid going out again.
I mean I, I can see why you're going out but it's, you know  I need, I need to have a night in I mean  I've done, I've had so many stupidly late nights.
Mm.
Tell you what I must do actually whilst I'm thinking about it is do  take one lot of washing out and put another lot in.
Yeah now we've got radiators it's very easy.
Yeah.
Goodbye  She wants me to  don't know what she wants.
I mean I'm quite happy to go to the pub with her I mean  she's alright.
I'm quite interested to see how I get on with her actually cos I've only ever known her in the context of Tom and Darrel really.
Yeah.
I find her a bit hard actually.
I get  she's not really interested in what I'm saying.
Yeah, I know what you mean.
It's the way that she kind of like answers before you've really got done finishing what you're saying.
Do you know what I mean ?
You know when people do that and you just think well 
Yeah you can't  really be listening to what I'm saying cos you  cos I haven't  finished yet .
Erm   Pizza Express tissues everywhere.
That's better.
Both T-shirts still look blue don't they?
 

to be free .
Maybe I put something in that's dyed them again   Hello 
Hello.
come in love.
You got what?
I like your jacket.
Hi.
Hello.
How are you?
Our heating's working again so it's bliss, absolute bliss  and lovely.
It's nice.
Yeah.
Oh lordy!
Are they?
Yeah Jim came over before and said that he was er  going off to do work tonight.
Andy's upstairs doing work.
Yeah.
No he's doing it at home I think.
I think he's, he's  like the other day when he was here he was talking about how he was turning over a new leaf and stuff.
So  don't know how he's getting on.
No I know what you mean.
I've never really found it that much of an insult ever anyway, but I just think that it's a bit of a term which doesn't really apply to us.
Do you know what I mean?
We've got hippyish tendencies but we're not hippies.
Well also I mean the term hippy I mean it's not really a real term I don't think.
Shall I put a bit more, do you reckon that's enough  that's okay that little bit of sauce innit?
Do you reckon there's enough there?
Is Nancy eating?
Yeah.
Er er er er er well what else could you put in that would make it more 
More more tomatoes and more tuna.
I might, I would maybe think it might be worth making a little bit more actually.
Right.
Shove it all in.
Do you wanna chop,mu mush that up a bit?
Okay.
But then I'm pretty shit at measurements and stuff  cook the dinner 
Well what's left I can have tomorrow.
Erm in that case  are these, this stuff here  is it yours?
What stuff?
This stuff.
No.
It might be Frank's or someone's.
I reckon it is.
Or Na 
Oh she won't mind you using it anyway.
She's got so much tuna she could bloody start an aquarium up.
tuna 
Mind you, they're all dead so it wouldn't be a very active aquarium really would it?
Think the pasta's done.
Right do you wanna  turn it off then.
Do you wanna taste it to check cos I might've got it wrong?
No I think it's done actually, what am I talking about, I have got a brain.
I can make decisions.
I'm a graduate.
Another thing I I've realized recently right, I, I have a brain, I can make decisions, I have an opinion 
 
that can be valued by people.
I've always valued your opinion.
Yeah I know you have but   anyone else has.
Do you mean straight?
Yeah, yeah basically.
You know I'd never really valued the  the erm  the truth in that term, straight heads do definitely think very differently.
Andy's a real mate he  just kept saying straight heads  er for all the times when I might have said  oh, I couldn't really talk to some people last night and he'd say what you mean straight heads?he's right.
Totally different wavelength man.
It's not just, I don't, well I d I don't think it's 
No it's not just straight heads but like quite a lot of the time it is straight heads.
I think the thing is  people who are very straight aren't likely to  people who are like very  limited in their m their way of thinking.
Probably maybe a bit of a chicken and egg situation and the egg might have come before the chicken?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Funny way of putting it.
Deep in my heart  safe from the guards  
Is there lots of space at the table?
Er I can make some space, is it nearly dinner time?
Yeah.
I'll open the wine then.
Let the wine breathe.
It's really funny right erm  in the office today this guy Paddy  got a er a an, an invitation, like a formal invitation to erm a posh do


and erm he, he was trying to work out how, how to write the reply correctly.
And he asked this girl er
Can you say that again, sorry?
This guy Paddy in the office
Yeah?
he had an invitation to a posh do, you know a black tie type of thing?
Yeah.
A for a formal  invitation
Yeah.
and he wasn't sure like how, what was the correct way  to reply to it, right?
Yeah.
And so he asked this girl Jane and, and then he asked me  and erm and er had I sat down and thought about it I could have said well er what I thought, you know, the correct way er but I thought well  there's correct and there's correct and I think the right way is to write to it and to say yes thanks  
No there is actually a very formal way of doing it though isn't there?
There's, I see what you mean, there's correct and correct.
Oh yeah, yeah but I, I but I just thought  so I, so I,so I, so I said to him  well I, if it was me I'd just write back and say thanks, yes I'll come actually, thank you very much 
 
cos I thought what you talk about is such a load of bollocks and he looked at me madly, and I thought oh how funny, I thought .
I'm gonna have to start explaining myself to people a bit more actually


cos they get very, they misunderstand me.
Yeah but I mean, it doesn't really matter if they misunderstand you does it?
But I mean I know what you mean.
I  a lot, cos I remember erm  when Claire was  I got a really formal invitation to something  and I asked Claire how you were supposed to reply  and she told me the exact wording of how you should reply and I just looked at her  I looked at her and I said I'm not bloody writing that.
Cos it sounded so stiff and so er
Cheers, lovely 
alright?
Oh dear  
 


Good job    
I mean the whole point of it is right is it doesn't make any difference how you reply to an invitation.
Well I know, I mean especially if you know the people, what's the point of being formal if you know the people?
Exactly.
It's so ridiculous.
with, with posh people, if th if they were being pissed off by the fact that you didn't reply to the invitation properly then he's a dickhead.
 
people.
Did you even try?
Did you even try to get it out or did you just think oh well?
  

Oh what!
That wasn't doing what I was asking it to do.
I wanted it to forward wind, I think I pressed the wrong button.
I've got  I did have the other one, Crossroads, but the reason why I had it was because Dave was in the house and he had it.
Right, right, yeah.
And then he fucked off and left me and he didn't give me  I di this, it really pisses me off the way that people like leave before you get round to taping the tapes that you liked, do you know what I mean?
D'ya know what I mean ?
I know what you mean, yeah.
Now I wonder if this is doing what it's supposed to do, let's have a check.
It's a cold night tonight.
Yeah.
It's gonna be minus two.
Really?
Yeah.
Tt  can feel it.
You can feel it can't you?
Mm.
Thank God we've got our heating.
Mm.
Are you gonna go to Handsworth then?
I might go a bit later  like meet her.
You're supposed to be there at half eight aren't you?
No, I'll have to leave at half eight  get there for about quarter to nine nine o'clock 
Did they say a specific time then?
Mm mm  just said come round after eight o'clock.
Oh.
No problem.
It's a one time thing, it just happened  
This one's really nice innit?
Mm.
Shall I get some knives and forks?
Erm  it's alright I'll bring them out.
Oh toss, when was that?
What was the night before last?
Monday.
Yeah I know, the date  was it the f 
It was the thirteenth.
Yeah?
Yeah.
Mm.
How many did you get done, four?
Yeah .
You should ta I should take some to my lectures or something.
No I I've gotta be there.
Yeah.
Oh cheers, nice one.
What, oh no  
 
  

This is your holiday now?
Yeah.
What's the date today?
The fourteenth?
Fifteenth.
Fifteen    It's all gone erm  it's gone all soggy .
You know what makes that not happen?
What?
Is if you put rice in it.
Yeah cos it absorbs the  
That's what they do in erm tt that's what they used to do in Nigeria.
I normally do it but  
I have been  
Oh we need glasses.
It's just, to me, it just makes me feel so much different if I have time to just potter about you know?
It just makes me feel, I just can't  I've wo worked out that I can't cope with this frenzying lark for  all the time, I have to have space to do my pottering.
Well you've been through a mad, I mean 
I've been having a mad one haven't I?
Darrel, Darrel and Tom and that, I mean er who, are er erm  if you look at them though they're, they're not really that  I, I, I can't cope with it cos I, I'm just calmer than that and I can't cope with  
Yeah it's also the fact that they didn't have a job or anything and they had the daytime to potter about, do you know what I mean?
Yeah  yeah.
So  but
Yeah.
yeah also I mean
Yeah.
also they're not used to the way that we're used to living.
Good stuff Jem.
Yeah?
Beautiful, yeah.
E'er.
Mm cheers love.


Mm.
In the winter time   Right.
So what do you, did they, what do you reckon's gonna happen at this   tribunal you've got  to go to?
Did you see the Central News before?
tribunal?
Ah?
Did you see Central News before?
When you went upstairs
Mm
and you were in your room, erm it was, like all day at work today  there's been loads of activity outside the magistrate's court with like, with erm various 
Cheers girls.
Cheers.
Cheers.
Yeah.
With er  with like reporters and stuff, all over the place, right?
I was watching Central News, Mr  was on it and all, like you know that bloke that comes in with his wife with the grey hair that's always really moody, they have a bottle of Frascati and always drink las 
Yeah.
eat er always eat lasagne?
Mm.
He was on it, all these people that go in to work all the time like every day were on the telly!
What are they, solicitors?
Yeah, all the solicitors.
They're all gonna go to London and campaign about something, we didn't quite see what it was.
No cos I was talking.
Something something to do with cuts in erm 
 
like legal funding I think it was.
Yeah.
I think it might, cos like   does a lot of legal aid, so erm  the, you know, legal aid work  and he's quite into it I think, I think he's quite a decent chappie  erm  what they were basically saying was poor people won't be re erm  erm  poor people wouldn't be represented well enough, weren't they?
It must be something like, like that.
Some bigwig fuck off cunt  erm wanker  judge in London has decided it would make less paperwork.
Well it w wasn't, it weren't wasn't mine, one of my nice friends was it?
My nice judges.
No, I mean, no  someone in London  has decided it'll mean less paperwork so all the judg all the erm people in  in er  Birmingham are going down to complain.
it's quite good to see someone 
Caring.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Mm.
It is actually.
It's reassuring, especially the way things are going at the moment.
I haven't got a real tribunal to go to.
What's this for?
Oh at Handsworth, I'm meant to go there this evening to speak to the domestic bursar  the residents' officer  and someone else, God knows, from the university  to put my case forward for why I had to leave Handsworth and that, why I shouldn't pay the money.
Yeah but I mean you can't, you don't pay the money now just cos someone's moved in.
Exactly, they're trying to screw me for every single penny  they can get out of me  
So what they're now saying that you've got to 
Well they want me to pay  three days until she moved in.
Ah ha you're joking ?
Every penny  it's getting really silly.
That is just stupid isn't it?
It'll be about three pounds or something.
Exactly.
Or it'll be about twenty quid or something.
cos the amount of m m time well, and the  
Administration and stuff.
Yeah.
The administration   the price of  stamps, phone calls, envelopes  office time
The , like the administrative people have to deal with your three pounds.
That is 
I know.
just stupid, you should say that to them, make them feel really stupid.
I will.
And also there's a, bloody hell 
It's so bur it's so bureaucratic.
it's a, it's for the students for God's sake, I mean they shouldn't be making like more hassles.
They are basically real  
This is what pisses me off so often you know, things like the halls of residence and stuff are there to help the students and they don't, they just try and rip them off for every cent they can do it for.
Yeah.
They er I mean in, in Handsworth right, on this bottom corridor, the boys' bottom corridor, it is in such a bad way you know like they keep erm  like  putting their fists through windows  and things like that, and the amount of repairs and fining.
Like th what they did one time they all had erm
What just cos they're all yobs?
Yeah.
They all had something one night and erm  er
I wouldn't bother Nance we're all gonna get 
a vegetable  
done anyway.
a nice vegetable 
Yeah, was it fungus by any chance?
Yeah, yeah  they were having 
 
fungus one night
Do you want, does an does anyone want some of this bread because it is really nice and it's not
Mm I'd like half.
it's not er it's not all horrible.
It's nice and  
Anyway yeah they had this, this fungus and erm  they, they kicked down a door and erm got extremely, extremely energetic and like  put like erm  er er er in this store, it was a storeroom and they'd put things like the projectors and erm  er catering equipment 
And in this door was what?
In this store 
Oh yeah?
It was a door to a storeroom and inside this store there was all video equipment, catering equipment
Oh dear.
and they put it in the sinks and  baths  all round the hall
And turned taps on?
No they didn't turn the taps on, they just left it all round the hall and, and the door frame had been kicked off and all things like this you know?
Oh dear.
Did they get caught?
Well the people that done it didn't get caught but  the corridor on which it happened was fined for all the equipment.
Oh!
A lot of money.
So did the people on the corridor know who it was?
Yeah.
Only they, they, they must be f mad with them.
Yeah.
They're obviously not gonna say anything but they are very mad.
They should get them to pay for it.
I know.
Well I think they are going to, the people that did it tt are gonna pay for it anon er anonymously
Yeah.
via the er  hall inhabitants, you know, that cannot afford it.
Yeah.
So at least they won't get done for it cos they'd probably go up to disciplinary and stuff wouldn't they?
that on?
Mm.
Erm  lordy lordy.
I remember that we, we had erm a corridor fine in our hall  for er just something stupid like they  one of the ceiling tiles got broken or something.
But we w did you have to pay a deposit?
It came out of our deposit.
we did, fifty pounds.
Mm.
That's true.
I should get that back shouldn't I?
Yeah.
Mm there's no reason why I shouldn't get that deposit back.
No.
Because last  
And that's why they've mentioned it isn't it?
Yeah.
Cos with us getting it back was automatic.
I think  you were in a shitty hall Nance .
I know.
What, what happened about your posters?
They just walked in and saw that you had posters up and
Yeah the cleaners, you know the cleaners have got a key to your room and that  and you  
What cos you'd used Blu Tak or something?
Yeah.
Oh basically you weren't allowed anything up on any wall.
Well we weren't supposed to have posters up in our hall either.
Really!
Mm.
And erm y every time the cleaners came round on a Tuesday  it's not ev er everything had to be on the bed, including chairs er everything, you know, you had to have your desk  
My cleaner used to come in and I'd be in bed .
And she used to clean round me and stuff.
Cos our cleaners won't clean if it's erm  occupied or  not everything is cleaned from the floor  they won't change the bed sheets unless you've actually taken them off and  
We're, oh no we didn't, they didn't do that for us either.
Well we we had that.
We had to erm  like have, you wouldn't, you wouldn't 
No  
wouldn't get bed sheets unless they were actually stripped off the bed, things like that.
Mm.
But I, I, me and Claire, by the time we left U H, had a store of bed sheets to bring to our new house.
Just because like they'd leave them for us and we hadn't changed them.
And we'd just shove them on, under the bed and stuff.
I had thousands, I mean I gave a load back cos I had loads of them.
And the reason why  they were shoved under the bed was because  I hadn't got round to sort of you know, doing anything about it sort of thing.
Mm.
Mm.
But I mean my cleaner used to come in and just sort of like  clean around me and chat a bit.
Dave's cleaner in High Hall used to do loads of stuff for him, she used to wash his mugs up and all sorts of things.
Mm.
Mm.
They do in the self catering flats.
But erm 
I'm gonna try a bit of your bread.
they're really funny and finicky about a lot of things, you know?
It does my head in.
And basically they ha and the other thing, right, I found out what they had for dinner the other night right?
We had jacket potatoes right, which is literally mouldy and baked hard so you'd get about  out of a jacket potato you'd probably get about that much potato and the rest is just skin and mould and hardness  quiche which is just like processed cheese and processed eggs and everything you can imagine just total packet mix
Mm.
it tastes like blancmange rather than quiche
Mm.
and erm  salad which is just like  brown lettuce.
And y and I was paying eighteen pounds a week to be catered for.
Wh why doesn't someone do anything about it?
Apparently  
Like take it to N U S or something.
Yeah.
Because that is just a pile of shit 
We're not even 
they're ripping everybody off in that hall.
we're not even in it, we've de-affiliated from erm
Oh that's, that's why it's in that, basically that's why
Oh
people, that's why erm N U S is there to protect man.
And nobody  Handsworth is  in a funny neck of the woods basically, it's like off campus, it's university accommodation
Miles away.
miles away, off campus, you know, they haven't got to make it look good 
So you haven't got, you haven't got any any back up kind of from the 
No 
campus, the whole campus feeling I guess is  
Yeah, yeah.
Mm.
It is, it's sort of like  it's sort of like extradited from the rest of the er  the rest of the whole university, you know, nobody really cares about what goes on at Handsworth.
But it's like wherever I, you know, if you get   a halls of residence on campus you would get put in Handsworth, like if you chuck a telly out of the, like one  
It's like a prison isn't it ?
Yeah.
It's like, you know 
Or a rehabilitation centre.
Yeah.
But it hasn't got anything going for it, basically, whatsoever
Mm.
it's got  three TVs though which are really rubbish and one small bar called The Bin, Village Inn it's called, and it is absolutely tiny, and really crap.
Mm.
Very expensive as well.
It's more expensive than on campus, I mean we haven't got a pub there, we haven't got  like the Guild bars or anything like that.
It's worse than being on Griffin Close.
Because there's no erm, there's no  like for freshers there wasn't any sort of entertainments during freshers' week on at Handsworth, it was all at campus.
Mm.
So how, how do you get in to campus then?
Do you, is there one bus that goes all the way in?
One bus the sixteen, but it's like  twenty minutes  it's like catching the bus from Moseley erm Village
Yeah.
from here.
You have to walk that far like to get the bus and then get in and then walk back home, it's not too far.
But do they erm  provide a minibus service
No, no there's no 
to get back?
no minibus service at all erm at any time of the day or night and they erm
Cos we used to have like this minibus service back from the Guild
Mm.
even if you weren't in hall, and like girls used to get priority.
Mm.
You could hire out free rape alarms and all that kind of stuff.
yeah you hand your railcard over and get  
Yeah, free rape alarm.
That is just so shit but a lot of that is to do with the fa is A the whole of Aston disaffiliated from the Guild, from the N U S?
The whole university is.
When did they do that?
Do you know?
Last year I think,
That is just I just don't understand why universities do that, it's so fucking stupid.
Cos that means that you can't get things like 
apparently I was talking to like, cos you know a lot of my lecturers  
erm like student cards and stuff cos that was all 
Mm I know.
th no you can, but all student cards and stuff are all negotiated by N U S.
I know.
And the N U S, you know  it is, in a way it is a good thing but in a way it isn't because when they were actual when they actually belonged to the N U S erm  they weren't get because it's a small university, they weren't getting much funding from the US er the N U S or erm any support really.
I mean it's just like  Aston is, it is, is, it's, it's a university but it hasn't been a university for that long, it was a technological institute before 
Mm.
it's only been a university now for about  sort of ten year well not even that, five or ten years I think.
Mm.
And before it was sort of like the tech it was mainly erm sort of post graduate retr er sort of training centre  for sort of science erm science graduates 
Yeah.
and things like that and it only, it's only become  and really it's only actually set up as a business school  quite recently as well, I mean what in the past ten years or something 
Mm.
as well.
Erm my course has only been running for three years.
I don't think they've actually had any graduates from my 
No.
course yet either.
Why?
Cos it's only been running for three years 
Oh of course it's a four year course.
four year course.
So they don't really know how it runs do they?
No.
They don't know how it's gonna work.
I mean it  I mean er the reason why it was set up really was the nineteen ninety two sort of like coming into the single European market and everything 
Yeah.
that's what gave them the sort of, the idea to set it up but  I mean Aston is good because  now we're   n now we're not