

I think the Labour Party's heart is in the right place, they want to take a positive approach and do what they can to help industry, to train, to put more money into training youngsters for industry then we have a skill work force, not a cheap, not a cheap unskilled labour force, er, you know, which is what we, what's happening now, because we've just not been trained, they're cutting the training, but it's all the same, anyway you know, I, I, I don't know, you say what can I do for ya, well er in the short run not much except to help the, the people who are on lower income and the children through the budget er which will be introduced, it'll be that why er through er child benefits and through er high, high benefits and through er, er lower taxes for the, everybody up to er twenty odd, twenty five thousand year or something, so, erm I mean that's in the short run and little that can be done, it's not as much as anybody would like, you put more and more into, into er, into training, er more money into industry to help them to invest, er you know you can have a sort of regional development banks to help industry to invest these in, in each of the regions, but I mean the, these are the positive plans and not like this one who's just letting things go.
If, if under, if and I hope that your crowd get in, see, I think
Yeah
as I say I'm just fed up with this lot, what is the outlook on er income tax?
Well
Cos I mean we know it's going up whoever gets in they're gonna put it up
well you know, John Smith laid out his budget for the next, study for the, to cover the next two years and there, I mean there's no intention to, to change it in the foreseeable future, I mean they've laid it out for two years so that the basic rate stays the same, that the personal allowances are being increased so that this will take a lot of lower paid people out of tax and that coupled with the child benefit will make everybody up to about twenty two thousand a year better off, and then from there they'll be a, a, a range of people who to it won't make much difference
No 
overall certainly if they've got children, but if we get above thirty, forty thousand a year, it'll take more the other people who've gained so much
Yeah
out of the last ten years 
Yeah, yeah it's not, it's not been fair 
Ooh aye it's not, it's not fair, I agree 
and not, not only on income tax but on poll tax local tax 
Yeah, yeah 
That's right
cos I mean that, that's just a joke that 
do you think Labour would alter the poll tax and put it back to its sort of original sort of rating system?
We're going back to a kind of rating system with the different assessment on valuations 
Yeah, it's fair int it?
The bigger the house the more money you should pay.
the Tories are gonna introduce their alternative, but they're still going to  through this banding system, the whole objective of that is to, is to make sure that the better off people don't pay their full whack
Mm
instead of paying er, you know, three or four times in a, for a big house to, to a very modern poor house
Yeah
er they only pay sort of one and a half or twice that's the, that's the purpose of the Tories
Well what el what's the other alternative for this VAT? cos I mean it was the Tories who brought this VAT system into operation, I mean it's wrong
Well
when you think about it, it's wrong you're paying tax on your wages at source and then you go to the shops and you've got to pay tax on your goods again
Well I hope that
That's right 
it's totally wrong
when we got a
A taxation system in place which would be fair, which means that the people in the big houses pay more, then we can do something about, maybe making the local people er pay more and reducing central taxes, reducing the VAT, it's not gonna be quick but 
No.
there's, there's no commitment to reduce VAT in the, in the Labour manifesto, but I mean er that will be the spirit of what we wanna do to make the people 
I hope you can, I hope you can do something with it, because being truthful I just, it's just 
I'm just warming my hands, it's cold outside 
Yeah you're welcome 
it's just 
anyway I'd better press on 
it's just a joke what they do 
He'll have you here all night  
Anyway you make sure you'll vote anyway 
We will yeah 
Oh yes without a doubt
thanks
Cheerio now
goodnight, come on in Michael 
Mummy what did the lady want?
Oh what did he want?
about me graphs, oh I know he will, this will happen now
 

He said 
Oh mummy
er  I went in the office and he said er  I'd been stood there about twenty minutes at the window and everybody was flitting around like a bee from flower to flower and they just left me stood there, so I never said anything, go on the back
I'm stood there and he said, all of a sudden he comes, cos he already had one of the lads in Ian 
Mm.
says to me, er can I have your graphs please John for last week
Where's the time?
so I goes and gets them  goes in the office 
Deana
and he kept, all he was interested in
Deana
was erm
Deana
it's fifteen minutes stop on the way back
Oh
so he said what's this here?
Said I've been sorting the notes out, I've put them in order back in, so that when he comes to the window all that the office staff gotta do is look through, like we was told to do
Yeah 
fifteen minutes  he said but you've got twenty minutes here, I said well yeah Nick you've got to fill the return book in as well I said and, he said what, I said well what day was it?
He said that was last Friday, oh I said I was filling my timesheet in and my expense sheet, not that long, I said well it takes as long as it takes don't it?
Mum
No he says I could do it in a lot less time than that, he said and a lot neater, I said, you saying I'm a scruffy writer?
Don't think you'd have to
I said that to him  and he looked at me over the top of his glasses like that, cos he, in his office, he sits here, the door's there, he sits here and I, I, everybody else has had the door open, I went in and shut the door and I stood behind him, I didn't stand in front of him, stood behind him so, keep
away and then all of a sudden he gets his, calculator out and it's  I said excuse me Eric I said not wishing to be appear thick, I said but, what you doing?
He said 
Mum have you got the tape recorder on?
I'm calculating kilometres into miles  so
All you have to do is talk normally, just ignore it
Oh right 
said okay, I said and what's the formula that you use?
And he told me, he told me, I've got it written on the back of me hand  I thought it was brilliant that, I thought little do you know what I'm gonna use that for   he never phoned me for a, he's not phoned me for 
Maybe he'll phone tomorrow, d'ya think I'll get four out of that?
where do you think I'm going?
Birmingham
Wrong
Manchester
you know that don't ya?
It's only the kids that are gonna be able to have this you know
Well give it to the kids then 
Michael stop it 
I'm gonna have a rum in a minute
Mm?
I'm gonna have a rum in a minute, I think I'm gonna take a valium
oh it's a bit late for them starting
Jane I think
on Valium 
They can have a biscuit
What's for tea?
Casserole
Mum
have I time for a scrub or what?
Yeah
Eh?
Well Michael, right I'm gonna turn this off for a bit 
You messing my work?
No
right come on you two get on with it
Can I just
you've got a little remote
 

What are you doing?, what did you do with Michael's bowl?try and, come on, are you ready for bed?
You've cleaned your teeth and everything?
Stacey come on 
I've done everything 
Have you been on the loo?
No I don't even need the loo
Er, well get on it please before you go to bed and put some cream on
Can I have Michael's squeaky squeak?
Please yourself 
Thank you, can Michael 
Where is he?
Here
Come on, right tomorrow we're going to strip these beds
I know you've told me this
look at the state of it Deana look 
I know keep, I picked everything up so I can get my lamp on, I, after I put the lamp on
that's been there all day, come on Deana, if you're gonna have the lamp on you're gonna have to put something away, some books or is that packet any good now?
 
Well alright, but can you, can you not get rid of a couple of the boxes and what's this thing there?well why don't you tip it up the other way and give yourself a bit more room, tomorrow Deana what's that, your dictionary?
That book at the end of the shelf?
That's a library book.
Talking of which, what's the date on it?
It should've been back by now, some day in March, twenty eighth of March
Mm
Mummy can I play with this?
oh I wondered where it was, yes alright  if you stand things up edge to edge, you'll have a bit more room won't ya?
There's half that stuff on there doesn't have to be there does it?
No
Eh?
You wanna get it sorted out and tidied up tomorrow, it's too late to do it now 
I just tidy this end up
quickly
quickly
and then tomorrow you can take everything off right, everything, dust it and rearrange everything, okay?
Yeah, Stacey, Stacey said I could keep this like this, she said she wouldn't mind
Well you're gonna have to put the wire down, run it down the bottom
Mummy is this my ?
and you wanna run it down the back, Deana take the wire down the back of all your books on the shelf
Mummy is this my ?
Shall I do it now?
No do it tomorrow, take everything off tomorrow and when we pull the beds out, strip the beds you can vac all behind the beds, right?
 
And then sort it out properly
Mummy this my one?
just for now put things up, look, what you can't get on your shelf  put on the drawers because you know 
I'll put on the drawers 
what's gonna happen, you're only gonna lose them all down the back
Mum
come on
is this my
right sunshine what you up to?
What have you got?
Oh Michael stop it, oh Michael that's dirty  come on, arms up, you're soaking wet  come on wash your hands  put your hands in, that's it, come here, no, leave the plug alone, what?
Is this my ?
The one that I left on your bed?
Yeah
Yeah, but use your other one up first, no Michael, put your hands in  put your hands in, in the water, I'm gonna sm Michael  put your hands in the water, right  come here 
Mummy do I need a new one?
Whoop
I need a new one
I can't
I've run out
Let me see the other one first.
I can't, I can't find it
Show me the other one first and you can find it  oh no you don't, come here
You put like 
we'll sort it out properly tomorrow Stacey  Michael up, now what have you got?
Mum I can't find it 
Alright, start on your new one
Thank you 
Stacey I want you anyway, come in the bathroom, Michael leave it alone, open your mouth, open, come on  that's right, open again
Do you think I need a brace?
Oh, I don't know whether you need a brace or not, open, Michael  don't know what they are Stacey you'll have to wait for them to grow properly, open 
Them are going square and my teeth, all my teeth 
Not everybody has a brace you know.
look
Leave it, mm, yeah, well they look funny because all your other teeth are little teeth, will you come here please?
You can have some medicine  come on  and put some vaseline on your lips please 
This is the wrong one.
No it's not
Oh I remember that other stuff that used to have to have
Mm, mm 
and I didn't even like it so the doctor had to change it for me
Oh, well you've got it back now, right are you ready?
Yeah
Right get into bed, I'll be in in a minute, Michael  is he in with you?
Yeah 
Right, look at, this is a tip this, what's this doing on the floor?
Now that's a bit better isn't it mummy?
Yeah a little bit, the whole place is a mess though isn't it?
It's gonna have to be really done tomorrow  come on, oi, right come on, say goodnight to , oh up the top
Ah, ma
kiss, kiss  that was a quickie, right kiss Stacey, kiss, kiss
Urgh on me nose 
right wave ni-night, ni-night
ni-night, night, night
ni-night
right  you've got till nine o'clock, give us a kiss
And nine o'clock for this
ni-night and Stacey you can lay down and listen to the story, come on put your stuff away and lay down, good night
Good night 
Good night 
ah I did ask you to put those dresses away, will you do them please in the morning?
Otherwise they're not gonna be fit for wearing  ta  where have you been?
Even your feet are wet, what have you been doing?
Eh?
Bill went out in the garage yeah and missed him
You would  he said you could cut that tree down when you're ready.
Eh?
He said you could cut that tree.
You said it was Hilda
Well Hilda
I like 
while they're away, well, she never, she was quite happy to let you go ahead and do it  she said, the only thing was, she said she'd miss having the privacy in that corner because of being overlooked at the back.
Does she want the stump digging up as well?
Well I don't know she never said any 
Well I take a piece of that and I'll make you a bird table out of the piece of trunk
Alright
about that much
yes
and we'll put a cross on the bottom of it and I'll put you a piece of plywood across it and you can stick your nuts on or whatever
mm.
you only want something simple don't ya?
Oh aye, she's gonna put like er erm, you know, trailing stuff over the fence, I suppose that's what we'll use as well to brighten it up a bit look at that, int that a waste?
She's taking one mouthful out of that
Who's that ?
That's  that 
Hark at me boy 
Are you gonna go up to him?
I was gonna wash the pots up so
Mm?
I was going to wash the pots  I'll go and smack him round the head
He's not been too bad but I tried to put him to sleep upstairs didn't I this afternoon?
And he got upset, so I ended up having to bring him downstairs, give him his lunch first and then I put him to sleep in his pram  this is all since the weekend this
Yeah.
he'd been alright before that.
Did he get you up last night?
Er  what time was it?
I got up to him a couple of times once he only 
Go to sleep Michael
stirred  I must of, don't know what happened this morning, I put the alarm off and turned over and went back to sleep again, it was about ten to eight before I finally got up.
And then the kids have gotta get up.
Yeah  I had to iron their blouses as well forgot the blouses didn't I?
I want Stacey's lunch box
Eh?
I want Stacey's lunch box  that's 
Go to sleep Michael, go to bo-bos, bo-bos time 
I think we're just gonna have to let him moan  I wouldn't mind, but until last weekend, he never give a dickie bird about going to sleep  I think it was  that came in and set him off  she should've just left him on to it instead of trying to do it herself 
These are 
Mm?
The plates
Yeah I know, do that last 
What time's the plane in the morning?
I don't know, she said she was leaving here at quarter to five
Oh, well I won't see 'em, I've got a seven o'clock start.
Have ya?
I don't want a cup of tea
You're not gonna get one.
it's too early
Please yourself.
if I happen to be awake at that time, then yes, but, if I don't have 
Well make your mind up 
No 
yes or no?
I said if I'm awake when you get up then yes, but don't wake me up 
I wouldn't get, I wouldn't mind if it was bloody six o'clock but it wasn't it was more like half past.
It wasn't it was more like twenty past and I was deep in the land of nod
You'd been asleep, you was not in the land of nod at all.
I was last week 
That bloody pie's repeating on me.
It wasn't a pie, it was a casserole.
The pie
Oh the apple pie, sorry 
That boy make noise, chuck him out of bed I would 
Oops, sorry
You will be  did you ask my permission?
No.
Then don't .
Sorry.
You will be.
Oh dear, I hope it's not going to be one of those nights 
Go to sleep Michael  just have a  still won't go.
He will in a minute, I'll go up to him  I'll leave you to do that dirty horrible casserole dish.
I knew that was coming  you only leave me to do the shit, I never get the good stuff just the crap  ah shut up  what was that?
What was what?
Dunno 
I didn't hear anything.
I don't think so, I didn't hear anything John 
what, him knocking one of the cupboard doors or something  John I didn't hear anything 
Here you are Stacey come on sit up  come on  oh managed to keep him in bed with you all night, here are
Thank you.
Mum you know when you had to take Michael downstairs when he was screaming, Stacey was, he would've gone off just Stacey was chat was talking.
I don't think Stacey had a lot to do with it actually apart from disturbing him coming outside 
Yeah well by then you'd, you'd already messed him up, she must've got him to sleep before she put him down in the cot did she?
Nothing to do whether it was you from, from Saturday he's never been the same, will you pick up your pen  before they go on the floor, what else have you got lurking on the bottom of your bed?
how many do you want?
Pass it to me please  thank you, Stacey can you reach the erm, no Deana can do it, can you climb down and go and get me one of my tablets please?
Which one's clean?
Which one are you wearing?
The pink one?
The pink one I can't wear it.
Why?
You, you, I've not got a slip
You're not wearing any of them?
No.
You have got an underslip downstairs.
I know it needs ironing.
Doesn't need ironing   Hello, what did you get on your hand?
Mm  give me your hand then  what, no, coming out?
Who is it?
Who's that?
Stacey, Stacey, say Stacey, who's, where's Deana, Deana in here
Hello
there she is, there she is 
give kiss 
Go on Stacey get back in bed to drink your tea
Hello, say hello, say hello on it, say 
Oh the little man's coming, what's he doing?
Move over Stacey
Oh you might knock it
No that's Stacey's, I'll give you yours in a minute, there you are, here are sit still, ta 
mm  you gonna put that yellow vest on then Deana?
Yeah
Mum
You might as well take
can you take the tape recorder anywhere?
Oh here are 
In her pocket
Well why is she doing it?
I told you yesterday, erm 
The money?
Right Stacey sit down, pull the bench out please 
Can I open this one for you?
No leave it now  come on  come on, sit down and start copying those out as well please.
How can I?
I haven't got a pen.
I'm giving you a pen now  copy them out and don't spill it, Deana sit down  move up a bit.
Deana
What?
I go there.
Yeah, you'll have to let Stacey in the middle for doing her spelling
Okay.
Why do I have to do it in the middle?
Told ya  I always seem to use up all the cereals in one go.
Do ya?
Mm, no free samples though is there?
I don't think, is there a free sample?
oh it's, it's a pen.
A pen?
Yeah, they're asking you to do a survey thing.
Can I open it?
If you want to, see if there's a coupon in it.
Can I open this one?
No, let Michael have it, Stacey come on sit down and do your breakfast so we can do your spelling please.
I want to open these, please.
Hurry up Stacey 
Yep  I've only just done one of those surveys the other week, is there a coupon with it?
No Michael you're not having the pen, he's after the pen Stacey that's all.
No I don't think there is, can I open this one?
Michael's not playing with this   it's your favourite colour
What the pen?
it's blue, you don't like black biros do ya?
No.
No it's blue, Michael open it, Michael open it, mummy shall I open it for him?
If you want to.
No it's got a coupon as well look you sit down and get on with your breakfast, I won't tell you again.
Mum what is your favourite colour?
I don't know really, just a minute, let me open it, I can't get the top of that one, hang on  here are, come on Stacey get on with it  can you move up a bit?
What?why didn't you pull the bench out?
Cos she's just too lazy to get off of her bottom.
Get up please, go to the other end of the table  right, go on
Oh I've got it all to myself.
come on, right time is nearly twenty past, now sit down and get on with it  what?there are  come on Deana you get on you're 
I just can't help wondering something
What?
Suit yourself.
Tell you later.
Don't bother Deana 
You'll find out in a minute when you 
Right, come on, do you want some more milk Stacey?
Yes.
Would you like to go and bring it over then?
And you stop dropping your pen, can I do it please?
Are you going shopping today?
Sort of.
I think about it 
This is yellow.
You must be Samson Stacey cos I couldn't do it?
Do what?
Samson
What's that?
Strong  come on hurry up with those words
Maybe hands were squeaking
I don't know what they were, I certainly wouldn't open that pen  Michael you've made a right mess
 

Come on  come on Stacey concentrate on what you're doing
I am  look at that 
It's cos you've got the paper wet, go over there a bit 
Oh no the pen won't work.
Yes it will.
Cos the paper's wet
Look.
I told you move over to the other side a little bit, you've got plenty of room at the bottom, start again what's the, what letter are you doing?
What word?
Lay.
Lay, right, give me the pen, right do said and do lay after  come on work your way across, hurry up Stacey please   work your way across not down  and you've just dropped your pen haven't ya?
Why didn't you start at the top and work across instead of working down?
Stacey don't write so big, you're making a mess  
We're not having spelling this week, with us, do you know why?
No.
Shall I tell ya?
Yeah.
Because we forgot to do, we forgot to do the spelling test last Friday, so we had to do it on Monday so we didn't get any spelling this week, so right now we didn't have a spelling test, this is brilliant, guess what we do now?
What?
Table test.
That's probably why you haven't got a spelling test.
No it isn't we, we have, on Monday we had a spelling test and a table test, but the table was quite easy.
Have you been practising?
We don't need to we've already done them.
You know them that well you can be cocky about it?
No not cocky, but I know them.
So you know them 
Six, seven eight, nines
so you know that you're going to get them all right?
I hope so, I've got twenty out of twenty so far  I have to do a spell test each day with twenty in, with twenty in each one 
Have I got all 
In each week you mean?
Mm, mm, do it today, we're doing that today.
What, your tables?
Yeah.
have I got all
Er you get on with what you're doing please  what, what you mm-ing at?
What have you dropped this time?
Mum is this hoop?
Hope,ho hope, write properly, if it was hoop it'd have two Os wouldn't it?
Hoop, has it got two Os?
It's got the E after the P which makes the O become an O sound doesn't it?
Write properly Stacey come on, say it out to yourself, what are you making such a row?
Oh
What you've dropped your pen, well say pen then 
Like you go to the doctors, you didn't 
Mm, come on Stacey.
I think it's brilliant, and when I came out of hospital you said mummy, I said I want to stay here for a couple of days is that Stacey?
Are you saying that to yourself rope, hope?
Yes.
Cope, you haven't got cope on there.
You haven't got, has it got, it's not got cope.
No.
Come on Stacey
Why haven't I got it?
I don't know  you only put so many down can't you?
Stac Deana I mean will you go upstairs and get the tray with the cups on it please?
Yeah.
Put those in the fridge.
Easy  what have we got in our sandwiches?
Chicken.
That's easy that, mummy.
Did what?
Did I do my bag yesterday?
No I did it last night.
Now don't mind me and don't mind it.
Is it on now?
Yeah.
Don't you have to plug it in or?
No.
And what you want then?
You want some extraordinary words to put in this dictionary like that 
No it's just an ordinary conversation
Oh.
that people er, just ordinary talking.
Er will you play it back to us afterwards?
 
Well er I sound like I sound like Hilda Ogden on the
You, you don't sound at all what you think you sound do ya?
No, no.
I was disgusted when I first heard my voice  
 
Can you remember when you er Mike had it behind the settee at Pigmere Close and he played it backed?
I sounded terrible.
Mm that's the worse one I've ever heard.
mm
oh she's bad enough when not on tape.
I know, she seems to screech don't she?
But 
Well we got er Mrs  that was in  she's like, when she comes on phone you've got to hold it like that.
Yeah, yeah.
I haven't, you know I haven't dared shown John's mum, but with Michael's birthday we got a video camera out and we videoed her talking, but I'm not
she heard herself on the video, I'm sure she
oh you've heard her 
she is, she's terrible, I was gonna do that coupon
then she waves at you, she's spotted you, he's lovely 
Yeah and Uncle Frank was saying those bushes were nice, I hadn't even noticed them.
What, in new house?
Yeah he must of erm
Well they've all flowered then.
they must of started coming out 
Yeah.
cos I said, oh we're having all sorts of different cuttings off from
yeah, but, if you flatten that you want to put
yeah I will do
cos there very expensive them bushes in there 
but I said to him, I said to him there's loads of bushes in the back as well 
Yeah.
she were 
Yeah.
saying they all flower in the summer
But is she gonna take any or not?
No.
No.
No cos she's got a great big garden like yours 
Has she?
she's actually, did I tell ya I asked her what Charmwood meant, you know cos it's called 
Charmwood, yes.
Charmwood the house and she was saying when her mum and dad were courting, where they used to do the co courting, like must of been a wood and that I think 
Yes 
Oi 
there was a place close by called Charmwood so 
There is it's near Betty.
Oh is there?
And also I think it was at 
Oh it, I've been there.
was it in the Midlands?
Yeah.
And there's erm, there was a firm Charmwood as well 
Oh.
so that's why her mum and dad called it Charmwood cos it's where they did their courting.
It's nice, it's lovely.
Oh she said she's gonna erm, part of the garden in Wales she's having it made into like a rose garden or something it's like a, did she say it's an acre 
Smallholding 
Mm 
yeah it's like a smallholder
and she's gonna call that Charmwood.
Yeah.
Oh can you imagine what that's like if they have one?
She said she's had some
that extension
 

She drives you bloody dizzy so I don't know what she's
No she said she's been to have a look at, it's Glenys I don't, no not Glenys
Glenys, yeah.
Glenys has she had an extension?
yeah and she said it was quite a good thing 
Yeah.
when I told her about  and she come running back to me on phone the other week Glenys, Glenys, she said will you tell people if they spend twenty five pound at Tescos, I thought well that won't be me, or is it thirty, you get a thing and to take it to school to put towards computers
Oh.
Yes I've heard about
Why's that at?
What school?
no because it's Saint Mark's, it's at Woodbone Road
mm, I've not heard of that one.
What?
I won't be spending twenty five pounds
Well on the what's the name next week on erm 
 
you know that Granada report where they do, they cook a meal
Yeah
er getting this woman to do erm
and it's gonna be lovely that extension is that, you know by the plans and the pictures.
Yeah, I suppose to, you know with you saying it's quite a biggish house, I said erm, does she need it like so she said yeah because the two kids are in one bedroom.
Who's this, our Glen?
Mm  well she's having another bedroom which make it four bedrooms.
Yeah.
Oh it looks lovely, you know the, how the architect has done it from 
Yeah.
the front, the side and the back 
It'll be very nice Margaret when it's done.
it was only with your mum saying it was quite a biggish house anyway
Well it is, I think she's just, she wanted to, to do a bigger third bedroom
Mm
and she's had this bloke round and I think he's 
and they've taught her 
he's recommended to her that instead of making the third bedroom bigger, to make four bedrooms because it would increase the value of the house more.
The house 
I mean anybody else would of made do with a little bedroom, I mean it's big enough to get a bed and a dressing table and what in, and it's bigger, it's a lot bigger than mine 
What I suppose she thinks is if she can afford to do it, do it.
Who's this?
Pam,
Pam.
she's had all her plans done for her 
Has she?
extension, this bloke come round  
Come on pop what you doing, where's your ?
This is for the son's bedroom?
Well it, when he, she originally wanted him to do plans to make the third bedroom bigger which would of been like an L shaped bedroom
Mm.
but he recommended to her to actually make it into a fourth bedroom because it would increase the value of the house 
Yeah.
and also
So where they gonna put the, the other bedroom?
At the side.
At the side, so, but she's not having a garage or anything at the side, she's having a side extension down below, but the front bit she's having made into a shower room and then the back bit it's gonna be like a morning room to the kitchen
Oh right.
like where you go in the kitchen you turn right, like that one of mine over there, the sink's there on the right hand side
Yeah.
well she's gonna have that knocked into an archway through to a dining room
Oh right, lovely.
so it'll be lovely
Mm.
but erm, she just get 
So the third bedroom would go right across that extension then?
Yeah well that'll be their bedroom 
That'll be the fourth fourth bedroom?
Well it'll be such a big room, she said it'll be, oh I don't know what she said about sixteen by twelve or summat like that 
Yeah be lovely.
so her and Ma Malcolm are gonna have that and Emma will have the front bedroom
Come on Michael, come on.
and then there be the third little bedroom in the middle which Pam has as a sewing room
Yeah.
well no she has it as a toy room don't she?
 
A good idea to have a toy room like that.
It is really.
Yeah, it's great if you've got the room on the side to do it.
with her being in a corner Jane
I know.
she's not, I mean the next door round the corner, like she's on the corner and the house here, it's been extended on the side, but it won't bring it anywhere near Pam's extension
No.
because it's in the corner 
Corner.
you know?
She could do it on the back an'all, she's got a third of an acre of garden, it's bloody massive.
I think that's it, if you can get a house with plenty of, you know you can stay there and live for ever can't ya?
Yeah you can, mm, you can do that can't ya?
I just don't, hope they don't bring the rates back
into bloody force, but she will be with all that land  
Mm, oh she will be won't she?
Mind you that's what Labour want to do don't they?
Mm.
Well, well the Conservative, are they going to leave it as it is?
No, no they're just gonna 
No they brought a new thing out, it's not the poll tax it's called something else int it?
Er it's like, it's the same flaming thing really
But Labour want to bring back the
Ordinary rateable value 
Yeah sort of more or less 
sort of yeah, I think it'll be more means tested won't it?
Yes, we had the Labour candidate knocking on our door yesterday and I think John must of been in a right foul mood, cos he  he says come in and talk to me
Oh my God.
in the end I mean normally it was the other way round, the Labour candidate couldn't wait to get out, cos you know trying to get out the door and John was
Yeah.
giving it this
Yeah.
he doesn't normally you know, but 
No.
normally they want to get in and start waffling
Well the bloody Conservative come er through with the er postman so I just picked it up, opened it, ripped it up and it was in bloody bin before postman got to gate  bloody Major and that Lamont, and the post together, yesterday.
Was that today?
Yesterday.
I got a Liberal one through the post.
And then the woman, the fella from Liberal Democrats come and he goes erm, can I rely on your vote?
I said no actually 
Mm, they've got the Labour and the Conservative both in same .
Oh have they?
Yeah.
Have they?
You see I put me  poster up in the window and then me flipping dad said to me I don't know whether you should have that poster up, what if Miss  is around, Conservative, so I bloody took it down and put it in a magazine, I thought when we've got 
Oh she's bound to be 
when we've exchanged contracts I'll put it back up again, no, well I mean like whatsername across the road, you know erm Stuart's brother 
Yeah.
I mean he's a rank Labour, he's got everything up there cos he was telling Mike, I mean he's got his neck in a collar and he's been waiting 
I know.
for that long to go and get it sorted out
Oh.
but he's so opposed to the National Health as it is at the moment, you see Margaret a lot of these figures are being conned
Yeah.
what they're doing is like 
What's that?
people like Mike
Mm.
who've had that little, little operation like that 
Yeah.
they're clearing the waiting list
Mm.
Yeah.
because they just go in in the day and they come out on the 
Yeah.
same day
Yeah, yeah.
but a more intricate type of operation, where you've got to be in for a day, they're not
No.
getting rid of those at all, they're just getting rid of
Replacements and 
yeah they're they're still waiting a couple of years for them Jane 
I know.
all look at that, was it next year they got, somebody got er, what er, another date and it was next Febru who was it?
That girl on the telly, from Tesco
Yeah, yeah.
that we saw
I don't know.
Well look at Billy he's waiting to have his eyes tested
Yeah.
be seen to at the eye hospital, Sir John said in January I'll send you to Altrincham because they have a specialist, go to the, like they have one go to the Cottage, each, a different like a skin one day, summat, so like you're there and you're not traipsing for the eye hospital
Mm.
but this one goes to Altrincham er about six weeks after, July
Oh.
but if he had sent him to the eye hospital he'd have waited two years.
Yeah.
Can't credit it and your eyes are precious aren't they?
Mm, well I mean that's what they're gonna do take the eye test charge off and the teeth charge off as soon as they get in, well it'll all materialize don't they?
Well I hope so, does that mean I ought to wait, my appointment's the end of, oh the end of April I must just  be able to 
Ooh, aye well oh what, that's what Sam over road said I mean he had open heart surgery, said I don't know what I'd of done without the National Health
Mm, that's it, int it you could say 
said I've no qualms about 'em, and yet he's, somebody that votes for bloody Green Party, eh, he's just been up and voted for Green Party, I said I'd of stopped at home if I was you
Er Theresa's friend she wants the hip redoing.
I think it's come out
You see the thing is is 
three thousand quid.
a lot of it is er propaganda by the Conservative if, if they were gonna get it right, why couldn't they get it right in the thirteen years that they've been in power?
Why haven't you done it in the time you've been in?
He said no 
But look look at that Denise, Pam's friend
Yeah.
the
about the little boy that they think he's dead
Oh yeah.
but she had to pay a hundred and eighty pounds in all 
That's right, Chris was telling me.
so they've still got to go back in three months, she was, I hope I've not got to come back and pay, so what the 
What they waiting to have done?
Something else, er, they can't determine it or something until he's a few months 
A bit older.
Yeah.
Yeah cos he's still only a baby int he?
Yeah.
It's very difficult until they can sort of reactions a bit quicker 
Yeah.
Yeah.
int it?
Michael  what you've done?
What made me laugh was the Conservative broadcast on Wednesday was real propaganda, trying to frighten you to death that if the Labour got in
Yeah.
we'd have no nuclear weapons and
Oh aye yeah I know that 
we'd be open to the Russians and all this sort of thing, it was really trying to frighten ya, what this soap box image he tries to give you know, a one man show, it's bloody path it's his voice
It's that smile.
his words no less
But Kinnock he was really good with Robin Day last night 
Was he?
oh cos Robin Day was really trying to get him with this nuclear thing
Yeah.
he kept going on and on and on and he said do you think it was an error of judgment and he was trying to get Kinnock to say yes and he said yes it was an error of judgment the way he, he'd sort of said I think he must of said in the mid seventies, that if he got in power he'd get rid of all nuclear weapons
Yeah.
but he was saying times have changed, so cos times have changed your opinions change
Yeah.
the fact is as Russia is now
Yeah.
you know, you woul they wouldn't get rid of all nuclear weapons the Labour 
No.
I mean they'd cut down on defence
Mm.
but they won't get rid of all nuclear weapons, they know it's you know you can't 
Impossible.
Oh he's, he's great Kinnock, but I still don't know whether I believe  
 
I don't like him.
but I wouldn't vote, cos I didn't like him
No.
I wouldn't vote for anybody else.
No  you shouldn't really take it on him personally 
No.
should you?
No.
You should take it on what the pu you see they keep going 
That's it.
on about you're gonna be worse off, nobody who earns less than twenty two thousand is going to be worse 
No.
off, and there's not a lot of people that I know of
No.
normal people like us, whose husbands earn more than twenty two thousand.
how much is it a week?
Well it's about four hundred pound a week int it?
Over four hundred pound a week int it?
Yeah, what are you doing now?
But they're not actually come out with that Margaret cos after tax and insurance it's a lot less
Yeah.
but they, they would 
 
is that what, there won't be much left of it, is that what erm, they won't be in the higher tax bracket though would they?
No, they'd go into the mid one wouldn't they?
But it's the ones that are earning over forty thousand
Ooh 
that would go up into the forty percent
Yeah, so what's the next one, is there one between twenty five and forty?
There isn't is there?
I don't know it, he work, he was gonna work that
Michael
It's alright.
You sure?
I'll pick it up in a minute.
There's something on the national insu about the national insurance as well, I can't think how he's gonna work that  because he said it is the ones that are on over forty thousand that are gonna be  
Come on there's gonna be nothing left of that.
Black banana.
No.
I don't know
erm, do you know what we were saying the other night?
How could they be short of money when everybody's always paying in money?
Yeah and we've got all this money from the er North Sea Gas
Yeah.
Yeah, but that won't last for ever.
but then they said work, they won't let them, the money that they've got on council houses, they won't let them spend it you see that?
They won't, they won't.
Well what's that staying as it is for?
I don't know, but they won't let them do with it 
They should let them do all the houses up with it shouldn't they?
They should let them buy more land and do more council building.
Yeah you see they've gotta 
They've been trying to see about that lot where the boys' grammar school is int they?
Yeah, yeah.
Because they want to sell that, but they want it to be sort of like half private
No.
and half I suppose council houses
Yeah.
cos it's quite a big plot of land that int it?
It must be mustn't it?
Yeah.
But oh, I don't know, whoever gets in it'll all still be the same in years so 
Of course it will.
I can't see that it matters.
Michael
He's okay, he's only playing with them, aren't you love?
Until he breaks, them, he's broken two at home.
Has he?
Mm, snaps the tapes.
Ooh and he's such a lovely lad.
Oh you wouldn't of said that last night.
What, in the middle of the night?
No, last night going to bed he's been, he's been smashing until Saturday 
You know he's been good going to bed.
Deana put him to bed
Saturday?
Saturday when we went out, Deana put him to bed
well she was stupid enough to let Deana put him to bed
no wait a minute 
of course he got all upset so she had to then mess about and try and get him to sleep, which apparently she did
Yeah.
but he must of been all worked up and since then I've had a right struggle, most nights
Yeah.
I've had to go back up in to him, yeah, but I don't know what happened last night, I don't know whether he was not quite tired enough, erm, he must of got up as soon as I put him down and started sort of moaning then I went into the girls and I sorted them out he started screaming he did, so I had to go to him in and lay him down and making him lay down 
Yeah.
and he was starting sobbing and he got that upset, in the end
He started screaming.
you know real, I've never heard him do that before.
Aye, they can do that sobbing.
No.
So erm, anyway I went back in to him, I kept going up and down, I left him for a while, but he doesn't normally cry like that
No.
so er
Ee, ee.
eventually I went up and I tried to get him to go down to sleep again, and he was shutting his eyes and on his dummy, but he was 
If they get that worked up, they can't calm down can they?
No 
No.
so I thought I couldn't, I couldn't let him go to 
No.
sleep while he was like that so I picked him up and took him back downstairs again,
He knows he's doing this thing.
Is it, do you think it might be as well that it's a bit lighter Jane, cos I was reading a smashing tip 
Oh yeah.
in one of me magazines to blacken your curtains out, cos I thought I'm gonna do that on Joanne's
Yeah I don't 
you know she moans, somebody suggested if you've got a curtain and you've got like you, a liner behind it 
Yeah.
to fasten a black bin bag
Oh yeah, yeah.
between the curtain and the liner
Yeah I put a  over his 
and it completely blacks over it was dark
when it was dark
but no, you know it does start getting lighter and you're gonna have problems then, you might try that cos you could, you've got liners on them curtains haven't ya?
Yeah.
Open up er, er a, a bin liner and pin it in between the two 
In between the two.
Oh that's a good idea.
so it's completely black.
Blacks it out.
Blacks it out.
It is a good idea.
Yeah.
I didn't, it was so cold yesterday, we'd been out in the morning and I decided to put him in his cot, on the odd occasion I do, do, he's gone to sleep without any problems
Mm.
but yesterday morn he was, yesterday morning he started crying didn't he, I didn't leave him for any length of time 
No.
I brought him downstairs give him his dinner and then I put him to sleep in his pram in the front room, but I think that'd also er 
Yeah, yeah.
Upset him.
so I just hope, it's so annoying though, you'd just give him a cuddle, lay him down and that was it, that was all 
I know, so I mean the thing is that we've always said haven't ya as long as you can sort of get 'em down
Mm.
Yeah 
to go to sleep so you can have a 
at least you've got some free time.
on your own, you can cope with waking up in the night can't ya?
Ten o'clock before I put him upstairs.
Yeah.
Cos you lose your patience.
What was wrong with ya?
Oh she's so calm.
No I'm not too bad really.
 
I lost me paddy with Stacey I must admit, cos he's by then screaming, I did get a bit cross last night
Yeah.
cos he's throwing a wobbly at the cot, he's thrown all his dummies out and Stacey comes out the door, I just wanted to leave him cos he's just, before he was ready and that 
No.
I was up there, stood on the landing where he couldn't hear me and couldn't see me I was 
No.
sort of just waiting to see what he was gonna do and then Stacey comes out, I can't sleep and I said get back in  that bloody bedroom  oh dear 
What was that?
over the road with Sam?
Er his mother, you know the one that works in Woolworths?
Yeah, yeah.
They've had him from the Wednesday, was it the Wed er, no from the Saturday to the Wednesday cos she was working and they took him on to seaside somewhere and when come home, he's having stitches in his head where he'd fell, he hit it on the stone or summat and I said oh did he enjoy it apart from that, she said he was a swine last night, he was screaming and hitting me and she called her husband down from work, she couldn't control him, said she should of smacked his arse and put him in the cot.
Mind you I've heard them shouting at him.
Oh it's awful.
How old is he?
He was two last Christmas, he's lovely an'all, but you see it doesn't take much to get out of a routine.
It does come nice after Christmas, Christmas it got him all out of plonk
Yeah.
cos you know he was that shattered he was falling asleep downstairs before I put him in his cot, so it was a case then of putting him to sleep in his cot
Mm.
and even in the middle of the night on the odd occasion that he sort of disturbed a bit, I just used to shout to him
Yeah.
lay down and go back to sleep and, sometimes he would.
Yeah.
Oh, she's very lucky that a child of that age had gone, I mean she don't see his, his nana that much
No.
really, to have him from
Mm.
er what was it?
Yeah the Saturday to the Wednesday
Aye.
d'ya know she's still at Woolworths?
I told ya
Mm.
it was that bit of 
Ta.
Yeah.
is she there?
Yeah.
Not seen her since 
Ta.
Yeah.
I mean cos there's time when
to stay open late weren't it?
And she didn't want to do it.
And she said I'm, I'm I'm not staying she said, I think it was New Year's Eve, she said I'm walking out so I might have no job, so I've not seen her since, so Madge said she's still there, that's in Altrincham int it?
Mm yeah that's how she's just 
 
but he keeps going up to the gnomes and saying hello is that  no he come home the other night and the, we, no the other day Sam he tipped all the bloody soil out of the earth and done something else, he said he's a naughty boy and she's said to Sam he wants a smacking he said I'm not smacking him 
Oh well he wouldn't do that.
He wouldn't do that would he?
She should tell him.
and he's never got a nappy on him, he's like this
it's swinging all the time he's looking at  
 
what is it, you doing a Josh?
Mike came down yesterday morning, mind you he had been on his own quite a lot, a lot of time yesterday for the day Josh, cos I went to Altrincham with me mum at half nine and it, I'd taken him out for a walk to make sure he'd had his walk and Mike didn't get up till gone half two and when he come down he'd cut a report of Lisa's on the floor
Oh.
they call it achievement you know they call it record of achievement 
Oh God, yeah.
but fortunately I put it in a folder so the folder was destroyed
But the 
but the thing that he was 
was alright 
actually caught with, I think he was just starting on that when Mike come down, er but, he got it out this magazine rack because it was at the back of there I put it, cos it's this year's the others I've got upstairs in a drawer
And he ferreted it out.
he ferreted it out, but I, you know I said to Mike well if er, if he's only chewing the paper 
Yeah.
I mean he could start on the 
Of course he could, he's not bad really.
Yeah, I found, only because I went out one night, and, it was when Mike was still next door and what I'd done I'd locked him in the back room and he said he was howling
Oh.
he doesn't, he doesn't like being cooped up 
In one room.
so if I leave the doors open 
Oh he's so good.
he can wander about you see and jumps up on the furniture and looks through 
Careful.
the window and what have you, you know?
Yeah good lad.
You're a good lad aren't ya?
You see that's where I really  
Aren't you?
Aren't you?
I've got that burglar alarm over there, but I don't think I'd ever be able to use it
You mean with the dog being loose 
You want your socks on?
Do you want some more?
Ask Chris for some.
or is it only to do with doors opening?
Well this is what I'll have to, we'll have to find out, I've not really gone into detail about it, I think it might be actually because it's er you, you've got two things 
When you open the front door 
on a, on a thing haven't they?
And they, if you go to it, I forget how it is, but that's how Jane's is, so
Now, if you go through the door you've got so many seconds to get to the box to turn it off.
That's right, yeah.
Ours the same.
Yeah, and there's a panic button at the front door and there's a panic button upstairs
What is it?
 
 
Ah good lad, good lad.
Come on Josh.
That was Diet Vimto.
 
 
Oh I didn't like the taste of that.
Didn't ya?
Oh I like it
No.
and Lisa, I get it for Lisa she likes it.
It seems to have a bit of a different taste.
 
 
Where is it?
Is it up there?, in your bag up there I think Marg?
Did you put it in the bag?
Oh, yeah I think I did.
You put it over there.
no I put it back up there.
Josh   has Josh licked it?
what was it like?
He needs to be thinner, he's like a bloody dustbin ain't he?
Your mum said he was eating enough 
I give him two barm cakes and we had one each and before we'd finished, started our second half of our one, he'd ate the two, give him a custard and he'd ate it 
 
in two mouthfuls, she said did you take
So did you enjoy that custard?
No wonder he don't get indigestion
Two int it?
he's such a gulper.
Oh.
See you next week Chris.
Okey-doke ma.
See you next week now.
right
cos I'll see you again then Margaret 
tarrah Jane 
take care.
bye bye Michael
Say bye bye, say bye bye.
bye.
Well wave bye bye then.
He's too busy licking his lips.
Where'd you get them braces from?
Tarrah
Tarrah.
tarrah Bill
They're lovely aren't they?
Mm, they'll last him for a long, long time.
Yeah.
Oh, where you going, mm?
To work?
Did you know
yes, you were saying
I just hope that I've plugged it in properly.
Oh it's going great guns that  I've got Len coming 
I'll take it home well and you can have, well there'll be nowt bloody said at our house after five o'clock so you don't
I've got Len coming round at half past twelve  
 

you'd just gone, it's a wonder you didn't see her coming round the bloody corner.
Was this Wednesday?
Wednesday, I'd got Michael outside in the pushchair, coat on and I think I'd just come down from the loo and I saw the car pull up  I quickly ran and got me coat on  oh I, I'll come with you she said, so she come shopping with me.
Who was this?
Er, erm 
This is a friend she's a d she's a nice girl isn't she Jane?
She is a nice girl
But she's got problems a bit like
Pat erm
what I used to have with Betty
Oh.
you know one of those 
Yeah.
that you want to really help them and you feel dead sorry for them
Yeah.
but no matter what you say you still end up doing what they want
Yeah.
and whatever.
She's very weak, I think that's what it is
Yeah.
she knows what she wants to do and what she should do, but she just can't 
Nah.
seem to be able to do it.
Nah.
Still the same now.
Is she?
Shame.
other day when she locked herself out no matter what 
 
what you suggested how she got in that, oh no you can't have that, well she kept coming and she kept aren't I a silly bitch, aren't I silly bitch Bill, and he looked  she was taking the mickey out and he said well what, what's your daughter's name, she said Jane, as if he was puddled he said no what's that name?
Anyway she, some bugger, you know Sue?
That er that's got the greengrocers, she got to know her daughter's phone number and phoned round for her
Ta.
well it didn't matter what you suggested 
 
yes, that's what the lads were
no wonder it was, me dad was trying to get her into the house and everything and she said oh well so and so's got me key  well I said I'm not bloody phoning er their Nora
He rang.
He rang?
Er are you talking about Nora?
Well this girl she's got two children at  and Nora's got in with her, but her husband is an Iranian so she goes over to Iran every now and again, she's got a key, I said I'm not phoning to bloody Iran for you Nora.
She's got a sister in Urmston, that's about
A daughter.
a daughter, what's er, what's her number the daughter, oh I don't know her number  I said well what's her name it'll be in the book, she said it's Jane
It's Jane I said  
er, it got that bad that I thought she was taking the piss out of me.
Yeah, did she get in in the end?
You could, could the window tre the cleaner get through that window he said yes, but she'll have to, he'll have to force it, she said oh I don't want it forcing, no, somebody at the shop in the greengrocers rooted through the phone book, eventually got her daughter's phone number in Urmston, phoned for her and her daughter come down
Urmston's not in our book you see.
No.
No it's not no.
No.
 
I said I'll go round the back and I said I can get in through that window for ya, I said well I'll have to force it, what d'ya mean force it?
I said I'll have to prise it open oh no, no 
No, no, no no.
I said well do you know anybody with a good ?
Oh blimey.
Do you know Nora, Nora ?
No I don't think 
In er Ashdon?
No.
Mind she's very lonely, she's on her own you know and she'll talk to anybody
Mm.
you can guarantee it she goes to shops about eleven o'clock, she don't come back till one because she's been talking on shops, that's her routine you know?
Yeah.
Very lonely, it's a shame, very, very good-natured as well 
Well where does she live, in Ashdon village?
No, up our road
Oh.
er third one from the top  gingery er talks a lot you know, gingery hair, nice girl, but as I say er  funny girl 
Mm  my John was in Sale on Saturday when he ran into John  he was telling him about his 
Oh I  
yeah, telling John all about his erm, he had an accident at work or something 
Well I don't know Jane, I don't really listen to any gossip up that end, you know what I mean?
Yeah.
But he's er, got a nice little girl
Has he?
Yeah fortunately 
He's still there then John ?
Oh aye Sandra yeah, he lives in 
Oh does he?
Mm.
John er bumped into him on Saturday 
Oh yeah.
and he was showing him his arm, apparently he got erm
Yes he did Jane he had an accident.
trapped into er a machine
Oh.
at work, I don't know where he was working
Yeah.
and pulled him into the machine and made a right mess of his arm.
Oh God.
Apparently he's had to have plastic surgery on his arm 
Yeah he showed us.
so, yeah, mm.
He'll get some compo for that.
He's waiting for a claim going through.
So what does he do Jane now?
He's a taxi driver part-time.
I think you mentioned it once about taxi driving 
Yeah and he, but he works for somebody else full-time, I can't think who he said it was now.
Oh  Serlison High, I cut through there going to, when I'm going to work.
Why they got a little house down there 
There's loads for sale down there, they're quite nice little houses cos Eileen used to work at 
Oh give it to down there
Nora's brother's got one.
Yeah, have I got to buy you a bottle of Vimto?
Oh he seems to like it don't he Jane?
but er Eileen  she's got four of them, you know, Margaret was living with that lad for ten years weren't she?
I know.
They got married and they've been together and apart for, ever since they've got bloody married
Yeah.
then there's Ellen, don't how the bloody hell she lives so or what have you
There's only Anthony and he seems pretty normal, yeah.
He's stuck with that girl I say cos I mean she's a lot older than he is, but they're stuck together  yeah, cos Carol must be near my age 
Blimey.
Yeah.
Every one of them she's had something with ain't she?
Mm, I suppose, John, how many bloody wives has he since I don't know 
 
how many kids has he had by each one?
I say he's had half a dozen kids to each girl he's been 
Yeah.
going out ain't he?
Mm and just think Jane if you'd of stayed with him you'd have your hands full.
Right, and I don't think he's even nice I don't.
Oh dear, must of said that about him 
Nosey hole 
do you like that Diet Vimto then Michael?
Hiya
He must have something though because I mean there's another 
Aye, very young int she?
Josh  for younger girls, they must think it keeps them young.
Yeah, but he he doesn't acknowledge those children to Ellen, don't he, don't even acknowledge 'em, he's walked past them in our road and never acknowledged them.
How can you do that to your own kids?
Yeah and our Lisa's bloody bad as well.
Is she?
You know they make me laugh with Eileen they want to think back when she, how she cheated on John her
Did she?
Oh Christ she was the talk of the bl that was bloody disgusting that, oh aye.
Mm.
Folk they forget that, you know what I mean?
Mm, and she's got the audacity to have a go at other people.
Mm.
I remember she had a go at me once, I was leading Margaret astray according to Eileen 
Oh aye oh Christ, my oh Margaret had Eileen like that Jane with what Margaret  mother, she daren't open her mouth to er Margaret because Margaret had copped her
Had she?
Oh aye.
How long ago?
How old was she?
Oh so long before John and I, but er, oh no they all had her under the thumb.
Michael stop it.
He was such a nice bloke John was.
Oh he was a lovely man I think John  knew you know, I mean look at Derek  she still talks to him
Mm  I think you're in his place Michael.
and yet you know that night Chris, and on that bloody Wednesday night knew what was going on, every bugger knew but Margaret .
Mm.
Josh don't be a  mardy 
I'd love to be a fly on the wall about Wednesday night.
is it still going?
Ooh, every bugger's business is discussed.
Does Margaret still go?
Yeah.
Does she?
Want to know how, what's going on in our road ask Margaret 
Ask Margaret.
she knows more what's going on than I do
Oh dear.
I couldn't be that bloody interested though could you?
watch out your brother's not up there Jane.
Mm.
Where is he?
 
 

Careful Michael 
Eh give us a kiss, oh
He gives bootiful kisses don't you then lad?
Oh you sloppy hap'orth.
Oh eh Josh you got
mm, what's Josh doing?
Eh between you and me, Alan isn't with her according to Margaret.
Oh so don't say anything.
No.
She keeps trying to  girlfriend, Anthony's girlfriend, but I won't 
He's here with Michael.
they're both on window ledge
Come here and have a look.
Ooh, oh  what you looking at?
They're both looking through the window , aren't ya?
Come on in then, come on, have you drunk that drink all again?
That's two big cupfuls you've drank, good lad  good lad, he's drank another cupful of that Jane
Oh blimey, you have got a spare nappy here somewhere haven't you?
 
Or you do have
Er, just as well I did have, yeah, God knows where anything is now what, what you have to do with that now
eh Jane do you know what?
Mike rang the solicitor up yesterday and he said that he was sending out the contracts to us
Yes.
that he just received them like, about half an hour before Mike rang up, so he said I've got to get me secretary to type them out and then we, I'll send them to you and we've got to sign 'em, then what happens from there?
Once you've signed the contracts?
Yeah.
You've got to have a witness, haven't you, sign it in front of somebody?
Is that the one, no?
I don't think
Send it back and it should be pretty soon after that isn't it?
Well he said Mike must have said, what has been holding it up if I, we were under the impression that when she left London, she was finished with her property 
Yeah.
cos it was put in the hands of Black Horse by Miss 
That's right.
and they were dealing with it
Yeah.
well seemingly it must be as simple as that
No.
so she's been dealing with her Manchester solicitors and a London solicitor 
Mm.
so this is what's been holding everything up.
Yeah.
So Mike must, said to him well, the thing is well we wanted to really get in before Easter
Mm.
so he said you don't have to move on a Friday cos Mike said well do we have to move Friday?
So he said oh no you can choose any day of the week.
That's right, yeah.
I suppose it's mutual agreement?
Yeah.
I mean we'll move any day, but it's whether Miss  will you see
Yeah, the only reason most people choose a Friday is because they get you over the weekend 
They get you over the weekend yeah, so erm, we'll just have to see what happens and have, just have the contracts out.
Yeah, it should be a week then, shouldn't it?
Hopefully, er what did you say five working days?
It's normally five working days, yeah.
Mm, mm, you see, cos even if we sort of made it for like the middle of next week, er, no not next week, the week after
Mm.
would bring us like the Wednesday, that would be my birthday actually the Wednesday
Mm.
but it'll make it Easter weekend
Yeah.
we'll, we wouldn't mind, I wouldn't mind doing that
No.
because it'd give Mike an extra few days anyway, could actually have 
Get settled.
the Wednesday off  and all the following week
Mm.
which would give him a good break really to get a few things done.
Yeah.
Well it'll all be
I'm not doing any, I'm, I'm, all this bloody panicking about getting a flaming gas fire sorted out and getting a carpet done, I'm not, not bothering, we'll just have to rough it for a while.
Let 'em rough it for a week.
Mm, we'll rough it for a while, because I know the downers, the only thing that Mike wants to do is put the fence and the gate up the side
Mm.
which Don said we could do
Yeah.
to sort the dog out really
Mm.
but everything else we can sort, getting there, it's not as if we're gonna need a bloody fire is it Jane?
Not really.
I mean do you find you, you use your fire more?
We have been doing over the past few nights
Have ya?
because I've been turning the heating, it's the 
Yeah.
I don't know, from tea time it seems to warm up the house 
Mm.
and it's boiling hot 
Yeah.
from sort of eight o'clock so I could 
Then it cools off 
Yeah.
don't it?
So I just put it on just to tick 
Yeah.
the room over really  but I mean if you can keep your heating on for that little bit of length of time 
Mm, that's what I'll do I don't think we'll use the fire that much, I mean we, I, did I put it on?
No I didn't put it on last night, but I did leave me heating on, it clicks off at nine o'clock, but the house was warm
Yeah.
and we went to bed anyway
Yeah.
just gone ten.
That's what, I mean we used to turn ours off of about nine, half nine and like you say it just used to tick 
Mm.
over till about eleven, you could just feel it cooling down
Yeah.
but, because I've been knocking it off that bit earlier
Yeah.
sort of five minutes 
And how have you fi I think we're gonna end up like with a fire like yours to be honest, because we don't want to alter that fireplace if we can help it 
No, it's ever so nice.
because we do like it
Yeah.
and we thought well one night, I mean it's a bloody big radiator in that room
Mm.
which I think would be enough 
You wouldn't you'd probably find that you would use it half a dozen times through the year.
Yeah, yeah.
No I won't get rid of mine.
Have you sort of not, I suppose you haven't found out money- wise what it's costing ya?
No, not really I should imagine it's not, I don't know you see, we don't, we'd of had the heating on anyway
Yeah.
so I don't suppose it's cost us any more
No.
because we've hardly had it on.
Mm.
Still you 
You do find it warm don't ya?
I do, yeah,
Have you got a couple of settings on yours is it a high and a low?
Well I've just got high and low that's all.
But I mean it'll give you er a wattage er, whatever it is
Yeah 
it pumps out anyway?
well I suppose so, I don't know what we've got.
The
yeah, because as I say something like what Jane's got would fit in that fireplace, just right
Mm.
Mm.
which like I say saw one up at erm  I told you that fireplace shop on the corner, mind you I think we'll get Edwards in, he had some in about a hundred and sixty quid or so
You should start looking round.
erm I mean really ideally Mike would like one of those that actually fits perfectly 
Yeah.
in, in the fireplace
I know what you mean.
and it's got a back to it
Mm.
and it sort of throws the heat out into the room.
Yeah, yeah.
Well I could, it could, it wouldn't justify it.
But Chris I can't see them I can't see them making a fire like that that your heat's gonna go all up the chimney, no way.
No, but what I'm saying is 
Josh come on 
if there wasn't
come on Josh, Josh 
if there wasn't a good amount of radiator in that room
Josh
it would justify having a fire like that 
Come on 
Yeah, yeah.
but because it's got such a good
Yeah.
Radiator.
you know cos I told you Mike actually fancies one of these that actually fits right in the fireplace 
I know what you mean next door 
and there's a backing to it and it pumps it out into the room, they're dead hot
Yeah.
but I don't think this room needs it Jane.
No.
Mm.
I think it'll be a waste, and I don't want to go to the expense of
Well they are bloody expensive.
because 
It slipped 
I think the fires are about three hundred quid
Mm.
but it's not that, you'd have to have a lot of the fireplace ripped up.
Mm you would 
Yeah.
it's only a little square.
Yeah, we'd have to have the pillars taken off
Yeah.
and everything like that, so all that would have to be redecorated.
Whereas like that one of ours, it'd be ideal wouldn't it?
It be it just work right
Must have your chimney swept.
That's what I want to get that number off you for that as well because I some  would suggest anyway 
I got it somewhere yeah.
wouldn't he?
I got it somewhere, I'll root it out for ya and I forgot to see Hilda about that
Michael shout Mike 
There's no rush for it.
Michael shout louder 
she's gone on holiday now.
you know, some time
Yeah.
if you think about it.
Mike
Funny enough I saw her yesterday
in a minute or two
 
and she started talking about putting the freezer in the back garden 
Is it worth my taking a coat on?
and that
Oh.
and it just slipped my mind.
Well just any time, we won't be doing nothing until the end of May anyway.
Michael, Michael shout Mike
As soon as she comes back I promise I'll ask her 
Mike, shout Mike, Mike 
But what would you, see Edward said 
shout Chris 
when we decided we want something he'll come down and 
Be careful 
sort it all out.
sort it out 
shout Chris
Hopefully we can get away with that room Jane with just maybe having to emulsion it
Yeah.
because I mean once you've taken all the pictures down, I think it did need it
She's a smoker int she?
That's 
very much.
Yeah that'll be your main thing then.
Rather than decorate I think we'll just 
Paint it.
er emulsion over it and maybe put a border around the picture frames.
This is in the back room?
Front room.
Mm.
Yeah, leave the front room, we'll have to, first week or so we'll have to live in that back room
Yeah.
until we've got 
 

Mike, Michael shout Chris, he does say Chris
It's quite an easy one that, int it?
say Chris, it's not that he can't though Madge, he just won't
No.
I've heard him say Deana and Stacey
Mm.
Yeah.
loads of times, he does moan mumma now he does that quite a lot 
 
but that is the only thing he says da, oh no
Catch this.
you'd better not have that had ya?
Had enough at the 
Chris, Mike, Michael, da, da, shout Chris, where's Chris, where's Chris  Chris  shout Chris  Chris, Chris, Chris
Ah good boy, come on 
most people I've talked to their little lads have been two before they started talking, seems to be very slow 
Yeah, boys are a bit like that mind he walked pretty quick didn't he, he can't 
He's done everything very early really.
Yeah.
Thing is he understands everything you tell him Madge
Oh aye.
I mean me friend come and picked up her two girls and her little lad, he's thirteen months, leave it, oh his dummy, erm, good boy, and his slipper come off his shoe, he only tried, the little'un to ram this slipper on, he understands everything you tell him 
Yeah.
telly off, telly on, give him a book and he'll put it on top of the telly, goes to the 
He did to Margaret, she said where's me umbrella?
He went and brought it back in.
Yeah, he does he understands everything
Mm.
but he just won't say it, not a thing 
Oh you going bo-bos?
You going bo-bos?
Saying that to him last night, go back upstairs in your cot
Oh it's terrible int it?
Dead
oh our Linda was the one, you'd get her settled down and you know what it, if you as much as turned the light switch off
She'd wake up.
Oh she was terrible.
He's alright like that, last night, once he went to sleep I sort of like staying around in his room for a couple of minutes, but I, went and opened you know, sort, sorted the curtains out and
Mm.
once he's asleep that's it
Yeah.
and I think it's just getting him that way, come on shall we put your
 
our Linda was the most terrible child
Really?
she never slept and our Edmond used to be worn out 
It does get you down actually.
Oh aye that's why we moved from our house she had me up, had played bloody hell over it, no bugger was getting no sleep
Aye.
so we went out and bought that house in  Maddors Road
Oh.
that's how she first got that
Ee, ee, ee
I can remember having  when she went in to have our Pam and er I thought on the Wednesday afternoon had a bloody good walk round
Tire her out.
I was that  knacked not her, bright as a button, she still didn't sleep that bloody night, she's a swine, Linda wasn't very old when Pam was born was she?
About fifteen months  
Ra, ra, ra, ra  come here  fasten you up, chin, chin, chin, chin, chin, chin chimney, come here  er, stand up  what, oh dear, there, right where's your ha 
But I'm used to wearing black, oh here he is, he's got his
without the trouble
Are you going skiing?
Are you going skiing?
And so she said oh I want to see that, d'ya mind if I come with you cos I don't want to go on me own, so  and then we arrived, mum arrived first and, I said you don't mind Naomi coming do you?
Mm
well if I'd known  enough company she said, I'd have been at home with me feet up
you know  
But your mum wanted to see the film did she?
Well obviously she didn't really
Mm,
anyway  to me on the way out, oh I really enjoyed that and we were crying our eyes out.
so she's glad she went in the end?
Mm   the last sort of six months 
Mm that'll be nice won't it?
So you perked her up a bit 
Well
so when are you going away?
I don't know 
I've got nothing to wear, you know I mean there's 
When's the kids going out tonight?
Mm, when I've dropped them  I won't see them now till Sunday
You've dropped them off from, straight from school?
Mm, mm and no, I dropped them off this morning, that's it, he's picking them up
Oh right he picks them up from school 
and then 
Jenny got some clothes at class and everything 
dropped at erm took the suitcase, gonna leave it at, with 
Mm
nanny's down the road, but Carl was in this morning so I dropped it off to him  it's gonna be a long time
Mm, is that normally how it is from Fridays?
No it's normally from Saturday morning till Sunday morning   I just think we'll end up going for the day  but he said, he's got Gerry coming up from Hull to mind the shop  on Saturday, he said oh you're tired and you need a change and a rest  he said something like erm
Do you think he'll stay over Saturday night?
then we'd have to be back for eleven, can't, I don't know what's gonna happen to the dog
Oh right, oh can't you take her, oh no you can't really can you?
 
You can't  right 
and you don't know what to do
I tried to
for the best
Well I do know what I want to do, but  it's knocked me for six cos I sort of felt really guilty
Mm 
sort of you can't kick them while they're down and
Yeah, but you do it, it were a good time though.
Mm 
heard something on the radio, he said, oh will you still love me in a year's time, so I looked  That's how I am, horrible to him really  it's worse than being married.
So when're you gonna tell him, when're you gonna do it  take the bull by the horns?
Yeah I can still see you  in flaming two year's time simply because you're too frightened to say anything to him, to my son.
hello  you don't give yourself time to wake up before you start moaning
Say not her again  oh look, he's such a cutey
Urgh
hello
got a bit warm under there
I was gonna say he's got rosy cheeks
I know, it's alright when the sun's out, but when the sun goes in it's freezing so I've had his plastic 
Mm
he was a little git last night.
Well no just screaming at the top of his voice, our Ben had to bring him down in the end and give him a drink and start again, even then I had to stay with him until he went to sleep
Ah 
this all started after last weekend  Deana put him to bed didn't she?
Instead of letting John's mum do it, consequently he got dead upset so 
Oh 
so he was dead annoyed with it, all week I've been struggling to get him to bed 
he, he was a treat before, just used to take him up, give him a cuddle, say night-night and that was it
So why did it disturb him with Deana?
Is it just
Well I just 
it's not like an adult?
Yeah I suppose so, yeah 
It seems, it's comforting is it?
It's the same routine
Yeah, of course you can't sort of cuddle him like that cos he's too heavy, I rock him you know for a, a couple of minutes, not that long, he's taken his braces off as well still do, don't ya?
Mm
Ah look at them 
there, I don't know, I don't know what you're gonna do, cos whatever it is you're not doing it, it's just letting time go by aren't ya, treading water if you like.
Last night I got really upset, I did in bed and erm  he kept saying what's the matter?
What's the matter?
And you have
and everything, yeah
Mm
but he'd just told me about the housing  with the car and everything.
Is it, is he, is that right, is somebody coming down to value the house?
No, just coming back home to show me the flaming car, and that's what sa I didn't  but I feel dead awful really, but I didn't jump up and down
I'm not surprised, I'd have done me fruit, if I was going around with somebody that, that say they're gonna put the house on the market for me, want to make a go, a go of the marriage, a new baby, two other kids and then oh, but yet, yet wants to play around in a, you know a little sports car, that nobody but two people can sit in
I know
I can't 
that's the weekend only and there's me 
Well he's got so many debts Lynn it just doesn't seem right he's, he's living in cuckoo land, I mean when are you ever gonna feel secure with somebody like that?
Never
You can't can ya?
Is there any more tea in the pot Jane at all?
Yeah there might be 
Well thanks that was beautiful tea,sort of ready for it
I'm not surprised with all that dashing around, he asks such a lot of you Lynn and I can't understand why he's like that when he says he loves you and everything, and he wants
I know  I don't know why I'm being so bloody docile no I really have and then 
I don't know he's gonna come a right bloody cropper
I keep burning , I bet I didn't, I thought, pardon me, positive  mm I popped round, I went in yesterday  I'm going to say something  and then he's going on about well I've sold me car to pay the mortgage and
And then all he tells you is a pack of bloody lies 
I know 
if he can lie that bloody easily
well he, he said he, he wanted it as a surprise well it's not a surprise for me is it?
Yeah, but he knew you wasn't 
 
you wasn't keen on the idea anyway didn't he?
Well that's right, yeah, cos then he asked me ages ago did I think he was being selfish, I said yes
Mm
I said, but like you tell me it's your life, mm 
he's like a Jekyll and Hyde that bloke, I've told you before you wanna be bloody careful how it works out 
and then he said to me how, how do you feel about your baby now?
Not, you know, and I said okay?
It's going to be his baby when it's a good baby
I know 
but your baby when anything comes to actually buying for it and er looking after it I would imagine, I can't see him doing all what he says he's gonna do with it Lynn
No
Oi you, he's playing with your
Oh let's have a, is it in there?
no  right, we'll have another cup of tea and then we'll have that nice cake
Right  look at you, eating all your crisps  look it's going to rain
I'm gonna go and bring my pushchair in then before it does, are you taking that with ya?
Or just  
Yeah, I'm going to, I'm just working out
I'll be back in a tick
mm, mm 
So you've still got your other  have ya that Alice had?
Mm, well it's at erm Carl's and
Yeah  but you could use it like when  
 
mind you, you might be pleased with it when it's 
Mm, I'm damn sure I will, I quite like doing things like that
Yeah
very  
 
but they remember which one   I did, I think it was that Mothercare one  they get grubby with the things and everything and it was a sunny day and I went outside with me bucket and me felt and me scrubbing brush
Yeah
and I just, I threw buckets of water on it to rinse it, and it dried because it was really warm and it came up like new 
Came up like new 
cos you can have a real good go at the wheels that way outside 
Yeah, outside, it's like my pram, I mean, I was, Stacey was going in hospital last year to have her adeno adenoids out and Sue was having him and I thought well, he was too big for his carrycot, but take the pram down and he's got nothing to sleep in  and er, I put him in it, it been six months since it was do well since he started using it, so I give that a good going over and the pram wheels come up lovely
I know
you know I get a Brillo
Yeah 
and some Jif on it, but erm, it's not been done since, so when the next good bit of weather, I've got to get the pushchair out and give that a good going over 
And do that 
and me pram as well 
I know, I fancied a big pram, but there you go 
Well it's, whether you've really got somewhere to put it really that's the top and bottom of it 
Well there's nowhere to walk to now, is there, you know  
Well where would you, mind you I suppose like in the olden days you could only get big prams, they just had them in the living room didn't they?
Yeah, well it'd just have to go in the hall, but, no, this will be better, carrycot and  that,ridiculous prices though
Well it is, it's different if you was, if you was starting from scratch I suppose  you know, first baby you're inclined to, you want everything new don't you with these new 
Well I sort of said to him as well about, I said and it's ridiculous, just because I said the bedding had been lo in the loft
Mm
with the cot and everything he, he sort of er  thought it was 
Well some lofts are lovely aren't they?
I mean our loft is a right mess 
grotty I mean they're all in bin bags
Mm
they only need washing , I mean I might be wrong, they might have, they might have gone funny, but I doubt it  they've not been up there that long really only about two 
Oh all of my stuff has been up in the loft  it's like you say, I mean if they've been double wrapped and everything and you wash them
he should put his hand in his pocket really and buy something
Of course he should, you ought to just ask him for say a hundred, you know to buy a couple of packs of nappies and some cream and changing mat, a changing bag, you'll want all that won't you?
I know a changing bag could cost sixteen 
Fifteen sixteen pounds and then you've got another six or seven pound for a changing mat  you wanna say to him, that you know, can I have er, some money, I want to start getting us a few things together, but you, I mean, what about clothes?
I know, he, he said er, he said about, plus when I mentioned the pushchair and the carrycot he said oh well , so I said yeah 
Yeah 
I said that development, I said,with the bargain coming up with a
He alright?
Yeah he's alright there  oh I just 
Ooh, you've made a right mess with them crisps young man, ain't ya?
The thing is Lynn you've got to start early 
Well
it's all part of the, of the process of getting ready for it though int it?
Yeah
where've you got these from?
Er the deli, you know in the village
Oh they should be nice then
you might need a, get a fork to eat it with, you don't mind, you might need a fork because 
Oh right are these of, what did you have, is that what you had before one of these with the bits of carrot on 
Yeah, but you might, I can't remember whether you really liked it and I thought oh
Oh I did yeah.
So it was the deli not that other place, because there's er, a, a little cake shop int there in the village?
Near where, next to 
I know where
where the new florist is?
Yeah, I know where the erm the delicatessen is, so you got them from there and not the other shop, cos
No
I've been in is it  
it's opposite erm, yeah not  Parker Radburn 
what about  Lingraves do they erm?
No they've gone, it's a florist now
Oh really, I only went in there the other day, well the other week about a fortnight ago 
I know cos I know when, when I got these  when I came, about two weeks ago
Ah
they were in, I know they've been there years
You know what's done it, I suppose  Parker and Radburn going in there 
Mm 
and they just about managed didn't they with the ?
cos they sell different sort of 
Mm, me and John had a, er one from the  Spinces the other day very nice 
What, yeah they're oblong aren't they?
Yeah  you can have my, would you like my carrot?
You can take it off 
Er will, will Michael like it?
No it's marzipan int it?
Yeah  right, erm thank you very much
You like marzipan do you?
Mm
Yuck, yuck, I like almonds and everything but
You just don't like
I just don't like marzipan, I think it was something that to do when I was a kid to be honest
They do another sort and that's really nice, it's called a nutty Vera
and it looks like this but it's a similar texture, but it's a different taste, it's got walnuts on the, bit on the top
Oh
and what it is, the man that bakes them, it's a  that makes his
Mm
and he's related to  Vera Duckworth out of Coronation Street cos it's  
Oh it's because 
something like that
Oh
so he's done one after her, a nutty Vera.
I bet that's nice
That's what she said anyway
with nuts on instead of erm
Yeah  d'ya know I could drink and drink and drink   you know there only  you get all the fingers caught, it's like with an ironing board int it?
Oh God, yeah 
It's like looking at another planet to a man
that's right  what's that?
Is that marzipan?
That is isn't it?
Yes it is, I'll have to dig that 
Ah
and it's everything just to stop you getting at   what, well get it then  yeah, I've, I don't mind some of it, I've not had a bit of marzipan for  I don't mind these erm almond slices, I quite like them, but I think it must be the texture of the marzipan
Mm, I love it, they do erm, German erm marzipan bar, chocolate bar
Oh aye
have you ever made marzipan?
No
I did it in the sixth form, it's really hard, it takes ages
Does it?
That's why I would think, it's ground almonds they're expensive
That's right, yeah
it, and it doesn't taste anything like, I mean this'll be probably be home, nearest to homemade, but that 
Mm 
bright yellow stuff it doesn't taste like that at all 
No
it's, sort of very more of 
Here 
a subtle taste, you know it  need loads of ground almonds
Mm
just to make a small  oh 
That come off rather easily, would you like my marzipan?
Hmm, well leave it there and I'll see how I go, cos I've had one carrot and I, sort of like, I had your carrot and I'm putting mine   quite rich though that's the thing, I quite like that bit there cos that's like brown sugar  erm
It's lovely
Carl started me on this, he was into carrot cake for years and
Yeah?
mm  and it's similar to a cake we used to have when he used to love erm  when we were engaged he introduced 
That's another name for it int it apparently 
Oh is it oh it was the same, but it was taller, and that sort of buttery cream that was all on top and that had nuts and things 
Mm 
rather than 
we had, I told you, at this meal we went to, on Saturday they had erm carrot cake, but that was completely covered in like this cream cheese
Mm sounds nice, mm 
it was gorgeous but Chris was saying that Tescos do one, but they call it passion cake which is the same thing 
Oh the same, mm 
like a horse today, drinking
Have you got a sore throat or something or just thirsty?
I don't know  catarrh but er   I've been thirsty the last few days 
I remember we used to just fancy 
Mm
go and buy one and dash in with a cup of tea and he  I hoped no one called and no one 
it's more satisfying when you're desperate for something and you get home 
Mm 
and  gulp it down
You're getting in a mess Michael   do it now, have you ever tried, bought, what, you can buy it in a slab can't you, but without the cream on
No I've not seen it
like  can buy it the, just carrot cake 
 
no, no, I've only just got onto 
Oh
 

There, I'm not too keen on the creamy soft piece
Mm, I like that 
You're a mess, mm
oh that's not too bad, you know
What were ya?
One thirty over eighty
How much weight have you put on?
Well she weighed me with me boots, er everything on and on their scales it was nine stone eight.
What are you doing?
You're not having it
I'll have me mouth round the tap in a minute
not quite the same 
there's that bottle there where did you , is that what you meant the bottle?
Over there by the er red basket
Oh right 
can you see it?
Yeah 
That marzipan on its own is filling though int it?
Yeah, well I 
I can't eat any more  oh dear 
Was there enough?
Oh God you've only got a little bit
No I've just filled  up there 
Oh 
I know there must be something wrong with me 
come on in the other room  Michael, right, now you've got your dummy
Oh
Pardon me, hmm, ooh that's better, that's all I do is burp
With all that liquid I'm not surprised  can you watch him with that tin?
You monkey
Okay
monkey, monkey, moo, yeah 
just put some water in the sink and we'll go and sit down, I'm not bothered about washing  I just don't like it when it's stuck to the plates
I know what you mean, it's harder to wash when it's 
Mm 
dried on, so you might as well 
That's it do your sweeping
Oh
that's it do your sweeping up, is it raining?
it's just a bit in the air, but you can tell it's going a bit damp now anyway
Mm 
what will you do, be able to go into the hotel to make your butties into your room and do it, or
We shall do them before we go out in the morning
Yeah
cos it's only 
that's a good idea.
er, it's only er breakfast but I believe they're very good breakfasts
Mm.
er and you can have as much as you want I believe
Oh you can help yourself there.
so I said well ha, ha, gonna be cheeky
Get your extra bits of bacon and take 'em away 
I'm, I'm gonna get a packet of freezer bags 
Yeah, you want to
and er, put one, just put one in me handbag in the morning and 
yeah 
if I see anything on the table I'll just pop it in a freezer bag
yeah, you can have it for your dinner with some, with your barm cakes can't you?
Yeah so I thought oh well I'll see what there is 
Good idea  you can have bacon and egg for breakfast and bacon butties for dinner
Yeah, well you never know do ya?
a good idea
Ah, ah, ah, ah, no, no, no
Thank you
where's your brush?
Where's your brush?
Here are, there it is.
There it is, go and get your brush.
Get your brush and brush up for mummy  there  yeah these places you can get quite a good discount for being 
Mm 
for staying there for your dinner 
Well I, I'd never thought of taking anything like that until she said, cos I, well you never pay, it's all new to me, I haven't done it before and she said oh no she said we take these small tins of stuff with us and er make our sandwiches, cos there's a supermarket I believe not far from there
Yeah
you can go and get some barm cakes  
yeah that'll be nice, different
Yeah
they have different sort of rolls to us as well don't they?
Yeah
That'll be nice 
on your travels
you ought to see underneath the fridge, he does this in the kitchen and they've all gone under the fridge, when you're at the top shop or any other places where the  will you have a look on the cards in the window, I'm looking for a slide, you know, but a smaller one for him for the garden for the summer really, cos that's just about had it that one  ?
Cos you can only use them up to about four I would think cos other, other than that they get a bit too big for them don't they?he could do with a little slide in the garden 
he will, Christmas
I'd like to get it sorted out a bit for him really before the summer starts
It'll be ideal
Mm
if you can just fasten him in the back it'll be smashing won't it?
Well there's the gate, he can only go so far with the gate anyway, so it won't really matter  yeah  yeah  you ought to see all the pegs at the back of me fridge 
Go and watch daddy  bring the tree down?
Watch it Michael, it's coming  yeah, oh you have got hiccups?
He's had them quite a bit these last few days , they seem to come like that don't they?
Mm
Then he'll go a month probably  
there we are it's down
Oh, fence nearly came with it  
it'll seem funny won't it to see that tree down?
I do think it's lightened this room up though when you think it  gone 
Yeah I mean it's better when you took that one from down there wasn't it?
Oh yeah
Yeah 
yeah  the only thing about having those others of course you can see through the windows, but there's not a lot you can do about that.
John had a word with the bloke across the back there
Oh did he?
about, you know the garage?
Yeah
So he said he'd got no objections to John moving it back
Oh well  mm
we'll probably end up doing a bit to the garden this year as opposed to er  you know going to, we were gonna go down to Somerset in June weren't we?
Mm
But that, with things as they are we might as well just hang fire
Well, it's no use spending money you haven't got is it?
No, well the thing is I mean you're talking of five or six hundred pounds
This is it
and if you can't replace it  I mean we've booked, we've booked through, erm,Au August anyway, we're definitely going in August to Southport
and it might be a little bit cheaper for yourself  than going all that way, it certainly won't, it certainly won't cost you as much to get there anyway 
No, well that's it int it?so    er if things are reasonable we might just go away for a long weekend or something, go find us a place in Southport for a weekend
Yeah 
but really I mean you need the odd week at home don't you really to sort of do bits to it, you can't work and do it 
Well I mean I'm not going away this year, but it's not really bothered me an awful lot 
No no
so
you can't
gone to erm, oh I think I told you didn't I?
Yeah
Gone to Windsor today
that's right
and a day Eastbourne tomorrow, now that's a nice little break
Mm
just, just a few hours like that
yeah 
see some places you see go from Friday to Monday don't they?
That's alright, I think that's ideal
Yeah
I think it's a good time to spend in the garden to be honest, I mean you can't, you can't, it's not really long enough to try and do it at weekends, not if he wants to move that garage back, it'll probably take the best part of the week to sort that out
Oh it will yeah, cos you've got to empty it and
That's right
move your swing haven't ya and 
yeah 
everything, yeah and prepare the ground 
Yeah I don't know whether that swing will end up going to the tip if it comes down, it's a bit rusty int it?
Seen better days
Just depends if the frame's strong
Yeah
you know you could always put a bit of paint on it 
mm 
to stop the rust, it just depends if it's strong enough to hold them, the frame
mm, it's done well though, I mean
You might, you might get a little something out of it for Michael
Mm, we haven't got a seat on it
Oh dear
I don't know what happened to that one that granddad made Deana  I know
is John going to the tip with all this tree?
Mm  me  broke as well 
Oh God
it's alright having two, you never get two for twelve months
Oh
it's erm, it's not too bad this time of year, you can peg out, the legs come off it, you know that brown one that you bought me?
Yeah
I mean I've had it since, I remember getting, washing me nappies and putting them on there
Oh I bought that one when Deana was a baby
Yeah, it was before Deana was born
was it before Deana was born?
Yeah cos I remember, I was doing  hang all me nappies out
before she was born, so I washed them all and put them on 
Did ya?
Yeah, so that was er,eleven years ago aren't ya?
Yeah 
And it's been used constantly, so it's not done bad, it's the way, the leg's been wiggly for a while, it just broke off the other day, so, I don't know whether John can mend it, he couldn't seem to think he can
No they're not er, I've got one that's got a rivet come out
Mm
on this side, you know where the little piece that, that bend, that you uncatch it to fold it up 
I know what you mean yeah
the rivet's come out
Yeah
and that, I find that very awkward, I've got a rubber band round it at the moment
yeah
but you see that only lasts so long they, they perish
yeah, done well, I might re come winter I'll probably replace it, I won't bother now it's not worth it with summer  says she having a nice summer
Yes, well, we're bound to have something aren't we?
Well I should think so
We're bound to have something
We live in hope don't we?
Yeah
What are you doing?
Mind you don't  your tongue with that  I tell you what they had in er  Woolies market as well, I don't know whether you've seen them and I don't, I've not got you know an old Argos catalogue to compare prices, cos they've not got it in the summer one, but they have them in the winter ones, it's like a, a tool box, but it's on wheels and you make it up, you, you know all the screws and the wheels come out and you're not, it's all plastic, I think it must be from age three, because of the little bits, and it's like erm, I've seen it somewhere, where I've been, it has little figures sat in this erm, what would you, it's like erm, a bit like a truck, yeah, and it's got the, the figures in it 
I haven't I haven't actually seen one, but I once saw a lady on the bus with one
if it, on the bus you can see 
it's quite a big thing isn't it?
Yeah, yes
Yeah
on the box you can see it made up and then with all the bits and pieces separate
Mm
and I think it was something like, say twenty pound, it was on the market, but I have a feeling it was something like thirty odd
Good boy, good boy, thank you, no we're not taking them out 
Ooh cheeky, you are cheeks all over your face
I don't think you should be chewing that one Michael cos if you, if you open it up it'll stick on your tongue
int it?
Yes  you think I can't see you just cos you're behind me.
Trying to stick it onto your jumper 
You'd have laughed at him yesterday with his boo
cos even John, you know, I mean, he heard him it was 
Yes 
as clear as anything, boo he says
Yeah
and boo again and then that was it, he co he wouldn't do it again 
It'll perhaps come all at once 
Yeah, he's, he's into ev oh it must've been about six or eight weeks ago he started saying a couple of things and I thought oh he's coming now, but it stopped  I think I got excited when he started saying dark, but that's as far as it got, int it?
Dark, is it dark?
Dark.
Is it dark  not dark
No he says it's not dark yet
not dark
not dark
You're not fooling me 
Not fooling me  do you mind  mind you he does say mama now when he's moaning, it's definitely mama, he says now, if he wants something, mama, er, er, mama
your skin  
Ow that's sharp , put it in there now please, put it in for mummy
Yes, he knows it's funny 
yes, in there, in there, put it away
Mine, mine 
That way they're saving money on a night out, they're gonna save on er actual depot hours, where it's like taking us sort of like ten and eleven hours, it's only gonna take them eight, nine to do that  cos they're there, they're on top of the job.
Mm, either way though, I mean the thing is if they do, you, you would be in for a little bit of something, if you hung it out till be, to being redundant
Yeah, but I mean it's like, it's 
but having said that  
if ifs were ands, and ands were swings 
Yeah, then you I know, but John I mean you'd be up for a good couple of grand if you did stick it out.
I don't know.
You would 
Two grand's not everything Jane, you know that and I know that
what, what I propose to do anyway if it's agreeable to you
Hand it in and see what happens.
give 'em a go, let's go and sit and listen to what the bloke says
Mm
and let him sit and listen to me
mm
he might turn round and say I'm sorry Mr  you're not suitable, alright, I've not lost nothing
mm
you just had, you've just had a bloody, you've had a  off work 
The thing is I mean if you turn round and just say to them well they're messing about with all the hours we've put it down to the erm
Recession.
recession, but it's just the, I think it's just a bloody good excuse to streamline a company that's 
Oh it is 
you know I mean they, they do don't they, they overstaff and then they've got to cut back.
Look at look at Llandudno
Mm.
one of the factories, they're shutting it
Yeah but 
and where're they moving it?
It's going 
yeah, but when 
to Creda.
when was it built all them factories it was built in the seventies when the boom was in 
I agree, I agree, yes I agree, that factory's old, it's out of date, it wants a lot of modifying
so now there's
so they've got
it's just a good excuse to streamline
yes
all the staff.
yeah, you see Creda now at  are already making some of the washer driers, that Llandudno used to make.
Mm, what gets me is how Creda they're gonna, they're, they're coming up in the pink and 
They've got job security Jane
But why haven't Hotpoint, the original Hotpoint drivers, I mean Hotpoint is the bigger firm
Yeah, but having saying that 
Hotpoint take over Creda 
Yeah
where are all Hotpoint's drivers?
it's like, yeah but it's like, it's like any big conglomeration int it, if, if I was to buy you out as a company you're gonna  
You'd have to keep me sweet 
you're, you're gonna say to him well there's conditions attached to this
Mm
I've, I've, those lads have served me well
mm
I want them looking after, and cou and you're gonna, I'm gonna say to you 
you're gonna go to your ordinary man
I'm gonna say to you yeah, alright, I'm, I 
thank you 
you're thinking long-term, yeah I can do this and then when it, a gentleman's agreement and then it comes to paper, and when that paper's signed you're stuck with it
Yeah
and I tell you what, this is, this is what I think's happened
Probably has, yeah.
being truthful  do you know what I think'll go next?
What?
Manchester?
the double holiday pay
Yeah I was thinking that actually 
and the profit sharing 
well the thing is they've 
I  
gone down anyway on the basic rate
d'ya know they've, well this is it, the profit sharing and the holiday pay as you say they've  
yeah
d'ya know the profit sharing's up to thirty one percent, thirty one hours up to now and there's another one, another one to go in yet
Is that good or bad?
I mean I don't know very much about 
It's better than what we had at Christmas
How come?
How come?
I don't know, but they tell us that they're not flogging anything
Mm, just a good excuse int it?
so who's, who's who's telling porkies here?
That is it John  that's it  thing I, I mean the thing that I can't understand you've, you've always been
You know I've never, I've never batted an eyelid have I?
No you've always done what they said alright everybody has 
I've always, I might've had a little moan, but I've always  to myself 
Yeah, but everybody does, yeah but everybody has a, in your job John everybody's entitled to a bit of a moan
I've never done it in the office, I've always gone, I've always probably gone in the canteen or in the of in the, in the wagon thing
Mm.
bleeding hell
You don't have any time off
and yet I'm being nailed
mm
and look what he said on Friday, I wanted  on main lines he said, but you're not one of them  and you're not getting a new motor
Is that what he said to you you're 
Yeah 
not getting a new motor?
that's what he turned round and told me.
Did you ask him why?
Well what can I say to him Jane, it's his property, he put, he gives the motors to who he wants, he's, he's the transport manager, I can't argue with him.
I know, it's not fair though is it?
I'm cutting these steaks in half John, cos we've got one fatty one and one that's alright.
So  I mean, if Jane, if it's such a good job why are all these people leaving?
Oh
Eh?
Think of it like that
Yeah I know 
why are these higher, you know Nick who used to be in Manchester?
Doing the, the mail order
Mm
I saw him
er he went didn't he?
He went to  Grangewell he's running  Grange now he said d'ya know something 
For Hotpoint?
Yeah, he said it's the best move I ever made he said getting out of here
Manchester?
yeah, he said it's the best move I ev he said I don't, the lads don't give me any trouble he says I'm fair with them and they're fair with me
Mm 
and I told him about the, him taking the wagon off me, he said that's bloody stupid that  cos Nick used to do my run, work it out for me
mm
he knew, if he, if he treated me right, I treated him right
 

I'm telling ya, I've just had it up to there honest  I told Dave this morning, he says well he says I can't, he, you're not losing anything, going and sitting and listening to the man
No
he said, he actually said, if it was m if I was in your position I'd go and have a listen
mm
see what the man's got to offer, it might be more  but there again it might be less, but having saying that, it might be a lesser basic, but higher return
If they can guarantee the overtime
is it, who knows
mm  thing is, I mean you're like that aren't ya?
I mean if you stick it out with Hotpoint and hope that the hours come back, if the hours come back you're gonna be earning a lot more money aren't ya?
Yeah but you see if it's 
This is it I know
ifs and ands
I know
I mean look at Colin Jane, he got it made at, at 
mm
take your bed there, now I know that
mm
take your bed there, money in abundance, even in this recession, well yeah the work's there, no problem, he just got a big new contract for some oh not Federal, give me another big haulage contractor, oh I can't think, T N T
T N T?
you know T N T, Taylors Nightly Trunk
Is that what it is?
Yeah, it's either Taylors Nightly Trunk or Turners Nightly Trunk I'm not sure, seventy new trailers  ten grand a piece
Why did Colin leave?
I don't think he wanted the er, I don't think he could hack the way Cartwrights work
On the trailers?
Well 
You, he's back to like labouring again weren't he really?
Cartwrights are very funny people
Int he trained up as a welder now?
He's not a fully fledged welder
Have you 
he's, he's welding
yeah, but 
but 
they trained him didn't they?
Yeah
That other firm.
but he's not
So what was he wel was he welding at Cartwrights?
He was making er legs for the 
Mm
what they do, they're like a leg and 
and you have to weld them in
no, this leg it's, it folds under
Oh
and what it is the box is stood there and then you back the motor under it and then you drop it onto the body and it folds 
Why didn't he like it?
He said it was repetitive
Boring?
Yeah
But the money was there
This is it, take your bed there, Saturdays and Sundays and as many nights as you want  now personally me, I'd have stuck that
Yeah, for the money
for the easy job, you set your stall out, you make a jig to sort it all out, you can slide it in, zip, zip, zip, done  you could probably say what, three an hour out, if you're lucky, two and a half, three an hour 
under there
now I could put up with that, but obviously Colin couldn't, but having saying that I feel, I, I think I learnt a lot from being  bonus there
Mm
being on piecework there
Was there, was it piecework then?
Yeah to a degree, but not, not that bad if you know what I mean 
Let me go and see where Michael is, I've seemed to have lost him, he's very quiet 
Well, I tell you what 
we can have our tea out here
I'm glad I had a word with Steve though
Deana, do you think you could watch Michael please?
Er, I'm gonna take the telly up there later on
Yes
and cut that board out alright?
that's alright, I'm not bothered, do you know  
I'll put the I'll put the, the chair, and put the telly back while I'm cutting it
You know that film I taped last night with John Travolta?
Oh aye
It's, it's a comedy and it don't look half bad  I just watched, I just watched about
Come here you
ten minutes of it
Oh 
No we'll get there eventually, one day John I suppose
I feel rotten though, I do honest cos I know what 
I know 
I know 
we want so much and we just can't do it, it's frustrating John, I mean
I feel as though I'm failing you though somehow 
Oh that's stupid though int it?
Bo 
It's not your bloody fault
I know it isn't, but that's the way I feel  I don't know
I , right let's get this dished up
I'll go and get me saw and everything out while it's still light
Well, you're gonna have your dinner now.
Yeah I know, I'm only gonna get it out
Well go on then.
while it's light then I can lock the garage up
Right well you'd better 
I will 
What have you got?
No Michael  put it back, there's a good boy, come on, put it back  Deana 
Who me?
sort Michael out please  Michael no, Deana 
Michael
come on please  John 
I'll sort them out after
It's a bit tough this steak, I think I made a mistake
Vinegar, have you got some vinegar kid?
Ooh
I didn't put it on, I didn't cook it on a high enough light  silly me  not quite like the one you had last week 
I think you'll be er, no I'm not gonna say anything, no, I'll keep me gob shut.
What sort of erm, what you putting round the sides of this wood?
Ah
I want a nice curved edge so it's kiddie proof.
well I've just got ordinary straight flat timber at the moment
Can you not get that nice edging that's got a bit of a pattern on it?
I was going to  it actually
Oh.
that's what I said to ya and you agreed with me, that's why I got it  it's inch and half thick er wide, by half inch thick, it's under there.
Can't you get this beading that's got a pattern in it?
You can, but it doesn't really take
Why?
erm, doesn't like being varnished.
Oh  if you pull it, do you want any more?
Cos there's some in the 
No that'll do 
Pull it upside down 
Shut up, that will, that will do  woman, enough
to the bottom
Mm.
You didn't give your mum any money to get that C D did you that I was after?
What C D that might be?
That one about Cher.
Which one?
That Cher's C D I was after.
Yeah which one?
There's only one in the top ten at the moment 
Oh I dunno, I've been looking at a few, not that probably, not in the top ten
No, but it's in the top thirty
There's Heart of Stone
No, it's just called Cher
there's another one
the one I was after is just called Cher
You said to me that you wouldn't mind whatever one you got of Cher cos you like her music.
Yeah, but the one that I, it's got all her latest stuff on, is just called Cher  that's the one I was after, but I don't want it now, I told ya
It's a bit bloody late
Oh you've not bought it have you?
Told you not to John it's a lot of money.
Shut up 
Which one did you get?
Heart of Stone 
I've only ever seen one and the one that, the recent one is called just Cher and that's got all the last, the last few top ten hits on it.
Can't you change it?
listen to it first and see what you think.
No I don't want to.
 

Oh I'm sorry, but there was only that one which is all, it's got her latest stuff on it, I'm not really keen on anything else, it's got those last, you know the sort of her last few records of it, on it I should say  I didn't know there was any others around, when I told you I wanted the Cher one, it was the one that was out now not the old ones.
This one's out now .
No, what I mean is er the new one sort of thing, the new Cher, it's in the top thirty, it was about number three a month about a month or so ago  I didn't know there was anything else 
Well have this one and see what else develops  listen to it, you might like it.
Oh it's alright I'll change it John.
Oh   
Yeah, but what did I tell ya?
I told you not to bother
Oh Jane for Christ sake stop it
Yeah, but I did
stop it .
I told you what I wanted 
Pissing me off now you.
It's no use getting in a huff about it there's erm 
Don't bother Jane don't bother
Ah it's your favourite word that don't bother.
there's no point in going on about it now is there?
I said not to spend any money, I said just get a little box of chocolates, that was all, finish.
Shut up  and since when did you ever listen to me?
It's not that I was worried about, it was just the money, it's a lot of money for something that, was an idea a couple of months ago.
You really know how to cheer people up don't ya?
I'm sorry I told ya  and not only that I bought that camera the other week didn't I?
What was Sandy saying to ya?
What about?
I don't know I wasn't there, you was talking to Sandy over the fence.
She was asking what Steve had come up with  job wise  she said if ever I wanted a C V writing Graham'd do it for me
Good idea  won't be a bad idea  mm, what I thought was the tough steak has turned out to be the, the one that's not  I cut the steaks about a bit, one was a bit fattier than the other  the one that I had I thought would be dead tough, is tender  it's  int it?they look more like a sirloin steak to me than a rump, even though it went under the name of rump  it looked like  you can only tell the shape of it can't, oh God
D'ya want me to go?
No, I put
Who was that?
Jane 
What she want?
I don't know if you remember but ages ago, round about October time she borrowed some stuff for the Brownies, for erm, for Sian, Sian was going camping and she hadn't got shorts or anything, so she borrowed it off me, I was thinking of Stacey starting, I wanted the t I'm not bothered about the shorts, but I want the T-shirt and I'm just gonna get Stacey the culottes  and she can wear her shorts and the cardigan with it  buy, when she first starts and then we could, Deana's moving up to Guides this, so she can have that sweatshirt of er, I mean they're nine pound
Mm.
it's no good buying another one, she's not gonna need it in the summer is she?
I've cooked these steaks too long, trying to get them brown.
Will you do me a favour and keep the receipt and everything for that C D and the bag that it's in?
Sandy must be having company, pulled the blind down    I think that's why they've been good about the parking this week, cos I mean Irene's pulled her car, we saw Irene pull her car in  was you here when she  I saw her get in it, it must of been teatime yesterday
No.
she got in it, pulled it forward and put it in.
Perhaps she's got the message.
Hmm, I doubt it somehow and then Derek put his in and then Paul parked up where Eileen was  Paul was waiting to get out 
So  well Paul come out, I was talking to Steven and he said I come home last night and he said I couldn't park me bloody car up cos there were cars everywhere, and they were all theirs.
Who said that, Paul?
Mm.
I didn't think he parked here last night.
Well he was when I come home from work.
What last night?
Oh 
They were all theirs.
was it?
Yeah.
Was that blue Escort there, the one that parked behind us?
I've not seen him
No, I was gonna say  mm won't do him any harm getting a bit of a taste of his own medicine.
Hmm  I personally think he's seen the light about it.
About time.
We went and took Josh out didn't we?
Give him a bit of a walk.
You've been for a walk eh?
Mm, we went in that, we went and got me barm cakes and a bit, a few veg and that, went, oh I bought Li Joanne a little set of er  instead of an Easter egg, it's quite nice, I got it from that shop, you know erm next to  Kingston and Hutch 
Oh yeah?
er, what's it called er?
Oh I call it the posh shop.
Yeah, it's just like a select second shop in't it?
Really, but er 
Yeah, but a hundred times dearer.
but I mean some, yeah, but I mean the stuff is cheaper compared to what you pay to other shop
What sort of  
it's nice it's just like, it's a sleeveless top, white, they had it in like lilac, jade and navy, erm and it's got, it's navy shorts with it
Mm
and like a big tie through the, the waist and the top is like white edge with navy and it's got like a sailor collar at the back
oh lovely
with like a navy stripe and erm an anchor on each side, it's quite nice cos she's got, I thought it would do for her holidays
mm
but the top she could wear with like, she's got, well it's only cotton you see, shorts are only cotton 
yeah 
but she's got some really smart erm navy shorts
yeah
that I thought this top would look nice to wear 
very nice this 
at night, it's a smart set rath er rather than in the day
oh lovely
so I'm just looking for er a T-shirt or something for Lisa  no you can't have the pen it's too sharp  yeah, you're crafty you are aren't you, you can get zips open now  mm 
So when you going in to sign the contracts?
Not heard anything yet 
Not heard anything yet
Velma called on Monday, erm, because I rang her up on Sunday to tell her what was happening, cos I mean she didn't know it, we signed our contract and erm I said to her well if we get a date this week, I said could, cos she's going back to Wales tomorrow, she won't be back till after Easter
No
so I said could Mike go in and do the fencing you see at the side, to keep the dog out
mm
so,sh oh she said you, oh first of all she said you can go and get the key, so I said oh no I'm not bothered about the key I said if you could just leave the side gate open, so erm
Has it got a lock then?
yeah I think, I don't, she must lock it from the inside window back through 
Back out 
you see, so er anyway when we got off the phone Mike said yeah but what about bloody power you see
Oh
so, anyway, she must of thought about this, so she called on Monday, and she said oh I've been thinking Michael'll need electric for the drill
mm
so she said what I'll do she said is I'll leave the key to the garage under two bricks at the side of the garage
mm
she said and then he can use the power in there
mm, mm
so as long as we've got a date by Saturday he can go and do it, if we still haven't got a date he won't be able to go and do it
you can't do anything 
we've got the fencing well no, no you can't Jane because you're not insured you see until 
no 
you actually exchange, as soon as you've exchanged contracts we've got to get insured you see  but erm  I mean on the letter we got from the solicitor on Saturday it said, it, it looks as though your purchaser's ready to exchange contracts in the forthcoming week
mm
so we've just wait and see.
she's doing everything by the book I think, so 
Oh I've never even seen anything of her Jane
no
I really thought I would see her round Sale, I've never seen anything of her 
no 
but, erm  it might of taken longer than what she thought as regards her London ends you see 
start again 
really, that's what it is
mm
well I think Dawn is quite happy now, I mean I think she felt as though she'd been rushed at first, but I mean
mm
that was her choice really 
that's right 
I mean she said to me on Monday something about, I mean it's her that wanted to be in, in, by the middle of March, now I never said the woman wanted to be in by March 
no 
we were just discussing it
mm
but, I, Miss  never actually said well I 
no 
want to be in by the end of March 
no 
I think she just assumed because she was coming down here with her job
she was ready to move in 
that she'll be ready to move in you see 
yeah 
but I said well at least you've got it all done, you don't have to rush around at the last minute.
that's right.
How much money did she make in the end on er garage thing?
She didn't say and I, I never thought to ask her, no she didn't say  so we're just, that's why really as I say I don't, I think at first she was quite happy for us to go in and maybe take stuff in, but I don't think she was happy about us doing structural things on it 
Mm 
cos I think her solicitor must of said something to her you see 
yeah 
but I mean even, even if we, if we get a date for next week Jane, we can't get in, cos I'm not going to get a key and go in when she's not there
no
if it'd happened a couple of weeks ago when she was about I would of kept going over like she said I could do 
yeah 
but we'll just leave it now 
yeah 
to the day
you might as well 
er, we'll get it all sorted, you know what you like, you sit there and you think oh I want it, to get it all sorted before I go and move, it'll just have to be in a tip for a while.
yeah, you can't though can ya?
I mean you've got, it takes you so long to place things and 
No you don't this is it, we'll just dump everything, I said to Mark we'll just dump everything in the back room and we'll stay in the back room till we've sorted the front room 
mm 
out and then we'll move into the front room 
into the front room you've got Easter hopefully to go out and to sort out 
Well I hope so.
your, your front room though  I think you just want to get everything
Well I think that's what it is Jane, but you can't 
tidy, but you know, you know in your own mind you can't 
you know in your own mind you can't
no
but
and Creg's on Monday  with the carpets , oh we shall have a right laugh with them two blokes, aye, they both go oh God not you again  you know  and do I have a
have you thought of any that you like?
Oh we do like that one in the window
That's the
that's the one Mike's mad on, and when I went in on, er
that particular colour or a different colour?
yeah it looks lovely in the square, yeah because I thought it was quite light, but it isn't actually
It's the pinky one int it there 
it's erm, you shut up, no I went in, I've never been in Weeks, to go in and have a look and everything, it was Hamish that was in that time and you can have a right laugh with him, he's the one that came and sorted the hall and stairs 
Oh 
out for me and erm, when he went in on Monday, erm it was the other one the lad that actually owns it, so I was in there for about bloody half an hour and we came home with some samples and one that I quite liked it was up on the wall and he said that is my best selling Axminster that I had, and it was like, it was maybe it was a bit too busy, it was, it was greyey and it was all different other colours in it, but it was a lot of flowers on it, it wasn't a traditional Axminster you see Mike loves these traditional Axminsters and he doesn't really, he won't really entertain anything else, erm, anyway I brought that sample home  and what else?
Oh yeah that's the only one I brought home, on Tuesday it was, well as soon as he saw, I brought it in and me dad looked at it and he goes yeah it's alright, I knew he didn't like it and then when Mike got in, he said oh I don't like that, so I said why?
Well you take it back I said and you pick the carpet
Mm where's this for then?
so, this is the front room
The front room
so er, he goes off and he comes back with three samples then, well one of them, it has been in the window as well, but it's a very definite diamondy shape
More
no quite big shaped diamond but it's in like pastel pink and pastel blue and it's very, very pastely colours 
Can't remember those 
but I would imagine down on a floor it would look very, the diamonds would be too much if you 
hit ya mm
know wha what I mean, he brought that one home and he brought another quite nice traditional one, but it tended to be quite browny, and then another one and, er
You're not ripping that up?
and then you know the one that was in the window?
Yeah
He didn't bring a sample home of that cos he, he brought the same design but in a different colour, but it was more greeny
mm
so, anyway, I just, we've got it down on the floor and I says if we had a brown suite
mm
that would be ideal
yeah
even though there was a bit of grey in it, it was the, really the brown that predominated it, I said it, it, the grey suite wouldn't go with it
so you're gonna have the front room with your grey suite in it?
yeah 
then shall I
You thought, have you thought of any colours for your back room?
No, this is, you're thinking this is for your front room now your carpet?
Yeah, er, well, so I brought the sample of that one home
Mm
the one that's in the window
right it's the pink squares 
and it's the and, yeah, me and Joanne weren't very keen on any of the carpets either and as soon as she saw that she said oh that's lovely
mm
she said now I do like that, cos it looks nice and warm cos there's loads of colours in it, there's pink, there's burgundy, there's blue, green, every colour you can think of, you've bro 
oh, you're determined to have that you are, aren't ya?
If he got a
wouldn't do him any harm, but it wouldn't half make him go ah, cos it's dead minty
what are ya?
What are ya?
Leave my handbag alone  but you see when it was in the window Jane I thought it looked a bit too light, but I think what makes it look like that is they've got the light shining 
Yeah 
right on it
I've seen it down Chris and I love it
when you actually see it on the floor, it looks totally different
Glenys has got it, very, very sim very, very similar, there's very, there's not a lot in it, I'll take those magazines off
you see, oh Christ, erm 
but she got it in the greens
yeah, well I, Mike says I brought that one home when we were looking for a hall instead, but I said no I said it was one very similar, but he said we couldn't have it because erm 
no 
with them being the squares you'd lose a hell of a lot coming down the stairs 
mm 
you know on the turn and everything 
it would spoil it I mean
it would, you've got to have a big spread really haven't ya?
yeah, yeah I mean I'd thought about it for ours 
But 
but I remember what you said about the squares
yeah
I'd like it in here
yeah
I really would 
it would go lovely with this
I know
because even though 
it's got all the colours hasn't it?
even though this is erm not a plain, it's not dead busy is it?
No 
If you know what I mean.
but that, it's not, it doesn't, I don't see that carpet as being a particularly patterned car I know it has got a pattern 
It is it's a definite square, it's definite true, what your colours 
but to me I look at the, I call patterned carpets all the flowers and 
mm 
rounded patterns
yeah
d'ya know what I mean but 
yeah 
to me this is, a square doesn't look the same as the round 
no 
you know
yeah
I know it sounds stupid, but I like
yeah
I don't like the round
no 
flowery carpets
no
er or the ones that have got leaves going into
mm
you know that sort you have 
yeah 
to me that's patterned
yeah
but that carpet that you're talking about to me is a plain
yeah
but it's a plain square.
yeah, as I say Mike says, reckons I 
Liked it 
brought the green one home cos I brought the three samples home, the one that we've got down and another one  and another one for the hall and stair, but I said I'm sure it wasn't the same as that, but it might have been, but I have to say he always said we would  
Mike said  
but you see the fortunate thing about it Jane, with that one, most of the carpets are only twelve foot wide
mm
which would mean, cos the room's thirteen foot wide
oh is it?
we would of had to
Have another piece
buy an extra five square yards
yeah
cos it was only twelve foot wide, anyway, they do that one in fifteen foot wide
Oh do they?
so it, we've got to have twenty one something square yards, I think he worked it out at
Is it thirteen foot wide then the room?
Yeah into the alcove
Yeah
the back room isn't, the back 
no 
room's only about eleven and a half, because you get the back room, the front room and then it goes in a bit
right
to the back room
to the kitchen
to the kitchen you see
yeah.
where it's
So what's the length of the front room?
Er fourteen ten, by
It's bigger than what it looks really 
though it's bigger than what you think really
I think it's deceiving because it's got such high ceilings
yeah
the high ceilings sort of seems to take it off with 
yeah 
I know it sounds silly, but perhaps if the ceilings was lower it would look big
yeah, yeah
higher that
I think it's just maybe er how you have it as well 
mm 
I mean if you look at it now without the dining table 
yeah 
it looks totally different
yeah
I mean, Mike really likes that as a front room, he keeps saying that's gonna be our room, you know
mm I like a front room 
he's, he's funny he does like a front room, so I thought well sod it, I hate picking carpets Jane, so I thought sod it he can pick 
yeah 
the carpet and if it's not right he can
I don't think you can go wrong, far wrong with that one
No, it is nice
thinking of pink and grey in there
yeah, and he wants to, he came home this morning and he said, he must of been thinking about it, and he said well we could emulsion the walls, he said erm, why don't we do an apricot white, I says well that's peach, I said the 
Yeah 
the carpet's pink
yeah and, the suite
it wouldn't, it wouldn't look right, I mean we have got apricot white on the walls in the back room now, but I said, he, I think he feels as though, a definite pink is not the right colour for a room, do you know what I mean?
Mm
And yet it, I was quite happy with it to be honest 
yeah 
Jane because I think it looks quite warm
yeah, you can only put another colour into your curtains and bring it out with your carpet 
Yeah, well what I think he, I think he will emulsion over it cos I mean the ceiling's a bit, as you say she'd been a smoker
mm
and the ceiling in that front room is a very deep, deep pink I think, if I can remember rightly, I think we'll go over, we'll probably will go over it and 
yeah 
erm we're not gonna go mad knocking picture frames down in that room, it's too much of a big job
Yes it is, innit?
I'm just gonna put a border round it
Mm
seen like a border in perhaps like a bit of pink and bit of grey on it and it's like sort of scalloped edging
Mm that'll look nice 
so put that over
yeah
at the top of the erm
in
of the picture frame
yeah
it sort of brings the ceiling down a little bit as well 
yeah 
cos to be honest, the more Mike goes over there, the more he keeps saying he doesn't really want to pull the picture frames down 
no well with them being such a tall ceilings, they're probably 
I don't know why, yeah and I think he feels as though you, he says well if you decorate it right you can blend it in with the wallpaper 
mm 
anyway you know, so 
of course you will.
I don't know I see I think we'll 
So what will you paint the picture rails white?
Same colour as the walls
Yeah
I think, so it just blends in with the border round
yeah, it'll look nice
and then it'll just, it'll just be titivated up really, so we can live in it and then the back room can just be done at our own time.
I, I'll definitely have those curtains for you this weekend, I'm gonna get them done.
Well as I say Jane
Well then you can put them straight up then can't you?
well no she's already got them up.
Mm, well what are they like?
Well they're not very nice, but I mean er I'll leave them up till I come to actually er get everything done
Mm, no I meant when you've dec once you've, you know painted in there and got your carpet down 
Yeah 
the grey curtains would go with your suite wouldn't they?
Oh they would match up with it yeah, yeah well I, okay then if you want  
I've been mean I've been, I would of done it last weekend, but, I don't, I had a load of washing and it depends 
Yeah, it is 
getting it all done
you've gotta get up in the mood Jane, I did Saturday morning 
Mm 
it was fine, I thought right get up and get them bloody curtains washed, I had 'em on the line, but do you think our Mike noticed them, well when he came home from work, because I thought of having to put 'em back up again, I just 
Yeah 
got straight in from work 
oh 
and I had Mike ironing them while I was putting 'em up, I said right stand here and watch me hang this curtain, so I'm showing him how to iron it, so while I'm upstairs putting 'em up he's ironing 
He's ironing 
'em, so I had 'em put back up again for quarter to six,
That's alright that, I must have done six loads of washing, for some reason I just didn't seem to have enough to do me loads
Yeah
but then come Saturday morning
it's all accumulated
I had to, I was doing two what I call mid washes, this sort of colour
yeah
and then I was doing two these colours and I'd 
yeah 
got about three lots of er white it's unbelievable 
yeah, I've done that Jane you sort of look one day and you think there's hardly anything 
Stop it.
there, I'll leave it
Yeah 
and then you'll regret it the next day 
I know 
cos the bloody basket's full to the brim
I'm determining to keep it, I'm just putting bits in now
yeah
but a white load's there that I must put in and must get that put out this afternoon
mm
but er, oh dear  I wanted to get them down and me others up while John's been in
mm
cos I didn't want to have no curtains up on me front
yeah
so I shall definitely get him to give us a lift 
yeah 
with them.
well as I say don't worry about it cos that first week I won't even bother anyway cos I'll leave up what I've got
Yeah
cos he said, you see I've, I think it's a picture, I think it's erm, what do you call it?
A pelmet, I think 
right 
she's got wooden pelmets on everything
Has she?
so I'll want to take them down
Yeah
so they'll, that'll have to come down anyway
yeah 
You see I hate choos that's another thing I hate choosing Jane 
Those windows are so big that you've got though, I mean I do I, they, they probably will fit, I think it will be a tight fit though
They're twelve foot, I know that one in the front room is twelve foot wide, by seventy two drop
Yeah, well I don't know  there more than seventy two aren't they?
Mm
But erm, they only really just go in my bay
yeah
there's no, there's not a lot of gathering there at all, what?
You're not having the pen 
cos like Joanne's bedroom I'd measured that, that's sixty six drop  so I ended up getting seventy two drop curtains
mm
and Pam was gonna shorten them and then I said no I think I'll leave them
yeah
cos it was only like sort of eight inches difference and I thought well when I wash 'em they might shrink anyway
mm
and er, it'll, it'll
Now Stacey, I remember, she used to, this is, must be mentioned within the bunk as well, cos I, for some reason I remember sitting her down on the chair to dress her by the bunk
Yes.
cos Deana used to have a chair by the bunk so she could climb down onto the chair, shut up
Oh.
and we always used to say what have you got?
And she used to say a big head  
You rotten thing you, I know well Mike's
potato head cos he has trouble getting things over his head, and especially off, it hurts more off than on don't it when er  
Yeah, it's easier to get them on int it?
oh dear  oh you've got plenty of
ready for this, mm 
You've got nothing to play with it now.
Me or Michael?
Why, do you want some thing to play with?
Don't  don't  oh what you doing?
Oh better not put you off your food.
You won't put him off really, I think he's just got a great a, he's not, just got a great appetite I think, he'll just eat and eat and eat
Mm.
once you're putting it in
But erm 
he won't feed himself or anything
has she not come, your friend?
Yes she has
Oh 
oh should of got you some more fromage frais Michael, oh I was looking at them as well wasn't I?
And I didn't get 'em, you'll have to have a, a wobbly, a strawberry wobbler.
I have a strawberry wobbler as well 
You what?
I have a strawberry wobbly every day 
Michael 
no 
 

you alright?
there you go, gotta wee in a minute, aha.
You don't have to go you know
Well you've got a lot of things to do and as I say erm, I thought I'll only go for half an hour, but I didn't really come
if I say that every time go and
I thought if I pop and see you then I gone, now I know I can
well now I know I can, that I shouldn't waste it, don't you think?
Definitely, you vote for John cos he's
oh is he?
Can't he go somewhere else?
No I don't think he can
No I suppose not a thing
the only thing I can do is to get somebody who doesn't know, who
Yeah.
know and get, cos lot I've got his card all you have got to do is go in and say the name
yeah, I don't know who I could ask though really, Joe Bloggs up the street
 

His car's got it on that
no
Perhaps he'll keep it out there, well he had that patch to it didn't he?
Well he loves it, he loved it before he knew sort of we got 
It's a lot of work
we had it for the weekend once
he offered, I didn't ask him 
Oh well perhaps he don't want to have any.
Well he probably will, but if he's going off to Florida
Well then you'll have to sort, by then with a bit of luck you might of been established with somewhere yourself  mightn't ya?
I see
I mean you, just say 
there's no doubt I'd rather have him sort of 
I mean he's not gonna sort of get up and go within the next twelve months is he?
No.
It's gonna take a bit of time  by then, hopefully you'll of got yourself sorted 
I'll think about it then
is that nice?
He's the type that you're gonna have to be firm with Lynn, tell him the only way he's gonna accept it, is you tell him you just don't love him
Mm.
be, be truthful with him
Mm.
otherwise you could have him knocking on your door and you know let's give it a go and 
I don't want really want Darren, I don't honestly think, I think I'd have difficulty in the initial breaking, but then everything else would go
Mm.
I don't think he'd come back
He's just a baby int he?
Mm.
oh the hard boy
Mm?
the hard boy and sort of yes I'm having his baby
Mm you don't know, you don't want
you're not prepared to be his er, what you call it?
his skivvy, he doesn't, you know
Well he's not erm
prepare to give you anything else
well he said the house is going up for sale, I think he thinks I'll be patient in that direction, it's not that, it's just that if it was a nice house, a normal house where the kids can play out on a nice day and just hang the washing out, I could be getting on with it
Yeah.
but you know, so
Yeah, I mean
but I knew that before I moved there he says I know better
mm, the thing is I mean, as well oh I don't know
oh I love to  maybe he'll shout 
I mean he would of put it up for sale knowing that you wanted to get somewhere between you, knowing that the house market is as it is
Mm.
you know sort of say, well go and get what you need to er, to make it happen 
Mm.
well at least of all for the time being 
No, he don't seem to care about
it's all material things for them int it you think about
he's probably had the car for God knows how many weeks, now he's got what car, you know, he could be, you don't know do ya?
You'd like to pull one over on him 
You know what girls do with married men
No.
I'm going for a wee
Right
and I'll tell you what they do
He's going to kill me with me tea again, I was ready for a mess
Oh Jane I've got 
urgh , hmm
oh no, what you got?
What's this?
What's this?
no you're not, you do it on purpose
everybody does it on purpose
Yes  
see those little ones, what's this one there?
boo
What  menace 
Ooh watch the coffee
Can I take me jumper off?
It's boiling outside, it really is.
No.
Please
No, I don't think it's that warm.
It is isn't it Amanda?
No Mandy's got her long sleeve thing on  who's that?
Can we have something cool to drink?
Yes.
Any ice?
De Deana get a drink of water.
Can we have an ice cream?
No, get a drink of water and stop it
Oh it's water we can drink, I've only got a coloured
do you want a drink of water?
No thanks.
You sure?
Can I have a couple of these mummy?
Pardon?
Anything to eat?
No.
Oh mummy I'm starving.
No you're not, what's that lot nextdoor had?
Lovely
Please mummy, just a biscuit, Trio biscuit, please just a biscuit  we get our bikes out?
On, you getting your shoes on Jane?
Come on .
Ee 
didn't I Rebecca?
Cheeky  oh, you, this thing under there like that  I think  I'm tired, just have me water on, I think, I had the gas fire up and I turned round and turned it off
Yeah, cos it's so warm
so I thought I'll have me water on
urgh, what, you're noisy baba, what are ya?
What?
Noisy, noisy, noisy.
Wiggle, wiggle, wiggle, wiggle
Oh, so next time you're down here you'll be settled in your mothers will ya?
Oh I hope so
You don't sound too sure.
I don't know what, no I don't mean it that way, I'm just weary and not looking forward to tonight and
Are you going to do it?
That's the thing.
Oh I'm going to tell him, I've got to
I can't see him
He's not gonna change now is he?
changing.
No.
No  what did I have?
Mm?
Mummy what's
oh Deana, what you gonna 
It's not that hot.
do in the middle of summer?
Mm?
It's
outside, you go outside and in a second you
I tell you what you can do, you can bring my curtains in for me  that'll keep you cool, go on
There mum
be a dear
did I put it up there?
What d'ya want?
The invitation to Maxine 
John's got his income tax, that'll please him
Oh God 
thank you very much, so what they doing at Hotpoint?
Are they making redundancies or
no, they've just cut all the hours down and one thing and another, it's a pain in the bum
It is, yeah.
yeah, it means he's getting less hours, so he'll be getting less money  which we don't want at all at the moment
No.
just about got ourselves reasonably tidy, you know, after Christmas and everything and set, managing to save  and spend as well 
Yeah.
not a lot, but you know spend 
But at least you've sort of 
yeah 
It's not fair is it?
No, something always comes along and puts a flaming great big spanner in the works and that upsets everybody.
What will he do look for another or
Well I don't know, just er, I don't know really, I don't want to mind cos he's been there five years, so if he does get made redundant he's got a chance of getting a little bit of money, not a lot, but it would help.
Story of four people  this is a story of four people named everybody, somebody, anybody and nobody, there was an important job to be done and everybody was sure that somebody could do it, anybody could of done it, but nobody did, somebody got angry about that because it was everybody's job, everybody thought anybody could do it, but nobody would .
You're not having it.
I only had two.
So that one's mine, I don't want it, I've had enough, you've had as much as me, get on with your pizza 
mum please
I don't want it 
mummy I don't want a pizza.
Well leave it then.
It's because of the ham.
What's wrong with the ham?
I don't like cooked ham.
No more Michael, it's all gone.
Mummy, mummy
Mm?
no I've changed me mind about the ice cream
mummy
it's too late for ice cream
you can have a bit of that whatsit
What whatsit?
I can't have anything.
Yes you can.
What?
Pass me your plate Deana please, sit, your head up.
I don't want it.
Why take it then?
Do you want it Stacey?
No thanks.
Can I have something else?
 

A piece of cake?
Pardon?
A piece of cake.
I haven't got any cake.
What you got then, a piece of what?
A piece of that?
Mm 
that's mine
I know
I don't see why I should give mine up 
thank you
mm 
 

What if I don't like it?
do you like it or what?
 

If you don't like it I'll have me bit back.
And I'll have the rest  I like it
You've got your book to read  when you've finished tea 
In the garden
Oh Michael no 
In the garden  I want to see this, I'm not going to read this.
bite  bite  bite it, bite it, open your mouth, open, bite 
How much sugar have you put in this?
Why?
I can't taste none, why, how much have you put in?
Three quarters like I always do.
Can I have a bit more in?
It's just that was sweet.
Come on  urgh  oh dear, you alright?
Alright?
Michael
He's been sick.
alright, don't run off 
probably cos he was coughing, turn that
Turn what off?
Go and get me a cloth Deana, floor cloth 
That okay?
That'll do, wait a minute Michael
Okay sweetheart
alright 
it was awful 
Get me the er, some kitchen roll first please  take those Stace, those things and put them up there  give me your shoe  you bet 
 
you better get some more paper please
Stacey get some more paper, I'll look after Michael.
He's alright, go and get some paper 
Come here Stacey go and finish, God that's not enough
No Stacey I don't want that, that's no good  alright Michael
 

Yes you, pest
Say it wasn't my fault, I coughed 
yes, Michael
Can he come in my bedroom?
Oh Deana, go and take him then, for God's sake 
Go on, I'm sorry Michael
take that to another place then.
Okay then, take that where?
Out of the way I said  oh go up that end  right get me a  I'll get it
Deana, pass us a chair from out of the whatsit please?
Eastenders are on.
Pardon?
Eastenders.
Right.
Pardon?
Alright, no Michael don't go out you've got nothing on your, come on you'll get cold, come here 
Come on sit and start reading, leave the recorder alone.
it's not an M, where's the M?
It's not  kimper 
P P C