

Hey up, I got some
Some what?
we had five pounds worth
Did ya?
went into
saw a mate of mine
Oh alright
he says how many do you want?
I says two or three so he give us three
Oh
how much
this is like confession you know save you going to church on a Sunday
This is true 
Is that where you got to now?
Don't look at me I didn't order them
What is it?
I'm not complaining mister, yeah he double
mm
Spoke to
las yesterday, yesterday evening
Yeah
Got some more here
Got more?
Yeah
Did you gather
all spelt differently


These
Oh got two the same
these are on the
just trying to contract me down
Yeah I expect to drive him
Yeah
got to go back and sort out any more problems we've got, that's where I'm going now  erm
Why have you got more problems?
get a complete list of complaints of them
I thought that you got that already
Well I got
Rhys says I've got to do it proper and then into Chelmsford do, do
wasting his time, thank you, ta, he's wasting his time
He was, got smacked and told him
I believe it they've got, they've got so many local companies
Yeah
you know board, even Daleys in Leicester
Yeah
and they go and drag somebody up in
Yeah
and he says to them, the thing is when it goes wrong
You're stuck
well you've got a three hour drive to go and put it right
Yes 
you know  you just  
 
that's it, another thing is
I don't think to ask, cos you hear from the way they were talking they were buying it 
I don't know, but er
they've got themselves stuck on the nine o'clock appointment
Who's that?
Ropers, they don't know, well they know I'm coming in some time today, but they don't know when
Yeah
so it's
 

Crazy absolutely crazy
Yeah
well I
If this is where I
you know what I've been trying to get hold of a couple of one of these  you know the phones, the phones that Donald's got
Oh not the, I thought you meant
yeah
Yeah
what for yourself?
Yeah
I don't like it
Don't you?
I don't, no
Certainly faster than the
I've got
I dunno erm, no I don't like them at all it's in fact I'm not even impressed with it I mean you look at the people with G six hundred and you look at the fifty six
and they're not a
Fifty six hundred?
No  oh you think well that's not an executive phone that's just er a phone with a couple of buttons on it
Yeah
well you know what the six hundreds are don't ya?
No
That's the white one with the, with the green L E D display it's got the calculator on it 
no, that's the fifty six hundred, the same model as O S D T
Yeah
the erm, the six hundred has got a separate power supply  little black eighteen volt car
looks like a mark two executive station, instead of being L C D it's L E D display, green L E D
Rider's got one, you know as you walk in
Oh yeah, the
on the right
Oh that thing
Yeah, did you like them?
They're one of the best we've ever done, I tell you what
You know there's quite a few about, I've seen them, you know
Mm
must of taken about ten years to make
Eh?
its external goes in the back  far superb
Yeah well, I put the paperwork in there and I
well I always keep it in the box so I don't get mixed up then, I don't start calling the mark three key board


I wonder why it doesn't work
Bruising quite well innit?
Yes   your neighbours could do with a lesson in parking
Oh  this one or that one?
Well I think it's Gary  I mean he's left a gap there's room for just about a car either side of him
Yeah, oh I know  I've said time and time again to them if you park up a bit, you know  that house
his driveway that he put up and er he just about misses where the tree was, but he's chopped all the tree down so he can have his grass, I dunno, well even if it meant just supporting the piece of something above his car so he don't get any sap on it or ought
Yeah well that's a point yeah there's something
I didn't thought of that 
   

It gets me how people drive a car sometimes with a
to look through
oh yeah
 

Well, well see how it goes, but erm  I don't, the thing is you see they can teach you so much about laying different bonds and making patterns and doing portholes and things like that, that'll be handy to know, but obviously you're not gonna learn that until much later on
Mm, what about arches with a keystone?
Yeah they'll probably teach you that, yeah more than likely, yeah, you'd of touch the chimney flue, part of it, but the trouble is the qualifications have fall beyond of what I want to do anyway and considering it's gonna cost a couple of grand to get it
Yeah
it's not worth it because I'm not gonna sort of get myself into a position where I'm only likely, where in other words get a job as a bricklayer
Yeah
so it's really not worth getting qualifications on reflection so  I want to do a bit of work you see, build myself a reputation that sort of thing
Yeah
and then do the odd wall, that's fine
yeah, I'm tempted to go around now looking at brickwork now
Mm
getting ideas
Mm
and probably incorporate one or two, can't do that on the garage though cos it won't, it's gonna be out of character
Mm, yeah, but er 
the, Russ' erm, done, well he's already got a wall, just make it a bit bigger, an existing wall just taking it around the back so gonna do that in the summer I'll erm, well in the spring, yeah gives er a bit, a bit of a practice
Mm  what's Russell like any good?
Yeah, he's quicker than I am, but he don't seem to be as accurate
Yeah
you know, by the time I've got about three bricks down, he's two
he's not as accurate as I am, no, but what I do I, I point mine up as well 
Yeah
cos that way it gives me a bit more incentive, it gives me an idea of how it's looking
Yeah
whereas Russ just throws it together and don't bother pointing it, and to me that is incentive, I mean you don't do it when you build it I know you don't, when you're earning, it's a bit of er, a mark, a guide to how you do it.
And er, certainly take advantage of the half price
Yeah 
thing , for twenty four quid for a hundred and eight weeks, you've got, you've got to take that, think it's coming on and learning, got the thing in there, start to progress it might get you, it's gonna get to the point where he says right, you know you've got them just about to sort of labour it's, you know, accurately with a fair amount of speed now we'll start sort of now being a bit adventurous, gonna get a lot more interesting.
You sees like cutting, you know you see these walls that are like that and they sort of go down like that and join a pillar and do the same again, just, instead of doing that you lay the soldiers across the top and you, you've got to sort of cut the bricks in between ain't ya?
Mm
Cutting bricks is another fault of Russ, it's all commonsense actually if you think about it, I mean actually we've drove round at night looking at people's walls and things like that and some were absolutely appalling, they've obviously paid money to have that done,so you, you, you can see it don't have to be absolutely perfect
Mm
although I'm, that'll only do for me
Yeah, these floors are impossible to
yeah, he's had his drive took across his back you know that there
mm
They do it individual
don't they?
Mm
yeah, there's one good there but, erm what they do, is they do it in concrete you know, but they can make it look like bricks
Yeah 
they colour the concrete
Oh dear
and they, they put the concrete down, then they get this thing to put on it and it, it sort of moulds it
Yeah
it just textures it like
Mm
looks like bricks, another one they can make it look like welsh slate and things like that
Christ
Yeah  yeah it's quite er  What are those
audio monitors?
Monitor audio yeah
Monitor audi 
Yeah it's sort of an L in shape of a O we've got
Oh yeah
oh
did ya?
Yeah, what I like about, what I liked about them was that they were dead flat like, you know if you, imagine it a sweet the weight for a sweet were from say ten ounces to twenty kilos
Yeah
you have some speakers if you, if you do a run like that you'll hit a pitch were it resonate with the speaker
Yeah
I mean most speakers have got resonate point, some, most of them are quite low
Yeah
but these, there are nothing, you know, there is no intonation at all 
Yeah
it was just everything that you heard was
As it should be
Yeah like crisp you know
Yeah
Yeah, I mean I don't know how powerful they were that, I mean he weren't, he weren't belting on those but there was, he was playing loud enough to appreciate with its own you know 
Yeah 
oh it went really well, how much does it cost?
He was on about something about
apparently monitors for some reason the most monitor cost, monitor class speakers
Yeah
but they're infinite in there er
Yeah I've heard that
Yeah
Yeah
that's what he was saying as long as you don't  what was he saying?
Some it you have to do
I think one rule that you have to follow and as long as you follow that particular rule then they can handle infinite amount of power, don't make sense to me
No 
cos there are some
direct drive aren't they, you know a lot of them passed a couple don't they there's a
Mm
an output stage
Mm
and a really big
I think it goes through that way, but, I think these are direct drive, but it's actually a straight piece in
you know
Is it?
Yeah, straight into the back of the speaker so you can actually make the speaker do what you want like
Yeah
to within reason like
Yeah, so the amp has to be match, match it then?
Or do you have to, have som 
You might, yeah , the trouble is it's gotta match down to be exact or
Mm, is his amp like that?
Yeah, his amp's got, yeah his amp was built for this particular type of er, I can't remember what bloody amp he's got now  there were no, no particularly flash like, you know, er, er, they were saying something to do with clipping, I think it's to do with clipping they saying the power up, the power point's alright as long as you don't  clip, because what happens is if the wave forms doing that
Yeah
you gain er an R M S
with power
Yeah
but if you, if you actually clipping
Yeah
the speaker's actually being pushed by the amp and staying out
Mm
you're practically burning the coil out so it's just a dri , a straight forward  plattening 
Mm
it can't handle any more so you got a, a
playing into the coil and it's not doing anything so it's just, just
in you know
Yeah
I think that's the point what he's making  and that's what actually you know does the lamp damage that  mm 
Do you speak good for what they are?
Yeah they are 
To say erm
that's what bothers me about it you ain't 
You just ain't got the power though
Well the thing is to buy summat
like it you know, you, you can spend a lot of bloody money just to try and improve 
That's right 
them, you know
that's right, well the thing is these are, I was looking at the power today I, er not read it properly in the past, there only four rounds, these have got to be A, if you want both A and B on
Yeah
you've got to have A tons
Yeah
if you have, cos what, what happens is if you put A and B it erm  it parallels them off, so if you've got two sets of four amps it's in two rows 
Oh yeah 
so it's no good cos it's four to A zones, you can run four providing you only have that channel 
Can't say that
I suppose you could, but it's got A and B outputs you see
Yeah
but it says here nominal input twenty five watts R M S  here it says maximum what forty watts
yeah, but that's a hundred  I mean you can tell, I've tried it, it is, I, I ain't even had it half way and it's, you can tell it's overdriving them
Yeah
is that a four to eight, O drive as well, does it say four to eight games?
It does, it's hundred watts, yeah it says you can use anything between four and eight Os
Yeah
but if you want them both, if you want both A and B on you've got to have a 
Yeah 
but er it's measure hundred, hundred watts R M S into eight Os
So it's 
 

Does he want fruit juice?
No he won't
yeah
What do you think to the board game on the back?
Oh, I thought it quite witty actually, yeah
Miracle Squares  I think there's a lot of thought gone into it you know, it can't be easy to re er to, to just dream up a game  erm, I like the one about you go to the last supper and the waiter spills soup on your trousers, the waiter, ha   tell you else about the Marx brothers an'all, the waiter is er the king of Snowdonia and it's Groucho Marx, the, they've got this massive hall, and er  these big steps leading down into it you know and as, as they're coming in there's somebody at the top and Ann says who's, who's walking in and they walk down the stairs you know and Mr and Mrs and the king has you know  and he says oh the king Snowdonia is about to arrive, he should be here any minute now, he should be here dead on this time you know, he gets these big fanfare trumpets up da, da, da, da, the king of Snowdonia, and there's nothing and all of a sudden it flashes to Groucho Marx and then he's in bed with
and, and they do it about four or five times, you know, the king of Snowdonia, welcome to see and all the bugles going you know all of a sudden he appears in the middle of the picture he says oh I've come through the back door


Yeah  don't know how many films they made do you?
No, they used to have a very good thing didn't they at weekends for
Did they?
Yeah a few years ago
They usually have them at erm Christmas time don't they, usually have a couple of Marx Brothers' films on
Yeah 
 

Say you can buy them films if you want
Yeah I, I, looking what it says in erm, rather than take the load
Yeah
cos they're not, they're not, get round to it otherwise  erm, I'm hoping they
do you know how long it lasts?
A couple of hours
Does it?
Mm  Dave Allen's on that as well the only bit, I think I've set it for the Beast Master ain't I?
Yeah
Yeah well when  right at the beginning of the tape is Dave Allen, but that's adult
Yeah
so, don't let the kids watch that.
Yeah 
Do you like him?
Sometimes yeah
Mm 
Only now and again though
Mm 
 

Oh dear
What's the time then?
 

Still got the timesheets to do yet 
I've got a load of paperwork to do tomorrow
Have ya?
what actually paper or the
Bills er, customer bills
Oh
sort out which bits are
you know
Mm, I've only got one charge me this week, you don't seem to get many now
Oh
I just have one connect, connect to
programme, programme one, ha only
get all these programmes for some reason, somebody allowed for it when they put the system in, mind you still have to check it I suppose but checked through it, tested it, took me about five minutes, still a minimum charge of an hour
try and include the customers into
as much as possible
Mm
I'm giving er a reduced rate for a while, so if anything goes wrong we foot the bill
Oh yeah
say like we're moving some equipment from one place to another
Yeah 
we do all the disconnect cable and
yeah
check it out for them and they want a quote, say it takes two blokes an hour each
Yeah
quote them a couple of hours, we drop the normal rate, you know by say thirty percent to start
Yeah
and wrap it up into a package and say you know if anything goes wrong and it takes four hours then you
the same, yeah, cos if, didn't the Co-Op move or something?
Oh yeah they did er 
And they fell flat on their face didn't they?
Yeah, they did a move like
Yeah
it cost them a bomb that did 
Well we went to a solicitor's office, what was it Friday morning?
Thursday morning?
Friday morning?
And erm  they'd moved the kit, got the electricians to do it and it took, it took three fuses when they did it, I mean the extensions fused on that particular system, the data pairs fused
Mm
and er they had to call us in, well Dick went out and er I think it was actually two separate visits so they must of, cos they're refurbishing the place you see so they must of moved into one office and thought oh you know this don't work, move into another office the day after, well this don't work either and he, he actually did two separate visits, whether they'll actually bill them for it I don't know , but I mean it's a minimum of an hour in both cases so
Mm
you know two calls, two hours
Mm  I dunno what we get asked to do you know, I mean in some cases we can handle everything like pulling out bloody cables after other receive in that kind of thing
Yeah
Oh I had one bloody customer see if I can quote him to a complete relocate, it was only a bloody er systems, probably no taller than that speaker
Yeah
but it's like a P C a bit 
Yeah 
like a flat P C but a power system one 
Oh them sitting on the desk?
Yeah
Mm
be like, be a bit lonely you know something like that, that kind of line
Mm
that width
wanted it relocated with all the cabling and that, you know er to the terminals
Yeah
in the same building?
No to another site
Mm
this is why it's
you know
Yeah
I says if we do it for you it'll cost you a fortune, he said
yeah
cos a lot of it's bloody play by ear you know the contract's 
Yeah 
put together
Yeah
if, they can't, they've got this system when they can key it in you know and comes up with a price, but it's that bloody strip
Yeah
you're better off just putting a bloody
mm
mm
Now is the time for the engineering man that is it  yeah
So you, it, he got you to move it in the end?
 
Yeah I didn't do it in myself like, but we did, we did end, end up with
yeah.
I went to some er, what was it, estate agents erm Alan Orwood on King Street, I says to them er, what was it, want an extra extension put in who do you go to?
I says well where did you get the system from?
Communications, I said well you can either go to them or you can got to, we'll do it for ya, so it's really up to you, he says well who's the cheapest?
I says well I don't know to be honest, I says I don't deal with them, but we were talking about Mercury these cross-routing got one of these systems here
Mm
and then I said have you got, are these cross-routing it?
He says no, he says we've thought about it, I says well you really ought to have it I says if you're dial dialling a lot of erm, cos they dial a lot of these insurance companies and er mortgage lenders, the head offices, they're always out in Ottingham, I said the Mercury pin number only cost you seven pound fifty a year, I says you think you can save that in a week  so er  ha  so erm he was on about it, he says who's the cheapest for that?
I says well we, we put erm a mailshot out for four hundred and ninety nine pound, cos the software and all the re-programming involved, I says Ford Communications followed it up, you know, they put a mailshot out for two hundred and ninety nine pound all in, oh he says I think I'd rather prefer G P T to them
Mm
which is erm now I'm dealing all the same company, maintenance and everything
Mm
so er we've got to hang on to it
Mm  surprising how, especially the, the bigger companies as well they tend to want to do things
 

Yeah, it's only a small estate agent
Yeah  it's, it's surprising how many companies want to like leave that side of things to un 
Yeah
one company may handle the lot from
that's it, yeah, yeah
There's a lot of money to be made in that if you want little bits of, put things here and there that you can different  
mm  yeah I 
even if he puts the cable in, did replace put the cable in then?
No we subcontract it
Oh yeah
we've got two subcontractors that we get in touch with, they just do it and then bill owes and then we uplift it
Yeah  but effectively the customers are only dealing with plastic of
Mm
Yeah for their own in installation like
Yeah that's right yeah 
Yeah 
probably as we don't add any real value when we did little jobs like the cabling you know 
Yeah 
they come to us and all we've done is uplifting and gone bloody subcontracting
Yeah
whereas other bigger sites we do all the planning and everything you know
Mm
so we actually add some value to it
Well we do that, we do that, we, we know 
Yeah 
exactly what we've got, erm
Yeah
how many clients we've got, you know for updating, what the capacities are and plus er we don't know erm what sort of cable we've got in so they might have only a ten P a cable when they already have nine pairs in use
Yeah
and they want two extra extensions you see in a certain area, we obviously don't know that
Mm
only the contractors do and even they only know when they go on site so, but we, we sort of say you do this, you do that and then we contract to who can do it, there's some of them by er
usually
mm 
I think for er even for upgrades we er the contracts do it sometimes which to me's wrong cos they aren't engineers
Mm 
But what er  what  what needles me a bit, but you can't blame them cos I, if I was er  a small communications firm I'd do the same myself, but, you see we won't sell now small systems through a sell
we do it through a dealership, like if you want a Cortin if you want a Sierra you've got to go to Cowlers or something you can't go to Ford
Mm
for it, they won't sell it ya, it's the same as us, we won't sell direct
Mm
so these businesses they buy from you know  erm communications company, a local company or Nottingham Telephones or something like that
Mm
and, erm  what they tend to do once it's gone in they'll say if there's anything you need, if you get any problems on the system or there's anything you want he says get in touch with us, he says and if necessary we'll get in touch with 
and we'll sort it out ourselves and what they do, if a customer says oh there's a phone that's broke, or it's not working or something like that, they'll say oh okay we'll get in touch with the maintenance for you, you see, cos he's making nowt out of it, if you say we dropped the phone and broke it, well we'll send a and then they send an engin one of their blokes out with a replacement phone and charge him for a new one, once they say wants some re-programming doing, oh yeah were sending an engineer round and they get, the dealer then gets the money for it so all we get is the flack end of it  you know so we, a service contract it's priced because, low because you know you're gonna make a bit on moves and changes
Mm
and that sort of thing, you know re-programming and upgrade, but we don't get that now because the er, the dealers are filtering all that sort of work off
Mm 
which it can't be right cos, I suppose in a way it's none of our business but it is I mean if it  gets to it, it puts our company in financial difficulties it means it's jobs on the line int it that sort of thing
Mm
that's why we've got to start cutting back  there's no money for wage rises and that sort of thing so 
what they are doing  you see, an authorized dealer, well even a non-authorized dealer get hold of a piece of kit and then somebody say want this system, right okay, and they just have a big load of forms for maintenance agreements and all they do the dealer'll go along and put this kit in, B T'll come along and say yeah that conforms to regulations, sign here, the customer er sign here, the dealer send the maintenance agreement to us, we signed it, send it back, we've never even seen it, then we turn up and find that the main control unit's high up in the attic or in a damp cellar, in a cupboard where you can't see it, there's no light and stuff like that and we're taking jobs on like that and it you know, it's just impossible to work on them
Mm
you see, but B T are not interested in that, all they're interested in is that the wiring's, you know that the boards are
Mm
the series that they should be, but we do pre-maintenance inspections now
Mm 
and, cos I said to the dealers for a long time you know don't put them under stairs, don't put them in store rooms, they get locked, locked up with vacuum cleaners and you can't get to the gear when you go to them, don't put them high up on the wall we can't reach them and they just laugh, but er, I think the last laugh's on us now cos er if I see one high up on the wall, I say well that, I say we're not accepting that, you have to move it
Mm 
what you doing you daft cat?
 
What a life 
Eh?
What a life eh?
I know, woke up this morning she was, she was obviously cold, cat was right under the covers, snuggled right up to me and got her, her chin on me arm like that, I was asleep  Justifying Nation, did you like that?
Good innit?
Mm, mm  like that one
that's quite good
What's that?
A new one where he got up a
 

Roger's got Transmission Vamp erm Velveting
Yeah, yeah
that's good
Yes
C D
Where?
Erm West Park Leisure Centre
Oh
It's a bit in the Midlands sort of 
What Wendy James was she?
Mm, she stop the bloody ha, stop the traffic when she used to walk in you know
Yeah
 
 
Everybody but you was looking at her out the window, incredible she really was
Yeah, very short int she though Wendy James
Is she?
Oh I dunno 
Oh yeah, she's only about four foot ten
Oh I didn't know, didn't know that
Mm right midget
Oh
Yeah 
Oh she's quite bright though ain't she?
Yeah
Really
She's no thicko is she?
I like them, I like erm Transmission Vamp
Yeah
Crashers one of my favourites too  your the only one as well 
Yeah
Rich er Russ played that yesterday, I played it through that on his C D, put it through his Leek speakers, brilliant
Mm 
I used to like a lot of that stuff you know the New Wave the erm 
Yeah 
The Stranglers er something 
Do you want some more fruit juice?
No
 

Did you read that proper that bit?
Yeah most of it like, yeah you see if there's any
what
Young Bailey
Yeah critics  did you see that?
Eh?
The critics?
Not under that one no
where they didn't like the Christmas, not the modern parents where they, they wouldn't let them have a Christmas tree, the erm  the critics is was erm  oh what was that about?
We saw it on telly and the er what was it Crispen or er Crispen something typical vegetarian names and she was criticizing the television Top Of The Pops and how they could do better you know and they got an art
 
Oh I remember you saying yeah 
it'd cost you about a hundred thousand quid and by the time they've done it, it's exactly the same as what the other one was .
They're not tending to play Bohemian Rhapsody on the er radio so much are they as er
No
The Days Of Our Lives, they tend to play that a bit more
Yeah they need to
I've never heard that you know  until, until it was, this round, since it last come out  must be out of touch in me old age
Probably, perhaps you don't notice it so much do you, but something, something like that breaks the tension on it don't it I suppose
 
Yeah if you don't , if you don't like it you probably just put it to the back of your mind then 
Yeah 
dismiss it something 
Yeah , yeah, what's the other one?
It uncle Vern, big Vern something?
yeah, he's all, all erm  he's on the front cover ain't he, I'm not spending my Christmas in joking 
 
he's, he's thinking the law's after him all the time
He's always wanting to top himself as well isn't he?
Yeah
eh?


Completely useless isn't he?
Which one's that?
It's the spook of Brassnick isn't it out of Dandy is it?
Was it the Dandy?
Sparky was it?
That bloody one 
No the  
cos Brassnick was the one with the square head and the cap weren't he?
Yeah, I didn't think there was a children's one
I think  cos we used to have them on a trolley, yeah  mm, I wonder if that
is the same that I, I think next time I get a Whizz I'll erm, I'll look cos there's a Zit comic as well 
Yeah
I'll have a look and see if it's the same publishers, cos it looks the same kind of format, but then again it probably would be cos it's aimed at the same market
Yeah
so they're probably trying to muscle into the er that niche you see, but er  brown bottle  you find the critics?
No I ain't read this
Ain't ya?
no I've not read that
Take it until you've read it
No  you're alright, it's 
Keep the cheapskates parade  they've got inflatable sheep and all sorts for set up here   oh it's still number one then
Yeah 
What you looking at there?
No it's er pair of tits on the front on the tree 
On the tree house  yeah, yeah, what's that one called?
Leafy Woods, The House in Leafy Woods
That's it, yeah  what was the one er, the out of date Christmas puddings, did you read that one as well?
It's about four pages long that one


where at the end, you don't, you know, you expect it's haunted to be a real you know, she says oh no screw that we've got the market by the bollocks  
 
the vicar Adolf Hitler


they've been playing loads of, out of date Christmas puddings


I don't know  but the artwork's very good ain't it?
Yeah 
You know the ideas there I think 
The men's best buy in Leafy Woods when Frank taught the children many of natures wonderful secrets 
Ha
what about these done, is it safe to eat these?
No Jack, cos you see these are rocks   
 
Oh dear 
A modern parent sitting there with a polo neck jumper on


loads of big teeth
 
Play all the record after er Queen aren't they?
What's that?
This is funny number one, probably Queen's not number one any more then
I don't know 
put the radio on and find out
Something about Kwiksave not being in these supermarkets
Yeah
Yeah
I've always said Kwiksave are the best
Well, bloody hell only nineteen pence cheaper out of a bo basketful
Eh?
Only nineteen pence cheaper out of a basketful, everybody else is only pennies over
Oh yeah 
It's still cheaper
we notice the joints of beef in Tesco gone up by a few quid
Is what?
gone up by a few quid from six pound odd to eight pound odd
Oh, it says here the basic necessities the things you buy have er have actually gone up, or they've hardly moved at all.
that amp's good
Is it?
Mm  yeah I like that  So when they picking his car up then?
Tonight I think
Yeah?
I was going to ring him up tonight  gonna ring him up after the
So which one's having it?
Well the first one's already had the first chance
Mm
I'm gonna tell him there'll be no fetch it'll go to the tomorrow night the other one
Mm  mm, you've done well then to get that one
I'm bloody sure I wouldn't of paid it  no way, er, thing is though you see when you first look at it, it don't look a bad car, but when you start studying it closely you start to see just exactly what problems it's got with it  did you point out the faults on it then?
Think he told him
that's why it won't
did he tell him about the hole in the wing then?
And the head gasket that had gone?
Said it, the bloke at the garage said they've changed the oil and that now he said it ain't bloody leaking 
You don't get all that water from nowhere  who choose the oil?
The bloke at the garage?
Terry did it
I know Terry changed it, yeah
but it's not
well it ain't run far enough has it?
Really  I reckon there's something wrong, convinced of it, oh it runs alright once it's moving  it's just such an awkward driver that's all  I was glad to get out of the thing I was  did knock the bloody er whatsit down, buses knock the er
gate way down to the embankment, were jogging down there tonight, I'll have a look at it  mm  on about it
Flogged it
No, none of them
yeah
the lad with the Porsche offered three thousand with four brand new tyres on it and a year's M O T, that's what he offered when the
when it was done
Yeah
and the other one never got back, he said he'd ring up to eleven o'clock last night, half past ten
Ain't you rang him?
Oh no, cos it er
  
you'll took that three grand 
Pardon?
You ought to have took that three grand
Yeah, but that three grand the bloke changed his mind
I thought you said the three grand as it stood without the M O T and anything
The lad rang and offered Terry three thousand pounds
Yeah
and his dad came with him
Yeah
and said he wanted an M O T on it, so his dad offered but he scrubbed his did, he wouldn't let him do it
Oh
he wanted an M O T, so Terry M O, he
get four brand new tyres on
Yeah and then say I don't want it
Yeah, they, it was them who got us to M O T it
What you ought to do was to said to him give me a deposit 
Mm
give me a deposit on it, I get it M O T'd if you change your bloody mind too bad
That's right
you can pay for the M O T
Yeah, that was like in good faith really weren't it, it's M O T 
So what's happened now then has he changed his mind then?
Has he told you he don't want it?
Well I quoted the three thousand as it stood, and, but Wayne won't, Wayne won't take that, in fact Wayne says on the phone didn't he tell him to
thought he wanted an M O T and
Yeah
three thousand, the thing is it's got four brand new tyres
Yeah
twelve months' M O T just to what to pay what the lad had offered it
Yeah
for it 
that's how you get Porsches innit?
Yeah
no ta
But the other one didn't get back to me 
Apparently said 
said he was gonna ring me last night and he's had plenty of time to ring tonight
Mm
so he's not bothered either
No
That surprised me cos they both were keen when 
Yeah 
they were looking over it
We see if anything happens really
The thing is
Cool down
the thing is, he saw it without an M O T and that lad wanted it, as soon as you've got it M O T'd he don't want it
Yeah
but he wanted it as well 
they do waste your bloody time they're 
I'm going to put 
I tell you what that's the worse thing about cars, getting rid of them
erm I'm going to put in the paper again Friday, Saturday and then Wayne's gonna have to borrow it, it's his problem it's not mine, he's gonna have to sort it out
Mm
if he's gonna borrow the money and get it
The only good thing are at least his tyres
Yeah
if it's
or something like that 
that's right 
then I can, I wanted
he wanted four tyres?
Four, every one, mind you I knew there was
Borderline
I mean each one was borderline yeah 
Oh 
yeah I mean one point six millimetres something like
Oh that's right 
A hundred and ninety three quid for four tyres
It is, yeah
I know they're all some
How much?
A hundred and ninety three quid
Mm
It'll pay, it'll pay Wayne to keep it now until he comes back and
Yeah probably so yeah, and at this time of year they're fetching so ridiculous in low money anyway, probably better off in the summer when the lads want to go out, out and about, well they're not bothered now nobody wants to go anywhere do they?
So erm
He might go and get a loan
put it in the bloody garage and forget it ain't he?
Yeah  it's er I take the car back half term, if, you know, I don't mind driving it down there, but the thing is how am I gonna get back if I drive it down, it's gonna cost me forty pound fifty 
Well wait until he's gonna come one weekend and you go down there and then come back together, oh why then again you're wasting your bloody, ha
He's going away next week
Is he?
Oh dear
that's why he's selling it, he's going away for seven
why?
Why not sell it?
No, but said it
oh
and then our dad lent you that three thousand when you moved in
he didn't lend me three thousand quid, he cut it off the will
It don't matter to me, I'm not bothered, it's just, it's just me and you should have this, look, it's his money, I'm not bothered, I've not
well you know if I, I said is it gonna cause any problems when he did it, cos it was er, it was er, to me 
Not with you 
No
not with you
No, but it was a loan to me and I said to my dad he was loaning it me and I said to him erm  I pay you back and then when I went to pick the cheque up er he says er well me mum says he giving you that you know he says what we're gonna do is when, when they write the will out you'll get that much less than the others, I says well as long as it ain't gonna cause any problems
Not with me I'm sure it's not you know 
and he says no I, I reckon I had a word with our Margaret she said no it don't matter, but if that's gonna be the case I'd rather give it to him back, I mean I've got it
Mm  she
she says it should be you three, me three and
well I don't believe that, well 
and  
I'll give it to him back then
Oh don't say anything
I've got the money in the bank, I might as well 
not after all 
give it to him
not after all this time, he's probably calmed down now, but er if, if our mum and dad give me anything she takes the hump, but mum and dad can give Margaret anything and it does not bother me
Funny, a bit like that
I couldn't, I couldn't care less honestly
Well she always used to say, why you don't say anything, but she always used to say to, she'd never come down to the house, I mean I don't think she's been to my house, house five times 
She don't 
it does my house, in fact it come the other day when Kerry had to pick a battery up and I walked out the front with Kerry and he sat in the car and didn't even look at me
Yeah
yet when you go round to the house he's sociable enough
She bought me at my
didn't come in, I cannot be doing with that
I don't think she's been five times to my house in all the time I've lived there, now in the early days er  she said that when it, hang on, she said she'd never come down cos she didn't like er
Mm
I thought well that's fair comment cos there's people's houses I'd stay away from cos I don't like the wives, so I mean, you know, that's, I don't go round, but the thing is she's been gone about what three year now, four year or something or however long it is  why don't she come now?
Perhaps our Marg she's just that way
oh it don't bloody matter to me 
A apart from that 
she can stay away she can come, come round
apart from that 
she can take her choice 
that would upset me mum and dad, I don't want, they're too old to be upset 
What?
you know
perhaps she's mellowed now, I mean the last time she went on with it, about it, was probably over a year ago, but she's still going on about it definitely a year ago not just 
What to mum and dad or to you?
er she's on, I think she said something earlier, well she told me she said something to mum and dad earlier on
But she hadn't?
I don't know if she'd not 
Liar 
but she said I want, no, Keith had three thousand we ought to have it and erm, I said it's mum and dad's money it's got nothing to do with you, you've got kids, we've had that money
and erm, you know, they spend it on the six of them pocket money for sixteen years it all of them have left school now
Yeah
that's just how Margaret, she's just that way, it used to hurt me at one time, but I, I don't hurt easily 
You know roughly 
I'm, I'm, I'm
myself so much, that erm nothing bothers me, everything just rides straight across me back
I used to, there's one of the women I work with used is a shout and she used to upset me and
mm
Not that she saw me teased, but even now I can give her back you know
Mm
and I don't stand any nonsense from anybody, but erm
Mm
as far as me mum and dad are concerned I'm, I try and protect them
Mm
I, just erm, I'm
on now this year to have me mum and dad cos she never had them at Christmas and I thought it's not fair, you know, she's the
Right
me mum and dad'll feel it
Yeah  oh don't, I reckon it was June who got
up there
Do you?
Yeah, I've never been the same since I was there you know
Are you?
No, no it's hard
I erm  I always vowed I'd never let erm, never let anything get to me like that again
Mm
you know, cos I was in desperation then, but, nobody, I mean I just, I just don't bother, I don't let things bother me it's as simple as that
It's not good building
no that's right, yeah, I mean, I, I've said it, I don't care, but er I've said in the past that er, I think some of the reason me and Ann split up was, I mean she always used to say I never treated her right and all things like that, I did you know, and I do care for her, but a lot of the things was I never showed it because erm if anything bothered me I never know it showed and it didn't bloody bother me because I'd resolved myself after Julie that I'd never let anything bother me again
Mm  well you have to put your defences down, but not all women are like that
Oh I know they're not
like them two, erm
No, well I've meet quite a few since and they're alright, they come and they go, but, I don't know  
That Ann probably be alright now, but that's how she should ever so 
yeah
Used to let them at me mum leave er my kids that she made of hers, yet she, me mum never treated them all the same 
if that, if anybody would see that it'd be somebody in neutral position, like me, and as far as I'm concerned treat them all the same 
Mm, mm
and they treat us all the same an'all 
but she's, she's terrible, she's got a good point you see you got to let them stop, but it's just, she's got an extremely jealous nature
Yeah
and, er I always say that I am so grateful I am not, because I've seen what it's done and our Marg with Val her sister, we've both got sisters who are extremely jealous you've seen them, you've seen jealously eat away at them
Yeah
and I say that I am so grateful that
Yeah
that I'm not jealous yet and both of them 
Yeah I'm the same 
have got more than me
Yeah  well that's it 
I know I've got a detached house and Marg's got a semi, but Marg lives in much more erm
Con financial comfort 
appreciate their lives that
Yeah
you know we've erm, we've chosen to have the erm
Material side
property
Yeah
Well not really material just got better taste than me
Why is she
what's better about her house than yours?
Well it always looks beautiful anyway
Well that's only cos, why is it?
So you think
Yeah, but so is this
Fucking all secondhand
ah, but the only bloody reason it's secondhand is cos it's the, that's the style you want
Mm
that's why
I'm happy with this style 
it's the style you want 
Yeah I'm happy with it
you can't get new stuff, you can't go out and get something new like that, to that quality
Mm, I'm happy with it 
Mm 
not
I  well I'm on about doing some stuff I am cos I can't get, can't find what I want, build my own  yeah
We've had, we've had the video repaired and
up to date, one hour's work
Yeah
no, no parts thirty quid
You're joking
I'm gonna ring up to that tomorrow
Is it got service
actually it was thirty five but five of it was
one hour, thirty pounds and I took it to them
You took it to them?
Yeah
Wonder if they've charged ya for er
 
Well we charge fifty pound an hour you know
Oh do you?
Is service
I don't know er
well probably gone to the best place maybe it's right
Well that's right, yes
Well Terry said it was because, we took this, we took that, we took, taken a place on Pranting Street and it still don't work
Yeah, it
yeah, so we said next time we have anything we'll take it to across the 
So what was wrong with it then?
The cassette kept getting stuck
It's only the belt usually 
It says on
wind it up
Wind it up have they?
re-line cam gear and flat gears on cassette housing, red, idol and cleaned up 
I think the speed up 
Such delicate things 
Oh they are, much
you can't bloody see what's happening can you?
Oh it's a
no
I say thirty, we've had that either eight or nine years I can't re I can't remember which, that's cost us thirty five quid in eight or nine years
Can't grumble
No
I said if we had a maintenance on it, maintenance was thirty odd quid a year, over eight years it would of cost us two hundred and forty pound 
Oh yeah these maintenance contracts are the lowest, I mean I took one out on my mum's C D player because they'd, they'd had trouble with it, er multi play, turns out it was the stack one they had trouble with not that one, but it was only thirty quid for four years I mean
Well that
Yeah, well I bought, I got the C D cheap enough, you know when I bought them that mini unit, that went just after a year, that bloody thing when it packed up, do you remember it was playing in night, in the middle of the night and my dad got up and said what pratt's playing music, it's his own  ha
That was lightning weren't it then?
Well I do it probably was actually but it was the switch that had gone, maybe lightning had hopped across the switch, yeah, but erm, that's all it was it was the switch, but er, I mean the thing is it went wrong and they had to pay for it, okay it's only a tenner to have it done, but it, if a C D player, I mean if the carriage goes, you know, sixty, seventy quid, you know I'm buying these electrical things, it's, because it's a  burg lock, I can buy them, get them a warranty with it an'all, then it's took the burden off them.
My dad's pleased with the compact disc, erm, my dad appreciates a good sound don't he?
Yeah
Really pleased
appreciates a good sound and puts that bloody crap on, ha
What's he put on?
Oh I don't know that stuff with, er I dunno, Acker Bilke or 
Mm
When I first got it in the I was a bit, well it don't sound too hard, bit down hard, but then again they were in a rush, I said there's your present and I gave it to them, and they unwrapped it and me mum says oh come on we'll be late for the club, cos they were getting free drinks at the pub, oh she, she didn't even want to look at it, I said oh, and she looked at it 
To see 
and er me dad says ooh it's a video recorder and he, I says no it isn't, he says it is, it's a video recorder, I says it isn't dad, I said Christ I bloody bought it
I says have another look, he says what is it?
I said it's a compact disc player, mum says oh that's nice, she says what do they do?
And I said, I said pour us a tea, oh she says we'll be late for the pub, I thought oh sodding hell
Yeah
so I says alright put it down
She don't think and as you get, you get older they get worse
Mm
erm, don't, they just don't think cos our kids you know they'll have money erm, say they had money and bought them presents
Mm
and I think the lads they used to get them some chocolates or something, she says oh more chocolates I've got loads of them
I know I bought
Do you know it's 
and it what not since she's been owed
They, they still remember that
Oh aye
and they, that was when they were kids and they still remember it 
It's not cos she's  it, cos she's like that you know I bought her summat, when ours were not, not very old, I didn't know what to get her and I bought her an ornament, she says oh I wish people'd stop buying me ornaments I've got too many, has to dust round them I thought you'll get sod all next year
I've had that, yeah and that 
you'll get bugger all
yeah, I think our Julie bought her some talc, she said everybody's bought me talc and that, and our Julie said this year she don't know what to get grandma cos whatever I get her she says she don't want it 
She moans about it I know
and that's, that's just it really she don't think does she?
No, she bloody ought to after the first couple of dozen times, but anyway, when they come back and we got back at night and we started playing them and putting things on er you know they got to like it
Yeah, that's it, my dad said it's a lovely, well it is 
That's right 
I wish I could get another one, it, I can't get one of them
Oh
same, the same as that, cos the idea was get two the same and I've got one contract, ha
Mm
I've thought guaran two machines you're guaranteed for four years then, cos they didn't write the serial number down, so if I got two machines and it goes faulty I just send it back and say this machine's faulty, they don't know how many I've got
Mm.
Morning young man
Morning
How are you?
Alright, have you got it?
how long?
Five minutes
Yeah, we've been to
oh you've found it 
You say sometimes it comes on on line three?
Line three, yeah  no, not on this one
So you've got
yeah
goes onto there
Aha
yeah
The first thing to do is change the erm change the
cos that, well I tell you what I think the first thing to do is do a system reset if that doesn't change the display decoder
I think
if that, yeah, if that don't work escalate it, because it's a loan problem, you've done everything you can then
What about C P U?
Change the C P U?
Bloody hell, mm, well I'd escalate it because it's a known problem, they might come, turn back and say change the C P U.
Well you know what you can do 
They're not they're not gonna do anything about it
They're gonna ask if you've changed it
Yeah they will yeah, well you can have a word with them first, you've got to have a word with them before you escalate any way
Yeah
but I, I think that's the erm 
but I mean 
that's the answer 
I, shouldn't I, that decoder's got to  er 
It's got to be told something before it does it yeah 
Yeah , you'll, you'll hear that actually come in, if you disconnect one of those legs, if you disconnect that blue wire  on there and then cease the intercom and put it back down again you know the relay clicking  you'll hear it come in and go back out again, there you go 
So the twenty four volts is here permanent
Oh yeah  yeah  yeah  I say reset the system, do a system reset and then see how it goes, it's all, it, it er it's the main problem them, and there's no cure for it.
We've spent months of shelving and then in the end he just says oh sod it, just took it out for an eight one six then.
There is one other cure 
What's that take the bell off?
What can you, I don't know if you ever, ever came across any of these er the mark two that want an extension and I think it would project a
producing stuff
Mm
and it was er
Oh acoustics
Yeah, that would cure the bastard, cos it would only ring when this rang
It would also ring if you pull a page out.
What was it an amplifier with a speak on it?
It's a little acoustic er coupler type
What does it do sense a sound and then ring 
Yeah 
ring a bell or does it actually pour out of a speaker what comes out of a speaker?
No it rings a bell
Does it?
Yeah
So if I call a paging call out and a paging call comes out it's gonna ring the bloody bell
Not necessarily 
I don't particularly want to get involved in anything like that
Yeah
but I tell you what you know the mark two, have you ever displayed a coder and it rings, rings the bell when the intercom rings, rings the bell if the trunk's designed to ring and all that, you know when you get the, you put a call on hold and it comes back and it goes brr, brr, brr, the bell starts going ding, ding, ding, a right noise and apparently that's standard in the system  I think that was a bit of an oversight to be honest with you 
So the, it's not worth changing the data and the
Not data to the
no I mean change the data
to the phone 
No I tell you it's wasting my time it's a known problem
Say is there something on the data
well whenever I've had this 
Clear this rubbish up
Well you know the one at erm  the environmental
Mm
the erm  the displayed decoded it's actually mounted next to the kit and all we'll do is take twenty four volts out, volts out, they'll take the, take the data off the kit itself and then just bring twenty four volts out 
Yeah
you know, maybe cos the signal's stronger now I don't know, but that's the way to do it there, well you've got to bring twenty four volts out anyway
Oh yeah I'll get 
you can take it here or you can take it there, it's just that the, the displayed decoder is safer
Mm, but what I can't weigh up is there's nothing wrong together in the first place
found the twenty four volts
Where is that?
Across there through that gap 
The very, the very strays are where the wire goes, if you look at the drawing there a bit er, it actually comes in and out you know, one, one of them is actually the same, it actually just comes in and loops in and goes out again and you may 
 
find that you're actually on the same potential there, could be low potential and difference between the two  that's all you need
Something there  there  there it's them two, it looks like it could be them, with them round together
Yeah, that's right
So weird
Oh very weird, yeah, I 
preferred I mean  there must be some more, how many more lines are there, look, hang on then
Well
there you are


end of the bloody wires are causing that then is there?
Why?
They say 
Say, say that is the bell
Yeah  mm 
and they're your data
mm
they're not paralleled off
Oh
they're not paralleled off
It's a weird way of doing things, it's extremely, it's, it's weird, if you look at the drawing
I don't even need to look at the drawing for this
it's only six
well to have to see take the bloody thing off
Oh shut up moaning we've got, aha I'm going down to er Wellingborough in the next
Wellingborough?
Why what you gonna say?
Your going to Wellingborough that's a bloody turn up for the books isn't it?
I upset George the other day
Why?
He says well I, we were on about sort of and he says bring it up at the next meeting, I says
I says what meeting's that?
He says, the next regional meeting it's being held in Neesden he says you can go to that one can't ya?
I says no I can't, he says it's not very far, I said it's not the distance that bothers me it's the fact that you want us to sit there till eleven o'clock at night and not get paid for it, he says yeah but if you want to say something, I says I'd say something if I thought we'd be backed on it, but we're not, oh I'm not going anywhere to be if I'm not being paid
I'm not getting involved 
I didn't know Dick  was er  Bob, moving, er Dick  's
is it?
Yeah, cos he covers Derby, he lives in Calverton, he comes through Nottingham to get to Derby, I live in Nottingham and I just do Nottingham, I'm nearer to Derby than what he is, near as door bell, I think it's the way they've laid it out though
Well they're trying to send 
it is 
they're trying to send me on
on that what?
well why don't you go?
That's not on my patch like
It's my patch, suit me here
Well I did make
do what


company here
never heard of it


yeah well it did didn't it when the weather's like that 
There we are
if you're gonna do that, I'll tell ya if you switch it off and switch it back on again if, if it's the problem I think it is it'll cure it, if it's  which I don't think it is, it's the other one that's incurable
Incurable
It's incurable  the reason I say it's incurable the system's too 
Eh?
The reason I say it's, it's, the system's too old to go back to the Japs and say get this sorted out, rewrite the software because they're just gonna say not likely we haven't made it for ten years, or whatever  seven or eight years or whatever it is, it's out of date, they're not gonna start working on the system that's that old  all they'll want to do is to sell you a new one
Yeah
that's what we'll do
are they overhead them cables?
They're not are the oh they are, the end there
bloody hell 
no I don't think it's in there, it's just description stuff, sizes and what have you  maybe on the right section there, it's the one where you might wire the L J Us up as well, that's
section, ah I think it is, that's it the one with the M B F to
what's that?
Station socket
Right
box 
extension belt  there it is next page  there you go  hear that mate, it just goes in there look, and that, oh hang on a minute no it don't that goes to the bell, through the bell, back out again  and then  er
Come out through the bell, back through the bell on to there and back to there
That's right through this big
that's right, so you'll probably only just seeing
Yeah
circuitry there and then there's your, your data
which you, you do parallel off
Yeah
like a yellow and that just says ring, ring, ring that brings the lane and it just does that, that's that belt, all it's doing is taking it through them relay contacts
Yeah  mm I see
which is why you don't see a voltage at the same leg really
Yeah  fucking weird though innit why it should suddenly start pulling like that
That's the way they are, have, have you any extension, extensions put in?
Tell you what it could be, ah hang on a minute, I ordered an extension for a bloody for a phone for that office, it could be the phone that's doing it in that office there  I know, I know  it could be corrupting, you know on the mark one the big one, the old generation mark one
It's been going on for months
Has it?
Two or three months
Oh two or three months
Yeah, but it's got worse and worse
Oh right, yeah
and he said it's got worse since he got the new switchboard operator, which makes you think
She's probably putting calls, she ain't cos we've tried it over there, you pressed intercom, put it down, it, it does that
Shouldn't do that should it?
No, I tell ya, there's about four in the company started doing it altogether, oh this is about the fourth one I think  why that's what third
told me I was talking to Brian  day before yesterday, second line, he says there's loads of them doing it and it can't be cured 
Well all we can do then is reset innit?
Yeah, let's do a system reset and
you sure you put everything back together that end first
Very careful, we'll do that when we get over there, ha 
Let me get me glasses
it looks more like the Selby's one than the erm, than the environmental
Oh, I mean
cos the main environmental was er, it did it on its own, with a completely empty switchboard, no calls on five o'clock at night, everybody had gone home and the bloody thing would just sit ringing, ringing, ringing, ringing and erm 
I know this is only when the switchboard's busy
Yeah, well you know this, this Selby's one that was the same, when the switchboard was busy it would er, if you, if you  sees line three and played it down, well if anybody sees line three and played it down it used to do that or if you sees the intercom that did it, says it's more like the Selby's one than the new one 
Well I 
and that was incurable
well that was only there
If you see line three on 
You got the key?
You've got it
I ain't got the key  I ain't got the key you had it
You put it in your pocket
I didn't  you've got it


Right then, what you got there for?
better tell them first
You tell them  can we just switch the phones off for a couple of minutes, no, no calls on are they?
Cheers, okay Dave  give it a good thirty second
bet you've got a screwdriver over there ain't ya?
Got to put this one back together while we're waiting 
Oh
What you got after this then, d'ya know?
Dunno
mm
That one of Selby's you know it was fine until they put an extension in just er a key station as soon as they did that this one started acting up, so he said it's only since we did that, he said it happened the day after we put that in, I said okay, disconnected it, still did it, disconnected it at the, end here, still did it, erased it from the program so it didn't even know it existed, still did it
yeah, I, er
wait for the light to come back up 
have you connected it?
Yeah, even connected it on the end here, the, the station and set this display decoder up and it even did it there so it was nothing to do with the live lamp wire, the way they routed it we thought that perhaps rerouted it to the cable or something like that
Yeah
nothing  went round and unplugged every phone out, wedged every one out cos we thought it might of been a station that's going down, cos er I'm saying about the mark one, the old
two sixty, if you've got a bad phone it used to drag the paging down for all others, where if you've got paint in the socket
Yeah
or a bit of mould in one of the sockets it used to click all the phones when anybody made a call and er, all, all sorts of things that, I would of thought ah there's a faulty phone somewhere and it's degenerating and er we went round and waste every single one out, every single one, went to this extension pressed line three, play it down and the phone rang, I thought right it's not a phone, I changed the cabinet, I changed all the cards and the cards in one big one, I had one three
so it weren't interacting between the two, everything had changed and it still did it, were a new kit, got a cabinet of setting line, changed it and it still did it.
Well it st I mean it's something stupid innit?
Because the simple reason
 
I even went in at seven in the morning when they've got no compressors going in case it was the compressors dragging the whatsit down
because to me it's, it's something like that  everything, it's gotta be the C P U innit?
It's gotta be something telling that bell to ring
That's right 
and you would think if you change every bloody thing out
That's right 
whenever it was telling it to ring 
That's right 
to stop
Yeah, well I got a kit there and I wir I wired, just put it on the floor and it
light on the wall, had it all connected bang, bang, pull them erm, er wired them all up and still did it, that mine?
Or yours?
Yours
Is it?
Yours 
Yours 
Call one please ring Brian  before ten thirty, it's ten twenty nine now so, oh bloody car phone 


 

It's like Selby must be decoder number right round here
No find it next to the unit, next to the
  



That's what I like you co , you depend on someone helping me out and
Don't
out on you
Well I, I wonder  if it does occur again, happen again
Yeah
do decode it  it's hell of a run you know innit?
I did that at Selby's, I had the decoder, the new cabinet, everything, I had the decoder there hanging on the floor like that, I wired it up and I pressed extension sixteen and away it went, it said four there and the display decoder was there about ten extensions 
And it was about ten, sixteen that was doing it
I think it was sixteen yeah, fifteen or sixteen, I'm sure it was sixteen
Aye you said, like you say it could be se 
but third lines
that is something that'd happened all of a sudden, of about four throughout the cou , well three at the time throughout the country have suddenly gone like it within about a month or so of each other , and they've never had any trouble before, but I was talking to Brian  and he said that's a load of cobblers, he says it's been doing it for a long time and there's loads of them doing it.
Unless we
and see what's been used
Yeah  well if, if I get called backed to
it, or I'll change that display decoder first, I mean that's been reset now, forget that, er
Aye
yeah, well if you can get out o, f of that though
You can
Can you, what on eight three one?
 

Oh dear 
I mean  I figured it's gotta be something date, dated I feel
Oh aye, yes
cause it to do it
Well I thought that, but er
you know, that was my
to do it, but then again that was in it all the time, you know, it just don't make sense
funny how they're both garages weren't it?
Mm  in fact, eh I tell you what
Over head
all, yeah they're not, round the corner, all three garages is this is Selby's and there's erm, Selby's is Volkswagen repairer and er, oh no, yeah Lee invite
it was in their garage where the lorry was.
 

Of all the systems we've got three garages it's happened to, radio station
 

I think that wants putting back together there
Eh?
If you want to ring Brian 
Cancel that will clear it up
Put this one back together
I thought you'd on we'll do a reset and see how it goes, and just leave it if it, if it clears it erm that's fine 
And if not I think the next thing actually is to move the decoder  or change the decoder
Change it, wow, bloody step
That's three times you try to fall that, if you have an industrial injury
Three steps to heaven that's what it is, kill myself next time
Somebody said did you see the accident, no 
I ask did I have my eyes shut when I kicked him, er
Free line now
Yeah I just clear it  er I don't like the idea of doing that actually
Why?
What using it for er
without asking, it comes up on the er  have er, I'll ask her first   hello it's the G P G engineer love, yeah, er my pager's just gone off, is it okay to use my telephone just to answer it please?
It is okay is it?
Alright, thank you, ta  
O'Connors again
O'Connors?
Yeah
Where's that?




Yeah
What's happened there?
I haven't been there for over a, a year or more I think last time I was there 
 
On a tray  there's service
Is there?
 

I had to put the phone down because of you
Oh I do apologize profusely, profoundly whatever it is, no, no I was there when you bought it
I know, I've gotta get a frame
You've got a get another a picture, it's crap
That's not a bad picture that
Yeah, it's two-toned as well, it's green and blue
Blue and green 
or is it just I can prove it's green and green because it's a  quester two tone exterior with a
so that roof's supposed to be green then
and that on the top of the boiler is definitely not blue, even though they use blue ink for it
That's definitely green cos it's got green on it
 

right
Brill news
What?
got a disco on March twenty eighth yeah
it's not that I don't wanna do it, it's
Not the people that book with you
Yeah
Yeah
it's relatives
Yeah and you feel obliged to them to have it for next to nothing
I feel obliged to do it er for more
No
No, I've been saying they booked me about two months ago and I've been saying that they have a deposit
mm
Well tonight
Mm
one of the lads at work come up says there's a disco on March twenty eight and before I said I'm already booked, I said yeah, he says er how much do you charge, I told him and I says well if you let me have confirmation as soon as you can and a deposit of ten or fifteen pounds as soon as you can
Yeah
as soon as you know for definite
That rides over the, the relatives
it overrides them
Yeah
I'm gonna pass them on to one of the other bods at work
Why does somebody else at work do a disco?
One of the girls at work, her brother does them, er  so it's got me out of it
Yeah
never get out of it


Well I don't want to keep a date open for no reason at all and I mean say  
That's it, yeah the general yeah, if you tell them to say you don't want it you've had it ain't ya?
Yeah
You know our Wayne don't ya?
We're back on line
Testing
right that one..
I've got
excuse me  I tell you what I like them, them
Two boxes of
chicken
Yeah I know, a terrible oversight there, I've got erm you know them chicken nuggets that I get, have you seen them?
Them cheapo ones from Wallis?
Or they might be turkey ones, I go to Kwiksave
you get thirty in a bag for about well just erm for a couple of quid I think, or you get twenty four in a bag, oh I don't know, you get something like that anyway  yeah
I think I'm gonna have to start eating some stuffing
I thought the erm, I should, I should get it
so erm  
  

tell you what I was in a bath this morning
yeah
You know what I mean
Yeah
no you didn't you said you were gonna leave it
Oh yeah, that was it, yeah, yeah, muttered it under my breath as I walked out, yeah, I'll have to get in touch with that to say if got that erm
yeah, yeah
I say that amplifier was absolutely useless
ha
 

He says need another wire
Who says a what, a chap at work?
Yeah
Well we can get an extension lead, mind you it's alright you
it's not the same is it?
You may find that's a moulded plug and it, no that end trigger, is it a variable speed trigger?
No
Oh I was gonna say I bought a variable speed trigger for mine cos its back up  it erm
But sometimes when you're using it it don't quite work
Yeah, mine, like that
Ha, see what he means  it's a switch
Is it?
told him it might need a new switch
Yeah, well that's why a switch, a switch on mine, so oh no the cable didn't come
I says to him be prepared for a bill said I don't mind paying for one, but 
My last one was eight pound summat but mine's a variable speed reversible and all that
About four quid
there's no slow start on the reverse I got it while I was working in Leicestershire so I couldn't really take it back it'll cost me more in petrol
mm
what, I didn't, did you call
special on Sunday?
Why?
Well Les says er when we got out the car and you went he says bloody hell that uses some juice don't it?
I said well he reckons it does, he says when he filled up at the garage it were full, he says we hadn't got back and it was between the half and three quarters, I said oh I never looked at it
Yeah
Is it really that thirsty?
Does about twenty, twenty three to the gallon
What on a motor like that, no surely not must 
Right 
do more
at the speed I was doing it keeps it to that, if I'd of kept it to fifty it would of been a lot more
You what, well come on we were only doing fifty on the way back
Yeah, weren't on the way there though
I know
seventy minimum on the way there
Do you think it's worth it though for what you get out of it, well I mean you obviously do, you like the car don't you?
I like it, er pulls the looks, it don't pull the birds but it
yeah, yeah, soon I'll call you logo he went running
yeah 
what is it?
A bit of a funnel
 
saucepan?
oh you're deep frying them are you?
Deep frying is a lot actually is a lot better than shallow frying
Mm
cos it seals the food as soon as you put it in
Does it?
Yeah
So you don't get so much fat in it, yeah I'll have to get a deep fat frying pan then, for all the fat 
Oh it's true 
for all the fried foods I'm not 
 
no that's what I mean yeah, I've, I mean I ain't got
for all the u fatty foods I eat I fry pasta, deep fat one, deep pan, oh I don't know, you know what I mean
yeah 
switch that's gone, it's proving it cos it's a bastard
Well you, if it's intermittent an'all put 
This 
the toggle fish on to use for a week if it cures the
no
I'll get a longer lead as well for it
Mm
about five metres of wire, is that long enough?
What powers the drill?
is it?
Oh I, I had one of them  oh would blow off wouldn't it?
What is it?
yeah, it's says low on it oh number, three thousand and under, one point eight amp, four hundred watts
Yeah
expect it to be that thick then
Yeah,thing is getting them wires out
Oh screws from under the side
Fuck off
What, what you on about?
Oh brilliant
Don't you know how to do them?
Mine, mine was mine was erm if you've got screw contacts on it, mine have  well to say that these er  these switches are so unreliable you'd expect it to be erm
these be a bit user friendly, cor blimey, just cut it about all things down and put a chocolate strip in, plenty of room in the handle 
Oh really
 

You really want that one off though don't ya?
Did he say he wants a
as well?
Yeah
It's a bit of a pain int it?
Seven or eight years
Oh I tried it for her
That's alright then
er, I'll put a new switch on and wire, it ain't the wire at all it's the switch
Mm
have to double that, cos when you wiggle the wires here what it is when you wiggling the wire you're moving the  thing contact, I said if you wiggle the wire it's alright it's sort of coincidental
Mm
it might actually just be breaking the wire there
Maybe, just remake it
I can't get them out, you can see it's struggling 
Usually is the wire
Not on them it isn't, it's usually the switch
Eh?
It's usually the switch
What on these?
Yeah
I dunno I think my jig saw went, that was the wire, I just cut it off and made it off again and it was alright  it's short enough so it don't go through the window when you throw it
Break the window to get the bloody wires through
it's what?
Where to get the ideas for the lamps and that 
Just 
what it is, it's these modern new
they're not that bloody brilliant
Mm, I can still remember Ann's face now, oh this bloody thing, got it and threw it, no, no
Yes 
it just stopped short of the window, well no it was quite short you know, you could just see it aiming for the window, luckily it was plugged in
It stopped it dead
 
it stopped it dead in its track, yeah, couldn't get to rewire it after it though it snapped it a little bit.
Yeah, just rewire it up, just try it for er, you know, I mean it failed straight away, if it don't fail within half an hour then your er  you know what it is, save yourself getting a switch.
Yeah, scrub the switch up  that'll do for a change, paint it black inside the hose thing.
cos if it's not the wiring, the switch is alright
won't be able to what?
Won't be able to get the
why?
    

a brand new blade, if working on something and
working away not  minding my own business
Mm
working away


Yeah 
Oh did I laugh me  just about done with these
Oh and I thought there were a couple of speakers
Oh, don't know where they're from
no not really, not proper  stand over here 
no I'm gonna turn the fan on, oh Jesus Christ
mm
and it always has the same thing
Yeah must be want what they swallowed it and they're swimming round
Oh shit
   

Zoom, zoom, zoom
What time is it?
Half past seven, what d'ya reckon then
do ya?
have you
teletext?
Yeah
Oh I don't know how you work that
Just press a button
go on and says you wouldn't mind my telly
just happened to mention in the night says I'd like a white telly you know, go a bit more with, with the decor
a cream, yeah, a cream telly you know, oh I'll have that one he says when you sell it, oh Christ almighty, I thought I was, excuse me  perhaps I, I would like a teletext one, just get, you know I don't want, I'm not sort I don't like the colour, I'd rather see a white one in the corner
Mm
get a white telly with teletext, you know  I suppose I could put that one in the bedroom
yeah, yeah 
oh dear
eh?
Oh that's sunken there innit, yeah  don't think there's yet an empty seat 
They've got people standing on top an'all
Yeah look at that right down to the water line though innit?
Yeah
Them on the bottom they're bound to get their feet wet aren't they?
Mm  These countries are amazing aren't they, they're so
in the cities and yet
Mm
out in the wild
Mm, oh, aye look at that  oh can you imagine waking up to that, well probably wake up blind
Yeah
tossed over a few times in the night, burnt me eyes out
yeah, yeah  I'd like to visit somewhere like that you know 
Do what?
I dunno, as you say to see the culture things like that  but it's a bit difficult to put niggers down in their own country  well what's that then, is that, is that just the ferry between an island or something
 

Look for this boat it doesn't even stop, blimey
Amazing int it you get something like that and it'll go forever
Mm
 

Blimey is that the
a bit wicked innit?
Did you hear that?
Yeah 
Can you imagine if they got cholera on that  what was that boat that got cholera on it, it wiped them out, not the Mary Celeste was it?
no
mm  I reckon pirates had a go at that you know 
Makes you wonder don't it?
Mm 
 

What's he travelling all that way for that, he could of gone to Doddington market, get the same effect couldn't ya?
Same thing 
 
both selling rubbish
Eh?
Get out you're not getting on that boat, look at it 
 

Oh god  Oh no wonder you say there's us like eating cockles I suppose as the French eating snails int it?
Mm
Same sort of thing  
Hello there man, of course I'm awake, I'm eating my tea, ha you're wrong, Russell's organizing his night so that he's gonna pick you up half eight quarter to nine  okay  well I, I ain't had a shower or anything yet, I mean er everything's organized I organized it all for picking you up eight quarter to nine, bless you, what's your number?
Oh what I'll do when I'm ready I'll give you a bell which means it'll be what ten, fifteen minutes from then to picking you up  Oh that's it  Alright, see you bell in a bit, ciao 
I thought that was floating then, but it's an island, the way their camera was moving it looked like the old grass was moving, oh that's a nice boat


 

yeah 
They have to pay as well?
Oh they 
talking to one of these receptionists today and she says erm   she's been trying to get a bit of erm, she's split up with her husband, trying to get, a bit of extra money together, you know, to be, she's got her own house like, buying her own house and all this and that she's fell into a bloody modelling job and saying get yourself a passport and er on about sending her off to either the South of France or Kenya
Yeah
Yeah  so she's er  instead of just earning herself a bit of money she ain't done bad has she?
Mind she's dead smart  dead smart 
Well there's a thing going round a few years ago weren't there with these models, just pay for them to go out there 
Yeah 
and just keep them on meagre wages and then they'd have to subsidize themselves or  
Oh, no oh no it's not like that, it's a proper model agency in er, in Nottingham, it, it sounds above board, well I've heard of the, the lass that's running it actually, she's an ex page three girl, she's er very good, you know, from what I've heard it's erm, it's a reputable agency and er, yeah the ones of the sharks doing that, but er, she ain't one of them  thing is she doe she 
Everybody wants to
yeah, yeah, including English women  er, what's he doing with that bird, he still, what's he doing?oh I don't believe it, he's got an AIDS problem and he's shaving a, oh god
yeah, that's true  it does show ya that it can grow though don't it, not the hair I mean AI AIDS you know if you shave somebody head and got AIDS and you shave his head, he cuts them both, that's it, two people's got AIDS just like that.
That was an antelope with his arse weren't it?
Which one?
That was were they just got all aboard
Yeah 
You can't get many of them out of sea surely
I thought they're trading people that's coming up as well 
Oh  that one isn't dead yet is he?
That one is  good god the size of that one  that must be still alive oh look at that look 
yeah  er I could tell that was still alive that pig
Mm 
I can't stand to see people being cruel to animals it absolutely appals me, it does really, I feel like to take an axe to them
Mm
I feel like I'd, I could take an axe to them  oh look at that look  oh  dear, probably seen his mother butchered  ah see that big fat body just then a pair of feet I thought it was his, did you see that?
Mm
I thought cor blimey it's a wonder he can walk  look at that  you wouldn't believe that today would you nineteen ninety two  oh no wonder they all come over here, is so really, can't blame them if that's the sort of quality of life they've got
Sorry we should never of let them in first
Well there'd ought to of been more control  but apparently now, you know how the Indians come over here, all the time don't they?
Yeah
You try and get to India, not that you'd want to go mind you, you try and live in India, won't let you in
Mm
No, you cannot get to India from what I've heard, you cannot get in
Well I see this thing in the paper 
Well the only reason you want to get out of here is to get out of the way of Indians
Yeah full of white man over there 
Yeah that's it cos they're all over here
See if you can find a tickatape reading machine for a
a tickatape reading, what er, er a telex type thing?
Yeah
Yeah
I've got
have ya?
Really love it, it is racist
I'm not racist
You, I tell you you'll love it
Me?
Yeah
I can't stand bigots, racist bigots, especially black'uns  no
I tell ya if you can, if you know anywhere that's got one
Mm
it'll look
yeah, er that's not many of them these days is there?
Aren't there?
I tell you what the biggest racist are the black, black, not so much the blacks, are the Asians
Yeah
They're terrible, they really are, not all of them
Oh I know but them who are, are really bad
Yeah oh when I went to that 
You know a lot of people erm, you're not, they
to acc accept them to what they are
I'm the same, I'm, I won't prejudge
But when they start coming  
Yeah that's right 
and start calling you behind your back cos you'll find out
Yeah  mm a bit like I say when I went to that dentist surgery at er Leicester
Mm
last year I couldn't believe my welcome, they're coming out and apologizing are you alright to wait, you know, he's, he's got dentist in the surgery and oh it was amazing 
I know, I was I went up for some chips at the top
Yeah
and er 
and I says to him that's one thing you never get at that, that one at Top Shop
What's that?
well she says like, I won't be a minute
I could see what she was doing, I won't be a minute, I think she knows what I go in for
Yeah
it ain't very often I go in for something other than chips and not have chips as well you know 
Chips and chips?
Well you know like fish and nothing else 
Yeah , yeah
says oh I'll not be a minute  yeah so he starts, you don't get that sort of thing that one, the Big Shops
Yeah you, you're there and they just ignore you
Yeah
Mm
and she were telling me the guy that runs it won't let them talk to the customers, said that was pig ignorant surely
owns it?
I thought he owns them all 
No  don't own that one at Top Shop
Don't he?
No
Oh I thought he did, are you sure?
I reckon he does you know 
But when you go go into this one yeah they're nice and friendly aren't they?
Yeah
You walk in and just like er, they're always talking to you
And he won't let them talk to the customers?
At that one at the Big Shops, the guy that ru okay it might be the guy that runs it not the one that owns it
Yeah I'm sure  owns it 
won't let them talk 
Yeah 
he won't let them talk, it's disgusting, I tell ya, you know, no end of times I've been in there and it's obvious we're waiting for chips
Yeah
to cook and they won't say
Anyone who don't want chips
Something like that
Yeah
on top of as well, we've just put them in they'll be about five minutes or whatever
Yeah
I mean what does it cost, no, no end of times I've just
Yeah
walked out with it's unreal  
Do you know the bloke , do bloke, do you know the bloke who owns it then?
Have you seen him?
No, it's, when I was talking to these 
Yeah 
this other chappie
Yeah
you know the top one out the two
Yeah, you don't know if he's Greek then?
He's some foreigner thing, but they were saying they don't allow them to talk to the customers that's it, you don't talk false stop, no hows, whys or whatever, you don't talk
Tell him cobblers
Yeah I don't go though
I won't, I wo I won't erm
I won't go in the shop even with  
where there's ignorance 
I've even considered reporting it to the health people
Why is it bad?
It can be
Can it?
Oh he don't look very pleased with something does he?
Want to nail him to the fence you should think he's not 
yeah, yeah  he had them all panicking 
 

Their captain's making it difficult for them on the blower
Yeah
 
Did you see that?he nearly shot himself in the butt that time didn't he?
 

He's in a rush to get somewhere ain't he?
Yeah he's had a big
is that what it is?
Oh it's a definite to the side, oh that's his canoe there
Oh I don't know why he just doesn't turn the boat so the current was too much for the
it is innit?
Yeah 
yeah  did you not know that?
I learnt something about it in the past yeah
You know when you're fishing
Yeah
boil ham
Yeah
throw it down as ground bait
Yeah
sends the fish high
Does it?
Yeah
oh I've heard of them, yeah, but I know this
Pre-boil it
Yeah
rinse the stuff out, and just throw it in and you're away
Oh
I wonder if you grind it up and smoke it in a pipe with tobacco, would it have the same effect?
I don't know
I bet it would eh?
I used to use them when I was fishing
Yeah didn't boil it though did you?
Mm, mm
can't remember, I di didn't go for long  
yeah, we was talking about them today actually as a mat as a  as a coincidence we er, we own that creepy crawlies and dragonflies 
Oh it didn't look like it was making a hundred miles an hour anyway
No 
What happens if that engine blows up?
Yeah, well it goes downstream then don't it?


Goes back to the fisherman and they just er done the dirty on 
 

Yeah got one job all day today, oh yeah
Got a good day then?
Good day, yeah  well I was in Beeston all morning preparing it, there's a programme on
well I used er technical supports, workshop, went in there grab my
and dashed out and fitted it, complete waste of bloody time mind you cos er we've got the own software back in now, well actually the latest releases of it, we were going back a release because er we were having trouble, but it turns out it's not our problem  external problem so, put three dot seven back in.
I can see it, blimey where's that from?
Did it?
What for?
What
really?
Yeah
You could use that couldn't you?
You, you, you have two don't you for a sub base or just, you just have one do ya?
One yeah
Cos it's not, it's non-directional ain't it base?
What, what it is on that one you've got this speaker right and it goes down to really low frequencies especially
right, oh you've got to have a special sub base speaker then?
Well it ain't gotta, it ain't got to be a sub base one, it's a base speaker
Mm, bigger then 
You know , you know that padding that you put on the car you know that stuff on the doors inside?
Mm, yeah 
You put two squares of that and stick on to the cone
You're joking
and it slows you down, and it goes in out and like that
Blimey  well you could have them on your A speakers and then have yours, just play your surrounds couldn't ya if you wanted to do it that way if you want really
Yeah but you'll lose, you'll lose
oh of course you are yeah, yeah  oh
just like that and hi-fi speakers and hi squire, hi-fi speakers
Hi squire be hi squire speakers
Anyway
something beginning with S


Yeah, all sorts like that
Yeah
and there's one it's supposed to be erm a pretty good unit
Yeah
and it only had one over all the speaker
Oval?
Electrical?
Was it?
Yeah on a four amp speaker that's it
well we're not talking
again, sub base
No, no these are speakers on
Really, new ones?
Well not new ones out all
sort of catalogue in them
Mm  computer, yeah
yeah I thought about, about that amp you know
Did you get it?
Oh, eh
Have you tried it out?
Oh yeah
Do you make a hundred and fifty watt speaker?
Ha, was it?
Sixteen hundred
Well the ones I'm running are twenty five watts
What's the, what's
forty, twenty five watts or less, forty watts nominal  the ones I'm running not through a hundred watt channel, er
Now we went, we went to er to  
No it's just after the  
just before Christmas
Right, okay then Angela, about six o'clock then 
Ain't you got the  ones?
Yeah
Okay then
Yeah
see ya, ta-ta 
he says he says
yeah
about a hundred and forty quid the pair
The pair?
The pair
Yeah
and they erm say a hundred and forty watt
Handling
yeah there's, yeah, yeah that's not bad then, you said they sounded alright didn't you?
Sounds
did they?
And when he sat in here like they've got like two glass doors
Yeah
yeah
He's got two of them that go in to his next room
Yeah
and then he got it up the back that far
You can hear it
and he got it turned up a bit and sounds bloody from the other room
Yeah
and then we get in the doors
well you know what I've done with mine erm, just temporarily, I'm trying to find out to speaker position, eh?
Put big resisters on it
Big resisters yeah, I just don't turn it up very far, it's, it's, it's lovely, it really is, it's well worth the money
Yeah
and er I've put er, you know how my room's, the fire's there and I, I had erm sort of either side of the fireplace didn't I, but one 
Yes 
was in the back room cos of the size of the fireplace and one in that corner  but they're in the way, that was only temporary while the house is upside down and I've put two
yeah, yeah, put them upside down and the house will be the right way round, I've put one either side of the patio door and sort of based them slightly inwards on the floor to get the maximum bass response, I understand in that room it's brilliant, it's absolutely su boom, boom
Yeah but what happens when you come down the other end?
As soon as you walk through the archway, I mean you'd expect it to be an open
You'll lose it
You lose it
Yeah
Well you'd lose it
Could you get, you know when I said it, you know when I said about 
It must hit the wall and bounce off
did I, did I ask you about that erm when Dave 
lighting on the ceiling, he's got four speakers and I said look what, what's happening is the, the sound from that particular sound from that
mm
It does work that does cos I've, I've read about it in one of the books
Oh yeah, it's like wiring your speakers back to front as well
Mm
erm, getting the
wrong, your, your, your bass response just goes  it cancels out cos one's pushing and pulling, the other's pulling and pushing, vicious
Yeah, I've got a design for a set of speakers upstairs and do, I think it's three way like that
Yeah
and it's, it's got the box the design of the box will interfere
yeah
I tell you what there's been about four or five different types of that
is there?
Yeah, you've got one where you get bass reflex
Yeah
right and then you've got an infinite backing where you got speakers there like that and then you got a board behind that and then one behind that and behind that
That's right yeah, yeah
you know, there's another one, another, another type of back is
This is all for bass is it?
No it's all for speaker's cabinets
Mm, mm
it's easily when
the computer program
is it
and all the generator the sills
mm
an amplifier, a multimeter
Yeah
you know, and you stick it on, you know, like it shows in the circuit, and then whatever reading you get that's
yeah
whatever that is, I dunno
yeah
work out and you can put all the information in to the computer
Yeah
bloody hell, yeah, my box in, I think my speaker boxes are glued together, you can't get at erm
Are they vacuum sealed though?
It wouldn't surprise me
Because it, it, it turns to the, you don't lose so much bass in the back
Yeah, if it's vacuum sealed yeah 
Yeah cos in, well I don't suppose it could be vacuum sealed it would rip all your
wouldn't it?
Yeah I suppose it would wouldn't it, if it tries to come forward yeah, yeah
But you don't get any
as your bass come out your
yeah, yeah, you don't get the sort of, when your speaker's on loud you get a lot of sound coming out the back
Yeah, but it's very, it's well, can, I don't suppose it can be, I might of had one of the speakers out but I know there in the back of the speakers, you had this loft insulation it's full of that
Yeah it's like white stuff
No it's yellow, it's yellow
Wadding
Yeah like wadding yeah
yeah there's a lot of different designs you can't move the back of these
Can't ya?
you've got to take the speakers out the front
Mm
to get, you know, to get inside
I can't get in my back or front
Oh can't you get your speakers out?
I can't remember now, I know I've had a go to have a look at them to see how, to see exactly how, cos what I thought, what I thought I was gonna do was, I didn't like the furniture of the, of the speakers and when I was keeping that system I was gonna remount the speakers in the box a bit more you know decorative
but erm, you know, I remember as coming across one or two obstacles and I couldn't get in to it  I thought if I'd tried a bit harder, I didn't want to start you know  so
I've been thinking about convert these speakers this time
Mm
because you only sort of need to buy one set of speakers
Mm
move the cabinets and if they're no good just cut them up and throw them away
Yeah
you know, but, one of them it shows you inside the side view of the cabinet
Yeah
right, and you've got your speaker there, and you've got your
coming down like that, but in the corner you've got a piece of concrete
Concrete?
and ceramic tiles set on it
You're joking
Eh?
All in the, all in the book
Oh
ceramic tiles set in it like that
Yeah
Well that's the sound lock
Oh
yeah, but
perspex in the speakers so you can see through them 
But the
of perspex is not the right material for the, for the box is it?
Not really because
mm, wouldn't sound right though, you wouldn't get the cor correct type of resonance out of it
mm, I don't know I think a lot of the sound travels through the wood, I think that's all part of it, you know, I don't think you'd have very good erm quality out of to be honest with you 
You know them, you know them little tubes that you put in
mm, I've seen them on the front that's all yeah, mm
things like that, they've a plastic tube in them, I
is it?
Yeah
really
but it's the right size
This is it you see, I mean a, a company like  or  have gone to a lot of trouble to get that length right, er and to tune the box and all this that and the other and get the right, I don't know maybe  er just think oh you know you just build this, put this massive speaker in and call it a sub based woofer
Mm
you know, you don't know what the qualities gonna be like, it's alright getting one for fifty quid
Yeah
if it's decent, but if you've got a decent system and you've got a crap
you're really wasting your time having one
Yeah I know
Yeah cos I've seen a sub based
they're over three hundred pounds and there must be a difference
is it?
Yeah
Well, rather pay a bit more and get one that's good
Yeah, I mean that Kenwood's got, he
he says it looks nice as well 
yeah
You can't actually see the speakers
Mm
he's got Kenwood words written on it and a great big diamond on the, at the end
Mm, yeah,ma maybe with a W
Yeah with a W
That's right yeah that it's made out, yeah
does it?
Yeah
Yeah and that's, that's what two hundred quid?
That's two hundred quid
Yeah, but I tell you what about  then I says to him I went to him and says erm about the stamp thirty one hundred, he says erm
Well I wouldn't do it, I'm not stupid enough
Oh he says I can get you one, I said I want to hear it first
Oh aye
he said oh it's not rigged up, there's no plug on it, there's no speakers attached to the back, I says well when can you get rigged up?
He says I'm coming New Year's Day, alright, he went down and he shut it, cos I went in the shop and I says er hang on I thought you was open New Year's Day?
I were, ah I says I came here at quarter past two, place was all shut up
what time did you go, I can deal with the manager and she was the manageress, he's the assistant, er, er, er, I says oh dear have I dropped you in it?
I paid you till four o'clock, I thought oh no  er and he says do you want one?
I says I want to listen to it, you know, I said I've heard it with C D going through it with about four sets of speakers, but I want to listen to it through eight sets of speakers with cassette, a cassette that I like to make sure, to my type, he says I guarantee you now you will like it, he says you will like he says, he says we do a ten day er return thing, he says you buy something, he says you bring it back within ten days undamaged we'll give you money back if you don't like the quality of the sound, for whatever reason we'll give you your money back.
yeah, yeah
when, when I went in to work the other day, Pete says I don't know about that, that Kenwood stuff
Oh too hot
says er they do C D player
Yeah
and amp and a set of speakers it's about three hundred and odd quid and it's er Samsung and it's supposed to be one 
Mm 
of the best you can, the best sound you can get
Really?
three hundred pound
Mm
I thought well
no 
be a bargain for somebody
Yeah 
this one, look at the back, I think the reason it's so big is to go in on the sockets at the back, put, you can put two tapes on it
Yeah
C D, two video recorders through it, why you would want to put er the video recorders through an amp I don't know, but you can 
have that
Moving out
Oh I wouldn't let them drive me out
Eh?
I wouldn't let them drive me out would you?
I don't
you can, you can probably get better ones than, than white labels
Yeah
Yeah
they keep themselves to themselves
That's right, they're always personable you know, they'll always speak to you
Aye
Aye
Even they're not always a problem though
lived on his own
Well I mean look at mine I've got white neighbours and you don't get noisier than them
pleasant enough, you know, but it's just everything you've done, you know
Sat here and
oh god I've had enough of this, so I went round, knocked on the front door,win curtain went back like that, she went 
What?
so I went round the back
Oh dear
knocked on the door Jim  said er 
Jim fancy her does he?
he was, he was sportsman happy, he was out on
well that'd be
going round the block wouldn't it?
 
used to go, used to go for runs didn't he?
Well , well you do anyway when you see them on telly and they're all hanging round the, you know, the, the A N C meetings they all go up and down like this


I think they do that in their sleep, I don't think there's a
get used to it
yeah 
Yeah poor thing knocked on the door
I said eh can you turn this music down, my kid's asleep, oh right, oh and he went and turned it down
Yeah
went in then
Well that's it
and then we waited till next morning when they were all fast asleep you know and
mm
didn't go to bed about five in the morning
yeah
then you start drilling and sawing


hammering and banging one night
especially, especially trying to do a bit of
up against the wall
Yeah
Yeah
we had, we had hammer drilled the blunt bit
Well they were knocking one night well gone twelve, about twenty to one I think it was, still banging and hammering, and I'm sure if I rang him and said look you know pack it up this, he'd, he'd say oh I'm sorry yeah and he will, but you shouldn't have to do that
No they should have
that's right 
 
I've always ain't I when I've done summat, if I've been sawing or banging, making a noise I've always stopped at ten
Yeah that's, I think that's a reasonable time 
He didn't only did that cos you lost your temper
did you hear us last night?
I said did you hear us, she said
mm
but when I did this, I did this 
Cor blimey that goes in one ear
when I did this there were no there were nobody next door
Yeah
were there that side
Yeah
then I bothered?
No
I mean sometimes you could sit here and
their music on
Mm
Or you'd be
 
The thing, the thing I like about it is with, with blackies and things like that when they turn it up all they do is boom, boom
Yeah
when you've got white people next door at least you can hear the music
You can hear the er 
I don't mind that I 
Yeah 
like, I'd turn the telly off and listen to their music sometimes
Mm
I don't mind the Beatles
Don't like the Beatles, though I like the blackies between, between two slices of bread 
How's your telly? is it alright?
Oh brilliant, yeah brilliant no problem
Have you tried them both together?
Yeah both work yeah
Great
Wicked, watch Ian, Ian Botham first time in my life
Er you watched that er Jack Nicholson thing?
Yeah
What The Shining?
No
 

Oh really
got this program upstairs, I didn't tell you about it did I?
Mick come down on Saturday, you know Mick
Mick?
Big Mick
Big Mick
Mick and Ricky?
No just Mick
Not Mick and Ricky?
No it's just Mick now
Right
Ricky has left, she went off with a bloke ten years younger than her
Really?
Yeah
You're joking
Not
she was more like a bloke
I like
I can get on with him 
 
you could get on with Ricky she's a good listener
oh really, yeah
Anyway he come down and he got this box with disks in
I thought he was gonna say he's got a belly
computer, computer disks 
Computer disks yeah
and he just come in and he just sort of put them down like that, put the books next to them like that and never said nothing, so I never said nothing to them about them anyway
computers and that and er he left it and he just carried on talking about this that and the other, and he says right I'm going and he went and he left the game, he'd brought it down for the kids, he didn't say, you know
had their computer nicked 
yeah, yeah 
it's Nick and Eddy's
He's goodhearted that way 
he gave it them and never said owt, you know what I mean he just says oh there's a Ninja in there and Batman and this that and the other and left them
Yeah
there's, there's a program in there it's called Auto Ring you put 
Oh yeah yeah
put, put put them in 
seen that we use that
put this program in and you swap it for this er map disk, then it comes up, you tell it where you are, where you going to and it works your route out
Yeah it gives you about three or four erm individual routes, don't it?
It gives you the fastest route
Shortest by road 
Shortest route 
Yeah
and an intermediate route
Yeah
or in some cases you get two intermediate routes
Mm
and it tells you how far away it is, how long it should take you to get there 
to get there, yeah, you can put the time of day in as well can't ya?
You can tell it what time you wanna set out
Yeah
you can also tell it what you 
I think it also works out the, the traffic load
Yeah
you can also, you can also 
Amazing 
work out if you want to avoid a place, you can put, say, say you're going from
Mm or you can go by 
say from here here to Corby or something like that
Mm
where you go, you go through Leicester more or less wouldn't you?
Yeah
And you can just put down Nottingham to Corby avoiding Leicester
Yeah
and it says break and you can put out all your stops going in
Mm
you know you stop for twenty minutes, put twenty minutes, and you, you just press return and it throws a map up, a map of part of England
Mm
where you are
That's it
goes
like that and puts all the numbers in
Mm
and then you can zoom in on it closer
Yeah that's it you can move the arrow around can't ya, the arrow moves
Yes
and you can move the arrow and the cursor, that's it an arrow and a mouse you just hit it and it expands that bit
Yeah you can zoom into it, you can zoom out from it, then you can put more detail in it, put more little places in around it and you can 
That's it, yeah 
where, where you are and that
I think Gordon's got one, we use one at work though, yeah it's, yeah yes it's very good 
and then you just print it out and what you do 
 
instead of, instead of in the map with a, with a drawing like that
Mm
you, you get to the text one as well?
Yeah
Where it tells you you're at 
Yeah that's it
Nottingham and
That's it
you have to walk so and so for three miles
Yeah that's it
Yeah
Often my
that's it, yeah, yeah, you can give it to the driver then can't you?
Yeah
Mm
I was just wondering how on earth your supposed to get to the M one heading towards er Bramford I mean
no Cockbrave, everywhere you go from here is towards Cockbrave
Is it?
Yeah 


I like, I like that, I like the idea of it telling you how far it is
Yeah
Lovely
Yeah
you know it's
if you put twenty minute break in then does it tell you which is the best cafe to stop at and how much egg and chips cost you?


and what you can do is if you've got a
yeah
you can go and say er Nottingham, Grantham, Grantham to Lincoln, Lincoln to Newark and it'll tell you the, the route between each town
Yeah
like that you see, if you get to Lincoln you've done that one
Yeah
go down here, down here, down here
you see it
Mm, very good, yeah, I was spellbound when I first saw that, saw that about, I think the first time about three years ago
how, how long did it take Mick to sort it out?
Sorry?
How long did it take Mick to sort a route out?
Erm, it all depends, it looks erm
On that one it sort of leaves a disk, it's got like a bar underneath
Mm
and as it's checking the list for the roads in the town 
That is I think that is
it, it cuts down like that, then it goes off then it starts again, then it goes off and then goes
that's it yeah, I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm vaguely recalling it now because it was six months ago since I saw Mick's but er, yeah that sounds about right
Mm
I can remember something about that
eight hundred and forty eight miles
Really?
fourteen hours and something
Good lord
that's without a break
Yeah, well he's, when he first says to me he says right he says er, this was when I first got an inkling that he was gonna check the mileage you know like for the future, and it says erm, where do you wanna go to?
I says er  when was it, he says where do you wanna go from?
I says Scotland, he says where?
To Nottingham, where do you wanna go by?
I says Dublin  he says I can't it's gotta be in Geordie then he says erm he says well where do you wanna go through?
I says well Blackpool then, did all the routes you know, tell you all the routes that you can take for you know, and that took what fifteen seconds, twenty seconds or something to work that out, maybe there's not a lot to er alternatives
Usually has a C C
that's it er yeah but the thing is learners can't use motorways, er they want something to, wish to avoid motorways
I think there might be yeah 
Yeah 
I ain't had a proper look I just put it on and said, work a few routes out you know where it
Yeah
where you're going, I mean I did Nottingham to Peterborough, how long did it take Nottingham to Peterborough?
Hour fifteen under
An hour and eleven
Yeah
one hour and eleven minutes it said on there
that's from door to door
Yeah will do, yeah
It'll take me fifty minutes
Did it?
Yeah, but I mean I think this is sticking to us


I tell you another option, tell you another option you've got in it, you can put down your G T I as well you can go in a G T I
What's that?
I don't know the difference that makes but it's got an option, something like erm
Well it's for time int it, obviously 
normal normal car
Yeah
you know van, lorries and stuff like that 
but, but the thing is if, if the traffic's gonna be heavy, if it thinks we're gonna get stuck in traffic, if you've got a G T I you're that type of driver you've got that type of power, you can sort of pass and save a bit of time
Yeah
so maybe it's, yeah, it's a good idea though  yeah 
Yeah have you seen those things like, like these
it's like an L C D screen between
the one with the, with the, with the map spins on the side of the road?
The one
It's a screen about this big right and you put it on your dashboard and plug it in to your cigarette lighter and er it's like a control centre and if there's been a crash
Mm
on the roads and if there's road works or summat, the section on, it's got all the major roads
Mm
and this section on your L C D flashes and you can like and you can zoom in and it'll say blah, blah, blah, road works at such and such avoid, or something like that
Mm
I know they did
you had it, you had it on your dashboard like that, you know like a map
Yeah
and what happen was you had like a, a receiver in your car and all the information was transmitted from, transmitted from like on lamp post
Yeah
and if you was, it says like he, you
going to Oxford, if you went to Oxford and you come to such and such a way and you're going out towards Ipswich and the big roundabout there was
Mm
you know solid or there's been an accident it tells you there's an accident at, at this point
Mm
and this is your alternative route and gives you an alternative way to go round to get passed it
Yeah
I'd seen an accident the other day in town I'd seen two and did you notice
they knocked the bridge down
What bridge?
Er not the bridge the er the gates to the Embankment have you seen that?
Yeah I have
Yeah
seen the state
Did you?
What, what was the thing about that?
What happened?
I dunno I just, I was coming in at dinner time and there was a, a double decker bus with all its front smashed in, the wall fell over
Mm, apparently the guy that was driving it had overalls on, so he may have been a mechanic delivering it to somewhere or test driving it over there 
yeah
Yeah 
then I went, I went into town a bit later on, come down Manstral Road and there was like a load of traffic there and I got to where the traffic lights are just before you get to the big turning at Manstral Road
Mm
do you know where I mean?
Mm
And there was a single decker bus then, right, stopped in the middle of the road and there was an Escort and he'd gone under the back right up to his windscreen like that the back 
Really?
the back of the bus was right at his windscreen like that 
Aye, cos they're quite high aren't they at the back, them Fords ain't they?
Yeah, and it was right up to his windscreen
Good god
just look, the windscreen weren't broke
Yeah
but the back of the bus was level with it like that
Yeah, you know these short dump trucks, the little stubby things, I saw one of them once erm, at the junction of Avenue Street and erm, well outside Lynn's there
Mm
and there was this dump truck sort of about two foot out, he'd obviously changed his mind and sort of had er stopped, had a Reliant Regal, you know a Reliant Regal it was right up to the windscreen and there was a pile of glass in, you know everywhere it was
Tell you what 
and that was that was done right underneath this lorry
on the, on the way to work one morning when I was, I was at
I went, I used to go into town, past that grey garden  up, up Forest Road
Yeah
and then turn left and you're down towards Icing Green, do you know where I mean?
And you come out near that new
 

No, you went from
it's called Mount Eaton Road
Mount Eaton Road I know yeah
Yeah that's when you, when you come up that
yes 
to the lights
Yes yeah oh I was 
instead of turning round 
coming the wrong way on the wrong road, yeah
if you go up
and going straight on up the hill 
You come along Ladford Road
Boulevard, that's with the bed shop on the corner
Yeah
Straight up there
straight on, past Camby and Sand
Yeah
up to the lights
Yeah
and then you come up and turn left at the florists
Yeah, the
right
go straight up
go straight up the hill
Salvage Street
Salvage Street is it?
Yeah
are the one
I was coming down there, right
Yeah
and I just got through the traffic lights first thing in the morning and there was two light
I couldn't believe it both of them and they'd smashed into each other 
Really?
and there were bits of fibreglass all over the street
Oh
and two halves of car like laying on the side.
Yeah
Incredible, I, I could never believe that, two
They
into each other, cos they do don't they?
Eh yeah Rick's er, Rick's car broke down you know and, and van broke down and somebody he, he, he lived in Clifton and worked at Radcliff on Trend and somebody says to him oh you can borrow our car it was a Reliant Regal, eh he said oh god, you know, I'll have to park it round the corner, and he got out, didn't go into work, you know go to work every day where erm
yeah, no problem, and he says when you're driving along he says people flashing me, he says you see a head a pair of headlights flashing you think, it's not, it's another Reliant Regal some other bloke with a cap on you know


you know, one enthusiast club
We had a bit of fun er not last Saturday the Saturday before didn't we?
We went bowling, he, come across he says
Oh I, yeah, yeah haven't a car
he says oh can we go in your car tonight he says mine's er, the alternator's gone
Yeah
and you have to push it to start it like, I says yes alright then, I knew the timing was out on mine so I thought I'd do that this afternoon
Mm
before we go, so I'm out there just set the timing
then all of a sudden it went, but you know like
kids give it a shove, pushed it on the street
so turned it round and come back, this bloke pulls up in this er  well three, three litre
super job was it?
Yeah
Yeah
J reg weren't it, jumped out, wanna push?
Yeah alright then, got down about ten yards it started again
Yeah
got it home and what it is, is the timing on the car probably cos it's so old
Yeah
is a lot further up er what it says in the book, no way near them
Yeah you can't set it by the book
so I just, you know
Till it sounded right
Mm that's it
That's it, I do till it peaks without pinking
Yeah
that's it, it's done
Yeah
so it er, it were running alright then, and er I took it for a spin I went round the block, up Robin Hood Way 
Which one's that?
Yeah, yeah
Yeah, up to Wickes
Mm, mm
straight up the erm by the custom bridge, right up to the next island round there, round the island and back down again
yeah
Yeah
I give it some you know 
Yeah 
back over the flyover, back down here, comes up stop, turns it straight back on again
oh no
Yeah
thought right, spanner  took it out the starter motor
What's that?
Well it wasn't it was the solenoid
Yeah, is it for a gauge?
A ring
Is the solenoid on the starter?
Yeah, yeah, what it, what it was on them ones
when you turn your key it suddenly clicks and it clicks the thingy forward
Yeah
and then when it does that when the solenoid comes back
Mm
it comes back through the starter motor and so I thought oh right strip it all down see what's up, see if it's bent inside
Yeah
strips it all down, gets the book out, do this, no, that don't work, put the book away
Aha 
ripped it to pieces 
Yeah just use your commonsense
took it all to pieces, cleaned it up all inside it's great, I thought right I'll take it outside and I'll try it now
Mm
just outside
held your foot on it so it didn't fly all over the place, yeah
yeah
where's all this gone
Yeah
I thought I'll get one  down the scrap yard
Well the
yeah so you can get the solenoid off
Eh?
don't you?
No, the one, the one I worked on it was inter 
you had to get a, take, replace the lot
The cella solenoid on the top like that
Yeah
and all, all it's got is now
Keith?
No ta
yeah
this
Don't put it on the floor
this solenoid is under
It look like ribbon and there's more to come
Yeah
What do you mean I made it like a brick?
A bit slow on that one weren't ya?
there's this solenoid on the top
Yeah
and it's got like a, a metal thing that comes from it and it's on a pivot
Mm
like, so you've got a solenoid that holding the top on the pivot and the bit at the bottom just like a
like that
Yeah like selector like a J selector?
Yeah
Yeah
and when it clicks back it just goes like that, it pushes and pulls
Yeah
and all you do is you take that pin out and pull it out 
Oh, eh
oh, eh, does it?
yeah go on
So I went round the scrap yard
to er, what's it called?
yeah
Ken's
Ah
No, not
anyway went in, have you got one?
Well there's one there, there's one there and there's one round the back, so I looked in that one
it's a different engine
Yeah
cos in, when you
and it shows you the, the engine
I went round the back and they'd got
yours a two litre?
I thought it was a sixteen hundred, yeah
yeah
looked in it they're the same, I thought
tried to pull it out, it won't come out, there's a bracket on it, on the back
Was it?
Yeah, and it was getting a bit dark and I couldn't see
Oh
and I couldn't see underneath like er
is it done?
I said no not yet, he says we're going in a minute, quarter to
dip stick
Yeah
pulled it out the way, fiddle me car
yeah
and then I go some, put it in
It's alright
cleaned it all first
Yeah my nephew's selling an X R Two you know, grant it in the paper's three thousand
whatever it is, deflate, and er  guy come round, no problems, no problems with it, well I mean the head gasket's gone and there's a hole near the wing and bald tyre on it but mechanically it's, this guy comes round to look at it, I mean he's been driving it from Plymouth, he's in the navy, up and down here, bloke comes round, yeah no problem, come on round mate, come and have a look at it, look round it, says yeah I like this can I just take it for a drive?
Yeah, goes click, click, click, the starter motor, wouldn't believe it would ya?
Eh?
Would of finished up
and now the van's got the red light heat coming on, on the battery, took it into the garage and checked it, it's charging the battery alright, its alternator's okay, but we don't know what it is  but when you turn it on, when you turn the key on in the morning
Yeah
you know where the indicator's on it's a dead flash int it?
Yeah
It sounds like that, but in the dashboard
on the back of the er alternator
Is it?
Yeah
Your instrument voltage regulator
That's what I think it is
Yeah
it's not cutting out for the for the thingy 
That's right is your
no
Oh
What, what else is happening, you know you know your brake warning lights?
Yeah
When your brakes are going
Yeah
erm that then don't come on either, but when it clicks like that they flash together and they both light up, and then when you start it up they go up and then they come back on again
You got an
problem?
I don't think so  he, he says it's charging alright so
sounds like you've got a
to me
This is it, if it's a
yeah
If the, if the battery was, like if you want it
the battery, when you turn it on that
that's true, yeah
Yeah, so you can leave it and
but this, this er starter motor is the one I bought from the
is better than the one that's in it
Yeah
it's got four good
instead of two
Has it?
Yeah
yeah, well is it?
you've got more chance of it firing
Yeah, cos if one set go you still got
 

right  I went to G T Cars
Yeah, will they do it?
to ask about the
yeah
To buy one
I bet they'll sell you one wouldn't they?
Yeah they would, yeah
Did they?
Yeah and
starter motor before
Yeah
I says er how much are they?
how much?
Well I'd say to price it, I know they're not quite so expensive on carpet but I'd say  I'd say about seventeen pounds, but I bet it was about twenty seven or thirty one
It was about fifty seven
You're joking, just for a solenoid?
I said alright, how much is it for the starter motor with the solenoid built onto it like?
Oh probably about sixty two
Eighty quid
Yeah, that's it
Twenty quid for a starting motor
Yeah
I'll have one of them
well he says we've had so many of them
I thought I'm not surprised
I've got er, I've got a database
Yeah
on a database because it'll soon be
what I've done is I've put like erm  the year, the year and the make of the month, right
the month anyway, so I've put something like one, ten, eighty seven  right as the month and after that I've put down what magazine it is
Yeah
every
yeah
and then I've put project what it's called and then I've put what kind of project it is what type 
Oh right 
and then I've put like audio
Yeah
and photographic
Yeah
so that in the end when I sell it again I can put the type in alphabetical ascending order
Mm
so it'll be like erm amplifier, bass amplifier
Yeah
you know
Oh yeah
things like that
Yeah
It, it's all that and then you can just look through the amplifier
and it takes about eighty records at a time because it's using forty five letters with the
right
cos some of them are dead wrong
Yeah
erm so many for the dates and for so many for the
and so on like that and er, I thought okay
 
I don't like the bow on it 
load it, sort it out and print it, right?
Mm
It starts off happily printing away, gets to page full
Yeah
starts to wind fan fold paper and wind it and wind it and wind it
Bet they're all printed
it's coming right through


I thought what the bloody hell's all this
Yeah
switched it off, fanned it all back, right and I thought start again, I must be doing something wrong, so I
the switches in the back
Yeah
so er  I thought I'd try it on one piece  one piece of paper
Yeah
one with perforation on
Yeah
try it on that, put the paper in
did pass the paper and er the paper light comes on
Right, yeah, and he's carried on printing while the
paper like
Really?
Yeah, gets
page, winds that piece of paper out, withdraw the package like that
Yeah
and then it winds another piece of paper in and starts printing again
yeah, aha
You're supposed to be using that, so it's printing the sheet and throwing it out and
printing on that one and then throwing that out and making another one
Yeah
that's why the, that's why they're running backwards and then forwards again
Mm
to make sure it ain't falling in, you know
What printer is it?
Epsom
They're good
very good, yeah, I say you could borrow my printer again, but that's, that packed up you know
Did it?
that printer of mine, yeah about
about, no, no it's only about a fortnight ago, I was on site doing a job and I come out and  as far as you know what you call courtesy dial in a card, so that you don't cut anybody off, you can dial it and everybody says oh what's going off, you know, you can courtesy dial it, when we've finished it shuts that channel down
Mm
yeah
oh can't get it, and that's what we do and it comes up three channels you can use and somebody else cleared out two channels are used and if them channel
everybody on that call, instead of sixteen channels on a card and there's five people using it, it comes up five channels in use and blocks out number eleven so that nobody else can use it
Ah right
you see?
as they as they share the line it switches them off
Blocks them off as well yeah, and it comes up one channel in use  when they cleared out card down, it clears the card so you can take it out  I don't, they come down three channels in use, two channels in use, one channel in use.